

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2012                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                               LORD BANNATYNE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           UCHENNA EUCHARIA IZUAZU
                                                                  Respondent


1. In cases to which the new Immigration Rules introduced  as  from  9  July
2012 by HC 194 apply, judges should proceed by first considering  whether  a
claimant  is  able  to  benefit  under  the  applicable  provisions  of  the
Immigration Rules designed to address Article 8 claims. Where  the  claimant
does not meet the requirements of the rules it will be necessary  to  go  on
to make an assessment of Article 8  applying  the  criteria  established  by
law. The Upper Tribunal observation in  MF  (Article  8-new  rules)  Nigeria
[2012] 00393 (IAC) to the same effect is endorsed.

2. The procedure adopted in relation to the introduction of  the  new  Rules
provided a weak form of Parliamentary scrutiny; Parliament has  not  altered
the  legal  duty  of  the   judge   determining   appeals   to   decide   on
proportionality for himself or herself.

3. There can be no presumption that the Rules will  normally  be  conclusive
of the Article 8 assessment or that a  fact-sensitive  inquiry  is  normally
not needed. The more the new Rules restrict otherwise relevant  and  weighty
considerations from being taken into account, the less regard  will  be  had
to them in the assessment of proportionality.

4. When considering whether a decision is in accordance  with  the  law,  it
has been authoritatively established by the higher courts that the  test  to
be applied is not exceptional circumstances or insurmountable obstacles.

5.The UKBA continues to accept that EU law prevents the state  requiring  an
EU law citizen from leaving the United Kingdom, although contends with  good
reason, that this is to be distinguished from a case  where  an  independent
adult can choose between  continued  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
continued cohabitation abroad.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    E Fripp instructed by Luqmani Thompson and Co.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal from a decision of Judge  Keane
    sitting in the First-tier Tribunal given on  31  July  2012.  This  was
    originally a fast track appeal from a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State refusing Ms Izuazu leave to enter the United  Kingdom  on  asylum
    and human rights grounds. We shall refer to Ms Izuazu as the  claimant.
    The judge dismissed the asylum claim but allowed the claimant's  appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR by reason of her marriage in March 2012 to  Julius
    Akinola.

 2. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred in law in his Article
    8 decision by failing to follow the provisions of the  new  Immigration
    Rules (HC 194) published on 13 June 2012 and stated to take effect on 9
    July 2012 where the Home Secretary set out a scheme as to when leave to
    enter or remain would be granted on human rights grounds.  This  is  an
    issue of considerable public importance as  many  decisions  are  being
    made to which the new rules have potential relevance.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on 3 August 2012 and  the  case  taken
    out of fast track.  There was a case management hearing on 12 September
    2012 following which the appeal was listed before a panel of the UT for
    a day.

 4. The claimant had been unrepresented before the First-tier Tribunal  but
    she had subsequently secured  the  services  of  Luqmani  Thompson  and
    Partners before us. We acknowledge the assistance  her  representatives
    have provided to us to decide the points of principle and the appeal.

 5. On 5 October 2012 she lodged a  skeleton  argument  signed  by  leading
    counsel Raza Husain QC as well as Mr Fripp and a bundle of  authorities
    in support of the appeal and a copy  was  served  on  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officers Unit. It was, therefore, with  considerable  dismay
    that the panel constituted  to  hear  this  appeal  received  the  news
    shortly before the case was called on at  10.00am  Tuesday  9  October,
    that Mr Nath was asking for a photocopy of the court bundle as  he  had
    no or incomplete papers. It was with greater dismay that we received an
    application to adjourn the case to a new date as he  did  not  consider
    himself sufficiently prepared to advance his own appeal.

 6. We rejected this application given the history set out  above  and  the
    need for a panel of the Tribunal  to  consider  the  important  matters
    raised in the appeal. We adjourned the matter for one hour for  further
    preparation to be undertaken  and  before  we  did  so  we  posed  some
    questions that we indicated we would like assistance on in due  course.
    The  hearing  then  proceeded  and  Mr  Nath   made   submissions   but
    acknowledged he was still unable to answer our questions. At the end of
    the hearing we issued directions  giving  a  timetable  for  a  written
    response to our questions.

         For the SSHD:

            i)    What difference, if any, do the  recent  changes  in  the
               Immigration Rules have on the pre existing case law  of  the
               Supreme Court and higher appellate courts as to the learning
               on Article 8? If it is contended that the relevant tests for
               assessing  whether  an   immigration   decision   interferes
               unjustifiably with family life have changed, how  can  rules
               achieve such a change?


           ii) Does the UKBA continue to accept that it is  not  reasonable
               to expect a British citizen party to genuine family life  in
               the UK to relocate permanently abroad (paras  93  to  95  of
               Sanade and others [2012] UKUT IAC)?   If not why not and how
               is it compatible with Dereci to require  an  EU  citizen  to
               live outside the EU?


         For the claimant:


          iii) Now that the rules make  express  provision  for  Article  8
               claims to remain, is  it  accepted  that  the  circumstances
               whereby a person who fails under the rules but  may  succeed
               under the law relating to Article 8  will  be  narrower  and
               will be exceptional having regard to the  new  criteria?  If
               not why not?


 7. We received the response of the Home  Office  on  24  October  and  the
    claimant in reply on 30 October 2012. We are grateful  to  the  parties
    for their written submissions. We append the Home Office submission  to
    this determination as  appendix  A,  in  the  light  of  the  potential
    importance to other cases of the observations made and for completeness
    we append the claimant's at appendix B.

 8. We, nevertheless, take this opportunity to express our  dissatisfaction
    at the appellant's lack of preparedness in this case, although on  what
    we were informed it  does  not  appear  to  have  been  the  individual
    responsibility of Mr Nath.  This was the Secretary of State's appeal on
    a profoundly important new issue for  determination  by  this  Tribunal
    with potential impact on  many  cases  being  heard  daily  across  the
    country.  Whenever an issue  of  this  significance  arises  the  Upper
    Tribunal is likely to constitute itself as a panel and deploy the  most
    senior judges available to it at the time.  It needs to give clear  and
    comprehensive guidance to judges sitting throughout the United  Kingdom
    as speedily as possible.  Here there had been a case management hearing
    attended, we were informed, by a Home Office Presenting  Officer  where
    the importance of the issue would have been made plain in  the  listing
    arrangements. Whether or not the Presenting Officers'  Unit  was  aware
    that the President and a judge of the Court of Session were to  sit  on
    this appeal is not the point.  The Tribunal is entitled to expect  that
    any advocate before it will  be  properly  briefed  with  the  relevant
    documents, fully prepared to address the issues that everybody is aware
    arises, and is capable of addressing the issues orally when they arise.
    Not for the first time, we conclude that there has been  a  failure  by
    UKBA of its duty of co-operation with the Tribunal to advance the over-
    riding objective of fast, fair and efficient adjudication.

 9. As it happens the urgency of this case as a guideline decision has been
    mitigated by the decision of the UT in MF (Article 8-new rules) Nigeria
    [2012] 00393 (IAC) promulgated on 31 October 2012.

The Facts

10. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria.  She was born in 1967, married in
    1989 and has five children by a marriage that broke down  between  2006
    and 2008.  From October 2005 to November 2007  she  made  a  number  of
    visits to the United Kingdom on multiple entry visas, the last of which
    was issued in October 2007 for five years.  It was during these  visits
    that she met Mr Akinola.

11. On 4 May 2008 the claimant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  again  as  a
    visitor.  On this occasion she overstayed her leave  to  remain  by  10
    months.  She returned to the United Kingdom after a  short  break  away
    and again over-stayed her leave to remain by two  years.   Subsequently
    evidence came to light that indicated that during this period  she  had
    started working in the United Kingdom using false identity papers.

12. In March 2012 she travelled to Nigeria with Mr.  Akinola.  She  applied
    for entry clearance as a spouse and  the  application  was  refused  in
    April 2012, because the ECO was not  satisfied  that  the  relationship
    between the parties was genuine  or  that  the  accommodation  that  Mr
    Akinola personally occupied (one room in a flat that was rented out  to
    others) was sufficient for  the  couple  and  the  claimant's  youngest
    daughter by her previous marriage.

13. An appeal was lodged but the claimant returned to the United Kingdom on
    the 16 May 2012 where she once more sought to enter as  a  visitor.  On
    this occasion the false identity papers and  false  National  Insurance
    number came to light.  She was charged  with  offences  in  respect  of
    these documents to which she pleaded guilty at the Magistrates Court on
    18 May and was given a sentence of twelve weeks' imprisonment.  She was
    transferred to immigration detention on 29 June 2012. She then  made  a
    claim for asylum which she withdrew and then re-instated. The  decision
    to refuse her leave to enter on asylum and  human  rights  grounds  was
    taken on 18 July 2012 and her  appeal  was  heard  before  Judge  Keane
    sitting at the Yarlswood detention and removal centre.

14. Notwithstanding this history of deceit, the judge found the claimant to
    be a credible witness and genuine in her fear  of  her  violent  former
    husband and of being the  victim  of  serious  crime  in  Nigeria.   He
    nevertheless dismissed her  asylum  claim  as  it  did  not  relate  to
    criteria for protection and there was adequate protection available  in
    Nigeria against the harm feared.  No issue arises in  respect  of  that
    decision on the appeal before us.

15.  The judge also heard from  Mr  Akinola  and  another  witness  to  the
    relationship between him and the claimant. He was satisfied that  there
    was a genuine relationship of three years plus duration even though the
    parties had not been living together as man and wife. Mr Akinola was of
    Nigerian origin. He had come to the United Kingdom in 1989.  He was now
    a British citizen. He had married and divorced in the  United  Kingdom.
    There was an adult daughter of the relationship who is  a  student  who
    lived with her mother in the United Kingdom but kept in regular contact
    with her father. Mr Akinola lived in Hounslow and had stable employment
    as a clerical officer employed by a cargo despatch company.

The UKBA Decision

16. The Home Office devoted nine paragraphs of its 61 paragraph  letter  to
    the Article 8 claim. The first five  paragraphs  disputed  the  factual
    basis of the relationship and concluded that it was not  accepted  "you
    have shown you are in a subsisting and long standing relationship  with
    Julius Akinola". The judge disagreed on the facts and no  issue  arises
    with respect to that finding.

17. The  letter  nevertheless  went  to  consider  "for  completeness"  the
    assessment of the case under the Appendix FM  (Family  Members)  to  HC
    194.  Two particular points were taken:-

        i. The claimant was not in the United Kingdom as  she  had  already
           been refused leave to enter  at the time of the decision.


       ii. There were no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing
           outside the United Kingdom namely by returning to Nigeria.

     On this second issue the decision letter reads as follows:

         "Although (Mr Akinola) has a daughter in the UK she  is  an  adult
           who attends university. She does not  live  with  him  and  only
           visits occasionally. Julius has family in Nigeria  as  evidenced
           by the fact that you married him in his home city of Ibadan in a
           ceremony attended by both your respective families. You are also
           both able to work and Julius is in  full-time  employment.   The
           documents that your solicitor has  submitted  show  that  he  is
           diabetic  and  takes  medication  for  his  medical  conditions.
           However as has been discussed  in  your  medical  consideration,
           above, it is considered that while the healthcare in Nigeria may
           not be up to UK standards  generally,  there  is  a  functioning
           healthcare system in place and as you both  can  work  and  earn
           money there is no reason why you cannot access private treatment
           if this is the better option for you.  Indeed the payslips  that
           your solicitor has submitted indicate that Mr Akinola is capable
           of working long  hours  in  a  respectable  job  and  earning  a
           reasonable amount of money".

18.  Having examined the application from the viewpoint of  the  new  rules
    only, the Secretary of State's conclusion was:

           "You do not qualify for limited leave to remain and it  is  both
           lawful and     proportionate to remove you  from  the  UK.  Your
           Article 8 rights will not be breached".

The Judge's Decision


19. After he reached his conclusions  of  fact  and  his  decision  on  the
    refugee claim, the judge at paragraph 22 onwards of  his  determination
    considered Article 8. He concluded that the  claimant  had  established
    family life in the UK by reason of her relationship to Mr Akinola.   He
    also found that she had a private life here by reason of  her  previous
    residence and wish to remain.

20. He then went on to consider the five questions posed by Lord Bingham in
    Razgar [2004] INLR 349 HL and concluded:

        i. The claimant's removal would  interfere  with  the  family  life
           enjoyed by her and Mr Akinola.


       ii. The interference was serious enough to engage Article 8.

      iii. The interference was in accordance with  the  law  and  for  the
           legitimate aim of the prevention of disorder or crime.

       iv. The central question in the appeal was whether the  interference
           was proportionate and a fair balance between  the  interests  of
           the community and the claimant and her husband.

21. The judge continued his analysis as follows

        "26. I acknowledge the determination of the respondent  to  achieve
        the legitimate aims of the prevention of disorder or crime and  the
        maintenance of an effective immigration policy.  Such are  laudable
        aims which she undertakes by means of her immigration and  criminal
        policies and she does so in  the  interests  of  the  wider  United
        Kingdom community.  I acknowledge that  the  legitimate  aims  thus
        expressed are rarely overridden.  I  particularly  acknowledge  the
        appellant's immigration history. In part, it was  a  poor  history.
        The facts were common  between  the  parties  to  the  appeal.  The
        appellant had overstayed during a previous period of  residence  in
        the United Kingdom. I also  acknowledge  the  appellant's  criminal
        offence.   It  was  a  most  serious  criminal  offence  which  the
        magistrates' court marked by handing  down  a  sentence  of  twelve
        weeks' imprisonment. I also acknowledge the appellant's conduct  in
        travelling to the United Kingdom in possession of false  documents.
        Such was lamentable conduct on her part.

         27. I remind myself that I should strike a  fair  balance  between
        the rights of the appellant and the  interests  of  the  community.
        Certainly, 'of course all will turn on the facts of the  individual
        case' (per Owen J in Mthokozisi v Secretary of State for  the  Home
        Department [2004] EWCH 2964 (Admin) at paragraph 28, a passage from
        authority cited by Lord Bingham at paragraph 9 of his  judgment  in
        EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2008]
        UKHL 41).  I have also borne  in  mind  that  guidance  which  Lord
        Bingham offered at paragraph 12 of his judgment in EB (Kosovo).  He
        stated:

               'Thus the appellate immigration authority must make its  own
               judgment and that judgment will be  strongly  influenced  by
               the particular facts and  circumstances  of  the  particular
               case.  The authority will, of course, take note  of  factors
               which have, or have not, weighed with the Strasbourg  court.
               It will, for example,  recognise  that  it  will  rarely  be
               proportionate to uphold an order for removal of a spouse  if
               there is a close and genuine bond with the other spouse  and
               that spouse cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  follow  the
               removed spouse to the country of removal...'


    28. Two factors have led me to strike the balance, the  essence  of  an
        assessment of  the  proportionality  of  a  decision  such  as  the
        decision under appeal, in favour of the appellant.  First,  drawing
        on those exclusively favourable findings of fact to  which  I  have
        arrived in respect of the appellant's .... contentions, I find that
        a particularly strong family life exists between the appellant  and
        Mr Akinola"

     He reviewed the evidence supporting this conclusion and  then  went  on
    to his second factor in favour.

        29. Second, I find that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  Mr
        Akinola to settle in Nigeria in order to continue family life  with
        the appellant.  Mr Akinola is a British citizen.  He has resided in
        the United Kingdom for 23 years.  He has a medical condition  which
        at present  is  being  satisfactorily  treated  by  the  healthcare
        services of the United Kingdom.  It would be harsh in  the  extreme
        to expect Mr Akinola to sever his ties with the United  Kingdom  in
        order to carry on family life with the appellant in  Nigeria.   His
        has been a very lengthy residence in the United  Kingdom.   Drawing
        due and proper inferences from his circumstances as  a  whole,  and
        indeed those  reflected  in  the  documents  which  the  respondent
        referred to in  her  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter,  his  ties  and
        connections are far greater with and in  the  United  Kingdom  than
        they are with and in Nigeria.  He has a daughter with whom he is in
        contact.   Such  contact  would  surely  be   undermined   by   the
        geographical divide?  I do acknowledge that Mr Akinola,  doing  the
        best I can on the evidence, grew up  and  developed  as  a  man  in
        Nigeria.  He is not to be equated with the  position  of  a  person
        born and bred in the United Kingdom who is to accompany one such as
        the appellant to  a  country  with  which  he  has  no  connection,
        understanding or sympathy.  However, I think the sacrifice -  I  do
        not put out of my  mind  the  extreme  difficulty  which  he  would
        experience in achieving employment in Nigeria - would be too great.
         Mr Akinola would be separated from that life which he has built up
        over a period as long as 23 years.  It would not be  reasonable  to
        expect him to leave the United Kingdom in order to carry on  family
        life with the appellant in Nigeria."

22. He therefore allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

23. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal were concise.  There were in
    substance four  in number and may be summarised as follows:-

          i. The judge gave  no  consideration  to  Appendix  FM  1  at  all
             although it had been cited in the refusal decision.


         ii. He erred in asking the question whether it  was  reasonable  to
             expect Mr Akinola to relocate to Nigeria rather than using  the
             test under Appendix FM Section R-ILRP and the  Section  EX  (b)
             Exception of whether "there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             family life with that partner continuing outside the UK".

        iii. The judge failed to give sufficient reasons for his findings on
             Article 8 and whether it was reasonable to expect Mr Akinola to
             relocate.

         iv. The judge failed to give sufficient weight  to  the  legitimate
             aim of safeguarding the economic well being of the  UK  through
             effective  immigration  control  and  the  public  interest  in
             removing her.

24. At the hearing Mr Nath clarified the  appellant's  case  by  indicating
    that ground iv. above was intended to include the submission  that  the
    judge's conclusions were wrong as a matter of  law  because  they  were
    irrational,  in  that  no  properly   self-   directing   judge   could
    legitimately have reached them on the findings of fact he had made.

The status of HC 194 Appendix FM

25. HC 194 is a set  of  changes  to  the  Immigration  Rules  laid  before
    Parliament on 13 June  2012.  It  was  accompanied  by  an  Explanatory
    Statement indicating amongst other things that the purpose of the Rules
    was:

          "To provide a clear basis for considering immigration  family  and
          private life cases in compliance with Article 8  of  the  European
          Convention on Human Rights (the right to respect for  private  and
          family life). In particular, the new Immigration Rules reflect the
          qualified  nature  of  Article  8,  setting   requirements   which
          correctly balance the individual's right to  respect  for  private
          and family life with  the  public  interest  in  safeguarding  the
          economic well-being of  the  UK  by  controlling  immigration  and
          protecting the public from foreign criminals".

26. The House of Commons debated a  motion  tabled  by  the  Government  in
    support of these Rules on 19 June 2012. The motion was carried  without
    a division. The conventional negative resolution procedure required  by
    Immigration Act 1971 s. 3(2) was adopted in the House of  Lords.   Both
    Houses were thus content for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  adopt  the
    statement of practice she has laid before them.

27. As a consequence, it has been submitted  to  us  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's written submissions:

         "However, while the Rules do not bind the Courts, in the same  way
          as primary legislation, they are a clear, democratically endorsed,
          statement of public policy which must now be taken into account by
          the courts when assessing proportionality. The Secretary of  State
          would expect the Court to defer to the view endorsed by Parliament
          on how, broadly, public policy considerations are weighed  against
          individual family and private life rights, when assessing  Article
          8 in any individual case. That is, save in a narrow group of cases
          where it  is  found  that  the  consequences  of  the  immigration
          decision are exceptional....


         In summary, the  Government  can  interfere  in  the  exercise  of
          Article 8 rights where in the public interest it is necessary  and
          proportionate to do so, including to safeguard the  UK's  economic
          well being by controlling immigration and to protect  the  public,
          by deterring  foreign criminals and removing  them  from  the  UK.
          Following the recent changes, the new rules now  properly  reflect
          the view of the Government and Parliament as to  how  the  balance
          should be struck between that  public  interest  and  individual's
          rights under Article 8 the Government expect the  Courts  to  have
          regard to that view in reaching their decisions."

28. The Secretary of State submits in response to  the  first  question  we
    posed  ("What difference,  if  any,  do  the  recent  changes   in  the
    Immigration Rules have  on  the  pre  existing  case  law...as  to  the
    learning on Article 8?") that the Rules make a  substantial  difference
    to the case law and essentially restore the  exceptional  circumstances
    test  disapproved of by the House of  Lords in   Huang  v  SSHD  [2007]
    UKHL 11; [2007] 2 AC 167  because their Lordships  were  considering  a
    set of immigration rules that did not spell out the  UK's  response  to
    Article 8 issues whereas the present rules before us do so.

29. The claimant, by contrast, in her reply to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    written submission, states that the new rules can make no difference to
    the case law binding upon us since that is the law relating to  Article
    8 made in pursuit of the legal duties imposed by the Human  Rights  Act
    1998, and the Rules, being only statements of executive policy  do  not
    have the force of  law  and  cannot  reverse  or  repeal  authoritative
    judicial decisions.

Discussion

30. In our judgment neither of the rival submissions  can  be  accepted  in
    full. We accept the claimant's submission on the status of  the  rules,
    and accordingly agree that the rules cannot over-ride either the  legal
    duty imposed by statute or the existing learning on that duty  supplied
    by the higher courts, and (to the extent it  is  consistent  with  that
    learning) the Upper Tribunal. However, we do not  accept  the  implicit
    submission that the new rules are irrelevant to the Article  8  balance
    required by the law to be conducted.

31. The Upper Tribunal has already observed in  MF  (Article  8-new  rules)
    Nigeria (loc cit) and we agree that the rules are the rules.  They  are
    in force and clearly apply to any decision made after 9  July  2012  as
    this one was, unless and until they are struck down as  being  unlawful
    or irrational.

32. The status of   immigration  rules  is  well  known  and  was  recently
    examined by the House of Lords in Odelola v SSHD [2009] UKHL 25  [2009]
    1 WLR 1230, from which the following points may be  summarised:

          (i)  The  rules  are  not  subordinate  legislation  but  detailed
          statements by a minister of the Crown as to how the Crown proposes
          to exercises its executive power to control immigration.  They are
          essentially executive not legislative (per Lord  Hoffman  at  [6];
          Lord Brown at [17], [34], [35]).


          (ii) The rules are those of the Secretary of State not  Parliament
          albeit that they are laid before Parliament (Lord Brown at [27]).

          (iii) The rules nevertheless create legal rights and  effects  and
          provide a ground  of  appeal  under  s.  84  (1)  (a)  Nationality
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, 'that  the  decision  is  not  in
          accordance with immigration rules.'

          (iv) When deciding appeals on this ground judges of this  and  the
          First-tier Tribunal are bound by and must apply  the  rules  (Lord
          Hoffman at [6], Lord Brown at [27], Lord Neuberger  at  [51]).  To
          this extent as the Tribunal acknowledged  in  MF   they  have  the
          force of law, not because  they  are  law,  but  because  the  law
          relating to  immigration appeals affords them a binding status for
          certain purposes and  precludes  judges  exercising  a  discretion
          differently from the Secretary of State other  than  a  discretion
          conferred under the rules (s.84 (1) (f)).

33. We then turn to the separate question  as  to  how  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules can influence an assessment of whether an immigration
    decision is in accordance with the law, either generally (s. 84  (1)(e)
    NIAA 2002) or under s.6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  and  whether  the
    decision is compatible with the appellant's Convention  rights  (s.  84
    (1) (c).

34. It is obvious that respect for a claimant's  family  and  private  life
    under  Article  8  (1)  is  subject  to  proportionate  and   justified
    interferences in pursuit of a legitimate aim under Article 8(2).

35. There is nothing unlawful about the Secretary of State having published
    policies  and  practices  designed  to  give   effect   to   Convention
    obligations or aspects of the public interest considered to be  weighty
    reasons justifying interference. Students of the history of immigration
    law and practice over the last 30 years will be familiar with  a  whole
    host of policies sometimes outside the rules and sometimes within  them
    said to be designed  to  reflect  Article  8  issues  with  respect  to
    marriage by those with no leave to remain, serious criminal  offending,
    the impact of removal on children, the period  of  irregular  residence
    giving rise to a presumption of regularisation and so on.

36. Many of these previous policy statements had been withdrawn at the time
    that the House of Lords considered the case of Huang (above).  In  that
    case the submissions advanced on behalf of  the  migrants  include  the
    fact that the Immigration Rules had not been amended to incorporate all
    classes of human rights claim that may be recognised  under  Article  8
    (see the Law Reporter's summary of the  submissions  at  179  A-C);  by
    contrast, where there was a relevant statement of  policy,  appropriate
    weight could be afforded to it (178 H).

37. Lord Bingham giving the judgment of the  Appellate Committee at [16] in
    a  passage  relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  her  written
    submissions in the present appeal, noted:

         "The general administrative desirability of applying known rules if
         a system of immigration control is  to  be  workable,  predictable,
         consistent and fair as  between  one  applicant  and  another;  the
         damage to good administration  and effective control if a system is
         perceived  by  applicants  internationally  to  be  unduly  porous,
         unpredictable or perfunctory; the need to discourage  non-nationals
         admitted to the country temporarily from believing they can  commit
         serious crimes and yet be allowed to remain; the need to discourage
         fraud, deception and serious breaches of the law and so on."


    Later in the same judgment Lord Bingham described the giving of  weight
    to the Secretary of State's views  as  when  deportation  or  exclusion
    operated as a valuable deterrent in the public interest as:

         "Performance of the ordinary judicial task of weighing up competing
         considerations on each side and according appropriate weight to the
         judgment of a person with responsibility for a given subject matter
         and access to special sources of information".

38. We see no reason why a statement of policy as to  when  those  with  no
    other claim under the Immigration Rules will or will not be admitted or
    expelled, should not be expressed in the Immigration  Rules,  and  when
    they are, appropriate weight should be given  to  it  for  the  reasons
    given by Lord Bingham.

39. There is the further consideration, not  explored  in  the  submissions
    before us, but reflected in particular in  the  case  law  relating  to
    Article 5 ECHR that although the rules and similar statements of policy
    do not have the force of law, they are considered to be part of the law
    for the assessment of whether an interference is  "in  accordance  with
    the law" for  rights that are balanced rights under  the  Convention  :
    see Nadarajah v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1768 [2004]  INLR  139  cited  and
    approved in Lumba and Mighty v SSHD [2011] UKSC 12 [2012] 1 AC 245   at
    [26] to  [37], [206] and [302]. By analogy,  a  decision  to  interfere
    with Article 8 rights that was not in accordance  with  lawful  policy,
    would, therefore, probably be considered as not in accordance with  the
    law for the purpose  of  justifying  an  interference  with  Article  8
    rights.

40. We accordingly further endorse the Upper Tribunal's observation  in  MF
    that judges called on  to  make  decisions  about  the  application  of
    Article 8 in cases to which the new  rules  apply,  should  proceed  by
    first considering whether a claimant  is  able  to  benefit  under  the
    applicable provisions of the  Immigration  Rules  designed  to  address
    Article 8 claims. If he or she does, there will be no need to go on  to
    consider Article 8 generally. The appeal can  be  allowed  because  the
    decision is not in accordance with the rules.

41. Where the claimant does not meet the requirements of the rules it  will
    be necessary for the judge to go on to make an assessment of Article  8
    applying the criteria established by law.

42. When considering  whether  the  immigration  decision  is  a  justified
    interference  with  the  right  to  family  and/or  private  life,  the
    provisions of the rules or other relevant statement of policy may again
    re-enter the debate but  this  time  as  part  of  the  proportionality
    evaluation. Here the judge will be asking whether the interference  was
    a proportionate means of achieving the legitimate aim in question and a
    fair balance as to the competing interests.

43. The weight to be attached to any reason  for  rejection  of  the  human
    rights claim indicated by  particular  provisions  of  the  rules  will
    depend both on the particular facts found by the judge in the  case  in
    hand and the extent that the rules themselves reflect criteria approved
    in the previous case law of the Human Rights Court  at  Strasbourg  and
    the higher courts in the United Kingdom.

44. For example, paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules deals  with  family
    life claims by people who are  liable  to  deportation.  Paragraph  398
    provides that those who have received a sentence  of  between  one  and
    four years imprisonment or have received a sentence of less than twelve
    months imprisonment but are persistent offenders can  expect  that  the
    public interest in  deportation  will  normally  outweigh  respect  for
    family life unless  paragraph 399 applies. This paragraph applies where
    the child is a British citizen, has lived  continuously  for  at  least
    seven years immediately preceding  the  immigration  decision,  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. However in
    addition there must be "no other family member who is able to care  for
    the  child  in  the  United  Kingdom".  Focusing  simply  on  the  last
    requirement, it is very difficult to see how any weight could be  given
    to this requirement in an Article 8 evaluation under the law as  it  is
    clear that the child's best interests are a primary consideration to be
    taken into account, and a child's best interests would normally require
    the maintenance of a genuine and effective care by both parents  rather
    than a default position of the absence of any family member to care for
    the child.  On  the  other  hand  the  identification  of  seven  years
    residence in the United Kingdom, may be a helpful  starting  point  for
    the assessment of when it would be reasonable  to  expect  a  child  of
    whatever nationality to have the company of  a  caring  parent  in  the
    United Kingdom.

45. The decision under appeal was made after 9 July 2012  and  so  the  new
    rules clearly apply. Unlike the Tribunal in  MF   we  do  not  have  to
    grapple with whether the rules can apply to immigration decisions  that
    have been taken before the new rules were brought into effect.  HC  194
    Appendix FM is expressed not to apply  to  any  application  for  entry
    clearance, leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain that had  been
    made and not  decided  before  8  July,  but  note  that   Rule  A  362
    provides:

         "Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under Part
         13 of these Rules, the claim under  Article  8  will  only  succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 9  July  2012  are  met
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served."

46. The rules themselves are silent as to their application to  deportation
    decisions that are made and the appeal determined before 9 July but may
    have to be re-examined later. It is at least clear that HC  194  cannot
    be used to undermine judicial decisions allowing an appeal on Article 8
    grounds taken before they came into effect. A retrospective deprivation
    of the benefit  of  a  favourable  decision  under  the  law  would  be
    offensive to basic public law and human rights principles.  Equally  we
    can see compelling reasons why a claimant who has or should have won an
    appeal that has been determined by a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    before the new rules had come into effect should  not  be  deprived  of
    such a benefit, by virtue of the fact that the judge had made an  error
    of law and the matter had to be remade. Otherwise, we can  see  that  a
    fresh judicial decision on an Article 8 claim made after  9  July  2012
    should take into account and give appropriate weight to  the  Secretary
    of state's policy as set out in the rules.

47. We now return to consider the Secretary of State's submissions  on  the
    status of HC 194 and its effect on Article 8 decision making where  the
    judge has to decide whether the decision is in accordance with the law.
    In our view, she over-states the significance of the rule change.

48. First, the reference to  Parliament's  approval  of  HC  194  seems  an
    attempt to approximate the rules  to  a  statutory  assessment  of  the
    balance between competing interests such  as  that  considered  by  the
    House of Lords in Kay v Lambeth Borough Council  [2006]  2  AC  465  on
    which the Secretary of State placed reliance in her submissions in  the
    case of Huang (loc cit) see [17].

49. We cannot agree, for the following reasons:

                        i) Lord Bingham's answer to the point remains a good
                           one:


                  "the Immigration Rules and supplementary instructions  are
                  not the product of active debate in Parliament where  non-
                  nationals seeking leave to remain are  not  in  any  event
                  represented"


         ii)  Only the Parliamentary process for primary legislation permits
             a clause by clause discussion of the measures, with opportunity
             for amendments and revision.


        iii) By comparison, we accept the  claimant's  contention  that  the
             procedure adopted here provided a weak  form  of  Parliamentary
             scrutiny: see R (Stellato) v SSHD [2007] UKHL 5, [2007] 2 AC 70
             at [12].

         iv) There may have been more active debate of the new rules in  the
             House of Commons than is often  the  case  under  the  negative
             procedure  resolution,  but  the  House  of  Commons   is   not
             Parliament and it has long been the law that  a  resolution  of
             the House of Commons is not given  supremacy  akin  to  primary
             legislation by the court: see Stockdale v Hansard  (1839)  9  A
             and E 1.   The  position  has  been  succinctly  summarised  by
             A.W.Bradley and K D Ewing   Constitutional  and  Administrative
             Law (15th Edition 2011 p.54):

                       "An Act of  Parliament  has  legal  force  which  the
                  courts are not willing to  ascribe  to  other  instruments
                  which for one reason or another fall short  of  that  pre-
                  eminent status. Thus  the  following  instruments  do  not
                  enjoy  legislative  supremacy  and  the  courts  will   if
                  necessary decide whether or not they have legal effect: a)
                  a resolution of the House of Commons"

          v) Just as in the case of Huang, Parliament has  not  altered  the
             legal duty of the judge determining appeals in  both  Chambers,
             to decide on proportionality for him or herself.


         vi)  A claimant who relies on Article 8  will  by  definition  have
             failed to succeed under the rules but may succeed under the law
             on Article 8 grounds despite the provisions of  the  rules.   A
             failure to comply with the  rules  thus  remains  the  starting
             point of the Article 8 inquiry and not its conclusion.

        vii)  There is a significant  difference  between  broad  issues  of
             social policy and individual immigration decisions where  there
             is private and/or family life to be respected. This  is  not  a
             situation where Parliament has chosen  to  interfere  with  the
             rights of property holders by enabling tenants  to  enfranchise
             see (James v United Kingdom [1986] 8 EHRR 123, or when a  court
             is able to prolong residence as a home beyond legal entitlement
             (Kay v Lambeth London Borough Council [2006] 2 AC 465).

       viii)  We note, in any event, that as the  Article  8  case  law  has
             developed  Pinnock v Manchester Corporation [2011] UKSC  6  and
             after, there are more grounds to suggest  that  greater  weight
             must  be  given  to  individualised  consideration   than   was
             suggested to be the case in Kay.

50. Second, we are equally unimpressed with the submission  that  following
    the adoption of HC 194 and Appendix FM, the test to be applied  by  the
    judge in deciding whether the decision is in accordance with the law is
    whether there are "exceptional circumstances" for allowing  the  appeal
    notwithstanding the absence of compliance with the rules:

          i) Article 8 decisions apply to a wide variety of people: some may
             be outside the UK and seeking entry clearance to enter;  others
             may be waiting a  first  decision  on  leave  to  enter  albeit
             physically present, some may have  entered  irregularly  before
             establishing  private  and  family  life;  others   will   have
             established such private and  family  life  during  periods  of
             lawful residence and have had the reasonable  expectation  that
             their future lay in the UK.


         ii)  One size does not fit all. It is not possible to apply one set
             of  criteria,  such  as  whether  there   are   'insurmountable
             obstacles'  to  these  divergent  cases,  where  the  case  law
             indicates that a fact sensitive assessment  is  necessary.  The
             Upper Tribunal made similar observations  in  its  decision  in
             Sanade and others [2012] UKUT  468  (IAC)  [2012]  Imm  AR  597
             before the new Rules were adopted at [35] and [37].  The  House
             of Lords has deprecated the test of  exceptional  circumstances
             in Huang and further explained why in EB Kosovo (see  below  at
             paragraph 56 below). In our judgment these observations  remain
             as true after the new rules came into force, as before.

        iii) The package of changes made  in  regulating  the  admission  of
             family members, grant of leave to remain or their expulsion are
             generally considerably more rigorous  than  previous  practice.
             We note the Secretary of State's response to our question 1 and
             accept that HC 194 and Appendix FM  does  not  reproduce  every
             negative factor that has been identified in  the  case  law  of
             domestic and international  courts.  Nevertheless,  it  imposes
             very  exacting  requirements  in  a  number  of  circumstances:
             minimum income at significantly higher levels than subsistence,
             continuous residence for 20 years in private life claims and in
             certain cases the absence of any ties; insurmountable obstacles
             to cohabitation by spouses and the like.   The  'in  accordance
             with the law' limb of the appeal is thus likely to arise  as  a
             real issue in more rather than fewer appeals.

51. Since the hearing and in the course of  making this  determination,  we
    have become aware of the decision of Lord Brodie in the case of   MS  v
    SSHD  [2013] CSOH 1 9 January 2013. This was  a  fresh  claim  judicial
    review case in which it was not necessary  to  analyse  the  particular
    provisions of the new rules in any detail or the case law of the higher
    courts in the United Kingdom on issues addressed in  part  by  the  new
    rules and where the factual foundation of the claim did not lend itself
    to any feature out of the ordinary. Whilst we note some  difference  in
    emphasis at [28] to [31] and our observations above, we do  not  detect
    any conflict in approach as to the function of a judge in an Article  8
    appeal where family life is indeed engaged.

52. Third, we do not accept that all the criteria set out in HC 194  accord
    with the criteria for  an  Article  8  assessment  established  by  the
    existing case law. The law relating to  the  best  interests  of  minor
    children resident is one such issue, that we  have  already  noted.  We
    share the concerns of  the  Tribunal  in  MF  that  provisions  of  the
    Appendix FM do not appear to  reflect  the  principle  that  a  primary
    consideration in immigration decision making is the  welfare  and  best
    interests of the child. The  more  the  new  rules  restrict  otherwise
    relevant and weighty considerations from being taken into account,  the
    less regard will be had to them in the assessment  of  proportionality.
    We do not need to consider this further in the present appeal  case  as
    there are no such children.

53. However, the decision does rely on the fact  that  the  claimant  fails
    under Article 8 because she cannot bring herself within  the  exception
    of 'insurmountable obstacles'. In our judgment, to reject a claim under
    Article 8 because the test of insurmountable obstacles is  not  met  as
    the Secretary of State did at [17] above is  to  fail  to  comply  with
    principles of the established law.

54. The Secretary of State disputes that and submits  that  "insurmountable
    obstacles" is the test clearly established in the Strasbourg case  law.
    Mr Nath referred us to Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer  v  Netherlands
    (2006) 4th Section [2006] ECHR at [39]:
         "The Court reiterates that in the  context  of  both  positive  and
         negative obligations the State must strike a fair  balance  between
         the competing interests of the individual and of the community as a
         whole. However, in both contexts the State enjoys a certain  margin
         of appreciation. Moreover, Article 8 does  not  entail  a  general
         obligation for a State to respect immigrants' choice of the country
         of  their  residence  and  to  authorise  family  reunion  in   its
         territory. Nevertheless, in a case which concerns  family  life  as
         well as immigration, the extent of a State's obligations  to  admit
         to its territory relatives of  persons  residing  there  will  vary
         according to the particular circumstances of the  persons  involved
         and the general interest (see Gl v. Switzerland,  judgment  of  19
         February 1996, Reports 1996-I, pp. 174-75,  38).  Factors  to  be
         taken into account in this context are the extent to  which  family
         life is effectively  ruptured,  the  extent  of  the  ties  in  the
         Contracting State, whether there are  insurmountable  obstacles  in
         the way of the family living in the country of  origin  of  one  or
         more of them, whether there  are  factors  of  immigration  control
         (e.g. a history of breaches of immigration law)  or  considerations
         of public order weighing in favour of exclusion (see Solomon v. the
         Netherlands  (dec.),  no.  44328/98,  5 September  2000).  Another
         important consideration  will  also  be  whether  family  life  was
         created at a time when the persons involved  were  aware  that  the
         immigration status of one of them was such that the persistence  of
         that family life within the host state would  from  the  outset  be
         precarious. The Court has previously held that where  this  is  the
         case it is likely only to be in the most exceptional  circumstances
         that the removal of the non-national family member will  constitute
         a violation of Article 8 (Mitchell v. the  United  Kingdom  (dec.),
         no. 40447/98, 24 November 1998, and Ajayi and Others v. the  United
         Kingdom (dec.), no. 27663/95, 22 June 1999)."
55. Similar statements have been made recently in  Nunez  v  Norway  [2011]
    ECHR 1047 at [70] and Antwi v Norway [2012] ECHR 259 at [89] to  [103];
    we understand that the case is to be heard in the Grand Chamber.

56. We acknowledge that in a  number  of  Strasbourg  decisions,  different
    sections of the European Court of Human Rights have stressed that where
    initial entry has  been  unlawful  or  whether  family  life  has  been
    established at a time where status was  precarious,  it  will  only  be
    exceptionally or where there are insurmountable obstacles to the family
    life being transferred abroad that removal will  be  a  violation.   We
    note that there is, therefore, some tension between those  cases  where
    these criteria are used and some of the decisions of senior  courts  in
    the United Kingdom. However, whereas the  Strasbourg  Court  refers  to
    this being one of several factors to consider  (and  others  that  were
    decisive in Nunez included the best interests  of  the  child)  HC  194
    imposes a test that has to be met for leave to be granted. This turns a
    factor in the case into a minimum requirement to be always met.  We  do
    not read the Strasbourg cases as doing this.

57. Further, where family life was established  through  lawful  residence,
    the Grand Chamber in Boultif v Switzerland  [2001]  did  not  refer  to
    insurmountable obstacles but posed a different question in its guidance
    at [48]:
         "The Court has only a limited number of  decided  cases  where  the
         main obstacle to expulsion was that it  would  entail  difficulties
         for the spouses to stay together and, in  particular,  for  one  of
         them and/or the children to live in the other's country of  origin.
         It is therefore called upon  to  establish  guiding  principles  in
         order to examine whether the measure in question was necessary in a
         democratic society.
         In assessing the relevant criteria in such a case, the  Court  will
         consider the nature and seriousness of the offence committed by the
         applicant; the duration of the applicant's stay in the country from
         which he is going to be expelled; the time which has elapsed  since
         the commission of the offence and the  applicant's  conduct  during
         that period; the nationalities of the  various  persons  concerned;
         the applicant's  family  situation,  such  as  the  length  of  the
         marriage; other factors revealing whether the couple  lead  a  real
         and genuine family life; whether the spouse knew about the  offence
         at the time when he or she entered into a family relationship;  and
         whether there are children in the marriage and, if so,  their  age.
         Not least, the Court will also  consider  the  seriousness  of  the
         difficulties which the spouse would be likely to encounter  in  the
         applicant's country of origin, although the mere fact that a person
         might face certain difficulties in accompanying her or  his  spouse
         cannot in itself preclude expulsion."
         It is thus the degree of difficulty the couple face rather than
    the 'surmountability' of the obstacle that is the focus of judicial
    assessment but again as a factor rather than a test.
58. It has been repeatedly stated in national jurisprudence  laid  down  by
    the higher courts in the UK that in none of these cases was  Strasbourg
    laying down a test for engagement of Article 8 as opposed to reaching a
    decision on proportionality in the particular case. The requirement for
    exceptional  circumstances  or  insurmountable   obstacles   has   been
    authoritatively declared to be  an  erroneous  one  in  the  Article  8
    immigration context by the House of Lords in Huang [2007]  UKHL  11  at
    [20], EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL 41 at [8] [12] [18] [20] [21]  and  by  the
    Court of Appeal on innumerable occasions  including   LM  (DRC)  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 325  at [11] and [13]; VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5  at  [19]
    and [24]; JO Uganda  [2010] EWCA Civ 10  at [14] to [15]  and  [23]  to
    [26].

59. Whilst  it  is  open  to  Parliament  to  change  the  law  by  primary
    legislation unless and until it does so these decisions are binding  on
    the Upper Tribunal and will be followed by it.

60. Even if it were open to us to do so, which it is not, we would  further
    reject any implicit submission that these decisions are contrary to the
    Strasbourg jurisprudence. In addition to the points  we  have  made  at
    [56] and [57] above,  we  observe  that  as  a  matter  of  fundamental
    principle in  its  international  supervision  of  the  application  of
    Article 8 the European Court of Human Rights as an international  court
    applies minimum standards rather than a  uniform  approach  binding  on
    every contracting state. The principle of subsidiarity affords a margin
    of appreciation to the institutions of the contracting  state  and  the
    national authorities are better placed than the international court  to
    conduct a primary examination of the  competing  considerations.  Those
    authorities include the courts and tribunals called upon  to  make  the
    assessment.

61. For example, the House of Lords has stated on  a  number  of  occasions
    that in assessing the proportionality of an interference with rights in
    United Kingdom law the question is whether the interference is no  more
    than necessary. This is an application of the least intrusive principle
    formulated by Lord Steyn in R   v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ex parte Daley  [2001]  UKHL  26;  [2001]  2  AC  532.  This
    approach was applied in immigration cases by Huang (supra). The Supreme
    Court has recently affirmed this in Quila [2011] UKSC 46. At  [45] Lord
     Wilson said:
       "The amendment had a legitimate aim: it was 'for the  protection  of
       the rights and freedoms of others', namely those who might otherwise
       be forced into marriage. It was "in accordance with  the  law."  But
       was it "necessary in  a  democratic  society"?  It  is  within  this
       question that an assessment of the amendment's proportionality  must
       be undertaken. In Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2007] 2 AC 167 Lord Bingham suggested, at para 19, that in  such  a
       context four questions generally arise, namely:
         a) is the legislative objective sufficiently important  to  justify
         limiting a fundamental right?
         b) are the measures which have been designed to meet it  rationally
         connected to it?
         c) are they no more than are necessary to accomplish it?
         d) do they  strike  a  fair  balance  between  the  rights  of  the
         individual and the interests of the community?
       In the present case the requisite enquiry may touch on question  (b)
       but the main focus is on questions (c) and (d)."
62.  Lord Wilson  concluded at [58]


         "I  would,  in  conclusion,  acknowledge  that  the  amendment   is
         rationally  connected  to  the  objective   of   deterring   forced
         marriages. So the Secretary of State provides a satisfactory answer
         to question (b) set out in para 45 above. But the number of  forced
         marriages which it deters is highly debatable. What seems clear  is
         that the number of unforced marriages which it obstructs from their
         intended development for up  to  three  years  vastly  exceeds  the
         number of forced marriages which it deters. Neither in the material
         which she published prior to the introduction of the  amendment  in
         2008 nor in her evidence in these proceedings has the Secretary  of
         State addressed this imbalance - still less sought to identify  the
         scale of it. Even had it been correct to say that the scale of  the
         imbalance was a matter of judgement  for  the  Secretary  of  State
         rather than for the courts, it is not a  judgement  which,  on  the
         evidence before the court, she has ever made. She clearly fails  to
         establish, in the words of question (c), that the amendment  is  no
         more than is necessary to accomplish  her  objective  and,  in  the
         words of question (d), that it strikes a fair balance  between  the
         rights of the parties to unforced marriages and  the  interests  of
         the community in preventing forced marriages. On any view it  is  a
         sledge-hammer but she has not attempted to identify the size of the
         nut. At all events she fails to  establish  that  the  interference
         with the rights of the respondents under article 8 is justified"


63. By contrast the European  Court  of  Human  Rights  generally  contents
    itself with the assessment of whether the interference can be justified
    because it represents a fair balance of the competing interests  rather
    than the least intrusive way of achieving the legitimate aim.  However,
    Strasbourg  has  never  suggested  that  the  Daly/Huang  approach   is
    inconsistent with Article 8 ECHR, and  similarly  has  never  suggested
    that it is inappropriate for the national court to ask  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect the couple to relocate the claimant's  country  of
    origin. We do not explore how this  principle  applies  in  deportation
    appeals as opposed to considerations of policy. We note that in general
    if it is concluded that  deportation  or  removal  is  necessary  as  a
    proportionate measure to  protect  a  public  interest   recognised  by
    Article 8(2) nothing less will do, although  in  particular  cases  the
    length of the exclusion and the capacity for reform, particularly of  a
    young  offender may be relevant considerations.

64. Apart from the  principle  of  subsidiarity,  there  are  further  good
    reasons why the national  approach  may  be  more  inclusive  than  the
    Strasbourg criteria. The national court has  to  apply  the  Convention
    through the prism of other legal obligations, for example the  European
    Convention on Establishment 1955  Article  3  that  affords  particular
    weight to  10  years  lawful  residence,  or  to  the  consequences  of
    nationality of the European Union in respect of measures that force  an
    EU national to leave the Union in breach of their  right  of  residence
    (see the Upper Tribunal's conclusions  in  Sanade  and  others  (above)
    applying the principle established in Ruiz Zambrano; see also  Harrison
    (Jamaica) v  SSHD  [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 at [63] to [68] ).

65. The uniform application of the Immigration Rules is  not  a  legitimate
    aim in itself justifying interference with Article 8 rights but a means
    of maintaining public safety, the economic well being of  the  country,
    prevention of disorder or crime, the protection of health or morals and
    the rights and freedoms others, (see Blake J  in  R  (Mansoor)  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin) [34] to [38] noted without disapproval in  SSHD
    v Treebhowan; SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, at [76] per
    Elias  LJ).  Therefore,  the  fact  that  a  person  cannot  meet   the
    requirements for leave under HC 194 does not mean that the Secretary of
    State can  for  that  reason  alone  demonstrate  a  proportionate  and
    justified interference to prevent disorder.

66.  We  agree  with  the  claimant's  submission  that  reliance  on   the
    authorities dealing with Article 8 in the context of  extradition  will
    not normally be helpful in the context  of  deportation  as  there  the
    legitimate aim of prosecuting  criminals  pursuant  to  an  extradition
    agreement is significantly different.

67. Accordingly, we conclude there can be no  presumption  that  the  Rules
    will normally be conclusive of the Article 8 assessment or that a  fact
    sensitive inquiry is not normally needed. Indeed, the conclusion  under
    the Rules may often have little bearing on the judge's  own  assessment
    of proportionality.  The Secretary of State may decide  to  only  grant
    leave to remain in cases where there would be insurmountable  obstacles
    to the family relocating to any country but the judge  is  unlikely  to
    give weight to that factor in the proportionality assessment if  he  or
    she concludes that the obstacles to relocation are substantial  and  in
    the circumstances it would not be reasonable to expect the other family
    members to relocate there, whether for reasons of  nationality,  length
    of residence, the best interest of the child or otherwise. If there  is
    no presumption that the provisions of the rules reflect and  apply  the
    balance between the competing considerations, exceptional circumstances
    cannot be the test to be applied under the law.

68. However, when the judge makes his evaluation of  proportionality  under
    the law, he or she is entitled to have  regard  to  particular  factors
    identified in the international and national jurisprudence whether they
    are reflected in the rules or not. The cases continue to make  relevant
    distinctions depending on the circumstances  between  criminal  conduct
    and a failure to meet the requirements for continued residence; between
    criminality of  an  intermediate  degree  of  seriousness  and  lengthy
    sentences for conduct of the highest  degree  of  seriousness;  between
    offenders whose propensity to re offend makes them a danger to the host
    community and those whose conduct is unlikely to be  repeated;  between
    those who were lawfully admitted when family life arose and  those  who
    were not;  between those who have resided here for many years  or  most
    of their life and others; between those whose  family  members  are  UK
    nationals  and  those  who  are  not;  between  those  irrespective  of
    nationality who have strong and substantial ties  with  the  claimant's
    country of origin and those who do not.
69. The Strasbourg case law indicates that weighty reasons  are  needed  to
    justify expulsion of someone who has had long residence as a  child  or
    that would risk separating devoted partners in a  family  relationship.
    It may, by contrast, require weighty reasons or exceptional factors  to
    outweigh the strong  justification  for  the  expulsion  of  those  who
    entered by deception, remained by fraud, established their relationship
    in the host state in precarious circumstances and  never  have  had  an
    expectation of being permitted to remain to conduct  their  family  and
    private life in the host state.

70. The use made of such guidance by the Upper Tribunal and the application
    in the course of the evaluation of the term  exceptional  circumstances
    is not a reference to a definitive test or otherwise unlawful,  but  is
    an appropriate way of setting the context for the  particular  decision
    (see Harrison (Jamaica) v SSHD   [2012] EWCA Civ 1736, 21 December 2012
    at [72] to [74]).

Error of law

71. We now return to the case in hand and consider each of the four grounds
    of appeal noted at [23] above.

72. Ground One: It follows from what we  have  said  above,  that  a  judge
    considering a decision made on or after 9  July  2012  should  consider
    whether the claimant complies with HC 194 and Appendix FM.  Judge Keane
    did not do so. It is accepted to be the case, that the claimant did not
    comply with the Rules. However, any error of law in  failing  first  to
    assess the claim under the Rules would be immaterial if the  assessment
    of the Article 8 case as a matter of  law  apart  from  the  Rules  was
    satisfactory.

73. Ground Two: Judge Keane made no error of law in considering whether  it
    was reasonable to  expect  Mr  Akinola  to  relocate  to  Nigeria.  The
    requirement of  EX 1 (b) that "there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with that partner continuing  outside  the  UK"  may  be  a
    requirement of the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  but  it  is  not  a
    requirement for the judge to apply in considering Article 8.

74. Ground Three:  Judge Keane gave reasons at paragraph 29 of his decision
    for his conclusion that it would not be reasonable for  Mr  Akinola  to
    move permanently to Nigeria. He is a British citizen, he has a daughter
    who is a student here, he has resided here for 23 years and has  stable
    employment and a home here. It is not  alleged  that  his  decision  is
    irrational or perverse.  In determining whether there is  an  error  of
    law, we do not need to consider whether  we  would  have  reached  this
    conclusion for ourselves. These are matters of assessment for the judge
    and we find no error of law.

75. Ground Four:  We accept that there was a material error of law made  by
    the judge in this aspect of his considering whether the decision was in
    accordance with  the  law.  He  nowhere  took  into  consideration  the
    precarious immigration status of  the  claimant  at  the  time  of  the
    marriage and the decision to refuse her admission.  He should have done
    so. The claimant was in the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  and  had  no
    claim to remain for any other purposes. Her visa  was  granted  on  the
    basis that she had satisfied the ECO that she would leave the UK at the
    end of each visit. From 2008, when her  relationship  with  Mr  Akinola
    deepened she was in breach of the terms of leave to enter and  remained
    without authority, moreover  she  used  false  documents,  including  a
    forged settlement visa to enable her to work. It  is  unclear  why  she
    needed to work if she was a dependant of Mr Akinola's before her return
    to Nigeria.

76. In Nunez v Norway June 2011 the Fourth Section of the European Court of
    Human Rights stated the principles for assessment  where a  person  had
    entered the country irregularly and sought to remain on the grounds  of
    a family relationship and concluded at [70] :-

         "The Court further reiterates that Article 8  does  not  entail  a
         general obligation for a State to respect immigrants' choice of the
         country of their residence and to authorise family reunion  in  its
         territory. Nevertheless, in a case which concerns  family  life  as
         well as immigration, the extent of a State's obligations  to  admit
         to its territory relatives of  persons  residing  there  will  vary
         according to the particular circumstances of the  persons  involved
         and the general interest (see Gl, cited above,  38; and Rodrigues
         da Silva and Hoogkamer, cited above,  39).  Factors  to  be  taken
         into account in this context are the extent to which family life is
         effectively ruptured, the extent of the  ties  in  the  Contracting
         State, whether there are insurmountable obstacles in the way of the
         family living in the country of origin of one or more of  them  and
         whether there are factors of immigration control  (for  example,  a
         history of breaches of immigration law) or considerations of public
         order weighing in favour of exclusion (see Rodrigues da  Silva  and
         Hoogkamer, cited above, ibid.;  Ajayi  and  Others  v.  the  United
         Kingdom  (dec.),  no.  27663/95,  22  June  1999;  Solomon  v.  the
         Netherlands  (dec.),  no.  44328/98,  5 September  2000).  Another
         important consideration is whether family life  was  created  at  a
         time when the persons involved  were  aware  that  the  immigration
         status of one of them was such that the persistence of that  family
         life within the host State would from the outset be precarious (see
         Jerry Olajide Sarumi v. the United Kingdom  (dec.),  no.  43279/98,
         26 January 1999; Andrey Sheabashov  c.  la  Lettonie  (dec.),  no.
         50065/99, 22 May 1999). Where this is the case the removal of  the
         non-national family member would be  incompatible  with  Article  8
         only in  exceptional  circumstances  (see  Abdulaziz,  Cabales  and
         Balkandali, cited above,   68;  Mitchell  v. the United  Kingdom
         (dec.), no. 40447/98, 24 November 1998, and Ajayi and Others, cited
         above; Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer, cited above, ibid.).

77. In this case the claimant and her  husband  must  have  known  she  was
    developing family life when  her  immigration  status  was  precarious,
    indeed when she had overstayed her leave to  remain.   In  addition  to
    breaching immigration control  she  had  employed  false  documents  to
    obtain unlawful employment. She was prosecuted for  this  conduct.  The
    claimant did maintain strong ties to Nigeria albeit that  her  previous
    marriage had broken down through her  husband's  violent  conduct.  She
    returned regularly to Nigeria and  had  married  there.   The  decision
    under appeal was taken after her application for entry clearance  as  a
    spouse had been rejected and when she was seeking to enter the UK  from
    Nigeria. As in the case of Nunez, this  combination  of  factors  meant
    that weighty reasons existed  to  refuse  her  entry  and  justify  her
    removal to Nigeria.

78. For reasons we have already explained this is not to  adopt  a  general
    test of exceptional  circumstances,   but  to  identify  the  need  for
    weighty factors in favour of the claimant in this class of  case.   The
    Upper Tribunal has consistently had  regard  to  the  circumstances  in
    which the family life was contracted and the  degree  of  deception  or
    breach of immigration control. All judges making such decisions must do
    so.

79. The reasons relied on by the claimant for why a human  rights  analysis
    required her admission were not strong. By contrast with  the  case  of
    Nunez there were no  interests  of  minor  children  to  consider.  The
    claimant and her husband had not founded a family  of  their  own,  and
    there was no evidence of any ties between the claimant and Mr Akinola's
    daughter by a previous marriage. In any event that daughter was now  an
    adult and living in a separate household. The claimant had returned  to
    Nigeria to get married, and was seeking admission in a  false  capacity
    as a visitor when her intentions were to remain with her husband.    HC
    194 Appendix FM makes it necessary  that  an  applicant  for  leave  on
    Article 8 grounds must not be in the UK as a visitor,  with  leave  for
    less than  six  months  (save  as  a  fianc  (e))  or  with  temporary
    admission. Whilst we do not accept that these requirements are fatal to
    an Article 8  claim,  they  serve  to  emphasise  how  precarious  this
    claimant's  connection  with  the  UK  was  and  how  recent  were  her
    continuing connections with Nigeria.

80. For these reasons we are satisfied that not only did the judge fail  to
    remind himself that the  family  life  was  established  in  precarious
    circumstances, but overall he reached a conclusion  in  the  claimant's
    favour that he was not entitled to reach.  The strength of  the  public
    interest in removal and the weakness of the right to respect for family
    life established in these circumstances, was  such  that  any  properly
    self-directed judge was bound to conclude that the Secretary  of  State
    had justified refusal of admission as a proportionate  measure  in  the
    interests of prevention of crime  and  disorder,  irrespective  of  the
    consequences to claimant and her husband. This is  a  case  where  Lord
    Bingham's observations  cited  at  [37]  are  particularly  applicable.
    There is a material error of law and we set aside the decision allowing
    the appeal.

81. In the light of this conclusion, we conclude that we  can  re-make  the
    case on the information before us without  a  further  hearing,  as  we
    informed the parties we anticipated would be the  case,  in  the  event
    that we found the conclusion irrational. However we ascertained at  the
    hearing that Mr Akinola is a dual Nigerian and British national. It  is
    clear that he has maintained his ties with his home country,  including
    of course, the fact that he returned to marry  the  claimant  there  in
    March 2012.

82. Whilst we did not find an error of law in the judge's conclusions  that
    it would not be reasonable for Mr Akinola to live in  Nigeria,  now  we
    have found an error of law it is open to us to re-visit  the  question.
    We do not disturb the primary facts found but note  that  we  now  know
    that Mr Akinola is a  dual  national.  He  has  retained  his  Nigerian
    nationality and has visited the country recently. We do not think  that
    the indefinite separation of  this  couple  is  inevitable  if  she  is
    removed to Nigeria. Even if Mr Akinola had  understandable  reasons  to
    want to remain in the United Kingdom and relocation to Nigeria would be
    a hardship for him, we have seen nothing to suggest that he  would  not
    be able to follow his wife to Nigeria.

83. In the particular circumstances of this case, given  the  circumstances
    in which the relationship arose we conclude that it is not unreasonable
    for him to have to decide between retaining his residence in the United
    Kingdom and following his  wife  to  Nigeria  for  the  time  being  to
    continue family life there. In any event, the fact that it may  not  be
    reasonable to expect the other family members to relocate does not mean
    that in every case deportation or removal is  disproportionate  or  not
    justified.

84. The facts are materially different  from  those  of  the  case  of  the
    successful appellant in Sanade where it was not  reasonable  to  expect
    the spouse to leave the EU as  in  that  case  the  claimant  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain before committing  the  offence  and
    requiring the mother to leave would also require the minor children  to
    be compelled to do so.  The  UKBA  continues  to  accept  that  EU  law
    prevents the state requiring an EU law citizen from leaving the  United
    Kingdom, although contends  with  good  reason,  that  this  is  to  be
    distinguished from a case where an independent adult can chose  between
    continued residence in the United  Kingdom  or  continued  cohabitation
    abroad.

85. Taking all the facts found below in the claimant's favour into account,
    it is clear that the Secretary of State's  decision  is  in  accordance
    with the rules and the applicable policy and is not unlawful.   In  our
    judgment it is taken in support  of  a  legitimate  aim  of  protecting
    public order and the rights and freedoms of others, is a  proportionate
     and fair balance  in  all  the  circumstances  and  thus  a  justified
    interference with Article 8 rights.

Conclusions:

86. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
    error on a point of law.

     We set aside the determination.

     We re-make the decision in the claimant's appeal by dismissing it.

     All members of the  panel  have  contributed  to  the  making  of  this
decision

                               Signed                                  Date


                               21 January 2013

                                Chamber President
APPENDIX A

Home Office letter 24 October 2012


Dear Mr Justice Blake,

Uchenna Eucharia Izuazu v Secretary of State (Appeal AA/06877/2012)

On 9 October 2012 you directed that the Secretary of State respond to the
following two questions raised in this appeal:

i. What difference, if any, do the recent changes in the Immigration Rules
have on the pre-existing case law of the Supreme Court and higher appellate
courts as to the learning on Article 8? If it is contended that the
relevant tests for assessing whether an immigration decision interferes
unjustifiably with family life have changed, how can rules achieve such a
change?

The Secretary of State's starting-point is that the Immigration Rules are a
statement of her practice in deciding applications. The purpose in
including provisions in the rules which reflect Article 8 consideration is
to ensure efficiency and consistency and prevent arbitrary decision-making.
This is important to applicants and caseworkers and to ensure public
confidence in the immigration system.

The Secretary of State has carefully considered the broad principles set
out in the Strasbourg and domestic case law when formulating the new rules.
The new rules properly reflect the right balance, in the great majority of
cases, between individual rights and the wider public interest in
maintaining immigration control and protecting the public from criminals.
This does not mean that the new rules fit exactly with every previous
Strasbourg and domestic judgment. Many decisions were fact-specific and
they were decided in a policy vacuum.

It is not the Secretary of State's position that in every case which meets
the requirements of the new rules a refusal prior to the new rules would
have been a breach of Article 8 (in some cases in order to ensure greater
consistency the new rules are more generous than strictly required under
the case law), nor that in every case under the new rules a refusal would
not be a breach of Article 8.

The recent changes in the Immigration Rules relating to family and private
life do not therefore alter the test set out in Razgar1 which the Secretary
of State accepts are the correct steps to follow when assessing whether an
immigration decision interferes unjustifiably with family or private life.
However, the new rules represent a significant change in the way the
caseworker assesses whether interference in an individual's family or
private life is proportionate to the legitimate public policy objective to
be achieved (step 5 of the Razgar test). The case law lists possible
relevant factors but leaves it to the decision-maker in an individual case
to determine how best to balance the relevant factors, based on that
person's individual perception of public policy considerations. Inevitably,
caseworkers and the Courts have had to reach their own view on the public
policy imperatives, without a clear statement from the Secretary of State
and Parliament on where the public interest lies.

Since the new rules came into force, caseworkers and the Courts no longer
operate in a policy vacuum. The facts of the individual case are the
starting-point when considering proportionality, but they are the starting-
point which then has to be balanced against the public interest as
reflected in the new rules. The public interest achieved by applying clear
rules must be measured by the effect of the rules across the board, not
just in relation to an individual case.

As the new rules are the Secretary of State's statement of practice to be
applied by her caseworkers it remains for a court or tribunal to determine
whether an immigration decision is compatible with Article 8 on the facts
of that case. This is clear from the legislation on appeals which states
that an appeal must be allowed if the decision was not in accordance with
the law. The appellate immigration authority, deciding an appeal, is not
reviewing the decision of another decision-maker. It is deciding whether or
not it is unlawful to refuse leave to enter or remain, and it is doing so
on the basis of up-to-date facts. The need for the authority to have regard
to the rules and public policy consideration, now clearly expressed by the
Secretary of State in the new rules, is supported by Huang2 -

    "...the general administrative desirability of applying known rules if
    a system of immigration control is o be workable, predictable,
    consistent and fair as between one applicant and another; the damage to
    good administration and effective control if a system is perceived by
    applicants internationally to be unduly porous, unpredictable or
    perfunctory; the need to discourage non-nationals admitted to the
    country temporarily from believing they can commit serious crimes and
    yet be allowed to remain; the need to discourage fraud, deception and
    deliberate breaches of the law; and so on."

However, while the rules do not bind the Courts in the same way as primary
legislation, they are a clear, democratically endorsed, statement of public
policy which must now be taken into account by the Courts when assessing
proportionality. The Secretary of State would expect the Courts to defer to
the view endorsed by Parliament on how, broadly, public policy
considerations are weighed against individual family and private life
rights, when assessing Article 8 in any individual case. That is, save in a
narrow group of cases where it is found that the consequences of the
immigration decision are exceptional (discussed in section iii. of this
letter).

In summary, the Government can interfere in the exercise of Article 8
rights where in the public interest it is necessary and proportionate to do
so, including to safeguard the UK's economic well-being by controlling
immigration and to protect the public, by deterring foreign criminals and
by removing them from the UK. Following the recent changes, the new rules
now properly reflect the view of the Government and Parliament as to how
the balance should be struck between that public interest and individuals'
rights under Article 8. The Government expects the Courts to have regard to
that view in reaching their decisions.

The Secretary of State makes the following supplementary points:

(a) Controlling immigration in the UK's economic interests and protecting
the public are matters of public policy which it is the responsibility of
the Government to determine, subject to the views of Parliament. The
Immigration Rules, laid before Parliament by the Secretary of State under
section 3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971, are a vehicle for the detailed
expression of that policy. They are a statement of the normal practice to
be followed by the Secretary of State's caseworkers in making immigration
decisions under the statutory framework that Parliament has provided. It is
in the interests of a clear, consistent and transparent immigration system,
in which applicants and the public can have confidence, that these rules
should enable the Secretary of State's caseworkers to decide individual
cases lawfully and in accordance with the Government's immigration policy

(b) When the Human Rights Act 1998 was commenced in 2000, no attempt was
made to reflect the detailed implications of this in the Immigration Rules.
In particular, the rules were amended, in paragraph 2, to require all Home
Office staff to carry out their duties in compliance with the provisions of
the Human Rights Act, but there was no substantive change to the family or
private life part of the rules to reflect any consideration of
proportionality under Article 8 and there was no attempt thereafter to
align the rules with developments in case law. Instead, previous
Secretaries of State asserted that if a Court thought that the rules
produced disproportionate results in a particular case, the Court should
itself decide the proportionate outcome on the facts before them rather
than hold that the rule itself was incompatible with Article 8.

(c) This approach - which meant that the Courts could not give due weight
to the Government's and Parliament's view of where the balance should be
struck under Article 8 between individual rights and the public interest,
as the Courts did not know fully what that view was - was not conducive to
clear, consistent and transparent decision-making by the Secretary of
State's caseworkers. It meant that each case was decided by the Courts on
its own facts without reference to the role of the Secretary of State as
the primary decision-maker. It meant that foreign criminals and those who
failed to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and who should
not therefore be allowed to come to or remain in the UK, were increasingly
able to challenge their decisions in the Courts on the grounds of a breach
of Article 8.

(d) This approach did not properly reflect the responsibility of the
Government and Parliament for determining the public policy framework under
which immigration decisions should be taken. Indeed, it left the Courts to
develop public policy themselves through case law on issues such as the
appropriate level of maintenance for family migrants. Where Parliament had
clearly expressed its views as to the public interest, the Secretary of
State noted that the Courts would have regard to that, for example the
deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007.

(e) The recent changes to the Immigration Rules relating to family and
private life deal with these issues. They fill the public policy vacuum the
Government inherited by setting out the position of the Secretary of State
on proportionality under Article 8, in the light of existing case law and
of evidence such as the report of the independent Migration Advisory
Committee on the minimum income threshold for sponsoring family migrants.
The new rules state how the balance should be struck between individual
rights and the public interest. They provide clear instructions for the
Secretary of State's caseworkers on the approach they must normally take
and they therefore provide the basis for a clear, consistent and
transparent decision-making process

(f) The Secretary of State recognises that the Courts have a clear
constitutional role in reviewing the proportionality of measures passed by
Parliament and of the executive decisions made under them. However, as the
Immigration Rules now explicitly take into account the public interest
element of an assessment of proportionality under Article 8, the Secretary
of State submits that the focus of the Courts when considering individual
cases should be on considering proportionality in the light of this clear
statement of public policy. The Government expects that the Courts will
give effect to the determination of the Government and Parliament on
matters of public policy.

(g) Both the new rules and the Secretary of State's guidance to her
caseworkers make clear that the Immigration Rules are the starting-point
for decision-making and are not absolute: no set of rules can deal with 100
per cent of cases. However, in light of the new rules, which incorporate
the principles set out in the Strasbourg jurisprudence, the Secretary of
State submits that only in exceptional cases will a decision made in
accordance with the rules lead to a disproportionate outcome.

(h) In bringing forward the recent changes to the Immigration Rules
relating to family and private life, the Government has sought to underline
the importance of the views of Parliament on the issues of public policy to
which the qualified right under Article 8 gives rise. The Government
recognises that the procedure to which the Immigration Rules are subject
under section 3(2) of the 1971 Act is not of the same order as the process
for Parliamentary consideration of primary legislation. For that reason,
the Immigration Rules cannot be said to carry the same weight as primary
legislation in representing the settled view of Parliament on a matter of
public policy. Nevertheless, the Immigration Rules are subject to
Parliamentary scrutiny; they can be prayed against and debated in
Parliament, as they were in the House of Lords on 23 October 2012; and they
can be disapproved by a resolution of either House of Parliament. These
procedures provide essential Parliamentary oversight and accountability for
the Government's regulation of entry to and stay in the UK under the
Immigration Rules.

(i) In the case of these recent rules changes, and within the constraints
of the Parliamentary time available to it, the Government has supplemented
the statutory procedure under the 1971 Act by tabling a motion inviting the
House of Commons to agree that, in the context of the qualified right under
Article 8, the conditions for migrants to enter or remain in the UK on the
basis of their family or private life should be those contained in the
Immigration Rules. The House of Commons debated and unanimously agreed the
Government's motion on 19 June 2012. As Secretary of State set out in
opening that debate (Hansard column 763):

    "Of course, judges will continue to consider each case on its
    individual merits, but it is the Courts themselves that have said that
    Parliament needs to make its views clear. In a case in 20073, the House
    of Lords said that a statement from Parliament was needed on where the
    public interest lies in the operation of Article 8 in immigration
    cases. The Court of Appeal, last year and this year4, has indicated
    that greater weight is to be given to the public interest when that has
    been endorsed by Parliament. Today's motion provides the Courts with
    the statement and the endorsement from Parliament that they have said
    is needed. The Courts should then give that statement from the elected
    legislature the weight that it deserves".

ii. Does the UKBA continue to accept that it is not reasonable to expect a
British citizen party to genuine family life in the UK to relocate
permanently abroad (paras 93 to 95 of Sanade and others [2012] UKUT IAC)?
If not, why not and how is it compatible with Dereci to require an EU
citizen to live outside the EU?

It was held in Dereci that EU law -
    "does not preclude a Member State from refusing to allow a third
    country national to reside on its territory, where that third country
    national wishes to reside with a member of his family who is a citizen
    of the Union residing in the Member State of which he has nationality,
    who has never exercised his right to freedom of movement, provided that
    such refusal does not lead, for the Union citizen concerned, to the
    denial of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights
    conferred by virtue of his status as a citizen of the Union...",

The Court was aware of the need for Member States to consider Article 8
issues even where a third country national does not qualify to remain under
EU law.

The Secretary of State continues to accept that where the primary carer of
a British citizen is denied a Zambrano right of residence on the basis that
his or her removal or deportation would not force the British citizen to
leave the EU, it will not logically be possible when considering any
Article 8 claim made by such a person to determine their claim on the basis
that the family (including the British citizen) can relocate together to a
place outside the EU. However, the Secretary of State does not accept that
it follows that there will be no circumstances in which a decision taken in
respect of the primary carer of a British citizen can require that British
citizen to leave the UK. The Secretary of State does not consider that the
UK Border Agency letter sent to the Tribunal in Sanade suggested that she
did accept that it is never reasonable to expect a British citizen party to
genuine family life in the UK to relocate permanently abroad but apologises
for any lack of clarity in the correspondence which may have caused the
Tribunal to reach this conclusion

The Secretary of State makes the following points in relation to these
issues:

(a) It is clear that the effect of Zambrano (as clarified by the subsequent
decision of the ECJ in Dereci) is that a Member State cannot deny the
primary carer of an EU citizen a right of residence where to do so would
force the EU citizen to leave the EU because they are unable to remain in
the EU without the support of their primary carer. A decision to remove or
deport a primary carer to another Member State would therefore be
compatible with the Zambrano judgment even if that decision forced a
British citizen to relocate to that Member State. It is therefore not the
case that any decision which has the effect of forcing a British citizen to
leave the UK is incompatible with the judgment in Zambrano.

(b) It is the Secretary of State's position that the proposition in
Zambrano cannot sensibly be read as imposing a complete bar to the
deportation or removal of the primary carer of an EU citizen in
circumstances in which that decision would force the EU citizen to leave
the EU. Such a proposition would suggest that irrespective of the severity
of the threat to public policy posed by such a person, the Member State in
question would be powerless to take any action to remove or deport them.
This is not a proposition which the Secretary of State accepts and is
difficult to reconcile with the fact that even the rights conferred
directly by the Treaties are subject to limitation on public policy
grounds.

(c) The Secretary of State therefore submits that Member States must be
entitled to refuse to recognise Zambrano rights in cases where the primary
carer in question can be deported under the domestic law of the relevant
Member State. In such cases there would therefore also be the prospect of
an EU citizen being required to leave the EU. This position is now
reflected in the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
following their amendment by the Immigration (European Economic Area)
(Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations 2012.

(d) Dereci did not extend the rights of a family member of an EU citizen
who has never exercised their free movement rights to put that family
member on a par with the family member of an EU national who is exercising
free movement rights. A person's status as an EU citizen allows them to be
joined by their family members who do not benefit from EU law rights only
in accordance with the domestic law of their Member State and having proper
regard to their rights under Article 8. Therefore, it does not add to the
consideration of the new rules and Article 8 already required.

iii. Your letter of 9 October invited the claimant to respond to the
following question:

Now that the rules make express provision for Article 8 claims to remain,
is it accepted that the circumstances whereby a person who fails under the
rules but may succeed under the law relating to Article 8 will be narrower
and will be exceptional having regard to the new criteria? If not, why not?


If it is helpful to the Tribunal, the Secretary of State, in answering this
question in the affirmative, would submit that "exceptional" does not
equate here to "unusual". Instead, "exceptional" should mean
circumstances in which refusal of an Article 8 claim on the basis that the
requirements of the new Immigration Rules were not met would result in an
unjustifiably harsh outcome for the claimant.
The Secretary of State's view on this point is informed by the Supreme
Court's assessment of the proper operation of Article 8 in the context of
extradition proceedings.5

As Lady Hale commented at paragraph 32 of that judgment:

    "32. The second main criticism of the approach in later cases is that
    the courts have not been examining carefully the nature and extent of
    the interference in family life. In focussing on "some quite
    exceptionally compelling feature" (para 56 in Norris), they have fallen
    into the trap identified by Lord Mance, tending "to divert attention
    from consideration of the potential impact of extradition on the
    particular persons involved ...towards a search for factors
    (particularly external factors) which can be regarded as out of the run
    of the mill" (para 109). Some particularly grave consequences are not
    out of the run of the mill at all. Once again, the test is always
    whether the gravity of the interference with family life is justified
    by the gravity of the public interest pursued (see also Lord Wilson, at
    para 152). Exceptionality is a prediction, just as it was in R (Razgar)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 2
    AC 368, and not a test. We are all agreed upon that".
In considering, in the light of this judgment, the operation of Article 8
in the immigration case now before the Tribunal, the Secretary of State
would submit that there are no exceptionally serious consequences for this
claimant to outweigh the clear public interest in her removal from the UK.
She is a serious immigration offender. She should expect to be removed from
the UK. The public interest in effective immigration control reflected in
the new Immigration Rules requires that she be refused leave to remain in
the UK. The Secretary of State submits that there is nothing to prevent the
claimant and her husband continuing their family life together outside the
UK. And, if the consequences for her and/or her husband of relocating to
Nigeria are harsh, which the Secretary of State does not accept, then those
consequences are justified by that clear public interest



Yours sincerely,



CLIVE PECKOVER
Head of Family Migration Policy

1 Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL

2 Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL

3 Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL

4 RU (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2011] EWCA; Gurung v SSHD [2012] EWCA

5 HH v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic, Genoa [2012] UKSC







Appendix B

Claimant's  written submissions in reply

-----------------------------------------------
REPLY ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
TO DIRECTIONS OF 9TH OCTOBER 2012
----------------------------------------------------------------
Introduction
1. On 9th October 2012 the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
directed that the Appellant Secretary of State for the Home Department
("SSHD") should respond to two specified questions by 24th October 2012 and
that the Respondent Ms. Izuazu ("R") should by 31st October 2012 reply to
any further submissions for the Appellant and to a further question posed
by the Tribunal to R. The question for R is as follows:

Now that the rules make express provision for Article 8 claims to remain,
is it accepted that the circumstances whereby a person who fails under the
rules but may succeed under the law relating to Article 8 will be narrower
and will be exceptional having regard to the new criteria? If not why not?
2. R's answer is "No", for the following five reasons, which are developed
below:

a. It is established principle that there is in law no exceptionality test
in Article 8 cases involving immigration;

b. The Rules are executive statements of policy, and do not carry a
legislative imprimatur sufficient to alter the correct legal test. The
suggestion to the contrary is wrong in principle and ill-founded in
context;

c. In the appellate context, no deference is owed to the executive
assessment of where the public interest in removal lies. There are no
institutional grounds (based on lack of appellate expertise) nor
constitutional grounds (based on accountability) for such deference. The
question is one of weight, and the approach is not altered because the
Rules now seek to make (inadequate and inaccurate) provision for Article 8:
before the recent changes, the Secretary of State was obliged to and did
make Article 8 assessments case by case;

d. The Rules operate independently of Article 8. The success of an Article
8 claim is not to be measured by its proximity to meeting the requirements
of the Rules;

e. The approach of the Strasbourg Court to Article 8 cases does not vary
according to the stringency of the municipal immigration policy at issue.
The assessment is independent.

R's reasoning on the points is set out sequentially below.

(1) No exceptionality test in law

3. In Huang v SSHD; Kashmiri v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11; [2007] 2 AC 167, Lord
Bingham for the House famously held that, unlike the position in housing
cases, the Rules did not and could not strike the balance between private
right and public interest in the way that housing legislation over the
years had [underlining added]:

17. Counsel for the Secretary of State nevertheless put his case much
higher even than that. She relied by analogy on the decision of the House
in Kay v Lambeth London Borough Council [2006] UKHL 10, [2006] 2 AC 465,
where the House considered the article 8 right to respect for the home. It
held that the right of a public authority landlord to enforce a claim for
possession under domestic law against an occupier whose right to occupy (if
any) had ended and who was entitled to no protection in domestic law would
in most cases automatically supply the justification required by article
8(2), and the courts would assume that domestic law struck the proper
balance, at any rate unless the contrary were shown. So here, it was said,
the appellate immigration authority should assume that the Immigration
Rules and supplementary instructions, made by the responsible minister and
laid before Parliament, had the imprimatur of democratic approval and
should be taken to strike the right balance between the interests of the
individual and those of the community. The analogy is unpersuasive.
Domestic housing policy has been a continuing subject of discussion and
debate in Parliament over very many years, with the competing interests of
landlords and tenants fully represented, as also the public interest in
securing accommodation for the indigent, averting homelessness and making
the best use of finite public resources. The outcome, changed from time to
time, may truly be said to represent a considered democratic compromise.
This cannot be said in the same way of the Immigration Rules and
supplementary instructions, which are not the product of active debate in
Parliament, where non-nationals seeking leave to enter or remain are not in
any event represented.

4. The reasoning in Huang is not undermined because the Secretary of State
asserts her own view as to the Article 8 balance in the Rules. The Rules
are not the subject of active debate and discussion over the years, and
immigrants or potential immigrants are not represented. The Article 8
balance remains for the Courts, whose task (classically) is to safeguard
the rights of vulnerable minorities. In a different context, as Justice
Jackson for the US Supreme Court famously held, "The very purpose of a Bill
of Rights was to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of
political controversy, to place them beyond the reach of majorities and
officials and to establish them as legal principles to be applied by the
courts.": West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette 319 U.S. 624
(1943), at 638.

5. The conclusion in Huang as to exceptionality was of course as follows:

20. In an article 8 case ... the ultimate question for the appellate
immigration authority is whether the refusal of leave to enter or remain,
in circumstances where the life of the family cannot reasonably be expected
to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account of all considerations weighing
in favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the applicant in a
manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of the fundamental right
protected by article 8. If the answer to this question is affirmative, the
refusal is unlawful and the authority must so decide. It is not necessary
that the appellate immigration authority, directing itself along the lines
indicated in this opinion, need ask in addition whether the case meets a
test of exceptionality. The suggestion that it should is based on an
observation of Lord Bingham in Razgar, para 20. He was there expressing an
expectation, shared with the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, that the number
of claimants not covered by the rules and supplementary directions but
entitled to succeed under article 8 would be a very small minority. That is
still his expectation. But he was not purporting to lay down a legal test.

6. There are two points to note concerning this passage. The first obvious
point is that the Committee reversed the approach of the Court of Appeal at
[2005] EWCA Civ 105; [2006] QB 1, as set out by Laws LJ at 52-62. This
considered the Immigration Rules themselves to "strike the balance between
the public interest and the private right" and to be entitled to deference
as having Parliamentary imprimatur:

58. In the present case the policy is given and the balance struck by the
Rules and not by main legislation. But the balance so struck is not in our
judgment entitled to less respect or deference on that account. We would
emphasise the particularity with which the Rules have prescribed which
classes of aliens will in the ordinary way be allowed to enter the United
Kingdom and which will not

7. Second, Lord Bingham's "expectation" as to exceptionality in Huang was
not one he held with respect to the vertical or horizontal splitting of
nuclear families. Indeed the expectation in such cases was reversed: it
would be the "rare" case where a separation of spouses or a parent and
child would be sanctioned by the Court. This was made plain in EB (Kosovo)
v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41; [2009] 1 AC 1159, one of the four Article 8 cases
decided a year after Huang, at 12, and in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40;
[2009] 1 All ER 363 at 44. Huang and Kashmiri concerned non-nuclear family
relationships (grandmother, adult daughter and grandchildren; adult son
respectively).

(2) The Rules are executive statements of policy

8. As the Secretary of State recognises, the Rules are a "statement of her
practice in deciding applications" (Secretary of State's submissions of
24.10.12). R's Skeleton rehearsed the case law making it plain that the
Rules are statements of executive policy: Skeleton at 18-19.

9. The Rules do not have sufficient legislative imprimatur to alter the
Huang approach. The Secretary of State's contrary submission is wrong in
principle and ill-founded in context.

Principle
10. The principled position is plain from Huang itself (see preceding
submissions), and was underscored in a "policy" context both in Chikwamba
(see R's Skeleton at 20(b), pp. 8-9), and in R (otao Quila & Anor) v SSHD
[2011] UKSC 45; [2011] 3 WLR 836, 44-46.

11. In the latter case, Lord Wilson for the majority (Lord Phillips P, Lady
Hale and Lord Clarke) held at 46 that [underlining added]:

46. ...Lord Brown's call, at para 91 below, for the courts in this context
to afford to government a very substantial area of discretionary judgement
is at odds with my understanding of the nature of their duty. Indeed, in
the case of Huang ... Lord Bingham proceeded to explain, at para 16, that
it would be wrong to afford "deference" to the judgments of the Secretary
of State on matters related to the above questions albeit that appropriate
weight had to be given to them to the extent, in particular, that she was
likely to have had access to special sources of knowledge and advice in
connection with them. He added, at para 17, that, notwithstanding the
limited right of Parliament to call upon the Secretary of State to
reconsider proposed changes in the Immigration Rules provided by section
3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971, it would go too far to say that any
changes ultimately made had the imprimatur of democratic approval such as
would be relevant in particular to any answer to [the fair balance
proportionality] question ...

 12. Quila concerned the proportionality of an amended provision of the
Rules as to marriage. Lord Brown had held (in a minority view) that:

91. Really these questions are questions of policy and should be for
government rather than us. Of course, the ultimate decision on article 8(2)
proportionality must be for the courts but in this particular context the
courts should to my mind accord government a very substantial area of
discretionary judgment. Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2007] 2 AC 167 (to which Lord Wilson refers at para 46 of his judgment)
was a very different sort of case from the present, concerning as it did
the article 8 claims of two particular individuals on their own special
facts. No one was seeking there, as here, actually to strike down an
immigration rule. Certainly, at paragraph 16 of the committee's opinion
(given by Lord Bingham) in Huang, we deprecated the use of the term
"deference" to describe the weight to be given to certain factors
considered important by the Secretary of State. But we expressly recognised
the need to accord "appropriate weight to the judgment of a person with
responsibility for a given subject matter and access to special sources of
knowledge and advice." That is precisely what I am suggesting should be
done here: it is the Secretary of State who has the responsibility for
combating forced marriages in the context of immigration and who should be
recognised as having access to special sources of knowledge and advice in
that regard.

13. Indeed Lord Brown's minority view is difficult to square with his own
approach in Chikwamba, to the Secretary of State's "policy" of requiring
prior entry clearance.

14. The fact that the Secretary of State has sought to address Article 8
considerations in the Rules therefore does not attract deference, or
weight, any more than her case-by-case consideration of Article 8 did
before HC 194.

15. Nor do the Rules attract deference or greater weight because they fill
a "policy vacuum" or represent "democratic endorsement" or "Parliament's
view": these themes run through the Secretary of State's further
submissions in this case and are redolent of the approach of the Court of
Appeal's decision in Huang overturned by the House of Lords (see above).
Policy is subject to law, not vice versa, as the House of Lords/Supreme
Court recognised in Huang, Chikwamba and Quila. The Rules are executive
statements of policy; they are not Parliament's view of where the balance
in Article 8 cases lies, as between the State and the individual.

Context
16. Moreover, in the present context, and given the nature of the debate
before the House of Commons, these principled objections to affording the
Rules a legislative warrant sufficient to alter the Huang approach are all
the more strong. See R's Skeleton at 24(c) pp.15-18.

(3) No deference
17. In the appellate context, in the ordinary run of immigration cases,
there is no basis for deferring to the Secretary of State's view of where
the balance lies. Firstly there is the observation of Lord Bingham in
Huang, at 15, that the appellate authority, having heard evidence under
cross examination from the appellant and witness, will very often be better
placed than the Secretary of State in assessing the strength of family life
and therefore better placed that the Secretary of State to perform the
Article 8 balancing exercise.

18. Second, there are no institutional reasons, concerning expertise, for
affording deference to the Secretary of State. The specialist appellate
authority had long been assigned the task by Parliament to consider, and
has built up expertise in assessing, the strength of the case for removal
in individual cases on the merits. Contrary to the Secretary of State's
further submissions, in an appellate context, she is not the "primary
decision-maker". Consider the IAT's longstanding previous merits
jurisdiction under s15 IA 1971 concerning deportation appeals where removal
was asserted to be conducive to the public good. Lord Wilson in Quila at
46 was with respect correct in summarising Lord Bingham in Huang, at 16,
to the effect that appropriate weight had to be given to the Secretary of
State's view "to the extent" that she was likely to have had access to
special sources of knowledge and advice.

19. Thirdly, there are no constitutional reasons, concerning the separation
of powers, for affording deference to the Secretary of State. The
Tribunal's jurisdiction to hear merits appeals is of course entirely
statutory.

20. Craig, Administrative Law, 7th edition, 2012 concludes (at 20-036) that
the Court owes no deference to the decision maker in an appellate context.

21. Accordingly, there is no reason now to give greater weight to the
Secretary of State's assessment of Article 8 considerations in the Rules
than there was before HC 194 to the Secretary of State's assessment in
individual cases. See R's Skeleton at 24ff, p.19. The judicial task is not
transformed. Still less is it transformed by a set of Rules that blatantly
misrepresent the binding learning on Article 8, e.g. as to insurmountable
obstacle, exceptionality and so forth. It is ambitious in the extreme to
suggest that they "incorporate the principles set out in the Strasbourg
jurisprudence" (Secretary of State's further submissions).

(4) The Rules operate independently of Article 8

22. The balance of the case-law indicates that the Rules operate
independently of Article 8. The implicit premise contained in the UT's
question to R is the flip-side of the "near-miss" argument, which has been
rejected by the Courts. The success of an Article 8 claim is not to be
measured by its proximity to meeting the requirements of the Rules.

23. Thus in Miah; Bibi; and Salman v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 261; [2012] 3 WLR
492, the Court of Appeal (Maurice Kay, Stanley Burnton, and Lewison LJJ)
rejected various submissions based on what it called the "near-miss
argument", delineated by Stanley Burnton LJ at 2 as being "that where an
appellant misses satisfying the requirements of the Immigration Rules by a
small margin, and contends that his removal from the UK will breach his
rights under Article 8, the weight to be given to the maintenance of
immigration controls should be diminished for the purpose of the assessment
as to whether his removal from this country should be permitted under
Article 8(2)." The Court held, endorsing earlier decisions in Mongoto v
SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 751 and Rudi v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1326, that the
existence of the Immigration Rules or of policy in other forms did not
enable what Laws LJ, in Mongoto at 25, described as "the building of
expectations approaching enforceable rights on the back of such a policy
for the benefit of persons to whom, in terms, the policy did not apply and,
it is assumed, was not intended to be applied..." In Rudi Carnwath LJ had
said of the near-miss argument that "This argument is, in my view, based on
a misconception. The Secretary of State is of course entitled to have a
policy. The promulgation of the policy normally creates a legitimate
expectation that it will be applied to those falling within its scope
unless there is good reason for making an exception. So much is trite law.
It is also trite law that the existence of the policy does not excuse the
decision-maker from due consideration of cases falling outside it. However,
the law knows no "near-miss" principle. There is no presumption that those
falling just outside the policy should be treated as though they were
within it, or given special consideration for that reason."

24. Similarly, Blake J in R (Mansoor) v SSHD [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin)
expressly rejected the proposition that the Immigration Rules represented
in themselves a legitimate aim in their own right and/or themselves came to
represent the balance to be struck between the public interest and the
rights of the individual:

34. The terms of the immigration regulations are not themselves a
legitimate aim within the context of Article 8.2, but as has been
repeatedly pointed out maintaining the integrity of our system of
immigration control is a means of protecting the economic well-being of the
country and may thus justify an interference with family life. Lord Bingham
makes the point in Huang that deception and fraud and the perception that
our borders should be should be discouraged. The removal of those who
commit serious criminal offences, enter unlawfully and in breach of
previous orders, and who remain with no colour of an arguable claim to do
so may engage more than one legitimate aim within Article 8(2) but
protecting the economic well-being of the country is normally the most
appropriate bone to consider.

35. However the terms of the immigration rules are not a legitimate aim in
their own right. Family life is not to be interfered with to protect the
Immigration Rules and their numerous requirements. A judgment needs to be
made as to how significant the aim, and how far the removal of the
particular claimant in the circumstances of her case is necessary to
promote that aim. The mere fact that a genuine spouse lawfully admitted
with her British citizen husband and settled children can no longer meet
one requirement of the rules through no fault of her own is unlikely to
amount to a weighty reason to justify interference with family life here
that otherwise to be respected. The importance of this observation may be
illustrated by the facts of this case. The claimant never got ILR simply
because her husband was made redundant and therefore had recourse to public
funds to which he and the children were entitled but the claimant, because
of the period of time when she was subject to conditional leave, could not
have recourse. As Lady Hale has pointed out, general considerations of
economic well-being, where other factors are strongly in favour of the
claim, are unlikely to be of great weight.

36. The claimant only failed to meet the Rules because she (unlike her
children was subject to the two year requirement). This was not a
requirement imposed to prohibit general future dependency on state funds,
but to guard against insubstantial marriages. This was not a consideration
that could apply to the this marriage and this claimant. Certain rules
applied to people in different circumstances than the mischief aimed at can
have disproportionate outcomes as the Court of Appeal have more recently
made plain in the case of Quila & Anr v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 1482.

37. Non-compliance with the Immigration Rules is the starting point for
human rights analysis, because if you can comply with the rules you do not
need to rely on human rights to remain; it is not the end point. The Rules
themselves as Lord Bingham has pointed out in Huang, are not the source of
balance between the public interest and that of the individual.

38. It is thus misdirection for the decision maker to state as in this
case, the policy of the immigration regulations justifies interference with
family life. It would be of considerable benefit if decision-makers
grappled with that point in the future.

This is considered and evidently approved in SSHD v Treebhowan; SSHD v
Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, at 76 per Elias LJ, effectively
giving the judgment of the Court.

(5) The Strasbourg approach does not vary according to the stringency of
local immigration laws


25. The point can be tested by considering the approach in Strasbourg to
Article 8 cases. The Strasbourg Court's approach does not vary according to
the stringency of the municipal immigration policy at issue. The assessment
of Article 8 is independent of local policy.

(6) Further matters

26. The Secretary of State's reliance on extradition authority (HH v Deputy
Prosecutor of the Italian Republic, Genoa [2012] UKSC 25; [2012] 3 WLR 90)
is telling. Plainly nothing in HH was intended to nor did alter the
approach in the House of Lords/Supreme Court immigration Article 8 cases.

27. The Secretary of State's concession in Sanade and others (British
children -Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC) at 94 was well made. It
will be unreasonable - and a denial of EU citizenship and local nationality
- to expect an EU citizen to move to a country outside the EU as the price
for maintaining family life. This is the logical result of the trio of CJEU
cases in Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ Case C-34/09 OJ
2011 C130/2; [2012] QB 265, McCarthy (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-
434/09; [2011] 3 CMLR 10 and Dereci & Ors (European citizenship) [2011]
EUECJ C-256/11.

28. This factor was not weighed by the FTT and adds to the harshness of
expected R's husband to relocate to Nigeria. It also heightens the
threshold of justification which the Secretary of State is required to meet
to justify R's expulsion and the separation of the couple.

Conclusion

29. Article 8 is a fundamental right, upon which there are authoritative
statements of law which HC 194 crudely seeks to challenge. Fundamental
rights and the law are not subject to the vicissitudes and political
expedients of executive policy. HC 194 does nothing to alter the approach
to Article 8 in an appeal as a matter of law.

RAZA HUSAIN QC
Matrix Chambers
ERIC FRIPP
Lamb Building

Instructed by
JAWAID LUQMANI
Luqmani Thompson and Partners


30 October 2012
