

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

              FK (SDF member/activist - risk) Cameroon CG [2007] UKAIT 00047



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 14 March 2007                       |On 21 May 2007            |
|Prepared 22 March 2007                 |                          |

                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE JARVIS
                             MR M G TAYLOR, CBE

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Ms F Webber of Counsel
For the Respondent:       Ms S Leatherland, Home Office Presenting Officer


In the light of the evidence currently available, membership  of  or  actual
or perceived involvement with the SDF at any level is unlikely by itself  to
give rise to a real risk  of  persecution  but  some  prominent  and  active
opponents of the government in Cameroon may depending  on  their  particular
profile and circumstances continue to be at risk.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.      This is the reconsideration of an appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision  made  on  10  September  2001  to  give  directions  for  the
    appellant's removal following the refusal  of  her  claim  for  asylum.
    Following  a  hearing  on  25  November  2005  the   Tribunal   (Senior
    Immigration Judge Gleeson, Mr A Smith and Mr A J Cragg) agreed that the
    determination of the adjudicator, Mrs N Bird, issued  on  12  May  2004
    contained material errors  of  law.   The  hearing  was  adjourned  and
    transferred to this Tribunal to consider the decision to be substituted
    for the adjudicator's decision.

Background

2.      The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born  in  April  1973.    She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 December 2000 claiming asylum on 20
    December 2000.   Her claim is based primarily on her and  her  family's
    political activities in support of the Social Democratic  Front  (SDF),
    now the largest opposition political party playing any  major  role  in
    opposing  the  government  party,  the  Cameroon  Peoples'   Democratic
    Movement (CPDM), also referred  to  as  the  Democratic  Rally  of  the
    Cameroon People (RDCP).   It is the appellant's case  that  her  father
    joined the newly formed SDF in 1990.  He  died  in  1997  following  an
    attack by agents of the RDCP.  In 1998 the appellant's brother became a
    departmental SDF secretary  and  the  appellant  a  ward  secretary  in
    Douala.   In May 1999 following the appellant publicly  condemning  the
    ruling RDPC  in  a  television  programme,  she  was  abducted  at  the
    instigation of a senior RDCP member (referred to in this  determination
    as Mrs F) and severely injured in a staged car crash. In April 2000 the
    appellant was detained, held incommunicado and repeatedly  raped  after
    again publicly condemning the RDCP.   On 20  August  2000  she  escaped
    from detention by bribing a guard and arrangements were made for her to
    leave Cameroon.

3.      The respondent refused her application for asylum  on  10  September
    2001.  She appealed to an adjudicator, Mr M Curzon-Lewis, but following
    a hearing on 29 April 2002 her appeal was dismissed.  She  was  refused
    permission to appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  but  that
    decision was quashed by consent in judicial  review  proceedings.   The
    Tribunal remitted the appeal for rehearing and it was allowed by Mrs  N
    Bird following a hearing on 26 April 2004.   The respondent was granted
    permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on 25 September
    2004.    This  grant  of  permission  took  effect  as  an  order   for
    reconsideration and on 25 November 2005  the  Tribunal  held  that  the
    Adjudicator had materially erred in law.   It set out  its  reasons  as
    follows:

    "1.     This appeal has a long  procedural  history.   The  appeal  was
         originally heard by Mr Curzon Lewis on 29 April 2002 and determined
         by him on 24 July 2002, the  Immigration  Judge  finding  that  the
         appellant had not established a well-founded fear of persecution by
         reason of her political opinion.  He  found  as  a  fact  that  the
         appellant's involvement with the SDF was at the lowest level in her
         ward as such activities as she undertook for  the  party  were  not
         such as to attract state attention.


    2.       An appeal from that decision was considered by the Immigration
         Appeal Tribunal on 17 September 2002 and leave to  appeal  refused.
         Pursuant to an application for judicial review  in  December  2002,
         that decision was quashed and the appeal remitted  to  a  different
         Tribunal for consideration.   The present solicitors  began  acting
         at that time.


    3.       At the hearing before the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  the
         appeal was remitted for hearing afresh, by  consent,  the  Tribunal
         noting that both parties had produced  further  evidence.   In  the
         Secretary of State's case the evidence  produced  is  one  two-page
         letter from the British High Commission in Cameroon.  The appellant
         produced various documents which the Immigration Judge  considered,
         in rebuttal of the points made in the High  Commissioner's  letter.




    4.       The appeal was then reheard by Mrs N Bird, who  determined  it
         for the second time on 12 May 2004, without reference to the  first
         determination; that was an entirely proper approach under  the  law
         as it then stood, because of the two tier structure  which  existed
         before  4  April  2005.    However,  the   second   [adjudicator's]
         determination does not deal with the letter from the  British  High
         Commission, although it does deal with other evidence which was put
         forward by the appellant to rebut  the  points  made  in  the  High
         Commissioner's letter.  Both parties made submissions on  the  High
         Commissioner's  letter,  which   are   recorded   in   the   second
         [adjudicator's] record of proceedings,  but  appear  to  have  been
         overlooked in the determination itself.


    5.       The letter from the British  High  Commission  is  potentially
         very significant in this appeal, as it records that -


         (a)     The High Commissioner had approached the chairman and legal
             adviser of the SDF, Mr John Fru Ndi, who had  never  heard  of
             the appellant, her father or the complaints against  a  Mrs  F
             upon which the appellant relied.  He noted that the  appellant
             had used terminology  describing  the  SDF  structures  in  an
             inaccurate manner and that the SDF did not use  the  term  sub
             group or have an administrative district in  Douala  known  as
             NBT.  He had found no trace of the appellant or her father  in
             SDF records.


         (b)     The High Commissioner had then consulted  the  Chairman  of
             the National Commission  for  Human  Rights  and  Freedoms  (a
             government founded body).   The NCHRF  Chairman,  Dr  C  D  B,
             indicated that he was sure that the appellant's claim to  have
             been persecuted because of her membership of the SDF  was  not
             true, based upon his experience of the  current  human  rights
             situation in Cameroon.  Dr B himself originates from the north
             west province where the SDF had its headquarters.


         (c)     The High Commissioner  next  consulted  two  leading  local
             NGOs,  the  Littoral  branch  of  ACAT  (The  Association   of
             Christians Against Torture), whose director  did  not  believe
             the claim,  and  the  chairman  of  NDH  (Nouveaux  Droits  de
             L'Homme), which had strong support from the French  Government
             and whose chairman, Dr H B, did not  believe  the  allegations
             and  was  "categorically  convinced  that  the  mere  fact  of
             belonging to the SDF would  not  today  expose  a  Cameroonian
             citizen to inhuman treatment".


         (d)     The High Commissioner confirmed that the death  certificate
             for the appellant's father appeared to be genuine.


         (e)     An article from the Jeune Detective of 29 August  2002  had
             indeed been published but the High Commissioner observed  that
             the   Jeune   Detective   newspaper   was    unreliable    and
             sensationalist.


         (f)      There was ready  access  to  treatment  for  the  physical
             aspects of the appellant's condition.


         (g)     Some NGOs in Cameroon worked with the victims of torture to
             support recovery.


    6.       It is most unfortunate that the Adjudicator did  not  deal  at
         all with the High Commissioner's letter, having  heard  submissions
         upon it from both parties.   The highest that Ms  Webber  was  able
         to put her case was that, since the documentary  evidence  obtained
         by the appellant was intended  to  rebut  the  High  Commissioner's
         letter, the Immigration Judge must have been aware  of  the  letter
         and could not be taken to have overlooked it.   That simply is  not
         good enough, because this document is of crucial  importance.   The
         failure to deal with it is plainly an error of law, and  one  which
         is potentially decisive and therefore material.  The appeal must be
         heard again.


    7.       There have been many changes in  the  political  situation  in
         Cameroon since the  appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.   We
         consider that this  appeal,  when  reheard,  may  be  suitable  for
         country guidance on the position of the SDF, and the parties should
         provide up to date evidence to assist the  reconsidering  panel  in
         considering the risk on return at the date of rehearing.


    8.       The Tribunal has therefore concluded that the appeal should be
         retained at Field House and heard by a legal panel."


    Directions were given for the  filing  of  further  evidence  including
    evidence on the issue of whether members of the SDF would  be  at  real
    risk on return to Cameroon.


Documentary Evidence

4.      The appellant  produced  a  bundle  of  documents  (A)  indexed  and
    paginated 1-179. The evidence relating to the country background is  at
    pages  165-179  and  is  identified  in  annex  A  attached   to   this
    determination.  In addition the appellant produced a statement she made
    in support of the application for asylum by her son (A1)  and  a  small
    bundle  of  further  documents  relating  to  her  claim  (A2).     The
    respondent produced a bundle of  documents  (R)  containing  background
    evidence again identified  in  annex  A  indexed  and  paginated  1-127
    together with a letter  dated  25  July  2003  from  the  British  High
    Commission in Yaounde (R1) and a fax containing a further  e-mail  from
    the High Commission sent on 17 February 2002  (R2).    The  appellant's
    representatives have indicated that they have not been in a position to
    obtain expert evidence in relation to the appellant's claim.

The Oral Evidence

(i).     Mr N

5.      Mr N is the head of the SDF (European  Division)  and  has  been  so
    since May 2006.  Before that he was the Chairman  and  Co-ordinator  of
    the London section of the SDF.   His letters and statements are set out
    at A122-137.   He has been recognised  as  a  refugee.    In  his  most
    recent statement of 6 February 2007 (A131-7) he confirmed that  in  May
    2006 the SDF divided into two arising from a dispute as to whether  its
    president John Fru Ndi had violated the statute of  the  party.    This
    dispute between the members led to two congresses being organised on 26
    May 2006, one at Yaounde (led by by Bernard  Muna)  and  the  other  in
    Bamenda (led by Fru Ndi).  There was violence at the meeting in Yaounde
    caused by supporters of the faction led by Fru Ndi. The  cause  of  the
    split arose from allegations of corruption and complicity  between  Fru
    Ndi and the CPDM, the ruling party.   According to Mr N, in  the  north
    of Cameroon the SDF has rejected Fru Ndi completely  whereas  elsewhere
    the SDF is split and there are two factions of the SDF in each town and
    district.  He supports the Muna faction.   It is Mr N's view  that  all
    activists  who  really  want  a  change  in  Cameroon  are   persecuted
    irrespective of their party membership.


6.      In an earlier statement (A126-130) he said that the appellant was a
    member of the SDF and that this was recorded in  the  party's  records.
    He had contacted the co-coordinator of the SDF in Douala II, Mr Nguiffo
    Innocent and her membership  had  been  confirmed.   Mr  Innocent  also
    confirmed that the appellant had been hospitalised following  a  kidnap
    and subsequent car accident but the matter was  not  discussed  in  any
    further detail as the focus was upon  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
    activities.   Mr N had also spoken to Dr K, one of the people consulted
    by the UK High Commission.  He had not been able  to  substantiate  the
    appellant's account and when he said that  he  did  not  "believe"  her
    account it was because they had not able to investigate sufficiently to
    see if the case was established or not.   It was Mr N's view  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of persecution on return to Cameroon because
    of her activities in this country.  She had  been  photographed  taking
    part in demonstrations and her association with him would also put  her
    at risk.


7.      In oral evidence he described the appellant as an active  member  of
    the  SDF  and  Cameroon  Diaspora  Coalition  (CDC),  a  human   rights
    organisation fighting for the rights of Cameroonians to take part in  a
    fair political process.  The Cameroon intelligence services would  know
    that the appellant was close to him.   He  was  aware  of  the  history
    between the appellant and Mrs F.   He had come across Mrs  F  for  many
    reasons.  She was currently an MP for the ruling party and a  Mayor  of
    one of the areas of Douala.  She would have power to do what she wanted
    without fear of arrest.   It was his view the appellant would  continue
    to be at risk from her.


8.      In cross examination Mr N said that he had last been in Cameroon  in
    February 1999.   He had not known the appellant or her father  at  that
    stage.  There were records of party members.  In 1991 or 1992 the party
    tried to computerise the files but they were destroyed by the army  and
    police.  Every cell had a register.  If he had the telephone number  of
    cell leaders, he could  contact  them  as  he  had  done  with  Nguiffo
    Innocent.   He had wanted to know if the appellant was an SDF  militant
    and he confirmed that she was.   When asked to describe what  he  meant
    by militant he said he would regard this as someone who was a holder of
    an SDF membership card rather than a sympathiser.


(ii)     The Appellant


9.      The appellant's witness statements appear at A1 -  46.    Her  claim
    is fully set out in her statement of 1 December 2005 at A11-37 and  can
    briefly be summarised as follows. Her father joined the  SDF  in  1990.
     She has two older brothers who are also active in  the  party.   From
    1992 to 1996 the appellant studied at the University of Douala and then
    served a three year apprenticeship as a midwife.   She started to  work
    as an SDF sympathiser in 1993.  One of her brothers became a counsellor
    in the area of Douala  II  and  was  secretary  to  the  Department  of
    Littoral.   The appellant's father encouraged his children to be active
    in politics and the appellant began to attend SDF meetings in the  cell
    in Ngangue within Douala II.   In  1997  the  appellant's  father  died
    following what his  family  believed  to  be  an  attack  by  political
    opponents.  Following his death the appellant continued  to  be  active
    for the SDF.   She  campaigned  for  the  SDF  candidate  in  municipal
    elections  and  became  a  volunteer  assistant   secretary   for   the
    constituency of Douala II.  She attended meetings of the "co-ordination
    departmental" covering a  number  of  constituencies  including  Douala
    II.


10.    There was a weekly national television programme "Expression  Direct"
    and each local "co-ordination  departmental"  had  the  opportunity  of
    producing an occasional short item for this programme as all  political
    parties were able to appear although the majority of the air  time  was
    reserved for the government. The appellant put herself  forward  to  do
    this and was accepted.  She decided to talk about the problems relating
    to petrol  and  how  the  Director  of  Hydrocarbons  in  Cameroon  was
    accountable only to the President and the Cameroonian  people  did  not
    benefit from  any  increase  in  price.   The  programme  was  due  for
    transmission on 13 May 1999.   The appellant said that on 19  May  1999
    she received a call saying that she would be picked up to take her to a
    meeting with the party president of her local area.  In  fact  she  was
    taken to see Mrs  F  and  was  threatened  by  her.  According  to  the
    appellant, Mrs F said that what happened to her  father  was  obviously
    not lesson enough and that she would be left in the  hands  of  someone
    who would look after her.  She was taken out and put in the boot  of  a
    car.   She did not know what happened  but  she  was  hospitalised  and
    unconscious for five days.  She discovered that she had  been  involved
    in an accident involving a crash with a stationary  lorry.   The  local
    president of the SDF was contacted and  he  visited  the  appellant  in
    hospital.  The appellant went to a clinic  for  surgery.   She  was  on
    crutches for forty five days and had to convalesce for a  month  before
    returning home.

11.    When their turn next  came  to  make  a  contribution  to  Expression
    Direct, the appellant suggested  that  she  should  testify  about  the
    treatment she had suffered as an example  of  the  persecution  of  SDF
    opponents.  The appellant's account was recorded in February 2000.  The
    cassette recording the broadcast was sent to  the  SDF  leadership  who
    then sent it on to the television station.  According to the  appellant
    in February 2000 a number of SDF activists were  arrested  particularly
    in Douala II.  In April she was detained by gendarmes  and  kept  in  a
    police cell for two weeks.   She was taken to New Bell Prison where she
    was raped by prison  wardens.    The  rapes  continued  throughout  her
    detention but eventually she was able to persuade one guard to help her
    and he arranged for her escape from detention  on  the  basis  that  he
    would be paid by the appellant's brother.  The appellant  escaped  from
    the prison in early August 2000 and was initially taken to  a  friend's
    house.   She then travelled to her grandmother's house in Bandjoun  and
    with the help of a priest was able to  leave  Douala  by  boat  finally
    arriving in this country on 16 December 2000.


12.    In her oral evidence the appellant said that her son arrived in  this
    country in September 2005.  He had become depressed because of what had
    happened to him in Cameroon and he was now receiving treatment  with  a
    family therapist.   Since arriving in this country  the  appellant  has
    had a child who is  a  French  national.  She  was  now  married  to  a
    Cameroonian national and they had a child born in September 2005.   She
    was pregnant again but was not able to live with  her  husband  because
    his case had been dismissed and he had been told that they could not be
    together until his case was finally resolved.  It was  the  appellant's
    view that nothing had changed so far as Mrs F was concerned.   She  had
    taken part in demonstrations against the Cameroonian Government in this
    country.  She attended meetings with the CDC.


13.    In cross-examination she said that the  first  broadcast  of  the  TV
    programme in Cameroon had been on 13  May  1999.    It  had  been  pre-
    recorded for Expression Direct which was a national TV channel. The "co-
    ordination departmental" of the SDF  decided  what  the  subject  would
    be.   She had been taken to see Mrs F who said that she had  seen  the
    appellant talking about petrol and asked her to confirm  that  she  was
    the daughter of her father. She did  not  know  whether  the  programme
    recorded in February 2000 had been broadcast.   She had thought that if
    what had happened to her was made known through the broadcast then this
    would protect her from any further persecution.



(iii)    The Appellant's son


14.    The appellant's son confirmed his witness statement at  A68-70.    He
     said that his mother had left Cameroon in 2000.   He went to live  with
     his aunt and grandmother.  The police constantly  came  to  their  home
     looking for his mother.  He had been  ill-treated  by  the  police  and
     beaten when they were looking for his mother.  The police then  started
     looking for his aunt after she left.   He had been  interrogated  about
     her.   Their house had been burned down and he had gone  to  live  with
     neighbours and was later collected by his aunt.   He was taken  by  his
     aunt to Mali where arrangements were made for him to be brought to this
     country to join his mother.   He confirmed that  he  had  been  granted
     refugee  status  following  a  successful  appeal.   A  copy   of   the
     determination of Immigration Judge Herbert allowing this appeal  is  at
     A73-81.   He confirmed that he was attending school and continued to go
     once a week to the Medical Foundation for family therapy.   He was  not
     cross-examined.


The Medical Evidence


15.    The medical evidence appears at A49-67.   There is a report  from  Dr
     Clark at A49-55 confirming the presence of extensive  scars  which  she
     describes as compatible with the account of being  involved  in  a  car
     crash.   There are many other scars  compatible  with  the  account  of
     being beaten in prison.   The appellant has pelvic inflammatory disease
     and other circumstantial evidence suggests that she was infected  as  a
     result of the rapes.  In  the  report  of  Dr  Garland  at  A56-60  the
     appellant is described as suffering from post traumatic stress disorder
     which in her view is  consistent  with  the  kidnap,  imprisonment  and
     brutal treatment she endured whilst in prison  in  Cameroon.    In  the
     report at A61-67 the appellant's injuries are described  as  consistent
     with her history but not with  a  story  of  deliberate  self  harm  or
     injuries  from  domestic  work.   They  are  consistent  with  violence
     particularly directed towards women with the intention  of  rape.   The
     diagnosis of pelvic inflammatory disease was consistent with a  history
     of being raped by different men on different occasions.


The Evidence from the British High Commission


16.    This evidence from the High Commission in Yaounde is set  out  in  a
     letter dated 25 July 2003 (R1) there is also a further letter dated  18
     October 2003 at A82-3.  In substance the letters are identical.   These
     confirm that the High Commission has consulted the Chairman of the SDF,
     John Fru Ndi, who said that he knew  neither  the  appellant  nor  her
     father and had not heard any complaints about Mrs  F.    Dr  B  of  the
     National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms  was  also  consulted
     and he was said  to  be  sure  that  the  appellant's  claim  of  being
     persecuted because of her membership of the SDF was ill-founded.    Two
     leading NGOs including Dr K  were  also  consulted  and  they  did  not
     believe the appellant's claims.  The letter confirmed  that  the  death
     certificate for the appellant's father was likely  to  be  genuine  and
     that there had been an article in a newspaper, Jeune  Detective  of  29
     August  2002,  but  that  paper  had  proved  to  be   unreliable   and
     sensationalist.  The letter also confirmed that medical facilities  for
     the physical aspects of the appellant's condition  would  be  available
     but treatment for the  mental  and  emotional  aspects  might  be  more
     difficult.   The High Commission would try to  ensure  the  appellant's
     safety by  keeping  in  regular  contact  with  her  and  alerting  the
     Cameroonian Government to her case and to her return.   In a subsequent
     e-mail sent on 17 February 2006 (R2)  it  is  confirmed  that  Innocent
     Nguiffo was the Chairperson of the Douala II Electoral District of  the
     SDF Party until late 2004 when he had been voted out of  office  during
     district elections and that Mrs F was the president of  the  Douala  IV
     Section of the ruling party and an MP for  a  constituency  in  Douala.
     She is described as an influential member of the  ruling  party  and  a
     leading female politician and business person.




Submissions


17.    Ms Leatherland relied on the contents of the letters from  the  High
     Commission submitting that they seriously  undermined  the  appellant's
     claim.   There were contradictions in her evidence about  the  position
     she held for the CDF and her descriptions of the  party's  organisation
     and structures were inaccurate.  It was not  clear  from  her  evidence
     whether after the kidnap she had attempted to contact the local or  the
     national  president  of  the  SDF  or  whether  the  police  had   been
     informed.   In one part of the evidence the car involved was said to be
     a Mercedes (P23/D3) and in the newspaper  article,  a  Toyota  (A87-9).
     The evidence relating to the television  broadcasts  was  inconclusive.
     At the hearing before Immigration Judge Herbert only the February  2000
     TV programme had been mentioned.   There was confusion about  the  date
     when the appellant had first been arrested.  She had given  a  date  of
     broadcast as 13 May 1999 but subsequently said that she was arrested on
     19 May 1999, the evening before the national holiday on  20 May  1999.
     There was no objective evidence to confirm that membership of  the  SDF
     by itself would put the appellant at risk.   She accepted that  it  was
     clear from the medical evidence that  something  had  happened  to  the
     appellant but her account of what had taken  place  was  not  credible.
     She submitted that it would be safe for the appellant to return.  There
     was  no  reason  to  believe  that  the   appellant's   attendance   at
     demonstrations in this country would have come to the attention of  the
     authorities or that this would put her at any risk on return.


18.    Ms  Webber  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  given  a  credible
     account.  Her evidence was corroborated  by  her  son's  evidence,  the
     medical evidence and the evidence of Mr N.   There was also documentary
     evidence to show that she had been a member of the Ngangue  ward  (A94-
     109) together with the letter from Innocent Nguiffo (A116) and a letter
     from the current ward president (A109-10).   There was a press  cutting
     about the appellant in La Cause and in Jeune Detective  (A87-93).   The
     concerns raised in the letter from the High Commission were  offset  by
     the further evidence from Mr N.  The comments in the letter from  Dr  K
     had to be considered in the light of the  later  conversation  with  Mr
     N.   Ms Webber did not seek to argue that the  appellant  would  be  at
     risk simply by virtue of being a member of the SDF but by reason of her
     own particular circumstances  in  the  light  of  what  had  previously
     happened to her.   There were no good reasons to consider that  in  her
     case the persecution  she  had  suffered  in  the  past  would  not  be
     repeated.



The Law

19.    The appellant would entitled to asylum if  owing  to  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution for a Convention reason she is outside his  country
    of nationality and is unable or, owing to such  fear  is  unwilling  to
    avail herself of the protection of that country.  The burden is on  her
    to show there is a reasonable degree of likelihood of persecution for a
    Convention reason if returned to Cameroon.  This standard can  also  be
    expressed as whether there is a real risk of persecution.    A  similar
    test applies to the assessment of whether the appellant is entitled  to
    a grant of humanitarian protection and whether there is  a  risk  of  a
    breach of the appellant's rights under Article 3.    The  Qualification
    Regulations 2006 and amendments to the Immigration Rules  implement  EU
    Council Directive 2004 83/EC on minimum standards for the assessment of
    refugee  claims.    By  virtue  of  Regulation  1(2)  we  apply   these
    provisions to all pending appeals.


The Background Situation in Cameroon


20.    The history of Cameroon is summarised in paragraph 3.01 of the  COIS
     Report of October 2006 at R31.  Cameroon is a unitary republic  with  a
     multi-party presidential regime where opposition parties were legalised
     in 1990 but the preponderance of  power  remains  with  the  President.
     The report describes Cameroon as generally enjoying stability and  this
     has permitted the development of agriculture,  roads  and  railways  as
     well as  the  petroleum  industry.   Despite  a  slow  movement  toward
     democratic reform, political power remains firmly in the hands  of  the
     ethnic oligarchy headed by President Paul Biya.   The SDF is one of the
     opposition parties and according to paragraph 17.02 of the COIS Report:


         "In the early days of multi-party democracy President Biya's regime
         was  seriously  shaken  by  widespread  opposition   and   protest.
         However, since then the CPDM and  the  President  have  managed  to
         assert  their  dominance  over  the  Cameroonian  political   scene
         although the SDF, led by Ni John Fru Ndi, has established itself as
         the main opposition party."


21.    The report confirms at paragraph 4.01 the evidence of Mr  N  that  at
    the end of May 2006 the SDF split in two with John Fru Ndi and  Bernard
    Muna heading each of the distinct factions.  Fru Ndi was elected at the
    party's Bamenda Convention whilst the one held in Yaounde chose Muna to
    lead what its chief organiser, Clement Ngwasiri,  calls  the  authentic
    SDF.  It is also reported that Fru  Ndi  is  now  facing  interrogation
    about the murder of Diboule Gregoire  during  a  confrontation  between
    supporters of the SDF rival factions.

22.    The general situation outlined in the COIS  Report  is  confirmed  by
    the US State Department Report of  2006  (A103-127).    This  describes
    Cameroon as a republic dominated by a strong presidency and despite the
    country's multi-party system of government the  CPDM  has  remained  in
    power since it was created in 1985.   It  says  that  the  government's
    human rights record remains poor and it continues  to  commit  numerous
    human rights abuses.   However, it does record that:

                   "Unlike  previous  years,  there  were  no  reports  that
        government  agents  committed   politically   motivated   killings;
        however, throughout the year the security forces have continued  to
        commit unlawful killings including killings resulting from beatings
        and other use of excessive force."

23.    It confirms that in August Fru Ndi was charged  with  the  murder  of
    Diboule Gregoire which was still under  investigation.    When  dealing
    with political prisoners the report says that two groups  of  prisoners
    are held who  could  be  considered  political  prisoners.   The  first
    relates to fifteen members of the SCNC serving  long  prison  sentences
    following their 1999 convictions in military trials.  Their trials  and
    convictions are described as  not  meeting  international  or  national
    legal standards and a number of international NGOs have criticised  the
    trials as unfair.  The second relates to the government  continuing  to
    hold two individuals widely considered  by  human  rights  NGOs  to  be
    political prisoners because of the irregularities in their  trials  and
    restricted access to counsel.  These are a former  Minister  of  Health
    and long-time aide to President Biya and his  campaign  manager.   They
    were arrested in 1997 and convicted on  charges  of  embezzling  public
    funds.


24.    The Amnesty International Report of 2006 for Cameroon refers  to  the
    appeals by the imprisoned  members  of  the  SCNC  against  their  1999
    convictions.   The  appeal  court  in  Yaounde  quashed  two   of   the
    convictions and reduced the sentences in respect  of  other  prisoners.
    Those who have remained in custody have appealed to the Supreme  Court.
    The US State Department Report confirms that there were no reports that
    security forces broke up or disrupted gatherings of the SDF during  the
    year but administrative authorities banned marches  and  meetings  that
    the SDF wanted to conduct in Douala  and  Limbe.   In  October  2005  a
    meeting of the National Executive Committee of the  SDF  in  Limbe  was
    banned on the grounds  that  internal  fighting  might  disrupt  public
    order.

25.    In the Operational Guidance Note (OGN) on Cameroon issued 24  January
    2007 the SDF is described as the largest opposition political party  to
    play a major role  in  opposition  political  party  activity  and  the
    contested elections in 2004.   Unlike in 2004  there  were  no  reports
    that security forces broke up or disrupted gatherings of the SDF during
    2005.   The SDF is a legally registered political party and  has  seats
    in the National Assembly and  mayoral  representations  throughout  the
    country.  During the Fact Finding Mission to Cameroon in  January  2004
    John Fru Ndi told the UK delegation that the government  officials  and
    police harassed and intimidated members of  the  SDF  and  that  people
    whose parents are members of the SDF were harassed and  intimidated  by
    the government and many young SDF supporters  were  also  stopped  from
    obtaining jobs or starting new businesses.   It was also difficult  for
    many young SDF supporters to live in Cameroon because of harassment and
    intimidation but it was noted that this form of  intimidation  was  not
    used against all SDF members.


26.    The OGN takes the view that the government in Cameroon took steps  to
    advance human rights during 2005 and that there was a systematic effort
    to investigate, suspend and prosecute security force members accused of
    killings and other abuses.  The control of  administration  of  prisons
    was moved to the Ministry of Justice allowing for  better  tracking  of
    prisoners from arrest to final trial sentencing.   The  government  had
    also opened a new Department of Human Rights in the Ministry of Justice
    to investigate any abuses  committed  in  areas  under  the  ministry's
    responsibility.   Cameroon's human rights record had been poor but  was
    showing gradual signs of improvement.

27.    The conclusion reached by the OGN in respect of the risk  to  members
    of the SDF at paragraph 3.6.6 is as follows:

        "Conclusion.  The SDF is the largest opposition  party  to  play  a
        major role in opposition political activity.  It  is  a  registered
        party and therefore being a member is not illegal.  Unlike in  2004
        when the party's activities were restricted  and  targeted  by  the
        government, there were no  reports  of  any  such  restrictions  in
        2005.   Therefore  membership  of,  involvement  in,  or  perceived
        involvement in the SDF at any level is not likely to amount to ill-
        treatment  that  engages  the  UK's  obligations  under  the   1951
        Convention.  The grant of asylum in such  cases  is  therefore  not
        likely to  be  appropriate  and  should  be  certified  as  clearly
        unfounded."

28.    We also note from paragraph 17.10 of the COIS report:

              "A UNHCR representative stated  that  although  in  the  past
         particular groups have been persecuted by  the  state  authorities,
         this is no longer the case.   In  the  past  members  of  the  SCNC
         (Southern Cameroon National Council) faced harassment  and  inhuman
         treatment by the police."

29.    Looking at the background evidence as  a  whole  we  agree  with  the
    conclusions set out in the OGN.  On the basis of the evidence currently
    available membership of, involvement or perceived  involvement  in  the
    SDF at any level is unlikely by itself to amount to give rise to a risk
    of persecution or ill-treatment engaging either the Refugee  Convention
    or Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  However, we accept in the
    light of Mr N's evidence and the evidence relating to the detention and
    imprisonment of SCNC supporters that some prominent active opponents of
    the government may, depending  on  their  own  particular  profile  and
    circumstances, continue to be at real risk of persecution.

Assessment of the Appellant's Evidence

30.    We must consider firstly whether the appellant has given  a  credible
    account of events in Cameroon and of her reasons for  leaving  assessed
    in accordance with the lower  standard  of  proof.   She  has  given  a
    consistent account of the two incidents she relies on, her  kidnap  and
    involvement in a staged car crash in May 1999 and  her  detention  when
    she was repeatedly raped from April to August 2000.    Her  account  is
    confirmed by the medical evidence to the extent that her  injuries  are
    found to be consistent with her description of how they were caused and
    also consistent with the  violence  directed  towards  women  with  the
    intention of rape.  The evidence  of  her  son  confirms  a  continuing
    interest in the appellant and other family members.  We also note  that
    the appellant gave evidence at the hearing of her son's appeal and  her
    account was accepted by the immigration judge.

31.    The appellant also relies on the evidence of Mr N, a  long  time  SDF
    activist who said that he had made enquiries with Innocent Nguiffo  and
    was able to confirm that the appellant had been a member of the Ngangue
    Ward.   In the document at A94 the appellant is described as  a  Deputy
    Secretary General of the cell.  There is a letter at A117 from Innocent
    Nguiffo purporting to confirm that following the appellant's appearance
    on the programmes "Expression Direct" she was kidnapped,  molested  and
    tortured causing her to be hospitalised for a  considerable  period  of
    time.   There is also a letter dated 20 February 2006 at A110A from the
    next Branch President.  The fax from the High Commission of 17 February
    2006 confirms that Innocent Nguiffo was the President of the Douala  II
    electoral district until late 2004.  The appellant has also referred to
    newspaper articles at A87-89 setting out details of the accident in May
    1999.   Oddly this refers to the car as a Toyota Corolla rather than  a
    Mercedes as described by the appellant.

32.    Set against this evidence, there is the evidence in the  letter  from
    the High Commission saying that those  consulted  either  knew  nothing
    about these incidents or believed that the claim by the  appellant  was
    not true.   Mr  N's  evidence  at  126-30  seeks  to  deal  with  these
    issues.   He said that he had spoken to Dr K who  said  that  when  the
    embassy made its enquiries he sought to undertake  what  investigations
    he could but his  organisation's  resources  were  limited  and  had  a
    different remit.   They had been  unable  to  investigate  sufficiently
    whether the appellant's case was established or not.   Mr  N  had  been
    able to confirm the appellant's membership of the SDF.  It is his  view
    that  the  NCHRT  was  a  government  sponsored  organisation  and  was
    apparently unreliable.  He did know about ACAT but the organisation was
    almost unknown before 2000.

33.    It was also argued on behalf of the  respondent  that  the  appellant
    had not used the correct names for relevant parts of  the  organisation
    of the SDF that she belonged to:   see paragraph 2 of the  letter  from
    the High Commission.  However, we attach little weight to  this  issue.
    The  description  of  the  various  layers  of  the  organisation  will
    inevitably depend upon not only local descriptions but on how they  are
    translated.   The fact the appellant might have described one group  as
    a "sub-group" seems to us  to  have  little  material  bearing  on  the
    credibility of her account particularly in the light  of  the  detailed
    evidence the appellant gave of the structures of the SDF in  paragraphs
    48-68 of her statement made on 19 April  2004  at  1A11-37.    We  also
    attach little weight to the fact that the newspaper  article  described
    the car as a Toyota Corolla when the appellant  said  it  was  a  black
    Mercedes.  We do accept that there are inconsistencies in the  evidence
    as to when the kidnapping took place and whether the police were  told.
    There is also some confusion about whether the appellant  reported  the
    matter to her local or to the national president but, looked at in  the
    context of the evidence  as  a  whole,  these  inconsistencies  do  not
    seriously undermine the appellant's evidence.

34.    We must  assess  the  evidence  as  a  whole  in  the  light  of  the
    relatively low standard of proof.  The issues raised by the  respondent
    do give rise to some doubts about aspects of the  appellant's  evidence
    but when we take into account the evidence which tends to  confirm  her
    account of events  we  find  that  there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the appellant has given a  true  account  of  what  has
    happened to her in Cameroon and of her reasons for leaving.

Assessment of the risk to the Appellant on return

35.    Ms Webber has not sought to argue that  the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk solely because of her membership of the  SDF.    She  argues  that
    because of her previous activities, her family's  connection  with  the
    SDF, her continued activities in this country and her association  with
    Mr N, the appellant would still be at real risk on return.

36.    We remind ourselves of the provisions of paragraph 339K  of  HC  395:
    the fact that a person has  already  been  subject  to  persecution  or
    serious harm should be regarded as a  serious  indication  of  a well-
    founded fear of persecution or real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm
    unless there are good reasons to  consider  that  such  persecution  or
    serious harm will not be repeated.  On the respondent's  behalf  it  is
    argued that these events took place a long time ago and were instigated
    by one influential member of the ruling party who would now be unlikely
    to have any adverse interest in the appellant.    The  respondent  also
    points to the fact that the situation in general terms in Cameroon  has
    been improving.   However, there is evidence that serious human  rights
    abuses are continuing to take place in the Cameroon.  It is argued that
    the split in the SDF may indicate that those who follow the faction led
    by Fru Ndi would no longer be at risk as they have tended  to  seek  an
    accommodation with the ruling party whereas prominent activists in  the
    Muna faction might still be regarded  by  the  authorities  as  a  real
    threat.  The appellant did not leave detention lawfully but escaped  by
    means of bribery and it is argued that there is therefore a  risk  that
    the security forces would rearrest her as someone who has escaped  from
    detention.   The appellant has continued to take part in demonstrations
    against the current authorities.   There is no reason to  believe  that
    the animosity shown towards her by Mrs F would not be  renewed  if  she
    were now to return as someone still opposed to the current government.

37.    On the basis of the evidence before us we are not satisfied  that  we
    can yet say there is good reason to believe that persecution previously
    suffered by the appellant would not be repeated.   She was deliberately
    targeted by a senior influential member of the governing party  because
    of her and her family's  political  involvement.    The  appellant  has
    continued to be politically active in support of the SDF and  currently
    supports the  faction  which  regards  Fru  Ndi  as  being  willing  to
    compromise with the present regime.  We are satisfied that there  would
    be a risk that Mrs F, whose power and influence is acknowledged in  the
    information from the High Commission, may  well  seek  to  take  action
    against a former political enemy who now supports what she  might  well
    regard as the more intransigent faction of the SDF.   For these reasons
    we are satisfied that there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that
    the appellant in the light of her  particular  background  and  profile
    would still be at real risk of persecution or serious harm amounting to
    a breach of Article 3 on return to Cameroon.

         Decision

38.    For the reasons previously given, the original Tribunal  did  make  a
    material error of law.  We substitute a decision allowing the appeal on
    both asylum and human rights grounds.







Signed
       Date: 23 April 2007

Senior Immigration Judge Latter



                                   ANNEX A


Background evidence produced at the hearing

CIPU Report 2004

USSD Report 2004

IRB Canada Report 29 April 2005, Cameroon The Social Democratic Front

US State Department Report Cameroon 2006

Amnesty International Report Cameroon 2006

E-mail from Peter Geschiere, 2 March 2006

COIS Report Cameroon 27 October 2006

Operation Guidance Note Cameroon issued 24 January 2007

This list does not include documents referred to  in  paragraphs  4  and  16
which relate solely to the appellant's circumstances.





