
KA (statelessness: meaning and relevance) Stateless [2008] UKAIT 00042

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at:  Newport (Columbus House)                        Date of Hearing:
13 September 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                         Immigration Judge S J Hall

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. E. Fripp, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:          Miss T. Powell, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.  Statelessness does not of itself constitute  persecution,  although  the
circumstances in which a person has been deprived of citizenship  may  be  a
guide to the circumstances likely to attend his life as a  non-citizen.   2.
The Refugee Convention uses nationality  as  one  of  the  criteria  of  the
identification of refugees: there is no relevant  criterion  of  'effective'
nationality for this purpose.


                                    NOTE

 1.  This  appeal  has  an  exceptionally  long  history,  which  has  been
    unnecessarily  (although  in  the  circumstances   only   fractionally)
    extended by us, for which we apologise.  It raises a number of  issues,
    some of which are difficult in themselves.   The  difficulty  has  been
    compounded by the fact that at various stages the Tribunal has not been
    very fully addressed on precisely the issues that need to be decided.

 2. The question lying at the heart of this appeal, as in many  others,  is
    that of the appellant's  nationality.   He  was  born  in  Ethiopia  of
    Eritrean  parents.   He  claims  that  he  has   lost   his   Ethiopian
    nationality, because of his parentage; and he says that any claim  that
    he might have to Eritrean nationality is  ineffective  because  of  the
    Eritreans' attitude toward those who come from Ethiopia.  But it is not
    easy to establish any of those propositions, and none of them  has  yet
    been  established  in  judicial  proceedings   that   have   not   been
    successfully appealed.  There is, in addition, a procedural  difficulty
    which relates to the notice of the decision against which the appellant
    appeals and which unfortunately has the capacity of further  prolonging
    the course of the process.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 September  1999.   He
    had no travel documents.  He applied for asylum.  He  was  interviewed,
    nearly two years later on 23 July 2001.  After another interval of nine
    months he was issued with a notice of refusal of leave  to  enter.   In
    that notice the Immigration Officer proposed his  removal  to  Eritrea.
    The appellant appealed.  The appeal was heard by  an  adjudicator,  who
    dismissed it.  Having obtained leave  to  do  so,  the  appellant  then
    appealed to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal which adjourned the hearing
    on a number of occasions at the  appellant's  request.   Following  the
    commencement of the appeals provisions of the 2004 Act, the  appeal  to
    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal continued as a  reconsideration  before
    this Tribunal.  At  a  hearing  on  17  November  2005  the  respondent
    conceded that the adjudicator's determination, sent to the parties on 3
    April 2003, contained material errors of law and that a rehearing would
    be necessary.  (If that is the case, it is very difficult indeed to see
    why the concession was not made years earlier.)  The  appeal  was  then
    reheard by a panel of this Tribunal, who dismissed it.   There  was  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, which  was
    refused by the Tribunal, but  renewed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  who
    granted it.  The substantive appeal to the Court was  then  settled  by
    consent, with an order that the appellant's appeal be heard again.

 4. We should point out that in the statement of reasons submitted  to  the
    Court, it is said that  the  appellant's  claim  was  "refused  by  the
    respondent on 26 July 2001", and that,  by  the  time  of  the  hearing
    before this Tribunal,  the  respondent  "now  proposed  to  remove  the
    appellant to Eritrea".  Both of those statements are correct, but  both
    are misleading.  The date given is the date of the  letter  giving  the
    Secretary of State's reasons for refusing the claim, but,  as  we  have
    said, the notice of the decision against which the  appellant  appealed
    was issued some months later.  And although the letter  is  written  in
    terms suggesting that the appellant could  and  should  be  removed  to
    Ethiopia, the destination  specified  in  the  notice  of  decision  is
    Eritrea.  The respondent has not sought to change it.  This is a  point
    to which we revert later.

 5. The appellant's appeal has been run on  Refugee  Convention  and  Human
    Rights grounds.  The advent of the Qualification  Directive  2004/83/EC
    and the regulations made under  it  does  not  affect  the  substantive
    issues to be determined and we are therefore  content  to  continue  to
    look at the position under those two Conventions.

 6. So far as the Refugee Convention  is  concerned,  the  appellant  is  a
    refugee if he has a well founded fear of persecution  for  one  of  the
    five "Convention reasons" in his country of  nationality.   It  follows
    that his nationality has to be determined as part  of  the  process  of
    determining his status as  a  refugee  or  otherwise.   If  he  has  no
    nationality, his status has to be determined by his country  of  former
    habitual residence, which is certainly Ethiopia.  It does not  look  as
    though he can have  dual  nationality,  because  neither  Ethiopia  nor
    Eritrea appears to permit dual nationality.  But he may still have  the
    Ethiopian nationality that he certainly had when he was born;  and,  if
    he does not have Ethiopian nationality, he may have become entitled  to
    have Eritrean nationality.  If he is stateless or if he  has  Ethiopian
    nationality, Ethiopia is the appropriate State  of  reference  for  the
    purposes of refugee  status  determination.   But  if  he  has,  or  is
    entitled  to  have,  Eritrean  nationality,  Eritrea  is  probably  the
    appropriate State.

 7. We say "probably", because Mr. Fripp raises  the  issue  of  "effective
    nationality", which has featured in a number of  other  cases.   It  is
    said, in  the  writings  of  Hathaway  and  some  others,  and  in  the
    jurisprudence of some other countries, that refugee  status  is  to  be
    determined not by nationality or access to nationality as such, but  by
    reference only to such nationality as may be "effective".  It is argued
    that a nationality that is acquired, or that  can  be  acquired,  on  a
    purely formal basis, but which  gives  no  substantive  rights  to  the
    person acquiring it, ought not to be considered as nationality for  the
    purposes of refugee status determination.  We  have  very  considerable
    doubt whether we should adopt that notion.  It appears to us to  insert
    a quite unnecessary construct into the clear provisions of the  Refugee
    Convention.  If a claimant's nationality  is  such  that  it  does  not
    afford him protection from  persecution  for  one  of  the  "Convention
    reasons", he may be able to establish his refugee status  by  reference
    by  that  nationality:  not  on  the  basis  that  the  nationality  is
    "ineffective", but because, as a person of that  nationality,  he  does
    not have protection from persecution in his country of nationality.  In
    circumstances  where  dual  nationality  is   permitted,   the   formal
    possession (or possibility of  acquiring)  a  second  nationality  will
    operate in precisely  the  same  way.   If  a  person  is  at  risk  of
    persecution in one of his countries of nationality the  possession  (or
    the possibility of acquiring) nationality of another country will  only
    prevent him from being a refugee if he is not at  risk  of  persecution
    there or at risk of being returned to the  first  country  from  there.
    That,  again,  will  depend  on  whether  the  second  nationality   is
    nationality  of  a  country  where  he  has  a  well  founded  fear  of
    persecution: it does not depend  on  whether  the  nationality  has  an
    additional feature of "effectiveness".  A person is stateless  only  if
    he has no nationality available to him.  If a notion  of  effectiveness
    of nationality were  to  be  incorporated  into  the  definition  of  a
    refugee, it would, first, cause some individuals who had (or had access
    to) nationality  to  be  treated  as  stateless,  which  is  inherently
    undesirable.  It would, further, cause the refugee status of  a  person
    who had a nationality to be determined not by reference to the State of
    which  he  was  a  national  (that  State  having  been  excluded  from
    consideration on the ground that the  nationality  was  "ineffective"),
    but by reference instead to the country of former  habitual  residence.
    We cannot see that the Refugee Convention has any such intention.

 8. Looking at the matter of the  point  of  view  of  this  case,  if  the
    appellant is, or is entitled to be, a national of Eritrea, his  refugee
    status has to be assessed by reference to  Eritrea.   He  cannot  claim
    that it should be assessed by reference to  Ethiopia,  his  country  of
    former habitual residence, on the ground that he is stateless.   He  is
    not stateless if he  is  entitled  to  Eritrean  nationality.   If  the
    position is that, although he is entitled to Eritrean  nationality,  he
    will be treated there in a way that amounts to persecution  within  the
    Convention, then he is, by reference to  Eritrea,  a  refugee.   If  he
    cannot show that his treatment in Eritrea would amount  to  persecution
    for one of the "Convention reasons",  he  cannot  show  that  he  is  a
    refugee:  nothing  is  added  by  saying  that  that  shows  that   his
    nationality of Eritrea would  not  be  "ineffective".   If  he  is  not
    entitled to nationality of Eritrea, his status must be determined  with
    reference to Ethiopia, either because he is a national of Ethiopia,  or
    because he is stateless and Ethiopia is his country of former  habitual
    residence.  Although the question is  the  same  in  either  case,  the
    answer may be different: it may  be  that  the  risks  in  Ethiopia  to
    Ethiopian nationals (albeit of Eritrean ancestry)  are  different  from
    the risks to stateless persons of Eritrean ancestry.

 9. Mr. Fripp's principal submission to  us  was  that  Eritrea  should  be
    excluded from consideration,  because  Eritrean  nationality  would  be
    "ineffective" in the appellant's case.   He  also  submitted  that  the
    appellant had been effectively stripped of Ethiopian  nationality.   We
    cannot accept that if the appellant has lost his Ethiopian  nationality
    he should be regarded as  stateless  if  he  is  entitled  to  Eritrean
    nationality.  A person who has an entitlement to a  nationality  should
    not be regarded as stateless.  The  incidents  of  the  nationality  to
    which he is entitled may have an effect on whether he  is  at  risk  of
    persecution, but they cannot make him stateless.

10. We should say that the evidence on the question whether  the  appellant
    is entitled to Eritrean  nationality  is  very  far  from  establishing
    anything.  It appears that the position since 1992  is  that  a  person
    like the appellant born of Eritrean parents is a national of Eritrea by
    birth.  The appellant made, in 2004, what may  described  as  a  rather
    half-hearted attempt to secure documentation  evidencing  his  Eritrean
    nationality, but decided to take the matter no further when he heard of
    the fees charged at the Eritrean Embassy in London and of the  need  to
    provide evidence from three individuals as well as his  parents'  birth
    certificates.

11. So far as Ethiopia is concerned, Mr. Fripp submitted  to  us  that  the
    appellant's status as a refugee was essentially settled by the decision
    of the Court of Appeal in EB (Ethiopia) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  809.
    That was a case in which the evidence established  that  the  appellant
    had had  her  Ethiopian  nationality  revoked  by  destruction  of  her
    identity documents whilst she was in Ethiopia.  There was also evidence
    that the Ethiopian Embassy in the United Kingdom would  not  issue  her
    with documents attesting Ethiopian nationality.  There was  accordingly
    no doubt that she was to be treated as a person who was not, and  could
    not become, a citizen  of  Ethiopia.   Although  she  had  an  Eritrean
    father, no real  consideration  appears  to  have  been  given  to  the
    possibility that she should be treated as a national of  Eritrea.   Her
    refugee status was determined by reference to Ethiopia, and  the  Court
    of Appeal decided, by a majority, that the material available to it was
    sufficient to establish that the deprival of her nationality was itself
    sufficient to establish a well founded fear of persecution in Ethiopia.
     A number of features  of  the  case  make  it  not  entirely  easy  to
    understand how the decision in  EB  (Ethiopia)  should  be  applied  to
    future similar cases.  All the members of  the  court  appear  to  have
    thought in principle that, at any rate in  the  circumstances  of  that
    case, the question of whether the appellant had at the present  time  a
    well founded fear of persecution could be answered solely by  reference
    to her experiences in the past.  That is no doubt right in some  cases,
    but it cannot be universally right.  Further, Longmore  and  Jacob  LJJ
    (but not Pill LJ, who dissented rather strongly) seem to  have  thought
    that the deprival of nationality of itself amounted to treatment  which
    was, and continued to  be  persecution,  without  any  inquiry  of  any
    consequences to such deprival.  That, although no doubt merited on  the
    facts of the particular case, is again surprising.  Many countries have
    a long and honourable history of affording  benefits  to  non-citizens.
    The Refugee Convention as a whole is structured around a predicate that
    the refugee will be in a country of which he  is  not  a  citizen.   It
    simply cannot be suggested without more that life  without  citizenship
    is a life of persecution.

12. In any event, however, we do not think that it is right to say that the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in  EB  (Ethiopia)  concludes  anything
    that is certainly an issue in this appeal;  and  it  is  certainly  not
    right to say, as Mr. Fripp did say, that the facts of the present  case
    are in all material respects identical to those of EB (Ethiopia).  Even
    if Eritrea were to be excluded from consideration, as Mr. Fripp submits
    that it should be, this appellant's  experiences  are  quite  different
    from those of EB.  The evidence is that  this  appellant's  father  may
    have been deprived of his  Ethiopian  nationality,  but  the  appellant
    himself, although arrested and detained briefly, was  released  on  his
    assertion that he was  an  Ethiopian  national.   There  is  little  or
    nothing in the appellant's account of his own history that could amount
    to a claim that the appellant  has  been  an  individual  victim  of  a
    deprivation of citizenship.  Indeed,  Mr.  Fripp  appeared  to  concede
    before us that the appellant had Ethiopian nationality de jure, and was
    not able to point to any evidence that he had been stripped  of  it  de
    facto.  If he has been deprived of his citizenship in some way, it must
    be as the result of the operation of law.  There is some evidence  that
    some Ethiopian nationals of Eritrean background have been  deprived  of
    nationality, but it is very far from clear that such  difficulties  are
    universal and they may not  at  present  be  widespread;  further,  the
    appellant's own experiences during his arrest may show that the risk is
    substantially reduced in his case.  As has been pointed  out  in  other
    judgements in this appeal, if the Ethiopian authorities wanted to  take
    action against him, it is surprising they did not do so when he was  in
    their hands: the fact that they did not do so tends to show that  there
    is little risk in his case.

13. For the foregoing reasons we reject both the principal matters  put  by
    Mr. Fripp in his skeleton argument.  We  are  not  prepared  to  decide
    refugee  status  on  the  basis  of  "effective"  rather  than   actual
    nationality or access to nationality; and we are not  prepared  to  say
    that the decision of the Court of Appeal in EB (Ethiopia) resolves this
    appeal.  Given that the previous judgements have all been set aside, it
    appears to us that the appellant's position in relation to  citizenship
    will need to be determined on up to date and reliable evidence of  that
    position vis-�-vis both Ethiopia and Eritrea.

14. As we have said, the proposal is to remove him to Eritrea.  Whether  or
    not that is the country of which he is a citizen,  he  is  entitled  to
    resist removal there if removal to Eritrea  would  breach  any  of  his
    rights under the Human Rights Act 1998.  It is submitted on his  behalf
    that if he is Ethiopian, then even if he has no well  founded  fear  of
    persecution in Ethiopia, he will  be  ill  treated  in  Eritrea  as  an
    Ethiopian.  If he is stateless, it is said he  will  similarly  be  ill
    treated as a perceived traitor to  the  Eritrean  State.   The  Consent
    Order of the Court of Appeal acknowledges that  the  previous  Tribunal
    did not properly consider whether removal to Eritrea,  as  proposed  by
    the respondent, would breach the appellant's human rights.  That  is  a
    further matter which, if this appeal proceeds as it has done, will need
    to be considered, and on which evidence will need to be taken before  a
    final judgement is reached.

15. We must return to the procedural aspects of this case.  On hearing  Mr.
    Fripp's submission that the appellant ought not in any circumstances to
    be regarded as effectively connected with  Eritrea,  Miss  Powell,  who
    appeared for the respondent, suggested that the appellant ought  to  be
    returned to Ethiopia.  She said on the  respondent's  behalf  that  she
    intended to therefore change the destination.  We directed that if that
    were to happen she was to lodge a new notice within 7 days and we would
    then consider whether, in consequence,  the  decision  presently  under
    appeal survived.  Shortly after the hearing another Presenting  Officer
    wrote to the Tribunal.  The effect of that  letter  was  not,  at  that
    time, entirely understood, and it is for that reason (for which we take
    responsibility)  that  the  writing  of  this  determination  has  been
    delayed: it is fair to say that we expected a new notice to be  issued.
    The letter reads as follows:

      "Further to directions, I am writing to confirm the following: -

      If the Tribunal find  as  a  fact  that  the  above  appellant  is  an
        Ethiopian citizen, who can be removed to Ethiopia without facing  a
        breach of his human rights, the SSHD will set removal directions to
        Ethiopia in pursuance of his powers under 10(1) of  Schedule  2  to
        the Immigration Act 1971, as per the verbal  undertaking  given  by
        Miss Powell at the hearing on 13th September 2007."

      With the greatest respect, that letter appears to indicate  the  worst
    of both worlds.  If Mr. Fripp is right and Eritrea is to  be  excluded,
    and if the respondent is right in saying that the appellant has no well
    found fear of persecution or risk of ill treatment in  Ethiopia,  which
    is what the respondent has said ever since issuing  the  letter  giving
    reasons for refusal, in July 2001, then a notice with a new destination
    will be issued.  A decision to refuse leave  to  enter  is  one  which,
    under the provisions of the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003  (SI
    2003/658: see reg 5(1)(b)) is  required  to  indicate  the  country  of
    proposed removal.  Previously, and because of the terms of  the  notice
    of the decision against which he is appealing, the  appellant  has  run
    this appeal on the basis that, although he says that  Ethiopia  is  the
    only country by reference to which his claim to refugee  status  should
    be assessed, he does not have to deal with the consequences  of  return
    to that country, because the Secretary of  State  did  not  propose  to
    return him there.  Having, by the  terms  of  the  notice,  effectively
    confined the issues in  the  appeal  to  the  legality  of  removal  to
    Eritrea, we apprehend that the Secretary of State could not remove  him
    to Ethiopia without more ado.  It may  be  that  she  is  not  formally
    required to reissue the notice of decision  with  the  new  destination
    specified; but if she attempts to  remove  the  appellant  to  Ethiopia
    following an appeal required only to deal with  Eritrea  it  is  highly
    likely that she will be challenged by way of Judicial Review.

16. So far as we are aware, it is not suggested in  this  appeal  that  the
    appellant can lawfully be removed  if  he  establishes  that  he  is  a
    refugee.  We have indicated above the issues  which  will  have  to  be
    determined in the course of deciding if he is a refugee.  If  he  fails
    to establish that he is a  refugee,  he  is  nevertheless  entitled  to
    succeed in his appeal if he establishes  that  what  the  Secretary  of
    State proposes to do to him will breach his human  rights.   The  clear
    present position is that the Secretary of State proposes to remove  him
    to Eritrea.  In practice,  if  she  wishes  to  retain  the  option  of
    removing him to Ethiopia, she needs to issue a new notice  of  decision
    specifying Eritrea and Ethiopia as alternatives, under reg 5(b)(ii)  of
    the Notices Regulations.  In any event, the appellant  is  entitled  to
    succeed if he shows that the proposed removal  will  breach  his  human
    rights.

17. So far as procedure in this Tribunal is concerned, the position  as  we
    see it is that the order of the  Court  of  Appeal,  made  by  consent,
    establishes for the purposes of rule  31  that  the  previous  Tribunal
    materially erred in law.  It is clear that there  will  have  to  be  a
    further hearing on the merits, and it is important, given  the  history
    of this case, that at that hearing all relevant matters are  determined
    with as much finality as possible.  It is for that reason that we  have
    done our best to give our views of the legal arguments advanced by  Mr.
    Fripp on the appellant's behalf and to identify the issues  with  which
    the Tribunal will be concerned at that  further  hearing.   Given  that
    there has to be another hearing, it may be that the Secretary of  State
    wishes to take the opportunity to withdraw the notice against which the
    appellant now appeals (thus bringing this appeal formally  to  an  end)
    and issue a new notice, naming all possible removal  destinations,  and
    carrying a new right of appeal.  That is a matter for her, but, for the
    reasons we have given, without a new notice it is unlikely that even  a
    new hearing will resolve with finality the issues raised here.

18. Whether as a continuation of the present reconsideration or in relation
    to a new appeal, the Tribunal will  take  this  Note  into  account  in
    deciding how to proceed to determine the issues which are relevant.  We
    do not seek to impose any restrictions on the  evidence  which  may  be
    adduced, provided it is relevant; nor do we suggest that  any  previous
    findings of fact be regarded as inviolable.  It  is,  however,  in  the
    highest degree  unlikely  that  the  Tribunal  will  entertain  further
    submissions on the matters of  law  raised  in  Mr.  Fripp's  arguments
    before us and resolved by this note.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
