
MS and others (family reunion: "in order to seek asylum") Somalia [2009]
UKAIT 00041

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Procession House, London                    Date of Hearing:  19
May 2009

                                   Before

      Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration
                                  Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
                       Senior Immigration Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                     MS
                                     AA
                                     FA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

The family reunion provisions of para 352A et  seq  do  not  extend  to  the
family members of those whose own status derives only from those Rules.   In
those circumstances, a claimant  cannot  show  that  the  sponsor  left  his
country of former habitual residence "in order to seek asylum"  as  required
by the Rules.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant is a Somali national aged twenty-six.   The  second
    and third Appellants are her two dependent children  aged  respectively
    five and three years of age.  On 1 February 2008  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in Addis Ababa refused the Appellants entry clearance  to  come
    to the UK as the spouse (in the case of the first  Appellant)  and  the
    children (in the case of  the  second  and  third  Appellants)  of  the
    Sponsor.  On appeal, Immigration Judge J R Devittie in a  determination
    signed on 23 October 2008, dismissed each of  the  Appellants'  appeals
    under paras 281 and 352A (in the  case  of  the  first  Appellant)  and
    paragraphs  297  and  352D  (in  the  case  of  the  second  and  third
    Appellants)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (Statement  of   Changes   in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395).  He also concluded that the Appellants  had
    failed to show a breach of Article 8  and  their  respective  right  to
    respect for their family life.  On 27 November 2008, Senior Immigration
    Judge Waumsley ordered reconsideration and thus the matter came  before
    us.

 2. The essential background facts to these appeals are  as  follows.   The
    Sponsor fled Somalia, a country of which he is a national, in  1991  at
    the outbreak of the civil war.  He claims to be  of  Ashraf  ethnicity.
    He went to Addis Ababa in Ethiopia.  On 30 January 2002 in Ethiopia  he
    married his first wife, LD on 30 January 2002. Shortly  after  that  LD
    came to the United Kingdom where she gave birth on 12 January  2003  to
    their son.  She claimed asylum and was recognised as a refugee in 2004.
     On 24 December 2002, after LD had left Ethiopia, the  Sponsor  married
    the first Appellant.  On 10 September 2003 their daughter  (the  second
    Appellant) was born.  On 28 May 2005, the Sponsor came  to  the  United
    Kingdom under the refugee family reunion provisions  to  join  LD,  his
    first wife who, as we have said, had been granted refugee status in the
    United Kingdom.  On 19 November 2005 the second child of  his  marriage
    to the first Appellant was born in Ethiopia.  That child is  the  third
    Appellant.  On 4 December 2007, the Sponsor and his first wife, LD were
    divorced (see decree absolute issued by the Willesden County  Court  at
    pages  19-20  of  the  Appellants'  trial  bundle).   Thereafter,   the
    Appellants sought entry clearance to join the Sponsor as his spouse and
    daughters, the refusals of which are the subject of this appeal.

 3. Mr Yeo accepted that the Appellants could not succeed under  paragraphs
    281 and 297 of HC 395 because they could not meet the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements.  Instead, Mr Yeo  relied  exclusively  upon
    the family reunion rules of HC 395, namely paras 352A and 352D.

 4. The first point taken before  us  concerned  para  14  of  the  Judge's
    determination where he concluded  that  the  first  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor were not validly married.  Thus, the Judge concluded  that  the
    first Appellant could not rely on para 281 to gain  entry  to  the  UK.
    That conclusion would equally debar the first Appellant relying on para
    352A as the "spouse" of a refugee.

 5. Mr Yeo submitted that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the  marriage  was  invalid.   He  submitted  that  the
    Judge's reasoning in para 13 of his determination  was  wrong.   There,
    the Judge said this:

        "It is accepted  that  polygamous  unions  are  not  recognised  in
        English law.  I find in public law...a polygamous union is void  ab
        initio....I find that for the reasons I have set out the fact  that
        polygamous unions are voidable in Ethiopian  law  does  not  confer
        validity on them in UK immigration law which I take to be  governed
        by principles of public law."

 6. Mr Yeo accepted  that  the  marriage  to  the  first  Appellant  was  a
    polygamous one but it  was,  he  submitted,  nevertheless  valid  under
    Ethiopian law unless subject to an order of dissolution under Ethiopian
    law.   Consequently,  he  submitted  that  as  a  matter   of   private
    international law the first Appellant's marriage to the Sponsor,  being
    a valid law under Ethiopian law, was one that was recognised by English
    law.

 7. We need say little about this submission, other than to note that it is
    demonstrably correct, and it was accepted  as  such  by  Mr  Deller  on
    behalf of the Respondent.  He accepted that the Judge had erred in  law
    in concluding that the first Appellant's marriage to the Sponsor is not
    a valid marriage for the purposes of English  law:  it  is  valid.   He
    further acknowledged that the polygamous nature of the marriage did not
    affect the application of the Immigration Rules to the first Appellant.
     We were referred to paragraph 278 of HC 395 which provides, so far  as
    relevant, as follows:

        "278.  Nothing in these Rules should be  construed  as  allowing  a
        person to be granted entry clearance,  leave  to  enter,  leave  to
        remain or variation of leave as the spouse of a man or  woman  (the
        Sponsor) if:

           i) his or her marriage to the Sponsor is polygamous; and

          ii) there is another person living who is the husband or wife  of
              the Sponsor and who:

               a) is, or at any time since  his  or  her  marriage  to  the
                  Sponsor has been, in the United Kingdom; or ..."

 8. It was accepted that since the Sponsor and his first wife were divorced
    under English law on 4 December 2007 it could not be said that, in  the
    words of para 278(ii),  "there is another person living who  is  the...
    wife of the Sponsor".

 9. Mr Deller submitted, however, that the error of law  was  not  material
    since the first Appellant could not succeed  under  para  352A  and  by
    parity of reasoning neither could the other Appellants under para 352D.
      The  only   possible  outcome  of  the  appeal  was  to  dismiss  the
    Appellants' claims under the Rules.

10. The applicable provision of the Immigration Rules  in  respect  of  the
    first Appellant is para 352A which, so far  as  relevant,  provides  as
    follows:-

        "352A.  The requirements to be met by a  person  seeking  leave  to
        enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  or  civil
        partner of a refugee are that:

          i) the applicant is married to or the civil partner  of  a  person
             granted asylum in the United Kingdom; and

         ii) the marriage or civil partnership did not take place after  the
             person granted asylum left the country of his  former  habitual
             residence in order to seek asylum; and

        iii) the applicant would not be excluded from protection  by  virtue
             of article 1F of the United  Nations  Convention  and  Protocol
             relating to the Status of Refugees if he were to seek asylum in
             his own right; and

         iv) each of the parties intends to live permanently with the  other
             as his or her spouse or civil partner and the marriage or civil
             partnership is subsisting;..."

11. The applicable provision of the Immigration Rules  in  respect  of  the
    second and third Appellants is para 352D which,  so  far  as  relevant,
    provides as follows:

        "352D.  The requirements to be met by a  person  seeking  leave  to
        enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order to  join  or  remain
        with the parent who has been granted asylum in the  United  Kingdom
        are that the applicant:

          i) is the child of a parent who has been  granted  asylum  in  the
             United Kingdom; and

         ii) is under the age of 18; and

        iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is  not  a
             civil partner, and had not formed an independent  family  unit;
             and

         iv) was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum at the
             time that the person granted asylum left  the  country  of  his
             habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and

          v) would not be excluded from  protection by virtue of article  1F
             of the United Nations Convention and Protocol relating  to  the
             Status of Refugees if  he  were  to  seek  asylum  in  his  own
             right;..."

12. In relation to paragraph 352A,  Mr  Deller  submitted  that  the  first
    Appellant could not show that she was the spouse of "a  refugee",  that
    she is married to "a person granted asylum" in the  UK  (para  352A(i))
    and that the marriage  did  not  take  place  after  the  Sponsor  left
    Ethiopia "in order to seek  asylum"  (para  352A(ii)).   By  parity  of
    reasoning, in relation to the second and  third  Appellants  Mr  Deller
    submitted that they were not the children of  a  person  (the  Sponsor)
    "granted asylum" (para 352D(i) and (iv)) and further that they had  not
    been part of the family unit  of  a  person  granted  asylum  who  left
    Ethiopia "in order to seek asylum" (para 352D(iv)).

13. Mr Yeo submitted that the Sponsor was indeed a refugee and a person who
    had been granted asylum in the UK.  He submitted that the Sponsor  when
    he came to the United Kingdom in May 2005  had  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee.  He drew our attention to the Convention travel document which
    had been issued to the Sponsor, a copy of which is at  pages  14-17  of
    the Appellants' trial bundle.  Further, he referred us to  page  18  of
    the same bundle where it is clear that the  Sponsor  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  Mr Yeo submitted that  it  was  irrelevant
    that the Sponsor's status derived not from his own fear of  persecution
    in Somalia but from his marriage to a refugee and  the  recognition  of
    his status in line with that of his first wife's when he joined her  in
    the UK.

14. Mr Yeo referred us to a number of documents set  out  in  his  original
    skeleton argument before the Judge at pages  8-10  (which  for  reasons
    which will shortly become apparent we need not set out here) and to the
    recent Court of Appeal  decision  in  DL  (DRC)  v  ECO,  Pretoria;  ZN
    Afghanistan v ECO, Karachi [2008] EWCA Civ 1420.  He submitted that the
    documents showed that it was normal to grant refugee  status  to  those
    family members who were joining a person who was a refugee by virtue of
    his fear of persecution in the country of refuge and that  it  was  the
    Secretary of State's policy to do so. He relied upon  para [19]  of  DL
    (DRC) where the Court of Appeal saw no  difference  in  the  expression
    "refugee" used in the preamble  words  to  para  352A  and  the  phrase
    "person granted asylum" in para 352A(i) and (ii).

15. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Deller did not seek  to  argue  to  the
    contrary. He accepted that it  was  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
    normally to recognise a family member as a refugee  in  line  with  the
    person in  the  UK  who  was  a  refugee  by  virtue  of  his  fear  of
    persecution.  That indeed is the terms of the guidance to ECOs and  the
    relevant IDI (set out at  paras  5.6  and  5.7  of  Mr  Yeo's  skeleton
    argument). He also accepted that the Sponsor in these appeals had  been
    recognised as a refugee on that basis.  Further, he  accepted,  in  the
    light of DR (DRC) that the phrases in paras 352A and 352D of  "refugee"
    and "a person granted asylum" were synonymous.

16. Consequently, that aspect of Mr Deller's argument fell away  in  favour
    of the Appellants.  Mr Deller maintained his other  submission,  namely
    that the Sponsor was not  someone  who,  within  the  wording  of  para
    352A(ii)  and  352D(iv),  had  left  his  country  of  former  habitual
    residence (namely Ethiopia) "in  order  to  seek  asylum".   Mr  Deller
    submitted that  the  basis  of  the  Sponsor's  application  for  entry
    clearance to come to the United Kingdom and for the subsequent grant of
    refugee status was his spousal relationship with  his  first  wife  who
    was, herself, a refugee in the UK.  Thus it could not be said that  the
    sponsor had left Ethiopia "in order to seek asylum" rather he had  left
    Ethiopia in order to seek reunion with his first wife in the UK.

17. In response, Mr Yeo acknowledged that the Sponsor had never said he was
    in fear of persecution when seeking entry  to  the  UK.   Mr  Yeo  did,
    however, suggest - without saying any more - that he would have  had  a
    good case on his own merits if he had made it.

18. Mr Yeo submitted that a person in the position of the Sponsor should be
    seen in precisely the same light as someone who did leave  his  country
    of habitual residence because of such a fear.  He  submitted  that  the
    family members of a refugee, himself recognised on  the  basis  of  his
    family relationship with a refugee in the UK,  should  be  granted  the
    same benefits of family unity as the  family  members  of  the  refugee
    whose status was recognised because of their fear.   Mr  Yeo  submitted
    that family members  were,  in  practice,  granted  refugee  status  to
    recognise the fact that  they  were  themselves  often  in  danger.  He
    referred us in particular to  recital  (27)  of  the  EU  Qualification
    Directive dealing with refugees and others  in  need  of  international
    protection (Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004) which is  in
    the following terms:-

        "Family members, merely due to their relation to the refugee,  will
        normally be vulnerable to acts of persecution in such a manner that
        could be the basis for refugee status."

19. That, then, is the issue between the parties.  Our task is to interpret
    the phrase "in order to seek asylum" in paras 352A(ii) and 352D(iv)  of
    HC 395.  Mr Yeo prays in aid the underlying purpose of these paragraphs
    namely that of family reunion between a refugee and his family members,
    at least, for these purposes, his wife and children.

20. The proper interpretive approach to the Immigration Rules was  recently
    set out by Laws LJ in MB (Somalia) [2008] EWCA Civ 102 at para [59]  in
    the following terms:

        "I disagree with Collins J's insistence [in Arman  Ali  [200]  INLR
        89] on a purposive construction of the Immigration Rule, if  it  is
        thought that such an approach would produce a  result  in  any  way
        different from the application of the Rule's ordinary language.  As
        Dyson LJ indicates, the purpose of the Rules generally is to  state
        the Secretary of State's policy with  regard  to  immigration.  The
        Secretary of State is thus concerned to articulate the  balance  to
        be struck, as a matter  of  policy,  between  the  requirements  of
        immigration control on the one hand and on the other the claims  of
        aliens, or classes of aliens, to enter the United Kingdom  on  this
        or that particular basis. Subject to the public law imperatives  of
        reason and fair procedure, and the  statutory  imperatives  of  the
        Human Rights Act 1998, there can be no a priori  bias  which  tilts
        the policy in a liberal, or a restrictive direction.  The  policy's
        direction is entirely  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  subject  to
        Parliament's approval by the negative procedure provided for by the
        legislation. It follows that the purpose of  the  Rule  (barring  a
        verbal mistake or an eccentric  use  of  language)  is  necessarily
        satisfied  by  the  ordinary  meaning  of  its  words.  Any   other
        conclusion must constitute a qualification by the court, on  merits
        grounds, of the Secretary of State's  policy;  and  that  would  be
        unprincipled."

21. That approach was subsequently adopted by the Court  of  Appeal  in  DL
    (DRC) at para [24] and AM (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 1082  where
    Laws LJ at [38] stated:

           "The whole of [the Immigration Rules'] meaning is, so to  speak,
           worn on their sleeve."

22. We must therefore search for the "ordinary meaning" of  the  words  "in
    order to seek asylum".  Having said that, it  would  be  wrong  not  to
    acknowledge at least in general terms that the  underlying  purpose  of
    paras 352A and 352D is to facilitate family union between refugees  and
    their pre-existing spouses and children.  That is consistent  with  the
    UK Government's obligation (now) under Article 23 of the  Qualification
    Directive that "Member States shall ensure that  family  unity  can  be
    maintained".  That obligation, as the material we  have  been  referred
    to, well demonstrates, has been a long-standing  one.   The  obligation
    applies to "family members" including the refugee's  spouse  and  minor
    children (see Article 2(h) of  the  Directive).  Article  23.1  of  the
    Qualification Directive also imposes an obligation on member States  to
    ensure that family  members  "who  do  not  individually  qualify"  for
    refugee status are entitled to the benefits accorded  to  refugees  set
    out in Articles 24-34 of the Qualification Directive which, inter  alia
    include documentation,  travel  documents  and  access  to  employment,
    education, social welfare and healthcare.  As we have already noted the
    administrative practice in the UK is to confer upon the relevant family
    members of a refugee, refugee status and the grant  of  leave  in  line
    with that of the refugee.

23. Our interpretive task is not greatly illuminated by recourse to a claim
    that paras 352A and 325D seek to further family unity between a refugee
    and certain of his  family  members.  The  issue  for  us  is  not  the
    principle of reunion but rather, accepting that to  be  the  case,  the
    precise  circumstances  when  it  is  contemplated  in   the   relevant
    paragraphs of the Immigration Rules.

24. More telling,  in  our  judgment,  are  two  provisions  in  the  Rules
    themselves.  First, we turn to Part 11 of the  Rules  headed  "Asylum".
    Here in paras 326A-352G  are  found  the  provisions  setting  out  the
    procedures  for  dealing  with  asylum  and  humanitarian   protection,
    including the process for applying for  and  the  basis  for  granting,
    refusing or revoking  such  protection.   For  these  purposes  we  can
    confine ourselves to  the  provisions  dealing  with  applications  for
    asylum.  Paras 326A-328 provide as follows:


           "Procedure

           326A.The procedures set out in these Rules shall  apply  to  the
           consideration of asylum and humanitarian protection.

           Definition of asylum applicant

           327. Under the Rules an asylum applicant is a person who either;

                 (a) makes a request to be recognised as a refugee under the
                 Geneva Convention on the basis that it would be contrary to
                 the  United  Kingdom's   obligations   under   the   Geneva
                 Convention for him to be removed from or required to  leave
                 the United Kingdom, or

                 (b) otherwise makes a request for international protection.
                 "Application for asylum" shall be construed accordingly.

           327A. Every person has the right  to  make  an  application  for
           asylum on his own behalf.

           Applications for asylum

           328. All asylum applications will be determined by the Secretary
           of State in accordance with the Geneva Convention. Every  asylum
           application made by a person at a port or airport in the  United
           Kingdom  will  be  referred  by  the  Immigration  Officer   for
           determination by the Secretary of State in accordance with these
           Rules."

25. Although these provisions did not  come  into  force  until  after  the
    Sponsor came to the UK, in our  judgment,  they  shed  an  illuminating
    light upon who is a person "seeking asylum" in the UK.  Such  a  person
    will, as contemplated by the Rules, make "an  application  for  asylum"
    (para 328).  That person is, in the  words  of  para  327,  "an  asylum
    applicant".  Who is that?   Ignoring  a  person  claiming  humanitarian
    protection, para 327(a) tells us that it is someone who requests to  be
    recognised as a refugee under the Geneva Convention "because  it  would
    be contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Geneva
    Convention" to remove him or require him to leave the  UK.    In  other
    words, an asylum applicant is someone who falls within  the  Convention
    definition of a "refugee" (customarily within Art 1A(2) because he  has
    a well-founded fear of persecution) and his removal (refoulment)  would
    be contrary to Art 33 of the Convention.  A person  who  claims  to  be
    entitled to live in the UK solely because he is the spouse or child  of
    a refugee and seeks family reunion with that person is not  "an  asylum
    applicant" even if it is the UK's practice to recognise him as such  in
    line with the refugee in the UK.  It seems to us that this is a  strong
    indication that when looking at paras 352A and  352D,  which  are  also
    within Part 11 of  HC  395,  the  phrase  "in  order  to  seek  asylum"
    contemplates a person who, when he arrives in the UK, would, within the
    terms of para 327 (read  with  para  328),  make  "an  application  for
    asylum".  It does not, therefore, include the Sponsor in these appeals.

26. Secondly, in our judgment, it is clear from their own terms that  paras
    352A and 352D are drafted on  the  basis  that  an  individual  seeking
    family reunion is not "seeking asylum".   Para  352A(iii)  sets  out  a
    requirement for the grant of leave by a spouse  of  a  refugee  in  the
    following terms:

        "The applicant would not be excluded from the protection by  virtue
        of  Article 1F  of  the  United  Nations  Convention  and  Protocol
        relating to the Status of Refugees if he were to seek asylum in his
        own right"(emphasis added).

27. Paragraph 352D(v) is in precisely the  same  terms.   These  provisions
    make plain, in our judgment, that an applicant for family reunion  made
    in accordance with them is not someone who is "seeking asylum", but  in
    para 352A(ii) is treated hypothetically as if he  were,   in  order  to
    determine whether, if he had been seeking asylum, he  would  have  been
    excluded from being a refugee under the Convention by virtue of Article
    1F and if so will be refused leave as a family member.

28. In our judgment, these provisions are powerful pointers that lead us to
    conclude that the meaning of the phrase "in order to seek asylum"  does
    not encompass a person who has left his own country  (or  that  of  his
    habitual residence), not because he fears persecution  and  is  seeking
    international protection under the Refugee Convention but, in order  to
    be reunited with a spouse  or  parent  who  has.   Family  reunion  is,
    therefore, restricted under paras 352A  and  352D  to  the  spouse  and
    children of a refugee as defined in the Refugee Convention.  The family
    members of an individual who has been granted refugee  status,  himself
    on the basis of family reunion, in line with the  refugee  who  is  his
    spouse or parent, may only gain entry if able to establish  a  personal
    fear of persecution (as reflected in recital (27) of the  Qualification
    Directive) or because he satisfies the applicable Immigration Rule  for
    entry (e.g paras 281 or 297) or he can show that to  exclude  him  from
    the United Kingdom would breach his right to respect  for  family  life
    under Article 8.

29. Whilst not for the reasons given by the  Judge,  in  our  judgment  the
    three Appellants were (and are) not entitled to succeed under para 352A
    and para 352D.  The Judge's error  of  law  was  not  material  to  his
    decision to dismiss each of the Appellants' appeals in respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  His decision to  dismiss  those  appeals  therefore
    stands.

30. Finally, we turn to consider the Judge's decision to  dismiss  each  of
    the Appellants' appeals in respect of their Article 8  claim.  Although
    the grounds for reconsideration drafted by Mr Yeo challenge the Judge's
    conclusions in paragraph 23  and  24  of  his  determination  that  the
    Respondent's decision not to grant entry clearance  to  the  Appellants
    was proportionate, Mr Yeo  did  not  refer  to  these  grounds  in  his
    submissions before us.  He was right to take  that  course.    In  2005
    when the Sponsor came to the United Kingdom he made a conscious  choice
    to leave his second wife and child (a second  child  was  born  shortly
    thereafter) and to live with his first wife and child in the  UK.   The
    effect of that is described  by  the  Judge  in  paragraph  25  of  his
    determination as follows:-

        "25.  The Sponsor left them to set up a separate family unit in the
        United Kingdom.  There is merit in the view that although they  are
        the offspring of a polygamous  union,  they  are  to  a  degree  an
        independent family unit by virtue of the sponsor's decision to move
        to the United Kingdom to live with his first wife."

31. That conclusion is not challenged in the grounds for reconsideration or
    elsewhere.  At paragraph 24 of his determination, the Judge  refers  to
    the contact between the Sponsor and the Appellants since 2005.  In  our
    judgment, taking all these factors into account the Judge was  entitled
    in law to find that it would not  be  disproportionate  to  refuse  the
    Appellants entry to the UK.  Despite what is said in  the  grounds  for
    reconsideration, these facts speak for themselves.   We  see  no  basis
    upon which it can be said that the Judge materially  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appeals under Article 8.

32. For these  reasons,  the  Judge's  decision  to  dismiss  each  of  the
    Appellants' appeals stands.


                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT

