
AR (Kurd: not risk per se) Syria CG [2006] UKAIT 00048

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 March 2006                                |On 07 June 2006            |
|Prepared                                        |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                   Mr D K Allen, Senior Immigration Judge
                   Mr A R Mackey, Senior Immigration Judge
                                 Mr A Smith

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms C Hulse, Counsel instructed by Duncan Moghal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer

A Syrian Kurd with no political history does not face a risk of  persecution
or breach of his human rights on return to Syria. This decision replaces  SY
(Kurd - No Political  Profile)  Syria  CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00039  as  country
guidance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Syria. He claims to  be  Kurdish  and  to
    lack citizenship. He appealed to an Adjudicator, Mr J R L G Varcoe CMG,
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 14 June 2004 to remove him
    as an illegal entrant from the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  claimed
    that his father who had died in 1997 was Kurdish  but  his  mother  was
    Arabic and he had grown up speaking Arabic although he understood  some
    Kurdish.  He grew up in the town of Qameshle which is near to both  the
    Turkish and Iraqi borders with Syria and has a large Kurdish  majority.
     He had worked partly as an employee and partly on his own behalf as  a
    builder, and he had got married in January 2004.  He said that  because
    of his father's ethnicity he himself was considered to be  Kurdish  and
    was a descendant of one of those who had been deprived  of  citizenship
    by the Syrian authorities in 1962.

2.   This meant that he was not liable to  undertake  military  service  and
    had no right to a passport. His restricted  identity  card  had  to  be
    renewed every six years.

3.   He claimed to have experienced problems on account of an incident  that
    occurred around March 2004.  He was disbelieved in  relation  to  that,
    and there was no effective challenge to the findings  in  that  regard.
    It was thought, however, by  the  Vice  President  of  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal who granted permission to appeal that the Adjudicator's
    findings could be interpreted as accepting that the  appellant  was  an
    undocumented Syrian Kurd, and it was arguable that if he fell into that
    category he was at risk on return to Syria.

4.   By virtue of a Transitional Provisions Order the appeal took effect  as
    a reconsideration before the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal.    At  a
    hearing on 6 September 2005 a panel of the AIT found there  to  be  an
    error of law in the Adjudicator's determination.  Reference was made to
    paragraph 37 of the  Adjudicator's  determination  where  he  expressed
    doubt as to whether the appellant's father was Kurdish given  that  the
    appellant's mother and wife were both Arabs, and the  Adjudicator  said
    he had serious doubts and was not in a position to  make  a  definitive
    finding that the appellant was not Kurdish as he had claimed.   He went
    on to say at paragraph 43 that  there  must  be  serious  doubt  as  to
    whether the appellant was of Kurdish origin  and  at  paragraph  45  he
    commented on objective evidence concerning what would happen to a  Kurd
    with restricted rights on return to Syria.  He referred to his  serious
    doubts as to whether the  appellant  fell  into  this  category  having
    alluded earlier to the difficulties over  his  claimed  ethnicity,  and
    considered that the fact that he had both an  identification  card  and
    birth certificate went contrary to objective evidence  indicating  that
    descendants of those deprived of citizenship were unable to obtain such
    documents.  The Tribunal went on to state that although the Adjudicator
    had serious doubts about these aspects of the appellant's claim he  had
    failed to make clear findings as to whether  he  accepted  or  rejected
    them, and it was concluded that this  amounted  to  an  error  of  law.
    Thereafter the Tribunal set out various matters in relation to which it
    was necessary to make findings and we set these out now in order.

    1.   Whether the appellant was Kurdish.


    2.   Whether his father was deprived of Syrian citizenship in or  about
         1962.


    3.   Whether the appellant was likely to be treated as a descendant  of
         those deprived of Syrian citizenship.


    4.   If so, what were the consequences.


    5.   Is the appellant no more than a person who has failed to establish
         his nationality to the authorities in Syria, which failure  may  be
         no more than an inability to establish the right  to  claim  Syrian
         nationality.


    6.   Alternatively, has the Syrian Government effectively deprived  him
         of citizenship and the benefits flowing from it which may  arguably
         constitute persecution.


    7.   What is the effect of being the holder of a Syrian  identification
         card and birth certificate on his claim to be a person deprived  of
         citizenship.


    8.   Does the treatment of Kurds in Syria amount to persecution.


    9.   Does the treatment of Kurds deprived of their citizenship in  1962
         and/or their descendants amount to persecution in Syria.


    10.  Does the treatment of those Kurds who  hold  identification  cards
         and birth certificates amount to persecution in Syria.


    11.  On the basis of the above findings, what is the risk faced by  the
         appellant:


         (a)  on arrival at an airport in Syria and/or if readmitted, on


         (b)  returning to his home area; or


         (c)  to another part of Syria.


5.   The hearing before us took  place  on  23  March  2006.   Ms  C  Hulse,
    instructed by Duncan  Moghal  Solicitors  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and Mr S Ouseley appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  There had been a previous hearing on  23  November  2005  after
    which directions were sent out indicating that  the  case  would  be  a
    country guidance case and setting deadlines for the filing of an expert
    report and response.   The case was listed for hearing  on  7  February
    2006 at which time further evidence was adduced by the Home Office  and
    it was considered to be appropriate to adjourn in order to  obtain  the
    comments of the appellant's expert, Dr George, on those.

6.   At the hearing on 23 March 2006 after discussion we  clarified  to  the
    representatives  that  the  credibility  issues  concerning  what   the
    appellant said had happened to him in March 2004  after  inter-communal
    fighting and the claimed damage to a statue were not before us since it
    had not been effectively challenged before the IAT.    The  issues  for
    reconsideration were as listed above,  and  therefore  the  appellant's
    evidence was to relate to those issues which we considered were clearly
    severable from the historical account that he had given of  the  events
    of March 2004.

7.   The appellant gave evidence through  an  Arabic  interpreter.   He  had
    previously provided  what  is  described  as  a  supplementary  witness
    statement which is undated but seems however to have been  made  on  22
    August 2005, according to paragraph 1 of that  statement,  and  also  a
    more recent statement  on  2  March  2006.   He  was  referred  to  the
    supplementary statement and said he had instructed  his  solicitors  to
    prepare it and was aware of the contents and it was truthful and to the
    best of his knowledge it was correct.   The more recent statement dealt
    with his Kurdish identity card which he had with him  today.    He  was
    aware of what it said and was content for these statements  to  be  his
    evidence in chief.

8.    He  then  said  that  he  did  not  understand  paragraph  3  of   the
    supplementary statement which he had been taken through.  It  was  read
    back to him by the interpreter and he said it was not  like  that.   Ms
    Hulse asked him if his father had been Syrian and whether he had Syrian
    citizenship and he said that he  had  been  before  1962  but  in  1962
    citizenship had been withdrawn  from  "us".    His  mother  had  Syrian
    citizenship.  He did  not  get  Syrian  citizenship  from  his  mother,
    because according to their law they followed the  father  and  not  the
    mother.

9.   He was asked whether a Kurd could go and get married and he  said  that
    some of the Kurds were allowed  to  get  married,  but  they  were  not
    allowed to register the marriage and he thought it  was  called  common
    law marriage.   He was asked whether it was right that a Kurd could get
    married in the mosque and he said, "kind of".   It was not  a  marriage
    as such but in the mosque they could allow the marriage to take  place.
     He was asked whether as far as he  knew  Arabic  Syrians  with  Syrian
    citizenship registered their marriages and he said  "no"  and  then  he
    changed his answer and said "of course they could and it  was  normal".
    He understood the question in a different way.

10.  He was asked whether he owned any property that he had bought and  said
    no.  He lived in the family house.   He was asked whether it was  owned
    or rented and he said it was registered under his  mother's  name.   He
    did not know why because it had happened a long time ago, and it was an
    agreement between his mother and father.

11.  He produced his ID card, and copies of this and  translations  were  in
    the bundle.   He was asked whether he believed it was  the  same  as  a
    standard Syrian ID card or was it a Kurdish ID card and he said it  was
    not the card that was issued to Syrians but to some of the  Kurds,  his
    group.  He was asked whether it was true that Syrians had one  kind  of
    ID card and Kurds another one which was orange  and  he  said  yes,  of
    course.

12.  It was put to him that the card he had produced was not orange  and  he
    was asked whether it was the same as an Arabic Syrian ID card.  He said
    that there were two categories of Kurds, one did not hold any ID  cards
    but according to what had been said they were given ID cards and  these
    were  red.   Those  Kurds  from  whom  the  government  had   withdrawn
    citizenship in 1962 had begun to use those cards and they were like the
    one that he had produced.   It was put to him that the card he produced
    was neither red nor orange and he was asked whether it was  similar  to
    the Arab Syrian ID card and said no.   He was asked whether it was  the
    case that Kurds who had been deprived of citizenship had  orange  cards
    and said not at all, they did not have either citizenship or an ID.  He
    did not have an orange ID card, only the ones  who  did  not  have  any
    citizenship from the beginning did.  He did not have citizenship.    He
    was asked why then he did not have an orange card and said in 1962 they
    had withdrawn citizenship from people who had citizenship.   Orange and
    red were to be equated.   His white card  was  different  from  a  full
    citizens card.   He was asked how he had obtained it and he said in any
    area they would appoint a person in charge of the area so if  a  person
    lost their ID they could go to this person and give evidence  and  they
    would register the evidence on a piece of paper.  He had got  the  card
    through this person and this person worked for the government. He could
    not go to another person in charge of another area and ask  him  for  a
    card.

13.  He was asked at what age ID cards were  usually  issued  in  Syria  and
    said it was when the person was fourteen or fifteen.  He  said  he  was
    about fourteen when he got his and then he said that  every  six  years
    they changed the card so perhaps he was fourteen then.  He had got this
    card from the man in charge in his area in 2000 or 2001.   He  had  not
    had to do anything to get it, just provide photographs and the  old  ID
    card.  There was a fee perhaps of one hundred or one hundred and  fifty
    Syrian Lire.  If he went to the police he could produce this. That  was
    how a person was known in his city.

14.  When cross-examined by Mr Ouseley the appellant said  that  anyone  who
    had an ID card would have to pay the one hundred lire charge.   It  was
    not akin to a bribe.   He confirmed that this was  a  genuine  properly
    issued ID card.  If they issued an ID to an  unknown  person  then  the
    person issuing the card could be liable to prison.   This  was  because
    they were a government employee.

15.  He was asked where he got married and said that it had  been  at  home.
    It was put to him that at interview he had told the interviewer that he
    was married in El-Gameshly and he said yes they  had  to  register  the
    marriage.   He was asked why if he had married at home he had  said  in
    interview that he was married at the court.  He said that the religious
    clerk could not register the marriage unless he received a  paper.   He
    was asked whether he married in court or not and he said no he had  not
    said that; he had said that he had bought a paper from the  court.   It
    was put to him that that contrasted with what the form said and he said
    he did not know why it had been put down at interview that he  had  got
    married in a court and he had told the interviewer that he  had  got  a
    paper from the court.

16.  He was asked whether his marriage was registered and  he  said  it  was
    registered with the religious clerk but it was a  common  law  marriage
    not a legal marriage.   He agreed that he had  said  the  marriage  was
    registered and he was asked why he would register the marriage with the
    court if it were not legal.   He did not understand this  question  and
    it was put to him that he  had  gone  to  the  court  to  register  the
    marriage and he said yes and agreed it must have been a legal marriage.
      When it was put to him that it  must  therefore  have  been  a  legal
    marriage he questioned from what point of view it could be said  to  be
    legal.   It was put to him that it seemed from  his  answers  to  be  a
    legal marriage if he had registered it with the Syrian authorities  and
    he replied, all right.   He was asked whether he agreed that it  was  a
    legal marriage then and he said it  had  to  be  a  legal  marriage  of
    course.  His wife was an Arab and she had to have her rights.   He  was
    asked why he had earlier said that it was a common law marriage and  he
    said yes it was a common  law  marriage  and  this  was  the  procedure
    concerning marriage in Syria.  They had to go to  the  religious  clerk
    and then they had to register the marriage.   It was put  to  him  that
    the evidence said that  Kurds  could  not  register  marriages  and  he
    reiterated that his wife was  Arab.   It  was  put  to  him  that  this
    contrasted with  what  he  had  said  earlier  that  the  marriage  was
    unregistered and he could not go to the government and the marriage was
    not legal and why it was different now and he said he had  not  changed
    his story.

17.  He was asked whether he said that he had had problems as a Syrian  Kurd
    and replied "all right" and when he  was asked whether  he  was  saying
    yes or no he said no though he asked for clarification of  the  meaning
    of the word "problems".  He was asked to tell Mr Ouseley what he  meant
    by this and he said that he referred to this problem or a problem  with
    the government.   He was asked whether he had a  problem  in  his  life
    purely as a Kurd and he said  yes  racial  problems.    His  answer  to
    Question 21 at interview was put to him concerning  this  and  he  said
    "all right", and the question being referred to was a specific question
    about problems with the  government.   It  was  put  to  him  that  the
    question had been whether he had had problems and he said in the  reply
    he had given to the question he had understood he thought it related to
    problems with the government and had not taken any  part  in  politics.
    He was asked whether nothing had happened to him prior to 2004  and  he
    said nothing with the government.

18.  He had been able to work in Syria doing private work but  not  to  work
    in a government department.   He had gone to school in Syria.   He  was
    asked whether he spoke Kurdish and he said he  understood  the  Kurdish
    language but was not allowed to use it at home or in the school  or  in
    the street and they used Arabic.   He was not able to speak Kurdish one
    hundred per cent.  Seventy to  eighty  per  cent  of  his  village  was
    Kurdish. None of them spoke Kurdish in  the  street  as  this  was  not
    allowed, but only at home.  Some of the Kurds spoke  Kurdish  at  home.
    His father had been able to speak Kurdish but as his mother was Arab he
    did not speak Kurdish at home; also due to  the  problems  he  had  not
    wanted to speak Kurdish at home.

19.  He had agreed that he said his uncle was very rich.  He had  shops  and
    used to work.  He was an Arab.  He agreed that  his  own  brothers  had
    worked doing private work and they had lived as a family together.   He
    was asked whether he would be able to register that house in  his  name
    and he said he had not tried to do that as Kurds were  allowed  private
    possessions only, where they could live, nothing else.   He  was  asked
    whether he was saying that no Kurd was allowed to register their  house
    and he said no they were not  allowed  to  buy  properties  apart  from
    houses.   He was asked whether once they bought their house they  could
    register it with the government and he said he  that  they  could  only
    register it with a solicitor.   The effect of  that  was  to  guarantee
    their rights, nothing else.   He was asked what the  rights  were  that
    were protected and said just private possessions, nothing else.  If  he
    bought a house he could register it with  a  solicitor.  He  was  asked
    whether if he did that he could pass it on to his children and he  said
    only if he made a will and registered it with the solicitor.

20.  He had not had to do military service.   He had never been involved  in
    politics in the past.   He was asked whether he  had  been  in  contact
    with any Kurdish groups whilst he was in the United Kingdom and he said
    they had contacted him because he was not able  to  contact  them  from
    home.  He had not been to any meetings.

21.  He was asked where a person would go in Syria if  they  were  ill,  for
    treatment, and he said one could go to the doctor  just  normally.   It
    would not be a government doctor but a private doctor.   He  had  never
    needed to go to a government hospital for more serious treatment.   Nor
    had any members of his family.   He was asked whether there had been  a
    doctor nearby who had been able to treat him and he  said  not  nearby,
    but there was a doctor in the city and they went to see him.  This  was
    a GP.   If they needed more serious medical treatment then they used to
    go to a private hospital.  His mother was  able  to  go  to  the  state
    hospital and his wife also.

22.  He had been at school in Syria for some six or  seven  years  until  he
    was fourteen or fifteen.  He had left of his own accord  and  he  could
    have stayed in school for nine years.  He could not  have  gone  on  to
    college or university after that if he had wanted as  only  people  who
    had Syrian ID were allowed to do that.  He was not allowed  a  vote  in
    Syria.  He could not use his ID card to travel to other parts of Syria.

23.  He was asked whether his father had registered in the 1962  census  and
    he believed he had prior to 1962 as they had withdrawn his  citizenship
    in 1962.  His father had then been registered as a foreigner.

24.  It was put to him that the Home Office information was that  people  in
    the appellant's position had to do military service and he  said  "no".
    He asked on what basis  that  could  be  if  he  did  not  hold  Syrian
    citizenship.

25.  On re-examination the appellant when  asked  said  that  he  had  never
    bought a property and had never gone to a solicitor for a  property  so
    he did not have personal knowledge of the procedures but only according
    to what he had heard.

26.  He did not have children.  If he had a son he  would  not  do  military
    service as he was not a Syrian national.   He was asked how the  Syrian
    authorities would know that the son was not Syrian and he said  it  was
    as he was not registered with the Syrian  Government  and  departments.
    He could not register his son in court but  only  with  the  person  in
    charge of their area.   He could not do this in court as the son  would
    not hold Syrian citizenship.   When a child was born you  would  go  to
    the person in charge of the whole area and register them yourself.   An
    Arab Syrian would go to the government department and register  himself
    and this contrasted with the appellant's situation.

27.  The next witness was Dr Alan George.   Dr George describes  himself  as
    a freelance consultant, writer and journalist  specialising  in  Middle
    Eastern political and economic affairs.  He has provided  two  reports,
    the first dated 2 December 2005 and the second dated 25 February  2006.
     In the first report Dr George set out his qualifications and  previous
    relevant work history.  He had read the appellant's  witness  statement
    of  21  April  2004  and  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  and   the
    Adjudicator's determination first and had read various other documents.
     He noted with regard to the appellant's ID card that it appeared to be
    genuine but it did not appear to carry an official rubber stamp mark as
    would be expected.

28.  In his report Dr George deals in some detail with the relevant  history
    of Syria in particular with regard to the Kurds.   At paragraph  30  he
    confirms the accuracy of the appellant's evidence  that  Kurds  without
    citizenship cannot undertake military service.    He  notes  again  the
    absence of an official rubber stamp mark on the ID card, a matter which
    he refers to in the second report, as we set out below.

29.  At paragraph 46 Dr George concludes that he has no  reason  to  suspect
    that the appellant may not be Kurdish.  At paragraph 28 he states  that
    the appellant's nationality and ethnicity depend solely on those of his
    father, and goes on to  state  at  paragraph  46  that  proficiency  in
    Kurdish or knowledge of Kurdish culture or traditions are irrelevant in
    defining Kurdish ethnic status in Syria.  A Kurd he says  is  simply  a
    person whose father is or was a Kurd.

30.  Dr George goes on to consider the views of  the  authorities  in  Syria
    about asylum seekers, the consequences of illegal exit from  Syria  and
    evidence concerning arrest of forcibly returned  asylum  seekers.    He
    does not consider that internal relocation is feasible.

31.   In  the  second  report  Dr  George  provides  at  paragraph  2   some
    clarification of an aspect of his employment history, making  it  clear
    that for four years between 1980  and  1984  he  worked  for  a  public
    relations company, The Main Event Limited, whose clients  included  the
    governments of the United Arab Emirates and Libya and the London office
    of the Palestine Liberation Organisation.  He had worked for this  firm
    on a full time freelance basis.

32.  He  goes  on  to  comment  on  two  articles  that  had  been  produced
    concerning indications that Syria  was  or  might  be  going  to  grant
    citizenship to a number of Kurds.   These are respectively  an  article
    in the New York Times dated 28 April 2005 and  an  article  in  Kurdish
    Media dated 29 January 2006.   Dr George notes at paragraph 5 that  the
    possibility of the Syrian Government granting citizenship to  stateless
    Kurds has been a subject of speculation for years  but  considers  that
    government hints and declarations on the subject must be  treated  with
    great caution.  He refers to a  report,  of  which  we  have  not  been
    provided a copy, entitled "The Syrian Kurds:  A  People  Discovered"  a
    report  published  in  January  2006  by   the   Royal   Institute   of
    International  Affairs  (Chatham  House).    The  point  is  made  that
    promises of this kind have been made and broken many times  before  but
    the fear is that little will change and even the largest figure  stated
    is less than half the total number of Kurds without citizenship.   This
    is a reference to an announcement  in  the  summer  of  2005  that  the
    government was considering awarding nationality to 120,000 Kurds.

33.  Dr George also spoke to a Dr Jawad Mella, Chairman of the London  based
    Western Kurdistan Association which represents Syrian  Kurds,  who  was
    emphatically of the view that the Syrian Government was  not  about  to
    grant citizenship to stateless Kurds.

34.  Thereafter Dr George returned to an issue which he had  also  commented
    on in the earlier report, that  being  the  general  issue  of  Syria's
    stateless Kurds and the appellant's status.   He  observed  that  there
    are two broad sub-categories of stateless Syrian Kurd.   The first  are
    known  as  Ajanib  which  comprises  those  who  were   registered   as
    "foreigners" in the 1961 census, and their descendants: they  form,  he
    says, the great majority of the stateless Kurds  and  are  issued  with
    special identity cards of the type described  in  the  earlier  report.
    The second category are termed Maktoumeen who comprise those, and their
    descendants, who were not registered in the 1962 census.   He  comments
    on a conflict between Human Rights Watch evidence and evidence from the
    Danish  Immigration  Service  Report  regarding  the   Maktoumeen   and
    considers that  the  Human  Rights  Watch  view  is  correct  and  that
    Maktoumeen do not  include  the  children  of  parents  who  were  both
    registered as "foreigners"  in  the  census.   He  concluded  that  the
    appellant would be one of the Maktoumeen who include  the  children  of
    "foreigners" married to women who are Syrian citizens.   He states that
    Maktoumeen are not issued with the special identity cards issued to the
    Ajanib.

35.  He went on to provide further  thoughts  on  the  appellant's  identity
    card.   He had a meeting with Dr Mella to whom we have referred  above,
    who showed him several examples of authentic Maktoumeen identity  cards
    which  all  carried  the  Interior  Ministry  rubberstamp   mark.    He
    considered that questions were raised about  the  appellant's  identity
    card assuming that he is a Maktoumeen as he would not  then  have  been
    given a special identity card of the type issued to the Ajanib category
    of stateless Kurds.   He  considered,  however,  that  there  were  two
    possible explanations, one was that there was an  administrative  error
    and the other was that the card was not genuine in the  sense  that  it
    was not issued officially.  Alternatively it could have  been  obtained
    by bribing an official or as a favour from an official but he  did  not
    consider that it was an out and out forgery.  He emphasised  that  from
    top to bottom  the  Syrian  political  economic  system  is  rife  with
    corruption.

36.  Dr George  also  dealt  with  the  issues  of  property  ownership  and
    marriage.  He stated that in Syria marriages become legal when they are
    formally registered and that marriages involving stateless Kurds can be
    formally registered only where the wife is an Ajanib and the husband is
    a citizen and he referred to a table to which we will come  shortly  at
    page 6 of a report of Refugees International, "Buried Alive: Status  of
    Kurds in Syria", January 2006.   He went on to state that this did  not
    mean that marriages, which are contracts between two families  as  well
    as two individuals, do not take place between  for  example  Maktoumeen
    husbands and wives.

37.  As regards property,  stateless  Kurds  can  own  property  but  cannot
    register that property in their own names and  typically  the  property
    they own is registered in the names of friends  or  relatives  who  are
    citizens.  This, it is said,  places  them  in  a  somewhat  vulnerable
    position since they have to rely on the good faith of such  people  and
    cannot pass on ownership of property to their children.

38.  Dr George then went  on  to  deal  further  with  aspects  of  risk  to
    forcibly returned asylum seekers, referring to a report of 19 September
    2005 of Amnesty International with reference to the widespread  use  of
    torture in  Syrian  detention  and  investigation  centres  and  citing
    various cases of Syrians who had been living abroad and  were  forcibly
    returned to Syria.

39.  In his oral evidence  Dr  George  reiterated  the  distinction  between
    Ajanib  and Maktoumeen.  It was possible to have members  of  the  same
    family in both categories.  Theoretically  it  would  be  possible  for
    members  of  the  same  family,  e.g.  brothers,  to  be  in  different
    categories at the time when the registration occurred as one  could  be
    registered and the other not.

40.  As regards the differences concerning property  ownership  between  the
    categories on the one hand of Arabs who were Syrian  citizens,  and  on
    the other hand Ajanib and Maktoumeen, full citizens could own  property
    and have a  passport.    Ajanib  and  Maktoumeen  were  unable  to  own
    property in the sense of registering it in their names as they were not
    nationals.   Essentially the same differences existed  with  regard  to
    ability to access public services.   There was generally no  right  for
    Ajanib and Maktoumeen although in practice they might attend the lowest
    levels of the education system.

41.  As regards registration of births, deaths and  marriages  it  could  be
    very confusing as it  depended  upon  the  appellant's  background.  He
    referred to the table in the Refugees International Report to which  we
    have referred above.   The limitations with regard to marriage depended
    upon whether the man was a full citizen and to  whom  he  was  married.
    Usually Ajanib and Maktoumeen could not register their  marriages,  and
    in Syrian law that legalised the marriage.   So Kurds could be  married
    informally only, as the marriage had to be registered  with  the  state
    authorities.

42.   As  regards  ownership  of  property,  if  an  Ajanib  and  Maktoumeen
    registered in the name of a trusted friend or relative  who  was  in  a
    position to register it with the state then this could be done so  that
    they would own it informally but not legally.

43.  He was referred to  page  6  of  his  supplementary  report  concerning
    forcible return of asylum seekers.  People who  were  Syrian  nationals
    but not citizens did not get passports. If a  person  returned  without
    documentation especially lacking a passport then they would come to the
    adverse attention  of  the  authorities.  If  a  full  Syrian  national
    returned with ID but as a failed asylum seeker there would be  problems
    potentially as Syria was a police state with intelligence services  and
    they kept a close eye on Syrians abroad and  there  was  some  evidence
    that  applying  for  asylum  was  seen  as  demonstrating  dissent   or
    disloyalty which would be a crucial matter.    With  reference  to  the
    table at page 6 of the Refugees International Report he said  that  the
    husband had to be a national to be able to register.   Maktoumeen  were
    unregistered.

44.  As regards the suggestions that citizenship was going to be granted  to
    some stateless Kurds, he said that declarations of intent did not  mean
    much in Syria.  This happened periodically but nothing had happened and
    he was not optimistic that it would happen soon.

45.  When cross-examined by Mr Ouseley Dr George confirmed that  he  has  an
    expertise in the Middle East generally and there was reference  to  the
    Palestinian Authority also in the list of countries of expertise in the
    ILPA and EIN Directory of  Experts  entry  under  his  name.    He  was
    referred to what he said about  his  role  concerning  the  PLO.    The
    journal for which he had written was not an official journal of the PLO
    but was issued by their office in London.  His firm had had a  contract
    with the PLO to do this.  He was asked whether the report favoured  the
    PLO position and he said it was a public relations company and a public
    relations journal so yes.   He had written a  wide  range  of  articles
    including articles concerned with the progress of  the  Lebanese  civil
    war and the  role  of  the  Palestinian  Authority  in  that  and  also
    concerning Israeli practices in the West Bank and the Gaza  Strip.   He
    had not written about the misdeeds of the PLO as it was a  PR  journal.
    He had done so elsewhere however.  It was put to him that it  could  be
    seen to affect his objectivity as an expert and he said he  had  worked
    for a company and had not been working for  the  PLO  but  had  written
    articles for the magazine.  He was asked why he had not mentioned  this
    in his original CV or in the ILPA and EIN Directory and he said it  had
    not seemed to him to be particularly significant.   He  contended  that
    implicit in what Mr Ouseley was saying was that the articles  were  not
    accurate,  but  they  were  based  on  the  United   Nations,   Amnesty
    International and Reuters Reports.   At  the  time  the  PLO  had  been
    advocating a negotiated peace with Israel.   It was put to him that  he
    had taken one side of a political argument and he said this was as  any
    public relations person would.   He  said  that  he  could  list  every
    journal he had written for  and  there  were  endless  magazines.   The
    office had done work for the Lebanon also and they were opposed to  the
    PLO and he had written about Lebanon also.   He accepted  that  Lebanon
    tortured political prisoners.  He had not written about  that  in  that
    magazine but in others.

46.  He was asked whether he believed the Syrian  state  could  ever  change
    and he said it was very difficult as it was a patronage system  and  at
    every level individuals had an interest in maintaining the  status  quo
    and there was no realistic likelihood of improvement.

47.  He had last been in Syria at the  end  of  2001  he  thought.   He  had
    become unpopular after his book had been published and visas had become
    impossible to obtain although more recently he had  been  told  by  the
    Syrian Ambassador that it would be possible to go.   He had had  recent
    contact with Munin Ali who was referred to in the introduction  to  his
    book and was employed by the Ministry of Information but  had  not  had
    contact recently with any of the  other  members  of  the  Ministry  of
    Information since the book had been written.

48.  He was of the view that it was unlikely that  Kurds  would  be  granted
    citizenship.  He was asked about Dr Mella and said he was not a  member
    of government in exile, having never claimed that, but his organisation
    represented Syrian Kurds.   He did not know what his  position  was  on
    the question of a separate state for Kurds but considered that Dr Mella
    would advocate Kurdish statehood.  He was  not  representative  in  the
    sense of having been elected but the organisation hosted  cultural  and
    political events including demonstrations.  It  was  not  a  very  high
    profile organisation.

49.  He had not sought to contact the named  person  in  the  Kurdish  Media
    article.  It was very  difficult  to  assess  such  a  report  and  the
    question was what action flowed from it.  Syria monitored international
    telephone calls so Shakib Hajou, who was referred to  in  the  article,
    would not say anything  different  if  telephoned.    One  knew  almost
    instinctively who was worth contacting  after  years  of  dealing  with
    Syria and this was of no importance; it was a question of what followed
    from it.  It was put to him that it was his duty to investigate, and Dr
    George said his duty was to  the  real  world  and  he  tried  to  keep
    objective and had developed an understanding of how to understand Syria
    and such contact would not assist to understand Syria.   He  was  asked
    why therefore he had telephoned Dr Mella about the matter and  he  said
    Dr Mella had not been speaking on a monitored telephone  and  they  had
    spoken before and he trusted Dr Mella's assessment of  the  situation.
    He moved in the Syrian Kurdish context  and  Dr  George  attached  more
    significance to his views.  It was put to him that Mr  Hajou  lived  in
    Syria and Dr George said that he could live in London and keep in close
    contact with what was happening in Syria.   Mr Hajou might be close  to
    the regime.

50.  It was suggested to him that Dr Mella might say what he did as  he  had
    no interest in believing in  change  and  he  said  that  anything  was
    possible but you had to make measured judgments.  He did  not  consider
    Dr Mella to be fanciful and the Chatham House Report endorsed his view.

51.  He was asked why he had  not  contacted  Munir  Ali,  the  Director  of
    Public Information in Foreign Media at the Information Ministry, and he
    said that Mr Ali was an Aloumi which was a sect  which  was  especially
    loyal to the regime especially in security areas and he  was  the  last
    person who would give Dr George an accurate assessment of the situation
    and probably would not know.  It was suggested that  surely  he  should
    have approached him and he said that Munir Ali's side of the story  was
    in the articles.   If he wanted  to  know  if  stateless  Syrian  Kurds
    believed it would happen then they would  be  the  ones  who  would  be
    affected the most and the most worthwhile people to approach.

52.  As regards the future of Kurds in Syria, from his reports it  could  be
    seen that he saw scant reason to be  optimistic  about  the  status  of
    Kurds and he would believe progress when he saw it.

53.  it was put to Dr George that the appellant had said  his  marriage  was
    registered and his wife was an Arab and she was a full citizen and this
    made him a Syrian national it was suggested.  Dr George  said  that  if
    the appellant's marriage was legally registered he would  be  a  Syrian
    national and would have a  passport.   It  was  put  to  him  that  the
    appellant could have destroyed his passport.   Reference  was  made  to
    the concerns he had had about the ID card and Dr George said he had had
    doubts. Other Kurds also got cards to which  they  were  not  entitled.
    It was put to him that the appellant had not said that he  had  paid  a
    bribe, but he said he had paid a normal fee so even if he  were  Syrian
    he could have got it by another means to  boost  an  asylum  claim,  Dr
    George agreed that it would be possible to get  a  Syrian  passport  by
    bribes, indeed he could do so himself.

54.  He was referred to his second report  concerning  return  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker, and a reference to the Amnesty International Report.  Dr
    George referred also to an update from the top of page  7  and  another
    report concerning the person referred to there who had been released on
    22 January 2006 having lost a lot of weight and  was  depressed  having
    been tortured.   There was a possibility of awareness  that  an  asylum
    claim had been made, from the Syrian community or if the United Kingdom
    authorities escorted  the  appellant  back  to  Syria.    He  would  be
    questioned, having returned to the United Kingdom without  a  passport.
    He was asked what would happen if the appellant showed his card and  he
    said that Ajanib and Maktoumeen did not have passports so  having  been
    abroad would cause consternation.  He was asked what the position would
    be if the appellant was Syrian and not Kurdish and  said  he  could  go
    back as a Syrian passport holder and it  was  not  known  whether  they
    would know if he had claimed asylum.   If he were Syrian he could go to
    the embassy and get a passport but this would be difficult.  If it  was
    assumed he was a Syrian who had claimed asylum  having  left  illegally
    then there would be further reason for attention on  return.    If  the
    authorities were unaware there was an asylum application  and  that  he
    had left illegally they would look for an exit stamp and there would be
    a penalty.  The report mentioned the likely sentence.

55.  Dr George did not know what portion of Syrians went to  university.  It
    was compulsory to go to primary  school  and  most  went  to  secondary
    school and the better off to university.  The school  leaving  age  was
    likely to be fifteen or sixteen.

56.  As regards healthcare in Syria, as to whether most Syrians  went  to  a
    state doctor or hospital it was a question of money.  The public health
    system in Syria was very bad.

57.  As to whether one could get public sector work if Kurdish, there was  a
    difference between the rules on  paper  and  the  reality.   Low  level
    public sector work was likely to be possible.   As  regards  the  vote,
    Kurds could not vote.  Syrians who could vote had no capacity to change
    the government.

58.  On re-examination Ms Hulse asked about the categories  with  regard  to
    registration of marriage in  the  Refugees  International  paper.   One
    could get married in a mosque or in their home and  be  made  legal  by
    registration  with  the  local  Population  Registry  Office,  in   the
    Mukhtar's home at one end of the scale or at the Ministry at the  other
    end.  It was a contract between two families.   That was the case  also
    if the marriage was between a  Kurd  and  a  Syrian.    They  would  be
    married and this was considered very seriously by  both  families.   In
    everyday language you would describe  it  as  legal.    It  was  not  a
    marriage against the  law  if  two  Kurds  married.   It  was  in  full
    accordance with Sharia law which was a source of legislation.  It would
    lack only the official registration which tied in with citizenship.

59.  We allowed Mr Ouseley to ask further questions  in  response.   It  was
    put to Dr George that the appellant had said that he had registered his
    marriage in a court house and Dr George questioned what he had meant by
    that and what he had done.  He would  take  it  to  mean  that  he  had
    registered in a formal legal way.  The context in Syria  was  different
    and it was a question of what had actually happened. It was put to  him
    that it was highly unlikely that a person would register a marriage  at
    a public court house if it was not registered and  he  questioned  what
    court it was and it should be the religious court.  It was put  to  him
    that the appellant had said it was registered and Dr  George  suggested
    it was necessary to be cautious as to what he had meant  and  what  had
    happened.  It was a very different society.

60.  In his submissions Mr Ouseley contended that  it  had  not  been  shown
    that the appellant was Kurdish and therefore was not stateless.  He had
    said that his marriage had been legally registered  at  a  court  house
    which was consistent  with  being  a  Syrian  Arab.    The  appellant's
    evidence had been contradictory as to whether the marriage was a common
    law or a lawful marriage.   The only category that he  fell  within  in
    the Refugees International table was that of  a  Syrian  married  to  a
    Syrian.  His family had not even spoken Kurdish at home.   The ID  card
    was also relevant.  Such cards, it was said, could be easily  obtained.
    At interview he had said he had had  no  problems  on  account  of  his
    ethnicity.  He said he thought this was with regard to  the  government
    but it had been a specific question.  He thought he knew how  he  would
    be able to register property although it was said that Kurds  were  not
    allowed to do so.  What he said conflicted with the objective evidence.
     Dr George had doubts about the ID card but the appellant said  it  was
    genuine and had not said he had paid for it.    Even  if  the  Tribunal
    found he was Kurdish then there were doubts as  to  what  he  was.   He
    could have citizenship as well.

61.  The Tribunal was urged to  treat  Dr  George's  evidence  with  extreme
    caution  since  it  was  contended  that  he  was  not   objective   or
    professional.  He had not made it clear except subsequently that he had
    previously written articles for a public relations agency in support of
    the PLO and his  enquiries  with  regard  to  such  matters  as  likely
    citizenship for Kurds were not balanced.  It  would  have  been  common
    sense to go to a wide range of sources.  In fact  he  had  gone  to  an
    organisation which he described as not being heavyweight.

62.  It was argued that stateless Kurds  did  not  face  a  situation  where
    there was a real risk of persecution or breach of their  human  rights.
    It was clear that there were different degrees of  citizenship  but  it
    was necessary to consider the practical effects  which  showed  limited
    restrictions with  regard  to  the  situation  of  Syrian  Arabs.   The
    relevant thresholds were not crossed.

63.  As regards return as a failed asylum seeker  there  were  a  number  of
    sources of evidence for  this.    There  would  have  to  be  political
    activity abroad for a person to be at risk and that was not true of the
    appellant.  It was pure speculation on the part of Dr George to suggest
    that the Syrians would definitely know he was a failed  asylum  seeker.



64.  In her submissions Ms Hulse relied on the earlier skeleton and  amended
    skeleton.   She accepted that there were inconsistencies in some of the
    appellant's  evidence  today.   If  Mr  Ouseley  were  right  that  the
    appellant was a Syrian Arab pretending to  be  a  Kurd  then  he  would
    surely have got his facts right.   His  evidence  was  consistent  with
    being a Kurd and it was not self serving.  It was quite clear that  the
    marriage was common law. There was the  element  of  it  being  in  the
    mosque which was not illegal and it had been registered.  There  was  a
    difficulty here, which it was suggested was one  of  language.   If  he
    were a Kurd he could not register his marriage, but the authorities did
    not mind if he was registered or not, but his wife's family would  mind
    so at one level it was a legal marriage.  His  evidence  could  not  be
    explained on the basis that he was a Syrian Arab who  was  not  telling
    the truth.

65.   There  was  no  indication  that  a  person  could  be  Kurdish   with
    citizenship in Syria.   As regards the attack on Dr George's  evidence,
    it was clear that he had written adverse articles about Lebanon as well
    as positive ones.  It was a question of what had been  commissioned  in
    each case and he  seemed  to  deal  impartially  with  the  matters  of
    interest concerning any Middle Eastern country.   His reports  had  not
    been criticised as  being  inaccurate.   The  attack  on  his  research
    methodology was not soundly based.  It made sense to ask the opposition
    party rather than asking the government about grants of citizenship  to
    Syrian Kurds.   The relevant issues  were  covered  effectively  in  Dr
    George's reports.   It was clear that in  the  context  of  Syria  some
    things were plausible that might be implausible elsewhere  and  it  was
    for the Tribunal to decide on these matters.

66.  It was contended that Syrian Kurds were  persecuted.   Emphasis  should
    particularly be placed on the inability  to  vote,  limited  access  to
    social provision housing and education and employment and inability  to
    travel at will in and out of  Syria  and  clearly  being  second  class
    citizens.  The Convention reason was ethnicity.

67.  With regard to risk on  return,  Syria  was  clearly  not  a  civilised
    country. Torture was routine.   The appellant had  left  illegally  and
    there were clear  punishments  for  that.   He  would  be  interrogated
    initially and would be seen to have criticised Syria abroad, which  was
    not tolerated.  There would be suspicion even if the  reasons  for  his
    departure were unclear, and the enquiries would not be pleasant.    The
    Tribunal was asked to look at the evidence contained in  the  objective
    bundle and in the two reports.

68.  We reserved our determination.

     Conclusions

69.  We start with the question of whether or not the appellant is  Kurdish,
    as clearly if we conclude he is not, a very great deal of the  evidence
    which we would  otherwise  have  to  consider  becomes  redundant.   He
    claims, as we have seen, to have had an Arab mother and also to have an
    Arab wife.   He said that there were significant limits on  the  extent
    to which people were allowed to speak Kurdish other than in  their  own
    homes and that he himself understands a good deal of Kurdish  but  does
    not speak it.  It is also relevant to note apparent inconsistencies  as
    between his evidence and what was said to be the position of the Kurds.
     There is the somewhat confused issue of his marriage, to which it will
    be appropriate to return subsequently.   In the SEF at  paragraph  1.79
    when he was asked where his marriage was held he said  it  was  in  El-
    Gameshly Court, he thought.   He was  asked  where  he  registered  the
    marriage and said it was at the court.   In his oral evidence  he  said
    that Kurds were not allowed to register their marriages and he  thought
    it was called common law marriage. In cross-examination he  first  said
    he was married at home and then said that  they  had  to  register  the
    marriage with the religious clerk and had got a paper from  the  court.
    He said that his marriage was registered with the religious  clerk  but
    it was  a  common  law  marriage  not  a  legal  marriage.   He  seemed
    thereafter to agree when it was put to him that it  must  have  been  a
    legal marriage although he queried for what purpose it was said  to  be
    legal.  He then said that it had to be a legal marriage as his wife was
    an Arab and she  had  to  have  her  rights.    Thereafter  however  he
    reiterated that it  was  a  common  law  marriage  and  said  that  the
    procedure of marriage in Syria was that they had to go to the religious
    clerk and then had to register the marriage.   It was put to  him  that
    the evidence said that Kurds could not register their marriages but  he
    reiterated the fact that his wife was Arab.

70.  There is also the question of his ID card.  At page  30  of  his  first
    report Dr George said that stateless  Syrian  Kurds  could  not  obtain
    standard Syrian Identity Cards of the type issued to  the  majority  of
    the population but rather are issued with a special identity card  that
    categorised them as "foreigners".   A description  is  provided,  taken
    from a Human Rights Watch Report of October  1996.    Dr  George  noted
    that the appellant's identity  card  conformed  with  that  description
    although it did not carry an official rubber stamp mark.

71.  In the second report Dr George commented that although the  appellant's
    card conformed with the cards issued to Ajanib, it did  not  carry  the
    rubber stamp mark.  He consulted Dr Mella, to  whom  we  have  referred
    above, about this, and set out various possible explanations  which  we
    have also set out above concerning the identity  card.   This  includes
    the possibility that the card had not been issued  officially  or  that
    there has been an administrative error or it was obtained as  a  result
    of bribing an official.  In  his  most  recent  statement  however  the
    appellant said no more than that he had paid one hundred  lire  to  get
    the card from the local Mukhtar, and he did not suggest that this was a
    consequence of bribery.

72.  We have seen the card and  have  before  us  translations  of  what  is
    written on it.   There are issues to which we shall  return  about  the
    implications of the  appellant  having  this  card,  but  we  consider,
    bearing in mind the suggestions in Dr George's report as to why despite
    his inability to speak much Kurdish and the fact that he did not  speak
    it even at home, that the explanations for this are reasonable ones and
    in the light of what is said on the card and the  appellant's  evidence
    taken as a whole in relation to the claim  to  be  Kurdish  we  accept,
    bearing in mind the lower standard of proof, that  he  is  Kurdish  and
    therefore we must go on to consider the consequences of  this  for  his
    claim.

73.  The appellant's evidence was that his  father  had  Syrian  citizenship
    but was deprived of this in 1962.    According  to  the  Chatham  House
    paper  "Syrian  Kurds:  A  People  Discovered",     the   1962   census
    arbitrarily stripped one hundred and twenty to one  hundred  and  fifty
    thousand Kurdish citizens  of  Syrian  citizenship.    These  stateless
    people became known as the Ajanib.  Those who failed to  take  part  in
    the 1962 census or were  born  of  unions  between  Ajanib  and  Syrian
    citizens  cannot  even  be  officially  registered  and  are  known  as
    Maktoumeen.   Dr  George's  report,  referring  also  to   the   Danish
    Immigration Service Report 2001 and the Human Rights  Watch  Report  of
    1966, notes a  conflict  between  the  information  on  the  Maktoumeen
    between those reports.   Dr George prefers the  view  of  Human  Rights
    Watch that Maktoumeen do not include the children of parents  who  were
    both registered as "foreigners" in the census.  It  is  however  agreed
    that the Maktoumeen include the children  of  "foreigners"  married  to
    women who are Syrian citizens, and that accords with what  is  said  in
    the Chatham House Report.  It  would  appear  therefore  to  be  common
    ground  between  these  reports  that  the  appellant  is  one  of  the
    Maktoumeen.

74.  It is rather surprising in the light of this that Dr George  then  goes
    on to state that the appellant's identity card conforms to cards issued
    to Ajanib.   At paragraph 15 of his supplementary report he stated that
    Maktoumeen are not issued even with the special identity  cards  issued
    to Ajanib.   The Chatham House Report suggests that the  situation  for
    the Maktoumeen is worse than that for the Ajanib although it goes  into
    no real detail about that.

75.  There are therefore problems in the evidence in this  regard  which  we
    find extremely difficult to resolve.  The objective  evidence  suggests
    that the appellant is one of the Maktoumeen and yet he  has  an  Ajanib
    card.   It may in the end  perhaps  make  no  great  difference  if  we
    conclude either on the one hand that both  categories  are  treated  in
    such a way as to amount to persecution or if we conclude that both  are
    treated in such a way that they are not, but it is a matter which  must
    cast some doubt on the evidence.  The simple answer may be  that  there
    has been a mistake or bribery of some kind, but we have the appellant's
    evidence which we see no reason to doubt  that  he  obtained  his  card
    perfectly lawfully.

76.  We see no reason not  to  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his
    father was deprived of Syrian citizenship in about 1962  though  as  we
    say the consequences of that are unclear to  the  extent  of  it  being
    difficult to say whether he is  Ajanib  or  Maktoumeen.    Dr  George's
    evidence, however, is on  the  basis  that  the  situation  for  either
    category of stateless Syrian Kurd is essentially the same, and we shall
    proceed on the basis that what the general evidence in his  report  and
    in the other reports says about  the  difference  between  their  civic
    rights and how they are treated in comparison to that of the  situation
    of Syrian Arabs who are citizens will be reflected  in  our  discussion
    below.

77.  It is perhaps appropriate for us to provide some  general  comments  at
    this point on Dr George's evidence.  As we have noted above, Mr Ouseley
    invited us to have significant doubts about Dr George's  evidence,  and
    we have set out his reasons for that submission above.   Dr  George  is
    clearly  a  knowledgeable  witness.   He  has  a  lengthy  history   of
    commentating on Middle Eastern matters.   We do not consider it  to  be
    adverse to the weight to be attached to his evidence that he  has  only
    latterly set out the nature of the involvement he had in the past  with
    the PLO.  As he said, he was writing articles  setting  out  the  other
    side of the story at  different  times,  and  a  person  who  describes
    himself as a freelance consultant writer and journalist must, we think,
    be allowed to write articles  for  a  particular  audience  or  with  a
    particular  slant  without  of  necessity  being  accused  of   lacking
    objectivity as a consequence.  It may be wise  for  Dr  George  in  the
    future to make it clear in reports he writes that he has from  time  to
    time accepted briefs to write reports setting  out  only  a  particular
    point of view or articles to that effect, but also of  course  to  make
    the point that he has represented the different sides of  the  argument
    and that he has of course given the undertaking to be found at the  end
    of the first and also the second report indicating that he  understands
    his duty to the court.

78.  We have somewhat more concern with the efforts  he  has  made  to  find
    evidence concerning the truth or lack of it concerning the  suggestions
    that  significant  numbers  of  Syrian  Kurds  were   to   be   granted
    citizenship.  He seems to us to have gone to a source  from  which  the
    answer given could be expected.  We see no reason to doubt his  reasons
    for trusting the judgment of Dr Mella, but he is  after  all  based  in
    London, and no opportunity has been taken  to  contact  anyone  in  the
    Syrian Government or indeed it seems anyone in Syria  in  this  regard.
    One  can  imagine  there  might  have  been  all  sorts  of  logistical
    difficulties  in  contacting  Mr  Hajou   who   is   described   as   a
    representative of  the  Kurdish  Haderkin  Tribe  from  the  Al-Hasakah
    district who has said that a forty three member delegation representing
    all the Kurdish tribes in Syria had met recently with  a  Ba'ath  party
    official  and  two  other  regional  politicians  discussing  restoring
    citizenship to Kurds at the  earliest  possible  opportunity;  this  is
    stated in a report dated  29  January  2006.  Nevertheless,  one  would
    imagine that Dr George could have made contact with Kurds in Syria  in
    order to obtain some indication as to the credibility or  otherwise  of
    this suggestion.  We bear in mind entirely the point made by Dr  George
    that these suggestions have been made before, and one  can  indeed  see
    reference to this at page 6 of the Chatham House  Report  concerning  a
    number of announcements in this regard since the Qameshli  troubles  in
    April 2004.   At that time there was a suggestion that thirty  thousand
    stateless Kurds had been  granted  citizenship  but  nothing  happened.
    There was a further  announcement  in  the  summer  of  2005  that  the
    government was considering awarding  nationality  to  one  hundred  and
    twenty thousand Kurds and there  were  reports  of  officials  visiting
    Ajanib and carrying out a census in preparation  of  this  so  one  can
    understand there might be some reason  to  doubt  that  this  would  go
    ahead.  However, that does not mean one should necessarily assume  that
    suggestions of this kind have no substance, and, as we  say,  we  would
    have expected Dr George to have carried  out  more  extensive  research
    than he did in order to find out whether the  likelihood  of  this  had
    increased to any material extent.  In  that  regard  we  consider  that
    contacting his government acquaintances might have had  some  relevance
    also.   Although a particular kind of answer might have  been  expected
    from them, further details might have been provided  which  would  have
    enabled further sources to be contacted and perhaps further information
    obtained.  In the end no doubt, as Dr George states, one has  to  wait
    and see what happens, but the fact that indications of this  type  have
    been given on two or three occasions in the last couple of  years  must
    be seen as being of some relevance to the situation of stateless Syrian
    Kurds.

79.  Bearing that caveat in mind, we consider that Dr George's  evidence  is
    in general, subject to the point we  have  made,  consistent  with  the
    objective evidence that we have considered and is  therefore  deserving
    of weight being attached to it as a consequence.

80   We turn to the essential issue in this case which is  the  question  of
    whether stateless Syrian Kurds are  treated  in  such  a  way  in  that
    country that they face a real risk of persecution or  breach  of  their
    human rights. There are of course particular issues  relating  to  this
    appellant, but in the light of the Adjudicator's findings and  our  own
    findings above we conclude that we  can  properly  consider  him  as  a
    stateless Syrian Kurd with no history  with  the  regime.   The  issues
    arise under a number of headings.  Firstly there  is  the  question  of
    marriage.   As we have set out above, the appellant's evidence on  this
    was somewhat uneven, but in the end it seemed to us  that  he  accepted
    that he had a legal marriage which had been registered with a religious
    clerk.  The marriage, as Dr George stated, is binding in Sharia law and
    is very much seen as a matter of a contract  between  the  families  as
    well as the couple.   In this regard it is also in passing relevant  to
    note that now in two generations  of  the  appellant's  family  Kurdish
    males have married Arab women, and  that,  we  think,  must  have  some
    relevance as to how Kurds are regarded in Syria generally.  If they are
    properly to be regarded as coming at the very low  end  of  the  scale,
    then  we think it is surprising that Arab families would be prepared to
    marry their children into Kurdish families, and particularly  for  Arab
    girls to be married into Kurdish families since rights arise  from  the
    male line.

81.  As we say, the appellant's evidence was  not  entirely  clear  on  this
    point, but we have concluded that his marriage  is  registered.    What
    the implications would be if it were not  are  unclear.   There  is  no
    suggestion that  children  are  illegitimate  as  a  consequence  of  a
    marriage being unregistered.   The matters seems to  be  tied  in  very
    much with the question of citizenship.   It is said that if one is  not
    a citizen then his marriage cannot be registered and that,  subject  to
    the particular situation of the appellant, even if  his  marriage  were
    not registered would seem to  leave  little  in  the  way  of  material
    adverse  consequence  to  him  and  his  family,  though  the  Refugees
    International Report states that it is sometimes  difficult  to  obtain
    birth certificates for children  when  their  parents  do  not  have  a
    marriage certificate.

82.  As regards ownership of land, the evidence is that a  Kurd  cannot  own
    land in the sense that he cannot register it but property can be bought
    and registered in another person's name. However, it cannot  be  passed
    on by a Kurd to his children.  They are dependent upon the goodwill  of
    the third party to whom they can transfer it, and  who,  it  seems  may
    well, according to the appellant's evidence, be a solicitor.  It is not
    without significance that the  appellant  said  in  his  evidence  that
    registering the house with a solicitor would be to guarantee a person's
    rights.  Though therefore there may be some distinction in the  ability
    to transfer property between Kurds and Arab Syrians, again  we  do  not
    consider this to be a distinction of real significance.

83.  As regards the ability to work,  the  appellant  worked  doing  private
    work as did his brothers.  It seems  from  Dr  George's  evidence  that
    there may be some ability outside the letter of the law  for  Kurds  to
    work in low level state jobs, but there appears to be no restriction on
    their ability to do private work.   This is a distinction between Kurds
    and Arabs of some greater significance in Syrian society.  If the range
    of employment that is available to people is restricted  then  that  is
    clearly of some relevance to their ability to live a  normal  life  and
    enjoy the normal benefits of living in a society.

84.  As regards educational matters,  Dr  George's  evidence  was  that  the
    available education to a Kurd is relatively restricted and the Refugees
    International Report confirms this. This contrasts somewhat  with  what
    the appellant said.   He said that he left school  of  his  own  accord
    when he was fourteen or fifteen although he could have stayed on for  a
    further two years which would appear to take him to the  normal  school
    leaving age.  Thereafter it  would  appear  that  higher  education  is
    restricted to exclude Kurds and indeed also to exclude others including
    many Arabs on the basis that it is only the  wealthy  classes  who  can
    afford to have their children educated to that level.  But in terms  of
    the ability to obtain a normal secondary education it would appear from
    the appellant's evidence that he was not restricted in any way  and  we
    see no reason to suppose that that is not equally true of other  Kurds.



85.  As regards access to medical facilities, it is the case that Kurds  are
    not allowed to make use of public  healthcare  but  are  restricted  to
    private healthcare.   The  appellant  did  not  indicate  that  he  had
    experienced nor had his family experienced any problems in this regard.
    Indeed Dr George's evidence was that public health  care  in  Syria  is
    very bad and it may well be  therefore  that  there  is  no  particular
    deprivation to the Kurds in not being allowed to  avail  themselves  of
    those facilities but it is again a distinction which cannot be left out
    of consideration.

86.  A further point is the inability to vote which is  clearly  deprivation
    of a significant civic right.   The  fact  that  the  vote  has  little
    practical  meaning  in  Syria  does   not   materially   diminish   the
    significance of the lack of that right.  The inability to  do  national
    service we regard as essentially a neutral factor.  It  hardly  appears
    to be a deprivation to Kurds  in  not  being  allowed  to  do  national
    service.

87.  There are other factors also including restrictions on not  being  able
    to have a passport or move around the  country  freely  and  leave  the
    country freely.  In addition, as the US Department of State  report  of
    2004 notes, all political activities by the 11 Syrian Kurdish political
    parties have been banned, though it seems from the Chatham House report
    that as long as they remain fairly  quiet  and  confine  themselves  to
    cultural matters, the Syrian Government is on  the  whole  prepared  to
    tolerate their existence.   These  matters  are  of  relevance  to  the
    further issue of risk to a failed asylum seeker to which we shall  come
    in due course.  They must be taken for the  moment  together  with  the
    other  issues  we  have  considered  above  as  part  of  the   overall
    restrictions on Kurds in  comparison  to  their  Arab  counterparts  in
    Syria.

88.  Taking these matters together we have concluded that  the  deprivations
    experienced by Syrian Kurds are not such as to amount to persecution or
    breach of their human rights if returned to Syria.  It is  not  without
    significance in this regard that the appellant at interview  said  that
    he had experienced no problems as a Kurd prior to the  events  of  2004
    which were disbelieved by the Adjudicator.   Clearly he would have  had
    to put up with deprivations of the kind we have set out above but we do
    not consider that these materially damaged or would damage the  quality
    of his life and nor could anything different be said with regard to the
    situation of any other person living as a stateless Kurd whether Ajanib
    or Maktoumeen in Syria.

89.  We return to the question of risk on account of being a  failed  asylum
    seeker.   We have a copy of  a  letter  from  the  British  Embassy  in
    Damascus dated 2 November 2004.   There it is said at paragraph 3  that
    the fate of a failed Syrian asylum seeker if returned to Syria  depends
    very much on their political activity before they left.    It  is  said
    that the authorities are unlikely to try them on the basis of  applying
    for asylum alone and it is also important not to assume that the Syrian
    authorities would automatically know that an individual had applied for
    asylum in the United Kingdom.

90.  In his first report at paragraph 48, Dr George quotes from a report  of
    the Canadian section of Amnesty International  of  January  2004  which
    states that Syrian Secret Service  agents  working  abroad  may  become
    aware of a request for asylum as their task is to  monitor  the  Syrian
    community and opposition abroad.   It is also said that the  very  fact
    of leaving the country to  seek  asylum  abroad  is  imputed  to  be  a
    manifestation of opposition to the Syrian  Government.    The  Canadian
    Amnesty Report concluded that failed Syrian asylum seekers who did  not
    have a history of opposition  activities  would  not  face  arrest  and
    maltreatment on return to Syria.   Dr George did not consider that this
    could be taken for granted partly on the basis  of  the  arbitrary  and
    unpredictable nature of the Syrian security agencies and partly because
    any Syrian who had applied for asylum  would  be  perceived  to  be  an
    oppositionist whatever their history.   He  also  quotes  a  report  of
    September 2003 of the Immigration and Refugee Board of  Canada  stating
    that the response of the Syrian authorities to  a  Syrian  who  returns
    after leaving the country illegally is very  much  dependent  upon  the
    nature of the departure and the person's profile and background and  if
    it becomes known that they have applied for asylum the consequences may
    be severe.

91.   Dr  George  goes  on  to  note  that  most  Syrians  must  obtain  the
    authorities' permission before travelling abroad from Syria. Any Syrian
    national who departs the country illegally faces judicial  consequences
    that may in principle result in up to three months imprisonment.  If  a
    person leaves  on  false  documents  or  using  a  false  identity  the
    penalties are much harsher.   If the seal of the Syrian state has  been
    falsified the sentence can be increased to include seven years of  hard
    labour. There is thought, in the  Canadian  Amnesty  Report,  to  be  a
    general risk of detention on return for an asylum seeker who left Syria
    in an illegal manner.   There are then various  examples  cited  by  Dr
    George of ill-treatment of individuals forcibly returned to Syria,  and
    other examples of this can  be  found  in  his  second  report  from  a
    September 2005 Amnesty International Report.  This  contains  reference
    to torture being  widespread  in  Syrian  detention  and  investigation
    centres especially during pre-trial detention  and  during  periods  of
    incommunicado detention.

92.  We assess risk to the appellant on return on the  basis  first  of  all
    that he has no political history in  the  light  of  the  Adjudicator's
    findings in this regard which were not effectively challenged.    There
    is no evidence to indicate that the authorities would be aware that  he
    has applied for asylum in the United Kingdom.  As Mr Ouseley suggested,
    Dr George's views on  this  were  essentially  speculative  as  to  the
    ability of the security services in Syria monitoring the activities  of
    Syrians in the United Kingdom.  In our view the evidence shows that the
    appellant would face no more than a risk of imprisonment potentially up
    to a period of three months.  We do  not  consider  that  the  evidence
    shows a real risk of ill-treatment giving  rise  to  a  breach  of  his
    protected rights on return in  that  regard.   Accordingly  we  do  not
    consider that the risk factor with regard to this aspect of  his  claim
    is such as to place him at a real risk of persecution or breach of  his
    human  rights.   We  see  no  reason  to  disagree  with  the   earlier
    conclusions of the IAT in SY (Kurd - No  Political  Profile)  Syria  CG
    [2005] UKIAT 00039 to similar  effect,  and  this  decision  should  be
    understood as updating SY, therefore.

93.  Accordingly, we conclude that  the  appellant  has  not  made  out  his
    claim.   Although there was  an  error  of  law  in  the  Adjudicator's
    determination we confirm his decision dismissing this appeal.





Signed                                  Date

D K Allen
Senior Immigration Judge

                    Index of Country Material Considered





|(1) |Refugees International:       |'Buried Alive: Stateless Kurds in Syria'|
|    |                              |                                        |
|    |                              |(January 2006)                          |
|(2) |Chatham House:                |The Syrian Kurds: A People Discovered'  |
|    |                              |(January 2006)                          |
|(3) |British Embassy, Damascus     |Letter of 2 November 2004               |
|(4) |Refugee International (USA):  |'Follow Through on Commitment to Grant  |
|    |                              |Citizenship to Stateless Kurds          |
|    |                              |(10 November 2005)                      |
|(5) |Dr Alan George                |1st report         |(2 December 2005)  |
|    |                              |2nd report         |(25 February 2005) |
|(6) |New York Times                |Report of 28 April 2006                 |
|(7) |Kurdish Media                 |Report of 29 January 2006               |
|(8) |US State Department           |Country Report on Human Rights Practices|
|    |                              |2004                                    |
|(9) |Human Rights Watch            |Report of October  1996                 |
|(10)|Danish Immigration Service    |Report on Fact-Finding Mission to Syria |
|    |                              |and Lebanon                             |
|    |                              |(September 2001)                        |
|(11)|Amnesty International         |Report of 19 September 2005             |

