


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                                  MM (Article 8 - family life - dependency)
                          Zambia [2007] UKAIT 00040

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 January 2007                               |On 23 April 2007           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                          Immigration Judge Dawson

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Norton-Taylor, Counsel, instructed by Hawkins
Russell Jones
For the Respondent:        Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

In the context of an in-country appeal, assessment of the facts relating  to
private and family life within the meaning of Article 8(1) of the  ECHR  has
to be made as at the date of hearing, not the  date  of  decision.  However,
that assessment is one which has to be made in the round, taking account  of
past, present and likely future circumstances. The fact  that  an  appellant
is economically dependent on adult children whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom
under  immigration  conditions  which  prevent  her  from  working  is   not
determinative of the question of whether  she  is  in  a  position  of  real
dependency.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a national of Zambia.  She is sixty years  old.   On  23
December 2001 she came to the UK  as  a  visitor.   On  12  April  2002  she
applied for indefinite leave to remain in the UK as a dependant of  her  two
adult daughters who are British citizens.  On 17 March 2003  the  respondent
refused to vary her leave to remain on that  basis.   She  appealed.   On  3
September 2004  an  adjudicator,  Mr  L  Lobo,  dismissed  her  appeal.   He
concluded that she did not meet the requirements of paragraph  317(i)(e)  of
the Immigration Rules HC395 as amended and could not succeed  on  Article  8
grounds.  Reconsideration was sought and ordered on Article 8 grounds  only.
 In a decision dated 29 September 2006  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Waumsley
decided that the adjudicator had materially erred in law.  His decision  was
as follows:

       "1.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in December  2001,
            ostensibly as a visitor to see her  two  adult  daughters.   She
            applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  their  dependent
            relative in April 2002.  That application  was  refused  by  the
            respondent in March 2003.

       2.     The appellant exercised  her  right  of  appeal  against  that
            refusal.  Her appeal came before an adjudicator (Mr L J R  Lobo)
            sitting  at  Taylor  House,  on  20   August   2004.    By   his
            determination, which was promulgated on  3  September  2004,  he
            dismissed the  appeal  on  both  immigration  and  human  rights
            grounds.


       3.     The appellant then applied for, and was granted, permission to
            appeal to the former Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  By virtue  of
            article  5(1)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
            Claimants, etc) Act 2004 (Commencement  No  5  and  Transitional
            Provisions) Order  2005,  the  appeal  now  takes  effect  as  a
            reconsideration pursuant to article 5(2) of that Order.


       4.     The sole basis on which the appellant seeks to  challenge  the
            adjudicator's decision is in relation to his  dismissal  of  her
            human rights appeal  under  Article  8  (right  to  respect  for
            private and family life) of the  European  Convention  on  Human
            Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.  That challenge  is  in  itself
            based on two separate grounds, namely that the adjudicator  made
            inconsistent findings of fact as to whether or not the appellant
            had established a sufficient private  and  family  life  in  the
            United Kingdom as to engage Article 8 at all, and that he failed
            to take account of all material evidence when  arriving  at  his
            assessment regarding proportionality.


       5.     At the start of the hearing before  me,  Mr  M  Blundell,  who
            appeared for the respondent, conceded with some hesitation  that
            the adjudicator's decision in relation to the  Article  8  claim
            was, in his words, "just not good enough".  On  that  basis,  he
            was content to concede that the hearing should be adjourned  for
            a full stage 2 reconsideration before  a  different  Immigration
            Judge so as to enable fresh findings of fact to be made  on  the
            material evidence, and for fresh conclusions to be reached based
            on the  basis  of  those  findings.   Mr  H  Norton-Taylor,  who
            appeared before me on behalf of the appellant, confirmed that he
            was content with that proposal.


       6.     In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the adjudicator made
            a material error of law in arriving at his decision in  relation
            to the Article 8 claim, namely that he failed to  give  adequate
            consideration to the evidence before him, and  failed  to  carry
            out sufficient analysis of that evidence in so far as it related
            to the Article 8 claim.  In the circumstances, and in  light  of
            the  agreement  reached  between  the  representatives  for  the
            parties, I am left with no  alternative  save  to  adjourn  this
            hearing for a full stage 2 reconsideration  before  a  different
            Immigration  Judge,  limited  to  the   question   whether   the
            appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would  constitute  a
            disproportionate interference with  her  right  to  respect  for
            private and family life under Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
            Convention."

2. The parties agreed at the hearing that there was no  dispute  as  to  the
facts relating to the appellant's family circumstances in the  UK.   Mindful
of the approach set out by the Court of Appeal in DK  (Serbia)  [2006]  EWCA
Civ 1747, Mr Norton-Taylor  conceded that in the absence of any  Rule  32(2)
notice relating to the submission of evidence not submitted on any  previous
occasions, the findings of fact made by the Adjudicator  should  stand.   In
particular he agreed that the reconsideration was to proceed  on  the  basis
that between 1981 and her arrival in the UK in December 2001  the  appellant
had supported herself.  Correspondingly, Mr Avery did not seek to  challenge
the appellant's statements in relation to her  circumstances  since  arrival
in the UK.  In a statement signed on the  date  of  hearing  before  us  the
appellant set out her current situation as follows:-

         "1.  I live at [address supplied] with my daughter ... who rents  a
             flat at that address from our friend ...  I have  put  in  the
             Bundle the Tenancy Agreement dated 3rd June 2005.  The tenants
             are shown as ... and myself (although my surname  is  omitted)
             and my daughter ... pays part of the rent of �600 per month.

         2.   Occasionally I  live  at  [address  supplied]  with  my  other
             daughter NM and her husband, JC.


         3.   I occupy myself by looking after my  step  daughter  in  law's
             children  occasionally,  I  do  some   ironing   and    church
             activities.


         4.   I am aged 60, having been born on 11th September 1946.


         5.   If permitted to remain, I would seek employment  in  the  care
             work field.  I have done some training as a care  worker.   My
             daughters paid for that  training.   I  would  also  be  in  a
             position to help my children.


         6.   In the Bundle I  have  added  correspondence  from  my  eldest
             sister  ...  and  my  husband   (estranged)   concerning   the
             difficulties I would  have  financially  and  otherwise  if  I
             return to Zambia."


3. Mr Norton-Taylor submitted that as the  appellant  has  depended  on  her
daughters for both emotional and financial support throughout  her  time  in
the UK, she has both a  private  and  family  life  within  the  meaning  of
Article 8(1).  She has lived  together  with  one  of  her  daughters  since
arrival in the UK.  One of them is still unmarried.   Being  estranged  from
her husband, she lacks any  other  family  to  whom  she  can  turn  to  for
emotional and financial support.  Mr Norton-Taylor next submitted  that  the
decision to refuse the appellant leave to remain amounts to an  interference
with the appellant's private and family life having grave  consequences,  in
view of the following factors: her children and  grandchildren  are  present
and settled here and her children  work  in  the  UK;  the  appellant  would
therefore have to return alone; since her children and  grandchildren  would
stay in the UK,  she will lose contact with them;  her  health,  albeit  not
serious, is poor; and Zambia is  one  of  the  countries  with  the  highest
percentage of population living below the poverty line.


4. Mr Avery disputed the existence of family  life  within  the  meaning  of
Article 8(1) in view of the evidence that the appellant  had  been  able  to
support herself prior to coming to the UK and was prepared to work,  despite
medical problems.  Therefore her dependency was  artificial.   Even  if  the
Tribunal considered there was  a  protected  right  within  the  meaning  of
Article 8(1), and that the decision interfered with  it,  such  interference
would not be disproportionate.  The appellant had  no  serious  physical  or
mental problems.  She is still fit enough and willing enough to  work.   The
bonds she shared with her two daughters, who are adults and one of whom  was
now married, contain no emotional and/or economic elements  over  and  above
those normally found between a mother and adult children.   Even  if  Zambia
has a very high percentage of the population living below the poverty  line,
that does not create a disproportionate or truly exceptional  situation  for
this appellant.


5. In reply to Mr Avery's point about the artificiality  of  dependency,  Mr
Norton-Taylor contended that  dependency  in  an  Article  8  context  is  a
question of fact and one which, by virtue of  s.85(4)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, stands to be assessed as at   the  date  of
hearing (in this case the hearing before us).


Our Assessment

6. Two points needs emphasising  at  the  outset.  First,  even  though  the
immigration decision was a refusal to vary  leave  to  remain,  it  was  one
which required a decision as  to  its  compatibility  with  the  appellant's
human rights: see JM [2006] EWCA Civ 1402. Second, we must decide this  case
in the light of the recent guidance of the House of Lords  in  Huang  [2007]
UKHL11 and in particular their guidance that  in  assessing  proportionality
there is no legal test of "truly exceptional circumstances".  We  considered
whether to invite further submissions from the parties  relating  to  Huang,
which post-dates the hearing before  us,  but  decided  it  was  unnecessary
since that judgment, whilst rejecting the Court of Appeal's  view  that  the
"truly exceptional circumstances" test is a legal one, otherwise  reaffirmed
the analysis it gave in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  also  reaffirmed  the
importance of continuing reliance on  established  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
relating to Article 8: see [18]-[20]. Lord Bingham's  step-by-step  approach
in Razgar continues to apply to all expulsion cases. As before, while it  is
necessary first to establish whether there is a private or family life  with
which  removal  will  interfere,  Lord  Bingham's  five   questions   should
thereafter serve as the framework for deciding such cases.

7. In this case the main focus of argument has been on whether  there  is  a
family  or  private  life  or  both.  Mr  Norton  Taylor's  first  principal
submission is that we should find that the appellant enjoys  a  family  life
within the meaning of Article 8(1). If, however, we were not persuaded  that
she has such a family life, he  asked  us  to  find  that  she  nevertheless
enjoyed a private life within the meaning of the same subparagraph.

The "family life" issue

8. We remind ourselves that the mere existence of a family  relationship  is
not  sufficient  for  the  applicability  of  Article  8.  In  the  case  of
relationships other than that between a parent and a natural  child  who  is
still a minor, family life within the meaning of Articled 8 will only  arise
if there are sufficiently close factual ties. In order to  establish  family
life, it is necessary to show that there is a real, committed  or  effective
support or relationship between the family  members.  The  normal  emotional
ties between a mother and an adult son or daughter will not,  without  more,
be enough: Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Advic v UK (1995) 20  EHRR  CD  125,
Marckx v Belgium (1979) 2 EHRR 330 para 31.

9. We agree with Mr Norton-Taylor that the existence of family  life  is  to
be assessed as at the date of hearing.  We  note  that,  suggestive  to  the
contrary, Macdonalds Immigration Law and Practice  (5th  edition  para  8.57
states:

               "The existence of family life is to be assessed at the  time
         when the decision constituting an alleged interference is made,  so
         that no account will be taken of the establishment of  family  life
         between the making of a decision to remove someone and its intended
         implementation".


10. What  this  paragraph  fails  to  mention  is  that  the  focus  of  the
Strasbourg Court is on  the  final  national  decision:  see   Boucheikia  v
France (1997) 25 EHRR  886,  Yildiz  judgement,  31  January  2002.  In  the
context of this appeal that decision, by virtue of s.85(4) of the 2002  Act,
must consist in the one we have to make on the basis of the evidence  as  at
the date of hearing before us, not as at the date on which the Secretary  of
State made the decision to refuse to vary leave to  remain.  Accordingly  Mr
Norton -Taylor is  entitled  to  rely  on  the  appellant's  current  family
circumstances in the UK.

11. However, it does not follow that the assessment  of  family  life  which
has to be made is one which freezes the situation in  the  present,  without
regard to the past and probable future. The preliminary question of  whether
or not there is a family or private life (or both) is  plainly  a  different
question from those raised in Lord Bingham's  five  questions:  one  obvious
difference is that its analysis does not  involve  any  balancing  exercise.
However, at all stages of the Article 8 assessment -  when deciding  whether
there is an existing private or family  life,  when  deciding   whether  any
existing private or family life  is the subject of  an  interference  having
grave consequences (Lord Bingham's question 2)  and  when  deciding  whether
any such interference is proportionate to the legitimate public  end  sought
to be achieved (Lord Bingham's question 5) - the approach followed  by   the
Strasbourg Court is to take  account  of  a  wide  range  of  circumstances,
including the applicant's previous personal  and  family  circumstances  and
the likely developments they will undergo in the future: Marckx  v  Belgium,
Berrehab v Netherlands (1988) 11 EHRR 322,  Keegan v Ireland (1994) 18  EHRR
342. That too must be our approach. Indeed it is for  this  reason  that  we
accept that Mr Norton-Taylor  is  entitled,  when  urging  us  to  view  the
appellant's family circumstances in the UK as  established  enough  to  give
rise to family life, to pray in aid the fact that she has now  been  in  the
United Kingdom over 5 years.

12. Turning to assess whether the appellant's  family  circumstances  amount
to family life within the meaning of Article 8(1), we note that there is  no
dispute as to their essential particulars. Although  his  findings  on  this
matter  were  not  entirely  clear  (compare  paragraph  12  with  14),  the
adjudicator plainly did not consider that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated
elements of dependency involving more than the normal emotional family  ties
between a mother and her two adult daughters. However, the issue is now  for
us to decide on the basis of the evidence relating to the  situation  as  at
the date of hearing before us, not at the date in August 2004 when he  heard
her appeal.

13. Mr Norton-Taylor's principal  objection  to  the  adjudicator's  finding
that there were no elements of dependency does not relate  to  the  latter's
assessment that the emotional content of the  ties  concerned  was  no  more
than normal, so much as to his failure to appreciate  that  these  ties  had
(and still have) an economic content: he pointed out  that  it  was  not  in
dispute that the appellant  had  been  economically  dependent  on  the  two
daughters since her arrival in the United Kingdom.  He contended  that  when
economic dependency was added to the fact of  emotional  dependency,  family
life within the meaning of Article 8 was established.

14. We would accept that since arrival in the United Kingdom  the  appellant
has relied on her daughters for financial support.  But that is not  in  our
view determinative of  the  question  of  whether  she  is  factually  in  a
position of dependency.  We agree with Mr Avery that it would be  artificial
to focus solely on who is providing for the appellant in the UK,  since  her
immigration status since arrival has prevented her  from  working.  She  has
been under a legal bar  against  providing  for  herself  through  work,  or
business or self-employment and this state of affairs will  only  change  if
she is successful in her appeal or the Secretary of State decides  to  grant
her further stay which does not prohibit her from working.  Furthermore,  it
is part of the accepted facts in this case that prior to coming  to  the  UK
the appellant had been economically  self-sufficient:  the  adjudicator  did
not accept that she had been supported by her daughters  when  still  living
in Zambia; he found she had supported herself (as indeed she had  stated  in
her family visit application form at Q33).


15. Thus the appellant is  someone  who  has  previously  held  professional
employment  in  Zambia,  having  worked  as  a  secretary  for  the   Zambia
Industrial and Mining Corporation  and  holding  certificates  in  personnel
management and industrial relations.  She has also worked as  an  industrial
relations manager: see para 9  of  the  determination.    In  addition,  the
appellant describes herself as someone who  has  an  ongoing  wish  to  work
notwithstanding her age (60):  As we have seen,  she  said,  albeit  in  the
context of her situation if allowed to remain in  the  UK,  that  she  would
want to work.  We see no reason why, if  she  could  work  in  the  UK,  she
cannot work in Zambia.

16. In the light of this evidence we do not consider that the appellant  has
shown that she is now in a position of real dependency upon  her  daughters.
She was not dependent on them before she arrived in the  UK  and  she  would
not need to be dependent on them when she returned to Zambia. The  cause  of
the disruption to the appellant's ability to support herself  has  been  her
decision, whilst here as a visitor,  to seek leave to remain as a  dependent
relative.  It has not  been  because  she  is  someone  who  cannot  support
herself.  Accordingly we conclude that  since  her  emotional  ties  to  her
daughters and grandchildren contained no features over and above the  normal
and since her current position of economic dependency  in  the  UK  did  not
reflect her real economic position in her country of origin,  the  appellant
has failed to show that she had an existing family life within  the  meaning
of Article 8(1).


 The "private life" issue

17. Nonetheless, as Mr Norton-Taylor properly submitted, it  is  still  open
to us to decide that the appellant has a protected right under Article  8(1)
by virtue of the fact that she has a private life or that  her  private  and
family life  circumstances,  viewed  cumulatively,  amount  to  a  protected
Article 8(1) right. The  need  to  view  "private  and  family  life"  as  a
composite right has been a settled part of UK and Strasbourg case  law:  see
Nhundu and Chiwera 01/TH/0613. However, as  the  adjudicator's  approach  in
this case illustrates, it is not one which is always borne in  mind.  So  as
to  reinforce  its  importance,  it  is  instructive  to  consider  how  the
Strasbourg Court proceeded in the recent case of Sisojeva  v  Latvia  [2005]
ECHR 405. In this case the threatened  break  up  of  a  family  with  adult
children was considered as an interference with private life, since the  age
of the children precluded the Court from finding the continued existence  of
a family life. The Court noted that the applicants had spent most  of  their
lives in Latvia and so had  "developed personal, social  and  economic  ties
strong enough for them to be regarded as sufficiently well  integrated  into
Latvian society".

18. We do not find that the  appellant's  private  life  circumstances  show
that she has developed strong enough ties to give rise to a protected  right
under Article 8(1) even considering her personal, family, social  and  other
circumstances cumulatively.

19. Having found that the appellant has no existing  private  and/or  family
life, it is not strictly necessary for us to proceed further.


Article 8(2) issues

20. Even assuming, however, that the appellant has a protected  right  under
Article 8(1) based on her close relationship with her  two  daughters  (with
one of whom she shares  a  house)  and  with  her  grandchildren,  and  even
assuming the decision to refuse to vary her leave to remain (since  it  will
entail removal) will have grave consequences for the appellant,  we  do  not
consider that it is a disproportionate one (We can  move  straight  to  Lord
Bingham's question five because there is no dispute  that  the  interference
in this case was in accordance with the  law  (question  3)  and  pursued  a
legitimate aim (question 4).)

21. When conducting the balancing exercise under  Article  8  we  take  into
account in the appellant's favour that she is over 60, that she  has  health
problems, that she is estranged from her  husband,  that  has  been  in  the
United Kingdom for over 5 years, that during that time she has  been  living
in the same household as one of her adult daughters,  that  she  has  formed
ties with her grandchildren and that during this time  her  adult  daughters
have economically supported  her.  However,  her  health  problems  are  not
serious; she is still willing and able to work; she has  re-established  her
relationship with her daughters and  her  grandchildren  in  full  knowledge
that her immigration  status  was  precarious;  she  is  not  someone  in  a
position of real economic dependency; her two daughters are adults  and  the
emotional ties she has with them  contain no elements over and  above  those
normally found between a mother and adult daughter.  Even assuming she  will
have no immediate family to return to in Zambia and that she will be  living
alone,  the  resultant  circumstances  do  not  indicate   any   significant
hardships.  We do not regard the fact that Zambia has a very  high  rate  of
poverty as constituting a significant  circumstance, but in any event  there
is no reason to consider that this  appellant,  with  her  prior  employment
experience and her continuing desire  to  work,  would  fall  into  poverty.
Contact between the appellant and her daughters can be maintained by  visits
by them to her in Zambia. Alternatively she has a viable option of  applying
from Zambia under the  immigration  rules  relating  to  visitors,  although
whether she  would have real prospects of success is not a  matter  for  us:
see SB (Bangladesh) [2007] EWCA Civ 28.

22. These factors have, of course, to be considered cumulatively,  but  even
considered thus they do not make the decision under appeal in this case  one
which constitutes  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's
right to respect for her private and family life.

23. For the above reasons we conclude:

The  adjudicator  materially  erred  in  law.   However,  the  decision   we
substitute for his is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.



Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Storey


