
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

        TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]
                                 UKAIT 00049

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Columbus House, Newport                  Date of Hearing:
12 April 2006
                                                  Promulgated on 24 May 2006

                                   Before:

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
                         Immigration Judge A D Baker


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SANA'A
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr N Gobir, Counsel instructed by Kalee Lau
& Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Russell, Home Office Presenting Officer

"Sole responsibility" is a  factual  matter  to  be  decided  upon  all  the
evidence.  Where one parent  is  not  involved  in  the  child's  upbringing
because he (or she) had abandoned or  abdicated  responsibility,  the  issue
may arise between the remaining parent and others who have  day-to-day  care
of the child abroad.  The test is whether the parent has continuing  control
and  direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,  including  making  all  the
important decisions in the child's life.  However, where  both  parents  are
involved in a child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that  one  of  them
will have "sole responsibility".

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant (aged 17) and his two brothers  (aged  15  and  14)  are
     citizens of Yemen.  They have lived since birth with their  mother  in
     Yemen.  In August 2004, they applied for entry clearance to settle  in
     the United Kingdom with their father who has lived  here  since  1976.
     They relied upon paragraph 297 of Statement of Changes in  Immigration
     Rules, HC 395, in particular that they fell within paragraph 297(i)(e)
     on the basis that their father had  "sole  responsibility"  for  them.
     Their applications were rejected by an Entry Clearance Officer  on  27
     December 2004 on a number of grounds.  They appealed to the Asylum and
     Immigration Tribunal and it was accepted that  the  only  issue  under
     paragraph 297 was that of "sole responsibility".   On 8 November 2005,
     Immigration Judge Halliwell dismissed their  appeals  concluding  that
     responsibility for the appellants was shared between their  father  in
     the UK and their mother in Yemen.   Thus,  the  "sole  responsibility"
     requirement in paragraph 297(i)(e) was not met for each of  them.   An
     order for reconsideration was made on the basis that  the  Immigration
     Judge had arguably erred in law in reaching his  conclusion  on  "sole
     responsibility".

  2. Before turning to that issue, we must first  deal  with  a  procedural
     matter which  was  raised  by  the  Tribunal  at  the  outset  of  the
     reconsideration hearing.   It  is  plain  from  the  "Application  for
     Reconsideration" on file that the application was made solely  in  the
     name of the first appellant to the appeal as  originally  lodged  with
     the AIT.  Mr Gobir, who appeared  for  the  appellants,  informed  the
     Tribunal that all three appellants intended to seek reconsideration of
     their appeals.  That may well be so.  Unfortunately, that was not what
     was done by those representing the appellants.  For  whatever  reason,
     the application for reconsideration did not include the names  of  the
     second and third appellants in the appeal as  originally  filed.   The
     effect is that their appeals are  not  now  before  the  Tribunal  for
     reconsideration.  There has been no order for reconsideration in their
     appeals.  We accept that this was unintended but the rules  are  there
     to be complied with and the oversight was no mere formality.  It  goes
     to the Tribunal's jurisdiction as to whose appeals are now  before  it
     for reconsideration.  It may be, however, that our resolution of  this
     reconsideration will, for all practical  purposes,  also  resolve  the
     substantive issues for the other two original appellants.

The Immigration Judge's decision

  3. The Immigration Judge accepted the evidence before him, in particular,
     the oral  evidence  of  the  sponsor,  the  appellant's  father.    He
     accepted that the appellant (and his brothers)  had  lived  separately
     from their father all their lives.  They lived with  their  mother  in
     Yemen.  For the last 4 years they have lived rent free in a flat owned
     by their paternal grandfather.  Their father  spoke  to  their  mother
     daily by telephone.  Their father had "left all day to  day  care  and
     control with  the  mother".   The  Immigration  Judge  seems  to  have
     accepted  the  father's  evidence  that  he  was  involved   in   "big
     decisions".  However, he noted that there  had  been  "no  very  major
     decisions in the Appellant's [sic] lives to date".   He  acknowledged,
     however, that the father had been  consulted  and  involved  in  their
     schooling and would probably make a decision as  to  which  University
     they should attend, not least because he would  be  paying  the  fees.
     Their father had spent very little time with  the  appellant  and  his
     brothers although there was  a  clear  emotional  bond  between  them.
     Their father only occasionally visited them in Yemen, perhaps every  4
     to 5 years.  Contact by telephone with them was extensive -  he  spoke
     to them weekly.  Their father had,  however,  provided  all  financial
     support for the appellant and his brothers throughout their lives.

  4. On the basis of this evidence,  the  Immigration  Judge  concluded  at
     paragraph [28] that responsibility was shared between the  appellant's
     mother and his  father.   Mr  Gobir  submitted  that  the  Immigration
     Judge's finding on "sole responsibility" was not one he could properly
     make on the evidence before him.  In effect,  he  submitted  that  the
     finding was perverse.

"Sole responsibility"

  5. The applicable Immigration Rule is paragraph 297 of HC 395.  The  only
     issue before  us  is  that  of  "sole  responsibility".   It  was  not
     suggested that the appellant failed to meet the other requirements  of
     paragraph 297 such as maintenance and accommodation and that he was  a
     child under  18,  unmarried  and  not  leading  an  independent  life.
     Paragraph 297(i)(e) provides as follows:

           "297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
           leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the  child  of  a  parent,
           parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted  for
           settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:


           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany  or  join  a  parent,
           parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
           ...
           (e) one parent is present and settled in the United  Kingdom  or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and  has  had
           sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; ..."

  6. The meaning of the phrase  "sole  responsibility"  in,  what  is  now,
     paragraph 297(i)(e) of HC 395 has given rise to a  body  of  case  law
     before the IAT dating back over 30 years and, more recently, a  number
     of decisions of the Court of Appeal have provided guidance.  Mr  Gobir
     referred us explicitly to some of these cases and others are cited  in
     the relevant passages in Macdonald's Immigration  Law  &  Practice,  I
     Macdonald QC and F Webber (eds), (6th edn), 2005 at paras  11.89-11.92
     to which he also referred us.

  7. The cases struggle with the obvious difficulty that where there  is  a
     UK based parent - the sponsor - whom the child is seeking to join  for
     settlement there will inevitably be others in the  country  of  origin
     who de facto 'look after' the child.    Usually  these  are  relatives
     such as grandparents or aunts and uncles but they could,  as  in  this
     case, be the other parent of the child  concerned.   As  a  matter  of
     common sense, some responsibility for the child's life must rest  with
     the carer in the country of origin.


      Leading Tribunal decisions

  8. We turn first to consider the leading Tribunal decisions of Emmanuel v
     SSHD [1972] Imm AR 69; Martin v SSHD [1972] Imm AR 71; Sloley  v  ECO,
     Kingston [1973] Imm AR 54; and Rudolph v ECO, Colombo  [1984]  Imm  AR
     84.

  9. Our starting point is the decision in Emmanuel v SSHD [1972] Imm AR 69
     which  illustrates  the  correct  approach  to  the  issue  of   "sole
     responsibility".  The appellant, who was 11, lived  in  St  Lucia  and
     sought entry clearance to join her mother who was settled in  the  UK.
     Her mother had left St Lucia to live in the UK when the appellant  was
     4.  Initially, the appellant lived with her grandmother and  when  the
     latter died shortly before the application was made, she went to  live
     with her aunt.  The appellant's father lived  in  St  Lucia  about  10
     miles from where the appellant lived.  He had  seen  his  daughter  at
     least once recently but took no part in her life and made no financial
     contribution to her upkeep despite a request by the appellant's mother
     to do so.   Her mother financially supported the appellant by  sending
     money from the  UK.   It  was  accepted  that  the  daily  burden  and
     responsibility  of  looking  after  the  appellant   fell   upon   her
     grandmother and latterly her aunt.   The  Adjudicator  held  that  the
     appellant's mother had abdicated responsibility for  her  rather  than
     delegated it to her grandmother and aunt.  The IAT disagreed.   In  an
     important passage, the IAT set out what it saw as  the  indicators  in
     the evidence that the mother retained "sole  responsibility"  for  the
     upbringing of the appellant (at p 71):

           "We  have  heard   argument   about   the   meaning   of   'sole
           responsibility' and clearly the first sentence of [the  relevant
           immigration rule] cannot reasonably be  construed  in  its  most
           strictly literal terms.  It appears plain to us that there  must
           be in nearly all  cases  some  form  of  responsibility  of  the
           relative  or  grandmother  with  whom  the  child   lives:   the
           responsibility for seeing that the  child  attends  school,  the
           responsibility for seeing that the child is fed and  clothed  in
           as reasonable a manner as can be  afforded,  the  responsibility
           for ensuring that the child has medical attention  when  needed,
           and so on.  We do not therefore think that literal  or  absolute
           sole responsibility of the parent in the  United  Kingdom  could
           ever be established.  In this case whilst we agree with the view
           of the adjudicator that the issue of sole responsibility is  not
           one to be decided only between parent and parent we do not think
           that it is more apt to say that there has been an abdication  of
           responsibility  in  this  case.   The  mother  has  sent   money
           regularly for the child's upkeep and, as the  adjudicator  says,
           she  retains  a  close  interest  in,  and  affection  for,  her
           daughter.  Considering all the circumstances  ...  we  concluded
           that this was a case in which it was shown that  the  parent  in
           the United Kingdom had had sole responsibility for  the  child's
           upbringing."

 10. As the IAT stated: "sole responsibility" cannot sensibly be read in an
     absolute or literal way.   The IAT rejected the  argument  that  "sole
     responsibility" was only an issue  between  parents.   It  could  also
     arise where the child lived with a relative.  Significantly,  the  IAT
     accepted that a parent who has settled in  the  UK  may  retain  "sole
     responsibility"  for  a   child   where   the   day-to-day   care   or
     responsibility for that child is necessarily undertaken by a  relative
     abroad.  That day-to-day responsibility may include  seeing  that  the
     child  attends  school,  is  fed  and  clothed  and  receives  medical
     attention when needed.  The  IAT  identified  the  mother's  financial
     support and the retention of a close interest in and affection for the
     child as important to its decision.   One final point: the  fact  that
     the appellant's father lived nearby did not affect the IAT's decision,
     presumably because, in  its  words,  "he  takes  no  interest  in  his
     daughter and has never played any part in her life" (at p 70).

 11. The outcome in Emmanuel may be contrasted with that in Martin  v  SSHD
     [1972] Imm AR 71.  The appellant, aged 13, sought entry to the  UK  to
     settle with her mother.   Prior  to  the  appellant's  mother  leaving
     Jamaica, she had left the appellant with the  appellant's  grandmother
     in order to work elsewhere in Jamaica and during  that  time  she  had
     lived separately from the appellant for 2 years with a man  with  whom
     she had another daughter.  She left Jamaica and came to  the  UK  when
     the appellant was almost aged 7 to live with her partner (who by  then
     had moved to the UK) and their daughter.   Thereafter,  the  appellant
     lived with her maternal grandmother.  The appellant  saw  her  father,
     who lived in Jamaica, every week and he gave her  money  on  a  weekly
     basis.  The appellant's aunt and uncle also contributed financially to
     support her.  In addition, the appellant's mother also sent money each
     week from the UK to the appellant's grandmother.

 12. Reiterating that the issue of "sole responsibility" must  depend  upon
     the facts of each case, the IAT distinguished the facts from  Emmanuel
     and held that they fell short of  establishing  that  the  appellant's
     mother had sole responsibility for her.  The IAT pointed to a  sharing
     of responsibility between the appellant's mother and grandmother prior
     to the former's departure to the UK  and  also  the  fact  that  other
     members  of  the  appellant's  family   were   contributing   to   her
     maintenance.   Although the reasoning of the IAT is sparse,  it  seems
     to us that the involvement of the appellant's father in her life was a
     matter of some significance to the outcome of the appeal  as  was  the
     fact that the mother had ceased to have factual sole responsibility at
     a time when she was not forced by circumstances to do so.

 13. A central part of the notion of "sole responsibility"  for  a  child's
     upbringing  is  the  UK-based   parent's   continuing   interest   and
     involvement in the child's life, including making or  being  consulted
     about and approving important decisions about the child's  upbringing.
     In Sloley v ECO, Kingston [1973] Imm AR 54  the  appellant,  aged  13,
     lived in Jamaica and sought entry clearance to settle with his  mother
     in the UK.  His mother came to the UK when he  was  5  years  old  and
     since that time he had  lived  with  his  maternal  grandmother.   The
     mother alone provided financial support for the  appellant.   Although
     the appellant's father lived in Jamaica, the appellant had  only  seen
     him on three occasions and he had given money to the appellant on only
     one occasion.  When the appellant was 10, his mother and  her  husband
     brought their son (the appellant's half-brother) to  Jamaica  to  live
     with the appellant and his grandmother so  that  they  could  grow  up
     together prior to them both coming to the UK.  There was  evidence  of
     correspondence between the appellant's grandmother and his  mother  in
     which she was consulting  and  seeking  approval  in  respect  of  the
     appellant's  upbringing.   The  evidence  was  that  his  mother  made
     decisions about his  schooling  and  that  she  gave  the  grandmother
     instructions  and  approved  holidays.   Referring  with  approval  to
     Emmanuel, the IAT approached the issue  of  "sole  responsibility"  as
     follows (at p 56):

           "The decision in every case will depend on  its  own  particular
           facts, and this will involve consideration, inter alia,  of  the
           source and degree of financial support of the child and  whether
           there is cogent evidence of genuine interest  in  and  affection
           for the child by the sponsoring parent in the United Kingdom."

 14. On the evidence, the IAT concluded that  the  appellant's  mother  had
     established "sole responsibility" for the appellant's upbringing.  She
     had never abdicated responsibility for him.   She had  sole  financial
     responsibility and "[a]ll the evidence ... demonstrated  a  continuing
     and positive concern on the part of the sponsor  in  the  welfare  and
     bringing up  of  the  appellant."  (at  p  57)  In  Sloley  again  the
     appellant's father lived nearby but  was  virtually  absent  from  her
     life.

 15. Further, in Sloley we see the emergence of what may be the core  issue
     in "sole responsibility", namely the idea  that  it  is  important  to
     identify the person, if any, who  alone  makes  significant  decisions
     about the child's upbringing and whose obligation it is to make  those
     decisions.  Sloley perhaps also illustrates that in a case where  only
     one parent has an involvement with a child's life, it is likely to  be
     that parent who alone is "responsible" for the child,  providing  that
     responsibility has not been relinquished or abdicated.

 16. Financial support, particularly sole financial support, of a child  is
     relevant since it may be an indicator of obligation stemming  from  an
     exercise of "responsibility" by a parent but it cannot be  conclusive.
     There may be other reasons why an individual  financially  supports  a
     child and so it can only be a factor to be taken  into  account  along
     with all the other facts.  Rudolph v ECO, Colombo  [1984]  Imm  AR  84
     illustrates this.

 17. Shortly after the appellant was born,  the  marriage  of  her  parents
     broke down.  She and  her  mother  went  to  live  with  her  paternal
     grandparents.  A year later the appellant's mother came to the UK as a
     student and remained here.  The appellant stayed with her grandparents
     but subsequently her grandmother and grandfather died.  Thereafter she
     moved into a convent where she remained until four years  later,  aged
     15 she applied to join her mother in the UK.  It was accepted that the
     appellant's mother had provided financial support  for  her  daughter.
     There  had  been  regular  contact  between  them  by   letter.    The
     appellant's father had little or no  involvement  in  her  life.    He
     rarely visited her at the convent and had been in a mental institution
     and most recently in prison.  The evidence was that a number of people
     including her paternal grandparents until their deaths,  her  maternal
     grandparents and the nuns at the convent all had played a part in  her
     life.  The decision to admit the appellant to the convent was  one  in
     which a number of people were involved and not the mother alone.   The
     IAT observed that there was "no evidence  of  anything  other  than  a
     natural concern of a caring mother which falls short of  the  exercise
     of the 'responsibility' required by the rule."  (at p 90)

 18. In approaching the issue of "sole responsibility" the IAT stated  that
     it must not only be established that the appellant's  mother  provided
     "essential  financial  support"  but  also  that  "she  was  regularly
     consulted about and expressed 'a continuing and positive concern'  for
     the appellant." (at p 89)  The fact that "sole responsibility" was not
     established for a limited time during the appellant's childhood  might
     not be crucial "looking at the childhood as a whole".   In  concluding
     that "sole responsibility" had not been established by the mother, the
     IAT stated (at p 90):

           "On the evidence we are unable to say  that  the  roles  of  all
           except [the appellant's mother] were in substance to act  simply
           on directions from [the  appellant's  mother].   The  period  of
           separation between mother and daughter was some 13 years at  the
           date  of  decision.   To  find  that  [the  appellant's  mother]
           exercised sole responsibility for [the  appellant's]  upbringing
           for that period even in a broad sense we would require  positive
           and  precise  evidence  of  regular  contact,  consultation  and
           decision taking  Such evidence is not before us."

 19. (See also  ECO,  Kingston  v  Martin  [1978]  Imm  AR  100  where  the
     appellant's father also provided money which was  interpreted  by  the
     IAT as amounting to contributions to the maintenance of the appellant.
      Distinguishing Sloley, the IAT concluded, on the evidence,  that  the
     sponsor did not have "sole responsibility".)

      Court of Appeal cases

 20. We now turn to the relevant cases in the Court of Appeal.  Three cases
     provide important guidance on  the  issue  of  "sole  responsibility":
     Ramos v IAT [1989] Imm AR 148, Nmaju v SSHD [2001] INLR 26 and Cenir v
     Entry Clearance Officer [2003] EWCA Civ 572.

 21. In Ramos, the appellant was from the Philippines.  Shortly before  her
     birth, her parents separated and  she  lived  with  her  mother.   Her
     father never had any contact with the appellant or played any part  in
     her life.  When the appellant was aged 5 years old,  her  mother  left
     the Philippines to work in the UK.  Thereafter,  the  appellant  lived
     with her maternal grandmother in a family home with an aunt and uncle.
      Her mother provided financial support for her  and  her  grandmother.
     Her mother had formed a relationship with a man settled in the UK  and
     had a daughter by him.  He, together with the appellant's half-sister,
     visited the Philippines but the mother did not.  The  following  year,
     when the appellant was aged 14, she applied to join her mother in  the
     UK.   Her application and subsequent appeals  were  dismissed.   Simon
     Brown J dismissed her application for judicial  review  of  the  IAT's
     decision.  The Court of  Appeal  dismissed  her  appeal  against  that
     decision.

 22. Dillon LJ (with whom Taylor LJ and Sir John Megaw  agreed)  identified
     two points about "sole responsibility" which were clear  and  accepted
     (at p 151):

           "One is that the issue of sole responsibility  for  the  child's
           upbringing is  not  to  be  decided  only  between  the  child's
           parents.  There may be cases where the conclusion is that  there
           has been a sharing of responsibility between the parent  who  is
           settled here and some other relative, or other person  possibly,
           in the country where the child has been  left  when  the  parent
           came here.


           The second point which is also established  is  that  the  words
           'sole responsibility' have to carry some form  of  qualification
           in that the rule envisages that a parent who is settled  in  the
           United Kingdom will or may have had the sole responsibility  for
           the child's upbringing in another country. Obviously  there  are
           matters of day-to-day decision in  the  upbringing  of  a  child
           which are bound to be decided on the spot by whoever is  looking
           after the child in the absence of the parent settled here,  such
           as getting the child to school safely and on  time,  or  putting
           the child to bed, or seeing what it has for breakfast,  or  that
           it cleans its teeth, or has enough clothing, and so  forth.  ...
           The question must be a broad question."

 23. Commenting on the correct approach, Dillon LJ continued (at p 152):

           "Each case must depend on its own facts considered broadly."

 24. Dillon LJ agreed  with  the  IAT's  view  that  "sole  responsibility"
     entailed "more than simple financial responsibility".  He  noted  that
     in reaching a view (at p 153):

           "Direction and control of the upbringing are also factors  which
           are part of the total fact pattern ... .  Another matter was  of
           course the extent of contact that the mother had  had  with  the
           child since the mother  went  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
           reasons why the contact had not been more ... .".

 25. As Dillon LJ indicated, the issue in the  case  was  not  whether  the
     father had any responsibility for the child - clearly he had not.  Nor
     was the  issue  whether  the  appellant's  mother  has  abandoned  all
     responsibility - again clearly she had not.   Rather,  the  issue  was
     whether responsibility was shared between the appellant's  mother  and
     her grandmother and, possibly, also the aunt and uncle.  He  concluded
     that there was no error in the approach of the IAT in deciding on  the
     facts  that  the  appellant's  mother  had   not   established   "sole
     responsibility" for the appellant.

 26. Taylor LJ in a  short  concurring  judgment  emphasised  two  specific
     findings  which,  in  his  judgment,  entirely  justified  the   IAT's
     conclusion (at p 153):

           "First, [the adjudicator]  found  that  there  was  no  evidence
           whatsoever of the grandmother consulting the sponsor -  that  is
           to say, the mother -  regarding  the  appellant.   Secondly,  he
           found that the appellant herself,  when  interviewed,  evidently
           believed that all the  decisions  regarding  her  education  and
           upbringing  were  made  by  her   grandmother   who   had   full
           responsibility and who consulted nobody."

 27. What is apparent from both the judgments  is  the  need  to  establish
     "responsibility" for the child's upbringing in the sense of  decision-
     making, control and  obligation  towards  the  child  which  must  lie
     exclusively with  the  parent.    Financial  support,  even  exclusive
     financial support, will not necessarily mean that the person providing
     it has "sole responsibility" for the child.  It is  a  factor  but  no
     more than that.

 28.  In Nmaju v SSHD, the Court of Appeal was faced  with  the  particular
     issue that if "sole responsibility" was established for a short period
     of time (in that case 2� months) at the date of decision whether  that
     was insufficient to satisfy the rule.  Not surprisingly, the Court  of
     Appeal refused to place a gloss on the wording of paragraph  297(i)(e)
     so as to require the "sole responsibility" to last for any  particular
     duration (see also Qui Zou [2002] UKIAT 07463).   We  would  add  only
     that the appellant's burden of showing sole responsibility may be more
     difficult to discharge when there is only a short period to point to.

 29. Schiemann LJ (with whom Aldous and Thorpe  LJJ  agreed)  offered  some
     guidance on the  nature  of  the  "sole  responsibility"  requirement.
     Having approved the approach of Dillon LJ in Ramos which we  have  set
     out above, he continued under the heading "The Quality of Control" (at
     para [9]):

           "9. While  legal  responsibility  under  the  appropriate  legal
           system will be a  relevant  consideration,  it  will  not  be  a
           conclusive one. One must also look at  what  has  actually  been
           done in relation to the child's upbringing by whom  and  whether
           it has been done under  the  direction  of  the  parent  settled
           here." (our emphasis)

 30. The Court of Appeal saw "sole responsibility" as a  practical  (rather
     than exclusively legal) exercise  of "control" by the UK-based  parent
     over the child's upbringing and whether what is done by the  carer  is
     done "under the direction" of that parent.

 31. The final Court of Appeal decision is Cenir v Entry Clearance Officer.
     The appellant was aged almost 18.  His mother had left the Philippines
     to work abroad, eventually ending up in the UK, when he  was  aged  4.
     She left him in the care of her parents.   For most of the  time  that
     she lived in the UK,  she  was  an  overstayer  but  she  was  granted
     indefinite leave to remain a year before the appellant's  application.
     She had only made two visits to the Philippines since  she  left,  one
     for six months when the appellant was aged 7 and one for a month about
     a year after she had been granted indefinite leave.  She provided  the
     family financial support.  The appellant's father was described  as  a
     "wastrel and drunkard" and had no involvement with the appellant.  The
     appellant's mother telephoned home about every two weeks  on  average.
     The Court of Appeal approved the approach in Ramos and Nmaju and again
     emphasised that in determining the issue of "sole responsibility" each
     case  will  depend  upon  its  own  particular  facts.   As  for   the
     'touchstone' for  "sole  responsibility",  Buxton  LJ  (at  para  [6])
     stated:

           "The general guidance is to look at whether what has  been  done
           in relation to the upbringing has been done under the  direction
           of the sponsoring settled parent."

 32.  He emphasised (at para [8]):

           "the importance of the parent with responsibility, albeit  at  a
           distance, having what can be identified  as  direction  over  or
           control of important decisions in the child's life."

 33. The Court rejected a submission - somewhat reminiscent of one made  by
     Mr Gobir in this case - that  the  Adjudicator  had  placed  too  much
     weight upon the  absence  of  day-to-day  control  and  care  for  the
     appellant.  Despite his findings that the sponsor was  a  devoted  and
     caring mother, provided financial support and was very concerned about
     the overall welfare of  her  family  (including  the  appellant),  the
     Adjudicator was entitled to reach the conclusion that the  appellant's
     mother had not established "sole responsibility" for the appellant.

 34.  These  cases  are  largely  concerned  with  the   issue   of   "sole
     responsibility" arising between a  UK-parent  and  relatives  who  are
     looking after the child in the country of  origin.   In  many  of  the
     cases, the other parent has disappeared from the child's life  totally
     or plays  so  little  part  as  to  have,  in  effect,  abdicated  any
     responsibility for its upbringing.   What  emerges  is  a  concept  of
     "authority" or "control" over a child's upbringing which derives  from
     the natural social and legal  role  of  an  individual  as  a  parent.
     Whilst others may, by force of circumstances, look after a  child,  it
     may be that they are doing so only on behalf of  the  child's  parent.
     The struggle in  the  case  law  is  to  identify  when  the  parent's
     responsibility has been relinquished in part or whole to another  such
     that it  should  be  said  that  there  is  shared  rather  than  sole
     responsibility.  By contrast, where both parents  are  active  in  the
     child's life, the involvement of the parent in the country  of  origin
     is significant - perhaps crucial - in assessing whether the parent  in
     the UK has "sole responsibility" for the child.

      Two-parents cases

 35. Two decisions of the IAT demonstrate the significance  of  involvement
     by the other parent in the child's life.  In SSHD v Pusey  [1972]  Imm
     AR  240,  the  appellant  lived  with  her  mother  in  her   maternal
     grandmother's home until she was 4 years old.  Her mother  then  moved
     out to live some 60 miles  away.   She  continued  to  live  with  her
     grandmother but was in regular contact with her mother and stayed with
     her during school holidays for three or  four  weeks  on  each  visit.
     The appellant's father (the sponsor) came to the UK when the appellant
     was  aged  5.   He  corresponded  regularly   with   the   appellant's
     grandmother about her upbringing  and  sent  money  for  her  support.
     When 17 years of age, the appellant sought  entry  clearance  to  live
     with her father in the UK.  The  IAT  accepted  that  as  between  the
     father  and  grandmother,  the  father  had   "shouldered   the   main
     responsibility" for the appellant (at pp 244-5).  However, overturning
     an adjudicator's  decision  that  the  appellant's  father  had  "sole
     responsibility" for her, the IAT held that the mother's  position  had
     to be taken into account and given the  "close  and  regular  contact"
     with the appellant, the parents shared responsibility for  the  child.
     (at p 245)

 36. The same outcome for similar reasons was  reached  in  Eugene  v  ECO,
     Bridgetown [1975] Imm AR 111 on  facts,  perhaps,  not  as  strong  as
     Pusey.  The appellant was 16 years of age.  He sought entry  clearance
     to join his father who came to the UK when the appellant was 6  months
     old.  He did not see the appellant until he visited  12  years  later.
     His father sent money for the appellant's upkeep.  From the  time  his
     father came to the UK, the appellant lived  first  with  his  paternal
     grandmother and then, when she died, with his aunt.  His mother  lived
     separately and the appellant visited her from time to  time  and  also
     spent  some  weekends  and  school  holidays  with  her.   His  mother
     maintained an interest in his welfare but she  provided  no  financial
     support because of her own circumstances other than to give him pocket
     money.  The IAT recognised that the mother had not had "such close and
     regular contact" as in Pusey.  Nevertheless, the Tribunal held that it
     was "difficult not to conclude that there has ... been some sharing of
     responsibility for the appellant's upbringing between his  mother  and
     father." (at p 114)

 37. The consistency of  approach  by  the  IAT  in  two-parents  cases  is
     illustrated by the more recent case of ECO,  Accra  v  Otuo-Acheampong
     [2002] UKIAT 06687.  The appellant, who was 17 years  of  age,  sought
     entry clearance to join her mother in the UK.  Her mother  left  Ghana
     to come to the UK when the  appellant  was  aged  3  and  was  granted
     indefinite leave  to  remain  when  the  appellant  was  twelve.   The
     appellant lived with her maternal grandmother.  The  sponsor  provided
     money for school fees and other expenses.  In addition,  it  seems  to
     have been the case  that  her  father  also  provided  some  financial
     support.  When  returning  from  boarding  school  for  holidays,  the
     appellant stayed overnight with her father  before  returning  to  her
     grandmother's house.   The IAT upheld the adjudicator's  finding  that
     the sponsor did not have sole responsibility  for  the  appellant  (at
     para [15]):

           "The  appellant's  father  accompanied  the  appellant  to   the
           interview.   That  in  itself  demonstrates  that  he  had   not
           abdicated responsibility for her.  On top of that, the appellant
           used to stay with him on her way to  her  grandmother  from  her
           school.  Furthermore, the appellant's father stated that he  was
           happy for the appellant to  live  with  him  although  she  felt
           comfortable with the sponsor.   The  appellant's  father  stated
           that he paid for the school fees and that her  grandmother  paid
           for household things.  In addition, he gave her money whilst she
           was at school."

 38. (See also R (Philippines) [2003] UKIAT 00109, where the  father  lived
     in the same house as appellant and other family members (albeit  on  a
     different floor). In finding that  the mother in UK did not have "sole
     responsibility", the IAT took account of the fact that the father  had
     played "some part in the household, in common with  other  members  of
     the claimant's family" (para [17]) and that the appellant  was  "close
     to his father" (para [7]).)

 39. A decision of the Outer House of the Court of Session  does,  however,
     contemplate a different  outcome  in  exceptional  circumstances.   In
     Alagon v ECO, Manilla [1993] Imm AR 336  the  appellant  sought  entry
     clearance to join his mother in the UK shortly before  his  eighteenth
     birthday.  His mother had come to this country when he was aged 8  and
     had only made one visit to see him when he  was  13  years  old.   The
     appellant lived in a house with his father who was divorced  from  her
     mother.  The house was owned by her mother.  The mother provided  most
     of the financial support  for  the  appellant.   Relatives  who  lived
     relatively close saw and provided some financial and other support  to
     the appellant.  The father  did  not  contribute  financially  to  the
     appellant's support and himself benefited from living in the house and
     the financial contributions from the mother.   The  mother  alone  was
     consulted  about  all  major  decisions  such  as  education  and  the
     appellant's future maintenance.  The father was not consulted  and  he
     took no major decisions about the appellant.  It was accepted that the
     father played "at most a passive role" in the appellant's  life.   The
     Lord Ordinary (Lord Prosser) acknowledged  (at  p  344)  that  it  was
     significant that the appellant was living with her father

           "since any responsibility exercised by her father  need  not  be
           derived from her mother, and might put  in  doubt  the  mother's
           'sole responsibility'."


 40. Nevertheless, the judge concluded  that  the  appellant's  mother  had
     indeed established "sole responsibility" for her  on  the  basis  that
     (at p 345):

           "the adjudicator effectively found  that  the  father  is  doing
           nothing for the child beyond the bare fact of living with her on
           reasonably good terms....  Moreover  ...  that  is  in  a  house
           belonging to the mother, so that even his bare presence and  any
           help that that might be to the child,  is  derivative  from  the
           mother and essentially part of her arrangements  for  the  child
           rather than his own."


 41. The judge concluded that that the mother (rather than  the  father  or
     other relatives) was  "exercising  all  the  forms  of  responsibility
     typical of sole responsibility properly understood". (at p 345)

 42. In our view, this case is  consistent  with  the  principled  approach
     applicable to cases of this sort.  It is merely a factually unusual  -
     indeed exceptional case - in its outcome.   It  turns  upon  the  very
     particular findings of the judge concerning the non-involvement of the
     father in the child's upbringing despite the fact that  the  appellant
     was living with him.

     Discussion


 43. We have set out in some detail the leading cases before the IAT and in
     the Court of Appeal relating to the issue of "sole responsibility" for
     a child's upbringing.   We emphasise that each case must turn  upon  a
     consideration of all the facts and each case will be  unique  in  that
     respect.  It is difficult to  imagine  any  two  cases  being  exactly
     alike.   The cases do, however, cumulatively provide  important  legal
     guidance for  determining  the  "sole  responsibility"  which  we  now
     attempt to draw together.

 44. In most of the cases, the parent based in the child's  own  country  -
     usually the father - has abdicated any responsibility for his child by
     disappearing or taking no part in the child's  upbringing.   There  is
     only one parent involved in the child's  life.  If  one  started  from
     principle, it might be thought that the issue of "responsibility"  for
     a child and whether or not that amounts to  "sole  responsibility"  is
     exclusively  an  issue   between   parents.    The   issue   of   sole
     responsibility should not, therefore, arise.  However, that is not the
     position taken in the cases, including those in the Court  of  Appeal.
     We accept that  the  question  of  "sole  responsibility"  is  not  so
     restricted and it remains an issue even where there is only one parent
     but, for practical reasons, the child is looked after by others  (see,
     Ramos, above, per Dillon LJ at p 151).   The issue is then whether, as
     between the relative/carers and the UK-based parent,  the  latter  has
     "sole responsibility" for the child.

 45.  To  understand  the  proper  approach   to   the   issue   of   "sole
     responsibility", we begin with the situation where a  child  has  both
     parents involved in its life.  The starting point must  be  that  both
     parents share responsibility  for  their  child's  upbringing.    This
     would be the position if the parents  and  child  lived  in  the  same
     country and we can see  no  reason  in  principle  why  it  should  be
     different if one parent has moved to the United Kingdom.

 46.  In  order  to  conclude  that   the   UK-based   parent   had   "sole
     responsibility" for the child, it would be necessary to show that  the
     parent abroad had abdicated any responsibility for the child  and  was
     merely acting  at  the  direction  of  the  UK-based  parent  and  was
     otherwise  totally  uninvolved  in  the   child's   upbringing.    The
     possibility clearly cannot be ruled out: Alagon provides an example of
     this exceptional situation and turns upon an acceptance by  the  judge
     of the wholly unusual situation that the father was "doing nothing for
     the child beyond the bare fact of living with her on  reasonably  good
     terms". (at p 345)

 47. Our conclusion on the likely decision that  responsibility  is  shared
     where a child has both parents involved in its life is, in  our  view,
     consistent with the policy relating to the admission of  children  for
     settlement  underlying  paragraph  297.   In  full,  paragraph  297(i)
     provides as follows:

           "297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
           leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the  child  of  a  parent,
           parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted  for
           settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:


           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany  or  join  a  parent,
           parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
           (a) both parents are present and settled in the United  Kingdom;
           or
           (b) both parents are being admitted on  the  same  occasion  for
           settlement; or
           (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom  and
           the other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement;
           or
           (d) one parent is present and settled in the United  Kingdom  or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the other
           parent is dead; or
           (e) one parent is present and settled in the United  Kingdom  or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and  has  had
           sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
           (f) one parent or a relative  is  present  and  settled  in  the
           United Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
           settlement and there are serious and compelling family or  other
           considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
           suitable arrangements have  been  made  for  the  child's  care;
           and..."

 48. The purpose of paragraph 297 is clear: it is designed to  maintain  or
     effect family unity.   Under sub-paragraphs (a) to  (d)  of  paragraph
     297(i), the child is accompanying his parents or a parent to  live  in
     the UK or he is seeking to join them when they are already settled  in
     the UK.  The end product is that parents and child  live  together  in
     the UK; only if one parent is dead will the other be able to be in the
     UK  alone  with  the  child.   By  contrast,  paragraph  297(i)(e)  is
     concerned with settlement where one parent is in the UK and the  other
     is abroad and will remain so.  Paragraph 297(i)(e) has  the  potential
     to split up a family and separate a  child  from  one  of  its  parent
     abroad who is involved in its life.   It is only  the  requirement  of
     "sole responsibility" which acts as a control mechanism.    It  would,
     in our view, usually run counter to the  policy  of  family  unity  to
     admit a child for settlement where the parent abroad is caring for the
     child and involved in  its  upbringing,  unless  the  requirements  of
     paragraph 297(i)(f) are  met.    This  must  be  borne  in  mind  when
     interpreting, and applying, the test of "sole  responsibility".    The
     requirements  of  that  latter  sub-paragraph  are  onerous  requiring
     "serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations  which  make
     exclusion of the child undesirable".  Hence, the family will be  split
     up only because the parent abroad has no involvement for  the  child's
     upbringing (para 297(i)(e) applies) or, where  there  is  involvement,
     because  all  the  circumstances  (including  the  child's  interests)
     require such a result (para 297(i)(f) applies).

 49. Where one  parent  has  disappeared  from  the  child's  life  and  so
     relinquished or abdicated his (or her) responsibility for  the  child,
     the starting point must be that it is the remaining active parent  who
     has "sole responsibility" for the child.  The fact that the  remaining
     active parent is in the UK makes no difference to  this.   Of  course,
     the geographical separation of the parent from the  child  means  that
     the day-to-day care of the child will  necessarily  be  undertaken  by
     others - relatives or friends abroad  -  who  look  after  the  child.
     Here, the issue under the immigration rules is  whether  the  UK-based
     parent has, in practice, allowed the parental responsibility  for  the
     child to be shared with the carer abroad.  This  is,  of  course,  the
     question we see most frequently in the case law.

 50. The cases, particularly Nmaju and Cenir in the Court of  Appeal,  make
     clear that the touchstone of "sole responsibility" is  the  continuing
     control and direction by the parent  in  the  UK  in  respect  of  the
     "important decisions" about the child's upbringing.  The fact that day-
     to-day decision-making for a child - such as  "getting  the  child  to
     school safely and on time, or putting the child to bed, or seeing what
     it has for breakfast, or that it  cleans  its  teeth,  or  has  enough
     clothing, and so forth" (Ramos, per Dillon LJ at p 151) -  rests  with
     the  carers  abroad  is  not  conclusive  of  the   issue   of   "sole
     responsibility".    However, if the UK-based parent  has  allowed  the
     carer abroad  to  make  some  "important  decisions"  in  the  child's
     upbringing, then it may readily be said that  the  responsibility  for
     the child has become "shared".

 51. In reaching a decision on what is a fact-rich issue, it  is  important
     to take account of evidence of any contact between the parent and  the
     carer in respect of important decisions to be taken  about  the  child
     and  its  upbringing.   The  availability  of  modern   communications
     technology may reduce the impact of distance alone on  a  UK  parent's
     ability to be consulted  (and  therefore  decide)  about  the  child's
     upbringing  in  another  country.   The  length,  and  cause,  of  the
     separation of parent and child and the reasons  for  its  continuation
     may shed some light on the role played by the carer abroad.  Likewise,
     it may be helpful to look at the financial  support  provided  by  the
     parent and, in particular, its absence may be very telling.

      Summary

 52. Questions of "sole responsibility" under the immigration rules  should
     be approached as follows:

           i. Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and  whether
              that responsibility is  "sole"  is  a  factual  matter  to  be
              decided upon all the evidence.
          ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should  not
              to be understood as a  theoretical  or  legal  obligation  but
              rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
              fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the  child.    That
              responsibility may have been for a short duration in that  the
              present arrangements may have begun quite recently.
         iii. "Responsibility" for a child's upbringing may be undertaken by
              individuals other than a child's parents  and  may  be  shared
              between different individuals: which  may  particularly  arise
              where the child remains in its own  country  whilst  the  only
              parent involved in its life travels to and lives in the UK.
          iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in  the
              upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one  of
              them will have sole responsibility.
           v. If it is said that  both  are  not  involved  in  the  child's
              upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
              other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
              cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
              longer has responsibility for the child.
          vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a matter
              between the parents.  So even if  there  is  only  one  parent
              involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may  not  have
              sole responsibility.
         vii.   In   the   circumstances   likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
              responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
              may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
              friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
              parent and child.
        viii. That,  however,  does  not  prevent  the  parent  having  sole
              responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.
          ix.  The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else   has   day-to-day
              responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
              and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
              the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
              responsibility is shared and so not "sole".

 53. With these matters in mind, we turn to consider the appellant's case.

The appellant's case

 54. Mr Gobir submitted that the Immigration Judge had  attached  too  much
     weight to the absence of physical contact between  the  Appellant  and
     his father and to  the  absence  of  day-to-day  responsibility.    He
     referred us to the decisions in Emmanuel; Martin  (1972)  and  Sloley.
     These  cases,   he   submitted,   showed   that   the   phrase   "sole
     responsibility"  should  not  be  interpreted  literally  -   absolute
     responsibility could never be established where a child was cared  for
     in another country.   What was important was whether  the  appellant's
     father had, as he put it, "chief" responsibility.   He  accepted  that
     the appellant's mother had day-to-day responsibility for the appellant
     but her responsibility was different in quality and type from that  of
     the father.  Her role in bringing  up  the  appellant  was  completely
     subordinate to the father's.  Mr Gobir pointed  out  that  the  father
     made all the "big decisions" in the appellant's life;  he  kept  daily
     contact with his wife; he was emotionally committed to the  appellant;
     the whole family was financially dependent upon him.  On the basis  of
     his findings, the Immigration  Judge's  decision  was,  he  submitted,
     perverse.

 55. Mr Gobir has failed to make good his contention that  the  Immigration
     Judge's decision was perverse on what is  quintessentially  a  factual
     assessment.

 56. The Immigration Judge set out the evidence - which he accepted in full
     - in paragraphs [15]-[25] of his determination.  In  paragraphs  [26]-
     [28] he set out his findings and concluded  as  follows  in  paragraph
     [28]:

           "I find that the parents of the Appellants  have  a  shared  but
           differing responsibility for the Appellants.  Neither parent  in
           this case has sole responsibility, and I accept  that  with  the
           constraints of living in the UK the Sponsor has done all that he
           can hope to do to maintain support, and keep in touch  with  the
           Appellants.  However real that telephone contact is, it is not a
           day to day responsibility which has been  left  fully  with  the
           Appellants' mother.  The Sponsor has played almost  no  physical
           part in the upbringing of  the  Appellants  -  even  the  oldest
           Appellant can  only  have  met  his  father  on  about  3  or  4
           occasions.  The Sponsor elected to  work  in  this  country  but
           otherwise delegated all day  to  day  care  to  the  mother.   I
           conclude this is a case where responsibility is shared,  and  it
           cannot be said the Sponsor has sole responsibility."

 57. Mr Gobir's objections, perhaps, focus attention on this  paragraph  of
     the judge's determination and his reference to the absence of  day-to-
     day contact between the appellant and his father and that  the  father
     had played no physical part in his upbringing.   We  do  not  consider
     that the judge gave inappropriate weight to  these  matters  when  his
     determination is read as a whole - as it must be.  The  judge  clearly
     and fairly  sets  out  and  accepts  the  sponsor's  evidence  in  his
     determination.  He plainly takes account of all the relevant  factors.
     In paragraph [27] he refers to the fact that the sponsor has not lived
     in Yemen since the appellant, who is now 17, was born.  He has visited
     only every 3 or 4 years. He refers to the weekly contact by  telephone
     with the appellant and the daily contact with the appellant's  mother.
     He refers to the fact that the sponsor is the sole financial supporter
     of the appellant apart from the free accommodation provided the family
     by his grandfather.  The judge accepts the sponsor's statement that he
     makes the "big  decisions",  hypothesising  that  he  would  make  the
     decision about the appellant's University education not least  because
     he would be paying.  However, the judge notes in paragraph [27]  that,
     on the evidence, no "very major decisions" have so far arisen  in  the
     appellant's life.  All these matters are relevant and were  considered
     by the judge.  We do not see anything in the determination to  suggest
     that the judge either failed to take account of  a  matter  he  should
     have taken into account or gave improper weight to any matter that  he
     did take into account.  The simple truth is that he correctly  engaged
     in the fact-dependent question of whether the appellant's  father  had
     "sole responsibility" for the appellant - presumably since  his  birth
     as it is not suggested that the relationship has significantly changed
     during the appellant's life.

 58. The judge was, of course,  dealing  with  a  case  where  the  child's
     'carer' abroad was his  own  mother  who  had  looked  after  him  for
     seventeen years.  As far as we are aware, there was no evidence before
     the judge from the appellant's mother as to  her  position.   We  note
     that no reliance was placed upon paragraph 297(i)(f) in this case.  We
     have already set out above our view in  relation  to  cases  involving
     both parents such as this. Despite the accepted involvement  and  role
     of the appellant's father, the judge was not perverse to conclude that
     the appellant's mother was not merely acting at the direction  of  his
     father and had not ceased to act as the appellant's mother caring  for
     her child.  This is not a case where the facts approach the  situation
     of "passive" non-involvement in the  child's  life  found  to  be  the
     position of the father in the Alagon case we discussed earlier.  We do
     not  consider  that  the   judge   perversely   concluded   in   those
     circumstances that the mother had not relinquished  or  abdicated  all
     responsibility for the upbringing of the appellant to  his  father  so
     that he had "sole responsibility" for the appellant.   Indeed,  we  do
     not think that the  judge  could  properly  have  come  to  any  other
     conclusion.

 59. There is one final matter with which we should deal.   Mr  Gobir  also
     submitted that in paragraph [29] of his determination  the  judge  had
     wrongly taken into account that he believed the appellant's reason for
     coming to the UK was to further his education.  We agree with Mr Gobir
     that this  is  irrelevant  to  the  issue  of  "sole  responsibility".
     However, there is nothing in this point as it is clear that the  judge
     did not take this into account in reaching his conclusion on the issue
     of "sole responsibility" - a conclusion he reaches in  paragraph  [28]
     of his determination.  Paragraph [29] is no more than  a  footnote  to
     his determination and in  no  way  infects  his  finding  -  which  is
     unassailable - on "sole responsibility".

Decision

 60. For these reasons, the  Immigration  Judge's  determination  does  not
     disclose a material error of law  and  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
     appellant's appeal stands.










                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
                                                                       Date:
