
HJ (homosexuality: reasonably tolerating living discreetly) Iran [2008]
UKAIT 00044

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 25 February 2008

                                   Before:


                         Mr Justice Hodge, President
                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                       Senior Immigration Judge Mather

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Ms L. Hooper, instructed by Paragon Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms J. Collier, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor

It is a question of fact to be decided on the evidence  of  the  appellant's
history  and  experiences  as  to  whether  a  homosexual   appellant   "can
reasonably be expected to tolerate" living discreetly in Iran.   Enforcement
of the law against homosexuality in Iran is arbitrary but the evidence  does
not  show  a  real  risk  of  discovery  of,  or  adverse  action   against,
homosexuals in Iran who  conduct  their  homosexual  activities  discreetly.
The position has not deteriorated since RM and BB.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant was born on 6 June 1970.  He is an Iranian male  who  is
      homosexual, who practised homosexuality in Iran and who has  continued
      to do so since his arrival in the United Kingdom.  He  claimed  asylum
      on arrival in the UK on 17 December 2001.

2.    The asylum claim has a lengthy history following its rejection by  the
      respondent.  His appeal was dismissed by an adjudicator  but  the  IAT
      remitted  the  case  for  further  consideration.    In   July   2005,
      Immigration  Judge  Hodgkinson  again  dismissed  the   appeal.    The
      appellant's appeal to the Court of Appeal was allowed in July 2006 and
      reported as J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA
      Civ 1238.  The appeal was allowed on the basis  that  the  AIT  should
      reconsider a number of matters set out in the  judgements  of  Maurice
      Kay and Buxton LJJ.

3.    A good deal turns on the evidence of the appellant.  He gave  evidence
      before us.  We also heard evidence  from  Ms  Anna  Enayat,  a  senior
      associate member at St Anthony's College, Oxford.  She is an expert on
      Iran, and has given evidence before this Tribunal in a number of cases
      focussing on the position of homosexuals in Iran.  We  have  read  and
      considered all the statements made by the appellant.  We have also had
      regard to the evidence as summarised in previous  determinations.   Ms
      Enayat, as well as giving  evidence,  produced  two  detailed  country
      reports on this and another case.  Each side produced detailed bundles
      and together a joint authorities bundle.  Both counsel  produced  full
      and helpful skeletons, for which we are grateful.

4.    In granting permission to the Court of Appeal in this case  Sedley  LJ
      stated that:

           "There   is   no   single   decision...   which   answers   this
           straightforward question... does it amount to persecution...  if
           the clandestine character of the homosexual activity which there
           has been in the past and will be on  return  in  the  future  is
           itself  the  product  of  fear  engendered   by   discriminatory
           legislation or policing which itself violates  the  individual's
           human rights?"

5.    In allowing the appeal, Maurice Kay LJ said that this Tribunal:

           "...will have to address questions that were not  considered  on
           the last occasion, including the reason why the appellant  opted
           for  'discretion'  before  his  departure  from  Iran  and,   by
           implication, would do so again on return.  It will have  to  ask
           itself whether 'discretion' is something that the appellant  can
           reasonably be expected to tolerate, not only in the  context  of
           random sexual activity but in  relation  to  'matters  following
           from and relevant  to,  sexual  identity'  in  the  wider  sense
           recognised by the High Court of Australia (see the judgement  of
           Gummow and Hayne JJ at para 83  [5395/002  2003  HCA71]).   This
           requires consideration of the fact that homosexuals living in  a
           stable relationship will wish, as this appellant says,  to  live
           openly with each other and the 'discretion' which they may  feel
           constrained to exercise as the price to pay for the avoidance of
           condign punishment will require suppression in respect  of  many
           aspects of life that  are  'related  to  or  informed  by  their
           sexuality' (ibid, para 81).  This is not simply  generalisation;
           it is dealt with in the appellant's evidence."

6.    Buxton LJ added a further point:

           "The question that will be before the AIT on remission  will  be
           whether the applicant can reasonably  be  expected  to  tolerate
           whatever circumstances are likely to arise were he to return  to
           Iran.  The applicant may have to  abandon  part  of  his  sexual
           identity, as referred to in the judgement of Gummow and Hayne JJ
           in S, in circumstances where failure to do that exposes  him  to
           the extreme danger that is set out in the country guidance  case
           of RM and BB (Iran) CG2005 UKAIT 00117.  The Tribunal  may  wish
           to consider whether the combination of these  two  circumstances
           may have an effect on their decision as to whether the applicant
           can be expected to tolerate the situation he may find himself in
           when he returns to Iran."

Persecution

7.    An act of persecution is defined in the Refugee or Person in  Need  of
      International  Protection  Regulations  2006  [SI   2006   No.   2170]
      (hereafter "the Protection Regulations") as follows:

           5 - (1)     In deciding whether a person is a refugee an act  of
                    persecution must be:

                 a) sufficiently serious by  its  nature  or  repetition  to
                    constitute a severe violation of a basic human right, in
                    particular a right from which derogation cannot be  made
                    under Article 15 of the Convention for the Protection of
                    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, or
                 b)  an  accumulation  of  various  measures,  including   a
                    violation of a human right which is sufficiently  severe
                    so as to affect an individual in  a  similar  manner  as
                    specified in (a)...
               ...


              (3)      An act of persecution must be committed for at least
                    one of the reasons  in  Article  1  (A)  of  the  Geneva
                    Convention.

8.    Maurice Kay LJ pointed out at para 11 of J:

           "If there is one  thing  upon  which  all  the  authorities  are
           agreed, it is that persecution is, in the words of Lord  Bingham
           of Cornhill in Sepet and Bulbul [2003] 1WLR 856 at paragraph  7,
           a 'strong word',  requiring  a  high  threshold.   It  has  been
           variously expressed, but the language of McHugh and Kirby JJ [in
           the High Court of Australia S395/002 [2003] HCA 71, [2004]  INLR
           233]... - 'it would constitute persecution only if by reason  of
           its  intensity  or  duration  the   person   persecuted   cannot
           reasonably be expected to tolerate it ' - has been adopted in  a
           number of recent authorities including Z [Z v  SSHD  2005  ImmAR
           75] (at paragraph 12) and Amare v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1600
           paragraph 27, and RG  (Colombia)  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  57
           paragraph 16."

Parties' Approach

9.    It is accepted that for a person  to  be  openly  gay  in  Iran  would
      attract a real risk of persecution (see in particular RM and BB).  The
      issue therefore is whether the need for the appellant to  be  discreet
      about  his  sexuality  on  return  to  Iran  would  itself  constitute
      persecution within the meaning of the Refugee Convention.

10.   It is the respondent's position that self-restraint due to  fear  will
      be persecution only if it is such  that  a  homosexual  person  cannot
      reasonably be expected  to  tolerate  such  self-restraint.   Where  a
      person does in fact live discreetly to avoid coming to  the  attention
      of the authorities he is reasonably tolerating the position.

11.   The appellant argues that  persecution  is  based  on  discrimination.
      Thus the impact  of  non-discrimination  provisions  in  international
      instruments, taken together with the right to private  life,  make  it
      clear that sexual orientation and sexual life are  core  human  rights
      and protected rights.  There are no non-discreet groups of gay men  in
      Iran.  The necessary requirement on a gay  man  in  Iran  to  exercise
      discretion is to suppress aspects of his life related to his sexuality
      and a denial of that sexuality.  The  suppression  is  driven  by  the
      condign punishments meted out to convicted homosexuals.  The real risk
      of  serious  physical  harm  is  a  strong  causative  factor  in  the
      "discretion"  that  is  exercised.   "Discretion"  on  return  is  not
      something that the appellant in this case can reasonably  be  expected
      to tolerate.


12.   Ms Hooper for the appellant in her skeleton  and  in  her  submissions
      was in effect raising wide ranging general  arguments  concerning  the
      different  respects  in  which  discrimination   against   homosexuals
      constitutes a violation of basic human rights.  These  arguments  come
      very  close  to  a  claim  that,  given  the  discrimination   against
      homosexuals in Iran, on a proper application of the law any homosexual
      person from Iran is entitled to international protection.  We have not
      addressed these arguments separately since to do so would deflect from
      the task set for us of answering the specific questions posed  by  the
      Court of Appeal as they relate to this appellant.

Case law


13.   We have read and considered the analyses of the various  cases  quoted
      by Maurice Kay LJ and the authorities quoted to us by the parties.  We
      note also that the Protection Regulations reflect the  high  threshold
      required for persecution, requiring that an act of persecution must be
      "sufficiently serious... as to constitute  a  severe  violation  of  a
      basic human right."

14.   The appellant places particular reliance on  the  human  rights  based
      approach to persecution and on the Australian case of S  395  at  para
      43.

           "43.  In many, perhaps  the  majority  of  cases,  however,  the
               applicant has acted in the way  that  he  or  she  did  only
               because of the threat of harm.   In  such  cases  the  well-
               founded fear of persecution held by  the  applicant  is  the
               fear that unless  the  person  acts  to  avoid  the  harmful
               conduct, he or she will suffer harm.  It is  the  threat  of
               serious harm with its menacing implication that  constitutes
               the persecutory conduct.  To determine  the  issue  of  real
               chance without determining whether the modified conduct  was
               influenced by the threat of harm is to fail to consider  the
               issue properly..."


15.   The respondent relies on the analysis of the human rights approach  to
      persecution as set out in the judgement of Laws  LJ  in  Amare  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 1600.  He too  has  regard  to  S  in  his  analysis.   Amare
      concerned an appellant who was homosexual as did Jain [2000] INLR  71,
      referred to in the judgement.  In Jain, Schiemann LJ said at page 77:

           "However the position has now been reached that  criminalisation
           of homosexual activity between consenting adults in  private  is
           not  regarded  by  the  international  community  at  large   as
           acceptable.  If a person wishes to engage in such  activity  and
           lives in a state which enforces a criminal law prohibiting  such
           activity he may be able to bring himself within  the  definition
           of a refugee.  That is one end of the continuum.

           The other end of the continuum is the  person  who  lives  in  a
           state in which such activity is not subjected to any  degree  of
           social disapprobation, and he is as free to engage in it  as  he
           is to breathe.

           In most states, however, the position is somewhere between these
           two extremes.  Those who wish to engage in  homosexual  activity
           are subjected to various pressures to discourage them from doing
           so.  Some  pressures  may  come  from  the  state:  e.g.  state-
           subsidised advertising or teaching to discourage them from their
           lifestyle.  Other pressures may come from other members  of  the
           community, without those members being  subjected  to  effective
           sanctions by the state to discourage them.  Some  pressures  are
           there all the time.  Others are merely spasmodic.  An occasional
           interference  with  the  exercise  of  a  human  right  is   not
           necessarily a persecution.  The problem which increasingly faces
           decision-makers is when to ascribe the word persecution to those
           pressures on the continuum.   In  this  context,  Mr  Shaw,  who
           appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  reminded  us  of  the
           references in Shah and Islam to the concept of serious harm  and
           the comment of Staughton LJ in Sandralingham  and  Vichandran  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [1996] ImmAR 97, 114,
           where the Lord Justice stated:


                 'Persecution must at least be persistent  and  serious  ill
                 treatment without just cause'."

16.   Laws LJ went on to say at para 27:

           "...the alignment  of  the  State  obligations  imposed  by  the
           Refugee Convention with the protection of basic  or  fundamental
           human rights is subject to important qualifications.  These  are
           well-known, and are no less important than the alignment itself.
            First is the fact that the Convention only requires  protection
           to be afforded in cases of particular violations of human rights
           norms:  those  arising   'for   reasons   of   race,   religion,
           nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  sexual   group   or
           political  opinion.    Secondly   the   violation,   or   rather
           prospective or apprehended violation, must attain a  substantial
           level of seriousness if it is to amount to persecution."

      And further at para 31:

           "The Convention is not there to safeguard or protect potentially
           affected persons from having to live in regimes where  pluralist
           liberal values are less respected,  even  much  less  respected,
           than they  are  here.   It  is  there  to  secure  international
           protection to the extent agreed by the contracting states.

           While, as I certainly accept, the sense accorded to  persecution
           might shift and stretch as the international consensus develops,
           the Convention's guarantees remain limited by the two conditions
           I have described."

Country information

17.   RM and BB remains the lead country guidance case on the issue of  risk
      to homosexuals in Iran.  The Tribunal there concluded:

        "on the basis of confessions or knowledge of the judge which  might
        arise from such matters as previous history or medical evidence  or
        the evidence of a person who claimed to  have  observed  homosexual
        acts... [a person accused of homosexual conduct] would be subjected
        to significant prison sentences and/or lashing."


      They further concluded that:


        "homosexual acts carried on in private  between  consenting  adults
        are most unlikely to come to the attention  of  the  authorities...
        and... that the authorities do not seek out homosexuals but  rather
        may respond to complaints of consensual homosexual  activity  being
        carried on."

18.   The IAT reached those conclusions in RM and BB after a  full  analysis
      of extensive expert evidence and background country  information.   Ms
      Enayat's evidence made a significant contribution to  the  conclusions
      in that case.  Her evidence before us updates that evidence.

19.   In her reports before us, she provides an update  at  part  2  of  the
      situation of homosexuals in Iran between 2005 and January 2008.  There
      are, she says, very few official statistics.  In the nine months  from
      March to December  2006,  53,971  people  were  arrested  for  immoral
      relationships.  The passage on  homosexuals  taken  from  an  official
      report states:

           "2,148 persons were arrested for the  crime  of  sodomy  (lavat)
           which thankfully showed no significant growth... Most  of  those
           arrested were between fifteen and twenty  years  old.   9%  were
           married men."

      Ms Enayat  says:  "[t]his  is  the  first  time  there  has  been  any
      acknowledgment from Iranian establishment sources  of  the  extent  of
      arrests among those suspected of homosexual  acts".   Homosexual  acts
      are classified as "crimes against public virtue".   She  concluded  in
      her report:

           "Crimes   against   public   virtue   include    adultery    and
           fornication...  sodomy,  tafkhiz  and   lesbianism...   pimping,
           immoral relationships between a man and a woman unrelated to one
           another... violations of the  moral  code  committed  in  public
           places... establishing a house of corruption... and  dealing  in
           or showing to third parties pornographic material."

      Ms Enayat confirmed the view summarised in RM and BB at para 108  that
      little information is available on these matters given the  "customary
      secrecy" exercised by the judiciary where moral crimes are  concerned.
      She concluded in her report:

           "It is difficult  to  determine  whether  this  new  information
           demonstrates a deterioration in the position of homosexuals over
           the past two  or  three  years,  or  whether  the  situation  it
           reflects has been constant since the 1979 revolution brought  to
           light by better communications, in particular the internet."

      She considers it impossible to say whether there has been an  increase
      in the arrests for sodomy, given the paucity of information.  However,
      the report she quotes as above seemed to suggest  there  had  been  no
      significant growth.


20.   Her report and the evidence before us  set  out  the  new  information
      that has come  to  light  since  2005.   She  considers  the  position
      summarised in RM and BB remains current.  The  part  of  the  criminal
      code concerning homosexuals is being renewed in parliament, with  more
      specific descriptions of the penalties faced by those convicted of the
      crime.  These are to  provide  that  penetrative  sodomy  attracts  an
      automatic death  sentence,  reduced  to  one  hundred  lashes  for  an
      unmarried man, but the person who is the passive partner  or  the  man
      who is married and forces sodomy is  subject  to  an  automatic  death
      penalty.  Non-penetrative acts as defined attract a  sentence  of  one
      hundred lashes, lying naked under the  same  cover  without  necessity
      ninety-nine lashes and kissing, touching or stroking  with  lascivious
      intent seventy-four lashes in the discretion of  the  judge.   On  any
      view such punishment constitutes persecution.

21.   Ms Enayat considers that  Iranian  authorities  have  adopted  a  more
      aggressive policy against moral offenders of  all  kinds  since  2004.
      There were active attempts in 2004 and 2005 by the  Basij  authorities
      to entrap homosexuals through internet chatrooms.  She reports that:


          "after the execution in August 2005 of two young men  in  Mashhad,
          apparently but by no means certainly on charges of homosexual rape
          of a minor, the government of the Netherlands and  the  government
          of Sweden both suspended intended deportations of Iranian gays."

      She provides examples of death sentences imposed or pending and  cites
      a  series  of  cases  confirming  the  overall  repressive  nature  of
      treatment and punishment of homosexuals in Iran.

22.   Ms Enayat also gave evidence of the beginnings of  the  establishment,
      since autumn 2004, of a Social Protection Division of  the  judiciary.
      She described this as "a sort of state-run neighbourhood  watch".   It
      is manned by volunteers whose principal purpose  is  to  discover  and
      report moral crimes.  She says that in many parts of Iran  the  Social
      Protection Division has begun operations and cites examples  of  their
      activity, although none in the quoted  reports  relate  to  homosexual
      activity.  She also commented at para 3.6.3:


          "respected international human rights reports routinely remark  on
          the uneven, arbitrary and unpredictable application of the law  in
          Iran."

23.   In reply to questions from the appellant's  counsel,  Ms  Enayat  said
      that, since the election of the current President of Iran,  the  drive
      by the establishment to stamp out ways of life that  are  anti-Islamic
      has increased.  Police do pick up moral offenders.  This  has  created
      alienation in society and there have been demonstrations against this.
       Generally, there has been an increase in surveillance.

24.   In cross examination, Ms Enayat accepted that men  can  kiss  and  hug
      when greeting and walk arm in arm.  Men can socialise in public,  they
      can  go  shopping  and  go  to  dinner  together.   She  thought   the
      aggressiveness of the surveillance of the society  had  changed  since
      she gave evidence in RM and BB.   The  "neighbourhood  watch"  exposed
      people to greater risk of discovery  than  previously.   She  accepted
      that  it  is  possible  for  men  to  meet  through  work  and  social
      relationships and as a consequence form homosexual relationships.  She
      said that people are informed upon.  She said that one public park  in
      Teheran is used as a pick-up  scene  for  homosexuals  and  homosexual
      prostitutes, but described that as a seedy place that  not  many  gays
      would use.  In relation to the Social Protection  Division,  she  said
      that the norm is not ever to mention  the  existence  of  homosexuals.
      There are, she said, no figures on homosexuals, or on drug use, or  on
      boys and girls being together.

25.   Ms Enayat herself quite properly stated in her report that it was:


          "difficult to determine whether this new information  demonstrates
          a deterioration in the position of homosexuals over the  past  two
          to three years."


      We agree.  It remains clear, as it was at the time of RM and BB,  that
      those who confess to homosexual acts  or  are  convicted  by  whatever
      means  are  at  real  risk  as  they  face  condign  punishment.   The
      establishment of the Social Protection Division of the judiciary  with
      its neighbourhood watch aspect is a new development.  Its exact  reach
      is not known but it is clear that its focus is on moral crimes in  the
      wide sense used in Iran.  But there is no evidence that their work  is
      focussed particularly on homosexual conduct.  Even assuming  that  the
      extent of surveillance of the private lives of citizens  in  Iran  has
      increased in recent times and that homosexuality is one of  the  moral
      crimes which is subject to this increased surveillance,  the  evidence
      before us falls well short  of  showing  that  this  surveillance  has
      reached such levels that Iranian citizens  who  engage  in  homosexual
      activities in private run a real risk  of  discovery.   It  must  also
      remain the case, as the Tribunal concluded in RM and BB at  para  124,
      that given


           "the legal context in which homosexuals operate in Iran, it  can
           be expected that they would  be  likely  to  conduct  themselves
           discreetly for fear  of  the  obvious  repercussions  that  will
           follow."

The appellant's evidence

26.   The appellant originally claimed that  he  left  Iran  after  escaping
      from police custody following  him  being  arrested  on  suspicion  of
      engaging in  homosexual  activity.   This  claim  was  comprehensively
      disbelieved by the immigration judge and has not  been  pursued.   But
      the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant   practised   homosexuality
      discreetly in Iran.  There is therefore no evidence that the appellant
      when in Iran was known by the authorities to be  homosexual  and  that
      because of that knowledge is at risk on any return.

27.   The appellant's evidence taken from his  various  statements  is  that
      when at school he was trying to have relationships  with  other  boys.
      At the age of fifteen he was beaten by the  headteacher  and  expelled
      for holding hands with another student.  He was  unable  to  get  into
      another school and worked in a market.  From the age  of  nineteen  he
      spent two years  in  the  army.   Throughout  his  army  days  he  had
      relationships with other men.

28.   On return from the army, he worked for a  few  years  at  the  market,
      where he met a gay man whom he was quite fond of.  Later,  he  started
      working as a taxi driver.  He then worked for the  owner  of  a  money
      exchange called "A", with whom he had a gay relationship for some nine
      months  prior  to  leaving  Iran.   These  matters,   save   for   the
      circumstances in which the appellant claims he left Iran, are part  of
      the accepted evidence.

29.   In the appellant's statements signed in 2001 he said:

           "17.  I escaped Iran because I was going to  be  persecuted  for
               being a gay man.  Me being homosexual is like  needing  food
               and water - it is natural for me.  The only place it is  not
               natural is in Iran.  The  penalties  were  not  something  I
               thought about.  It was more important for me  to  pursue  my
               right to a private life and to think and act the way I  wish
               to.  Also in my relationship with "A" it was more  important
               for me to be with him than to think about  what  the  police
               might do to me. "

30.   However, in a witness statement signed on 10 February  2007,  directed
      no doubt to issues raised by the Court of Appeal's judgement  in  July
      2006, the appellant gives somewhat different evidence  as  to  why  he
      conducted his homosexual activities "discreetly" before his  departure
      from Iran.  In summary he said:

           "1    It is impossible for anybody who is homosexual living Iran
               because  it  is  extremely  important  that  you  keep  your
               homosexuality hidden.

             2   I could never admit to people that I wanted to be in a gay
               relationship and that I wanted to have a future with  a  man
               and build my life with another man.

             3   I would also  hear  about  things  that  had  happened  to
               homosexual people in Iran on the news or through newspapers.
                I would hear about how  they  had  been  targeted  and  ill
               treated and knew they could quite easily be me.  This  would
               make me extremely afraid.  I  was  always  scared  of  being
               caught because I knew what  the  consequences  were  to  me.
               However, being a homosexual is who and what I am and  it  is
               something that I cannot change and therefore I had no option
               but to continue practising my homosexuality  even  though  I
               did so in fear.  Having to live a lie every day of  my  life
               and having to live with the fear of what would happen to  me
               if I was caught was an intolerable way for  me  to  live  in
               Iran."

31.   In evidence to us we were told by the appellant that  his  mother  and
      brother knew he was gay and he did not have to pretend to  his  mother
      and brother.  He confirmed his relationship with "A" had  lasted  nine
      months and he told a few friends about this so he was open with  them.
      He spent many nights with "A" and a lot of time with him.   They  went
      out in public, but did not do anything together.  They  went  to  city
      gardens  and  parks.   He  agreed  it  was  possible   to   have   gay
      relationships whilst he hid his sexuality from all but a  few  people.
      He had told people in Iran in response to questions that  he  did  not
      want to get married and he agreed  he  did  not  have  to  answer  any
      questions that were put to him about  why  he  was  not  married  from
      friends and colleagues, but he only told a handful of people  and  his
      family.

32.   The appellant agreed he was not living a lie with  his  family  and  a
      handful of friends who  knew  he  was  gay.   He  agreed  he  was  not
      completely isolated because of "A" and his friends and the man at  the
      market.  He agreed he was able to admit to a handful of people that he
      wanted to live with and have a life with a man.  He got to know people
      with whom he might  have  gay  relationships  through  work  and  they
      exchanged confidences once they got to know each other.  He did not go
      to an internet chatroom or to the park, as he said  the  latter  would
      "take your life away".  He denied he could now go  to  Iran  and  form
      relationships with people he could meet  in  the  ordinary  course  of
      life.  He described that  as  "extremely  hard  now".   He  was  taken
      through the quote from 2001 set out above, and confirmed that  he  did
      not think about the penalty.

33.   It was put to him that he was not  constantly  scared  and  afraid  in
      Iran, but he said that he was.  He said that he did not know that  the
      penalties would be so harsh.  He accepted that he did not  leave  Iran
      until he was thirty one.  When asked why  he  did  not  try  to  leave
      earlier, he said that nothing had happened to him.  He was asked if he
      had been able to tolerate life and he said that it was extremely hard.
       He agreed he had been able to discuss his sexual  identity  with  "A"
      and with two or three friends.  They could host barbeques in a private
      garden.  It was put to him that he could go back to Iran  but  he  did
      not wish to do so.  He replied that he could not live openly in  Iran.
      He said it was not possible to go back as "everybody  knows  about  it
      now", referring to his homosexuality and  apparently  relying  on  the
      story that had been disbelieved i.e. that he had come to the attention
      of the authorities.

34.   The appellant said that kissing on the  cheek  was  possible  in  Iran
      between men, but kissing on the lips is impossible.   He  denied  that
      men could walk arm in arm.

35.   From prior to the AIT  hearing  of  this  case  in  July  2005  up  to
      November 2007, the appellant was in a  relationship  in  the  UK  with
      "HA".  This relationship has we  were told now  ended.   The  Tribunal
      has therefore not had to consider the issues that  might  have  arisen
      were the appellant to be returned and "HA" to remain in this country.

36.   In his statement of 10 October 2007, the appellant described his  life
      as a gay man in the UK with his former partner "HA".  He said he could
      go to pubs, clubs, parks and friends' homes on a  regular  basis.   He
      could relax with his gay friends and:

           "this is our sexual identity and it is extremely liberating  for
           me to be able to discuss my sexual identity  with  other  people
           who have the same sexual identity."

37.   He says he is able to feel part  of  a  group,  as  opposed  to  being
      isolated in Iran.  In Iran he did not have a life, and in  the  UK  he
      has a life that he wants and the only life that is acceptable to him:

           "I feel liberated by even very basic things like  holding  hands
           with "HA" in public and being able to put my arm around  him  in
           public.  As I have stated earlier, I could not go  back  to  the
           life that I had in Iran and this would be intolerable for me."


Court of Appeal Questions

38.   We turn now to the questions raised by the Court of Appeal as set  out
      in paragraphs 5 and 6 above.

39.   We take as our starting point that when  assessing  whether  a  person
      who is a homosexual would face risk of persecution or serious harm  on
      return to his own country we must take  a  factual,  not  a  normative
      approach. That is to say we must focus on the factual issue of how  it
      is likely he will behave given the evidence we have about how and  why
      he has behaved up to now. It is wrong for a decision-maker to apply  a
      normative approach which focuses on how it  is  thought  an  applicant
      should behave. However, we take from the way in  which  the  Court  of
      Appeal has formulated its questions  that  in  examining  how  such  a
      person will behave we have to examine whether that will entail for him
      having to live a life  which  he  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to
      tolerate because to do so would entail suppression of many aspects  of
      his sexual identity.  We are confident that when referring to what  an
      appellant can "reasonably be expected to tolerate" the Court of Appeal
      had in mind an objective, not a subjective test.

40.   To answer the Court of Appeal questions we look first at the  evidence
      relating to the appellant's history and experiences in Iran.  We  find
      from this evidence that from the age of fifteen to the age  of  thirty
      one when he left Iran he identified himself  as  homosexual.   He  had
      relationships at the age of  fifteen  at  school,  for  which  he  was
      penalised.  He had relationships with other men for two years  in  the
      army from the age of nineteen which were not noted by the authorities.
       For the following approximately ten years, the evidence is he  had  a
      friendship with one gay man and a nine  month  relationship  with  "A"
      before  leaving  Iran.   His  mother  and  one  brother  knew  of  his
      homosexuality.  He had friends who also knew.  He  was  able  to  make
      contacts through work.  Some social life was open to him.

41.   In his witness statement of 10  February  2007  and  in  his  evidence
      before us the appellant  has  claimed  that  living  discreetly  as  a
      homosexual in Iran was for him a matter of living in extreme fear  and
      of having to live a lie every day of his life. However, we prefer  the
      evidence he gave in his statement in 2001 immediately on or after  his
      arrival - and when his past in Iran was fresher in his mind - when  he
      said of his homosexuality in Iran:

           "The penalties were not something I thought about.  It was  more
           important for me to pursue my right to a  private  life  and  to
           think and act the way I wanted to.  Also in my relationship with
           "A" it was more important for me to be with him  than  to  think
           about what the police might do to me."

42.   It was clearly possible for the appellant to live in  Iran,  from  the
      age of fifteen to his leaving at the age of thirty one, as a  gay  man
      without  discovery  or  adverse  consequences.  In  our  judgment  the
      appellant was able to conduct his homosexual activities in Iran in the
      way that he wanted to and without any serious  detriment  to  his  own
      private and social life.  The  evidence  does  not  indicate  that  he
      experienced the  constraints  Iranian  society  placed  on  homosexual
      activity as oppressive or as constraints that he could not  reasonably
      be expected to tolerate.

43.   Before turning to consider what would be the appellant's  position  on
      return, we must consider the evidence of his homosexual activities  in
      the UK.  From that evidence it is clear  that  he  has  felt  able  to
      express his homosexuality much more fully in the UK.  Although  it  is
      fair to say that he did not describe  his  activities  in  the  UK  as
      encompassing highly extroverted forms of homosexual activity,  he  has
      found welcome the ability to go to pubs,  clubs,  parks  and  friends'
      homes on a regular basis and be able to hold hands and  put  his  arms
      around gay friends. He has also given evidence that on  the  basis  of
      his experiences in the UK, his life here is the only one he wants  and
      the only one that is acceptable or tolerable to him.

44.   We acknowledge that the way in which he is able to live as a  gay  man
      in the UK is preferable for him and we are satisfied that this informs
      his view that it is  "impossible"  for  him  to  return  to  Iran.  We
      acknowledge too that the appellant is now much more aware of the legal
      prohibitions on homosexuals in Iran and the potential punishments  for
      breach of those prohibitions. On any return, to avoid  coming  to  the
      attention of the authorities because of  his  homosexuality  he  would
      necessarily have  to  act  discreetly  in  relation  to  it.   We  are
      satisfied that as a matter of fact he would behave discreetly.  On the
      evidence he was able to conduct  his  homosexual  activities  in  Iran
      without serious detriment to his private life and without that causing
      him to suppress many aspects of his sexual  identity.  Whilst  he  has
      conducted his homosexual activities in the UK less discreetly, we  are
      not persuaded that his adaptation  back  to  life  in  Iran  would  be
      something he could not reasonably be expected to tolerate. We consider
      that as a matter of fact he would behave in similar fashion as he  did
      before he left Iran and that in doing so he would, as before, be  able
      to seek out homosexual relationships through work or  friends  without
      real risk to his safety or serious detriment to his personal  identity
      and without this involving for him suppression of many aspects of  his
      sexual identity.

45.   The evidence of suppression of aspects  of  the  appellant's  life  in
      Iran in comparison to his life in the UK is limited.  In Iran he could
      not go to gay clubs as he can in the UK.  Public displays of affection
      to a homosexual partner may lead to a risk of being  reported  to  the
      authorities which is not so in the UK.  The appellant's ability to  be
      open about his sexuality as has been  the  case  in  the  UK  was  not
      possible for him throughout his thirteen adult years in Iran and three
      years as a minor.  But he did have friends who knew of his  sexuality,
      he was able to socialise with them and he was able to tell his family.
       If a wish to avoid  persecution  was  ever  a  reason  why  he  acted
      discreetly in Iran it was not, on  the  evidence,  the  sole  or  main
      reason.  It is difficult to see on the evidence that a return to  that
      way of living can properly be characterised as likely to result in  an
      abandonment of the  appellant's  sexual  identity.   To  live  as  the
      appellant did for thirteen years did not expose him  to  danger.   The
      appellant may well live in fear on return to Iran now he is  aware  of
      the penalties which  might  be  arbitrarily  imposed  were  he  to  be
      discovered.   The  question  as  to  whether  such  fear  reaches   so
      substantial  a  level  of  seriousness  as  to  require  international
      protection has to be considered objectively and in the  light  of  the
      evidence as we have found it to be.   Homosexuals  may  wish  to,  but
      cannot, live openly in Iran as is the  case  in  many  countries.  The
      conclusions in RM and BB as to risk remain the same.   This  appellant
      was able to live in Iran during his adult life until he left in a  way
      which meant he was able to express his  sexuality  albeit  in  a  more
      limited way than he can do elsewhere. In particular we have regard  to
      the fact that  the  evidence  as  found  shows  that  the  appellant's
      sexuality was  not  known  to  the  authorities  when  he  left  Iran.
      Objectively we cannot see that the level of seriousness  required  for
      international protection is in this case reached.

46.   Buxton LJ describes the question before this Tribunal as "whether  the
      applicant  can   reasonably   be   expected   to   tolerate   whatever
      circumstances are likely to arise were he  to  return  to  Iran";  and
      further " the applicant  may  have  to  abandon  part  of  his  sexual
      identity...in circumstances where failure to do that  exposes  him  to
      extreme danger". The circumstances to be tolerated are  the  inability
      to live openly as a gay man as the appellant can in the UK.  The  part
      of sexuality to be abandoned is on the evidence also  the  ability  to
      live openly as a gay  man  in  the  same  way  the  appellant  can  do
      elsewhere.   To  live  a  private  life  discreetly  will  not   cause
      significant detriment to his right to respect for  private  life,  nor
      will it involve suppression of many aspects of  his  sexual  identity.
      Enforcement of the law against homosexuality in Iran is arbitrary  but
      the evidence does not show a real risk of  discovery  of,  or  adverse
      action against, homosexuals  in  Iran  who  conduct  their  homosexual
      activities discreetly.  The position has not deteriorated since RM and
      BB. On the evidence we find the appellant can reasonably  be  expected
      to tolerate the position on any return.

Decision

47.   This appeal was remitted to this Tribunal for further  reconsideration
      of the appellant's asylum  claim  which  had  been  dismissed  by  the
      Tribunal on 11 August 2005.  For the  reasons  given  the  appellant's
      appeal remains dismissed.




                                                   Signed:


                                                 Mr Justice Hodge, President
                                                   Date: 18 April 2008
