



Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                         NA (Palestinians - risk) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00046


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Kings Court, North Shields             |
|On 13th November 2007                           |
|Prepared 2nd January 2008                       |



                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                          IMMIGRATION JUDGE GILLANCE

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Lewis of Counsel instructed by Arden Solicitors

For the Respondent:      Miss D. Graham, Home Office Presenting Officer


In the light of recent evidence highlighting that  the  position  of  ethnic
Palestinians in Iraq has  worsened,  JA  (Ethnic  Palestinian-Iraq-Objective
Evidence) Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT 00045  is  no  longer  to  be  considered  as
authoritative on this  issue.  Currently  ethnic  Palestinians  in  Iraq  in
general face a real risk of persecution and treatment contrary to Article  3
ECHR. Whilst each case is to be considered on its merits, it would  only  be
in exceptional cases that an ethnic Palestinian would not be at real risk.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born in Iraq on  15th  August  1972  of  an  Egyptian
    mother  and  a  Palestinian  father.  The  appellant  asserts  and  the
    respondent accepts that she is a "stateless person"  whose  country  of
    former habitual residence is Iraq.  In 2001 she married  a  citizen  of
    Iraq and thereafter lived in Baghdad.  The three children born of  that
    marriage, all citizens of Iraq, are dependants in this appeal.

 2. The decision of this Tribunal is the decision of both of us. I wish  to
    acknowledge at the outset the very significant contribution made to its
    writing by Immigration Judge Gillance.

The Appeal

 3.  The appellant claims to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  19th
    September  2006,  accompanied  by  her  three  dependent  children  and
    assisted by an agent who provided her with false documents  with  which
    she gained illegal entry at the airport.  On 20th  September  2006  she
    applied for asylum. Her application was refused on 13th  November  2006
    and directions were issued for her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    Originally  those  directions  were  for  removal  to   Palestine   but
    subsequent  directions  were  issued  for  her  removal  to  Iraq.  She
    appealed against the refusal decision.

 4. The original appeal was heard before Immigration Judge Bircher  sitting
    at North Shields on 20th December 2006, who  dismissed  her  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds by  a  written
    determination  promulgated  on  9th  January   2007.    The   appellant
    successfully applied for reconsideration. Following a hearing at  Field
    House on 29 June  2007  Immigration  Judge  Lever  concluded  that  the
    immigration judge had materially erred in  law  and  ordered  that  the
    appeal be heard again in full.  The reasons  given  for  that  decision
    were stated as follows.

      "REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW IN THE DETERMINATION


         Introduction

       1. The Appellant born on 15th August 1972 is  a  national  [sic]  of
          Palestine (1948 Palestinian) born in Baghdad.  The Appellant fled
          Iraq and applied  for  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  20th
          September 2006 with her three dependent children.  The Respondent
          had refused  that  application  and  had  initially  set  removal
          directions for Palestine.  The Appellant appealed.

       2. Her appeal was heard by an Immigration  Judge  sitting  at  North
          Shields on 20th December 2006.  At that  hearing  the  Respondent
          withdrew the decision to remove to Palestine and set new  removal
          directions to Iraq.  The Appellant's appeal was dismissed on  all
          grounds.

       3. The Appellant appealed contending that the Immigration Judge  had
          failed to  properly  consider  facts  when  indicating  that  the
          Appellant could relocate to the KRG within Iraq and had failed to
          take account of the fact the Appellant  would  be  returning  and
          relocating as a single woman with three young children.

       4.  This  matter  comes  before  me  by  virtue  of  an  order   for
          reconsideration dated 26th January 2007.




       Submissions

       5. Mr Lewis submitted that the Appellant's first  problem  was  that
          she had no registration documents and the Immigration  Judge  had
          failed to make any proper  findings  upon  that  matter  and  the
          consequence  on  return   that   flowed   from   that   lack   of
          documentation.

       6. It was further submitted that the concept of  relocation  to  the
          KRG, came from the refusal letter.  It  was  submitted  that  the
          Immigration Judge failed to have regard to the objective material
          on that matter and to distinguish the fact the  Appellant  was  a
          single woman.

       7. Mrs Kiss submitted that the Appellant's inability to register was
          prior to her own relocation in Iraq and she had also got her  job
          back and accordingly it could not be said that she had a problem.
           Further it  was  submitted  that  it  was  found  that  she  had
          protection from her brother-in-law in Iraq  and  accordingly  was
          not a lone single woman.

       Decision

       8. It was accepted at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing  before  the
          Immigration Judge that removal directions were set for  Iraq  and
          that was the relevant country to consider in  terms  of  risk  on
          return.

       9. The Immigration Judge noted at paragraph 12 that the  Appellant's
          mother was Egyptian and her father Palestinian and that  she  had
          taken her father's nationality namely Palestinian.   Her  parents
          had lived in Iraq since the 1950s.

      10. At paragraph  26  the  Immigration  Judge  found  (on  undisputed
          evidence) that the Appellant was a  highly  qualified  university
          lecturer with a doctorate in physics.

      11. Central to the Appellant's claim was that her husband  (whom  she
          married in 2001) was a high ranking member of  the  Ba'ath  Party
          and that the Appellant herself had joined that party in 1989  and
          risen to the rank of active Udo by 1999.  She  had  claimed  that
          since the fall of the Saddam regime there  had  been  a  backlash
          against privileged Palestinians and  Ba'ath  Party  members  such
          that her husband had been abducted  in  July  2006  and  she  had
          received death threats and attempted attacks.  It was that set of
          circumstances that had caused her to flee Iraq.

      12. The Immigration Judge had naturally focused on that  account  and
          for reasons provided at paragraphs 26 to  38  did  not  find  the
          Appellant's account to be credible.  On  the  evidence  presented
          and for the reasons  provided  by  the  Immigration  Judge  those
          findings were open to her.

      13. Based upon those findings of adverse credibility the  Immigration
          Judge found that the Appellant could return  to  Iraq.   In  this
          regard her findings are set out at paragraph 34 and 35.

      14. At paragraph 34 the Immigration Judge said:

             "I find that the Appellant can return to Iraq without fear  of
             persecution and undue hardship given that there are places  in
             Iraq where the Appellant can relocate to such as  the  Kurdish
             Regional Government who have indicated that they  are  seeking
             entry  of  suitably  qualified  professionals  such   as   the
             Appellant.  At the Syrian border Palestinian residents receive
             assistance from the UNHCR and the Syrian authorities."

          At paragraph 35 the Immigration Judge referred to the case  of  JA
         CG [2005] and quoted from it thus:

             "There is no subsequent adverse material which  would  show  a
             worsening of the situation of ethnic Palestinians in Iraq.  In
             so  far  as  there  are  allegations   of   violence   against
             Palestinian refugees following the fall of the Saddam  Hussein
             regime it appears from the  evidence  before  the  Adjudicator
             that these arose primarily in circumstances of  eviction  from
             rented property".  (The Immigration Judge noted that that  was
             not a category into which the Appellant fell.)

      15. When looking at the risk on return to Iraq paragraph  34  of  the
          Immigration Judge's determination is significant.   It  is  there
          that the  finding  is  made  that  the  Appellant  could  return.
          However the return as the Immigration Judge specifies was to  two
          such areas of Iraq mainly the KRG and the Syrian border.  That it
          seems is as a result of her analysis of the background  material,
          parts of which she quoted at  paragraphs  21  to  24.   In  those
          sections quoted she notes at paragraph 24 that  the  COI  section
          latest news states that Arab families fleeing violence in Baghdad
          have made their way to the KRG who  have  welcomed  professionals
          such as the Appellant.  She further noted at paragraph 23 that on
          28th April 2006 Syrian authorities confirmed they would receive a
          group of Palestinian refugees following UNHCR requests.

      16. In dealing with relocation to the KRG the case  of  LM  (Educated
          women) Iraq CG [2006] UKAIT 00060 (July 2006) is of  significance
          both  as  a  country  guidance  case  determined  prior  to   the
          Immigration  Judge's  determination  and  its  dealings  with   a
          professional woman (albeit a Christian).   At  paragraph  69  the
          Tribunal said this about relocation to the KRG:

             "Persons with links to the KRG may be able to  mitigate  their
             position by internal relocation  but  entry  to  the  northern
             governance is restricted.  The governance  are  now  accepting
             only those who have a proven link to their territories or  for
             whom (and  specific  evidence  is  required)  someone  in  the
             territory is prepared to support them.  In general  those  who
             are admitted to the KRG will be of Kurdish origin and will  be
             Kurdish speakers particularly as the evidence shows  that  the
             Northern Governance have tightened  entry  controls  to  those
             areas."

         Although decided after the Immigration Judge's  determination,  the
         case of NS CG [2007] UKAIT 00046 reinforced that point made in  the
         earlier case by stating:

             "Relocation to the KRG for  any  Iraqis  is  in  general  only
             feasible if the person concerned would be allowed to enter and
             legally reside in  the  area  of  relocation  and  has  family
             community  and/or  political  links  there  enabling  them  to
             survive."

      17. The Appellant's profile, leaving aside issues of credibility, did
          not indicate that she fell within those  likely  to  be  able  to
          relocate to the KRG as indicated in the  country  guidance  case.
          Further again leaving aside issues of credibility the Immigration
          Judge  does  not  appear  to  have  specifically  looked  at  the
          Appellant relocating to the KRG in terms  of  her  being  a  lone
          female with three young children.

      18. When looking at relocation to the Syrian border, whilst accepting
          the Immigration Judge quoted objective material as to the  Syrian
          position in April 2006 she  failed  to  mention  paragraph  32.20
          indicating that the Human Rights  Watch  Report  dated  September
          2006 stated "Following a request from the Palestinian authorities
          foreign ministry Syria allowed those Palestinians into Syria  but
          again closed its  borders  to  Palestinian  refugees  immediately
          afterwards."  That appears to update the position as  it  was  in
          April 2006 indicating the Syrian border had been closed.

      19. I find therefore that the Immigration Judge  when  assessing  the
          objective material for internal relocation to the border did  not
          fully take into account the objective material  as  it  stood  in
          September 2006 rather than the earlier position  in  April  2006.
          Further such relocation in any event is not essentially "internal
          relocation" but location to another country i.e. Syria.

      20. Accordingly I find that the Immigration Judge  in  concluding  as
          she did in paragraph 34 failed to take account  of  the  relevant
          country  guidance  case  and  available  objective  material  and
          therefore reached a conclusion  on  a  flawed  basis.   For  that
          reason I find a material error of law was made.

      21. In so  far  as  registration  is  concerned  I  do  not  see  the
          Immigration Judge reached any  conclusions  on  that  matter.   I
          accept that in terms of the Appellant  living  in  Iraq  and  her
          credibility her registration or lack of it was perhaps  secondary
          to the credibility findings of what she actually could  or  could
          not do.  However, being as she now is  outside  of  Iraq  and  in
          contemplation of removal from the UK back to Iraq  it  is  in  my
          view incumbent for a conclusion to have been reached  as  to  her
          registration status and any significance that  flowed  from  that
          factor.  The Immigration Judge noted the Appellant's assertion in
          paragraph 11 to 19 being in summary as follows:

               a) The Appellant possesses a Palestinian travel document.

               b) Post 2003 the Appellant's application to re-register  her
                  residence permit was refused and she became illegal.

               c) Later she tried to renew her residency and that  too  was
                  refused.

      22. The Immigration Judge's findings on fact and credibility  do  not
          touch directly on whether she found the above account credible or
          not specifically in terms of what the Appellant  has  said  about
          registration.  As stated above on return to Iraq  as  opposed  to
          being within the country it is in my view necessary to make  such
          findings in order to properly  assess  the  risk  on  return  and
          relocation.  To that extent a failure to  do  so  amounts  to  an
          error of law.

      23. For the above reasons I find that a material  error  of  law  was
          made in the determination and the matter should be remitted to be
          heard afresh.  For the avoidance of doubt whilst the findings  of
          lack of credibility were open to the Immigration Judge  it  would
          be difficult for the Tribunal at the second stage  to  reconsider
          matters properly without themselves being  the  determinators  of
          fact and credibility and in my view therefore the  matter  should
          be heard afresh as a de novo hearing.

         Directions

         Case to be heard at North Shields with a time estimate of  2  hours
         with an Arabic interpreter."

Our reconsideration

 5. This appeal came before us as a second-stage  reconsideration  hearing.
    The parties confirmed that in this hearing,  apart  from  the  accepted
    fact that the appellant is a stateless ethnic Palestinian  person  from
    Iraq, all matters were at large.  The appellant gave oral evidence.  In
    addition we had before us several bundles of documentary  evidence  all
    of which we have read and considered.  During the hearing  we  referred
    the parties to a UNHCR Report dated August 2007  and  asked  that  they
    locate it and file written submissions  upon  it.  We  also  asked  the
    Respondent to clarify what arrangements existed for Palestinians in the
    UK to obtain travel  documents.  The  Respondent  was  given  leave  to
    explain more fully  the  contents  of  a  COI  Service  Reply  and  the
    appellant's representatives were given leave to submit a further report
    from the UNHCR on Palestinians in Iraq, which we  were  told  had  been
    written but had yet to be formally cleared  by   UNHCR.   Whilst  by  a
    letter dated 10 December 2007 we received from Miss Graham  a  copy  of
    the UNHCR August 2007 report, together with some  further  submissions,
    we received nothing  from  the  appellant's  representatives  except  a
    letter to say that  the  specific  report  from  UNHCR  was  still  not
    available. Since we made clear that our decision would only be  delayed
    to await further evidence and submissions  in  compliance  with  strict
    time limits, we decided, on their expiry, to proceed to  determine  the
    appeal without waiting for this report.

 6. In relation to questions we had raised with the  respondent  concerning
    the  position  with  regard  to   arrangements   made   for   stateless
    Palestinians from Iraq to obtain travel documents whilst in the UK,  we
    have decided, on reflection, that  this  is  not  a  relevant  area  of
    inquiry for the issues we have to decide, since it concerns  contingent
    matters: see AG (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ  1342.  We  are  required  to
    consider the position of the appellant on the basis of  a  hypothetical
    approach focussing on her  situation  as  a  stateless  Palestinian  if
    returned.

The Appellant's Evidence

 7. The Appellant's account of her history which she  says  caused  her  to
    flee Iraq and come to the United  Kingdom  is  set  out  in  her  three
    statements dated 4th October 2006, 7th December 2006 and 24th September
    2007.  In her evidence to us she described how  her  parents  moved  to
    Iraq in the 1950s where she  was  born  and  grew  up  with  her  three
    brothers.  She married in April 2001 and has one son and two daughters.
     Her father had been a university lecturer in law at the University  of
    Baghdad and also gave lectures to  members  of  the  national  security
    forces and was highly respected by Saddam Hussein.  Her father died  in
    1989 and her mother returned to Egypt shortly before the Allied  Forces
    entered Iraq and removed Saddam Hussein.   At  the  time  she  met  her
    husband he was a high ranking  member  of  the  Ba'ath  Party  and  was
    promoted to High Ranking Division Member  in  charge  of  Ba'ath  Party
    headquarters in Al Sheikh Marof in 2001.  She described  her  husband's
    many and varied duties  with  the  Party  from  lecturing  low  ranking
    members on Party aims and  objectives,  arranging  for  attendances  to
    celebrate Ba'ath Party festivals, being responsible for recruitment  of
    Party members within his headquarters and  helping  to  mobilise  Iraqi
    people and recruit them  in  the  Popular  Army  at  the  time  of  the
    Iran/Iraq war.  He had a Masters degree in history and in  addition  to
    his Party activities worked as a teacher in a secondary school.

 8. The Appellant herself joined the Ba'ath Party in 1989 as a sympathiser,
    was later promoted to 'Supporter' and in 1992 to 'Advanced  Supporter'.
    In 1998 she took an intensive course on  Ba'ath  Party  principles  and
    objectives lasting three months and was then promoted to  the  rank  of
    'Udo' within the Party and a year later was promoted  to  the  rank  of
    Active 'Udo'.  She described how during the reign of  Saddam  Hussein's
    regime her family  had  comfortable  lives  with  many  privileges  and
    important  concessions  such  as  free  accommodation  and  access   to
    facilities.    Following the removal of Saddam Hussein's regime on  9th
    April 2003 the whole situation for Palestinians  in  Iraq  changed.  In
    particular those who were members of  the  Ba'ath  Party,  and  various
    militia  in  Iraq,  launched  a  campaign  against  sections   of   the
    Palestinian community.  She said  that  Palestinians  in  general  were
    treated badly and abused by the  authorities.   The  Interior  Ministry
    refused to renew their residence permits and they were unable to travel
    outside Iraq. With lack of residence permits their presence within Iraq
    became illegal.  Some managed to escape and fled to  Syria  and  Jordan
    but the governments of those countries refused to accept them and  they
    were left in refugee camps in the deserts.

 9. She said that her family were amongst those persecuted and subjected to
    ill-treatment by militia and  mainstream  parties  within  the  current
    government such as the Al Dawa and  the  Supreme  Council  for  Islamic
    Revolution in Iraq.  As a result of all this she and her  husband  were
    forced to flee with their children to the nearby Al Ademia District  of
    Baghdad where they stayed with her brother-in-law.  After  a  few  days
    her husband had to flee again from the  city  of  Baghdad  to  Al  Hila
    Province where he went into hiding on a farm owned by a friend, because
    of the intensification of persecution and ill-treatment against  former
    Ba'ath Party members following  the  de-Ba'athification  law  that  was
    passed on 5th May 2003.  According to that law,  the  Appellant  claims
    that her husband was a target to be killed.  In May 2004 the  Appellant
    and her children returned to their home in Mahld  District  of  Baghdad
    because she was officially excluded from the de-Ba'athification law and
    felt it was safe to return to  her  home  and  her  job.   Her  husband
    remained in hiding on the farm and made occasional visits to the family
    under cover of disguise.

10. Upon return to her home and her job the Appellant  said  that  she  was
    constantly abused verbally and  referred  to  as  an  agent  of  Saddam
    Hussein  as  well  as  suffering  discrimination  and  harassment  from
    government authorities when she tried to obtain her residence permit or
    her travel documents.

11. In February 2006 threats against Palestinians  significantly  increased
    following the attack upon two sacred  Shi'ite  shrines  in  Samarra  by
    suspected terrorists from the Sunni population.  This,  she  says,  was
    the turning  point  in  the  sectarian  strife,  and  the  campaign  of
    intimidation and terror increased and intensified to what she described
    as 'civil war'.   Palestinians  were  cursed  and  described  as  Sunni
    infidels and agents of the Ba'ath regime and she began to receive death
    threats in the form of notes at her university, from religious  parties
    describing themselves as the Al Dawa Party and the Supreme Council  for
    Islamic Revolution in Iraq.  She was ordered to abandon  her  post  and
    leave Iraq or face being killed.   Threats  were  made  to  kidnap  her
    children.  Similar threats were made to a colleague at the  university,
    that he must leave his post and when he refused he disappeared and  his
    body was  later  found  in  the  street.   The  appellant  produced  at
    interview a number of documents  relating  to  her  employment  at  the
    university and the threats she said  she  received  in  writing.  Those
    threats impelled her to abandon her post at the university  and  remain
    at home.

12. On 1st July 2006 following a secret visit to her home,  she  said  that
    her husband was kidnapped as he left the house. She believed  this  was
    the work of militia.  She did not witness the kidnap  but  states  that
    neighbours told her what had happened and described having seen  masked
    men in black uniforms taking her husband.  She had not  seen  or  heard
    from him since.  In the days  which  followed  she  toured  the  city's
    morgues, a common practice at  the  time  for  families  who  had  lost
    relatives, but was unable to identify  his  body.   She  received  more
    threatening   letters.    She   also   received   a   document   headed
    'Announcement' purporting to be from the Al Dawa Islamic  Party  (which
    she produced to the Home Office).  As a result of the intimidation  and
    terror she went to the Palestinian Embassy in July  2006  and  reported
    the receipt of these  letters  and  threats.  The  Palestinian  Embassy
    issued her with a letter dated 15th July 2006 in  confirmation  of  her
    having reported these matters (this  she  also  provided  to  the  Home
    Office).  The following day she  attended  the  Interior  Ministry  and
    showed  them  the  letter  from  the  Palestinian  Embassy   but   they
    nevertheless refused to renew her residency permit.

13. On 6th September 2006 she stated  that  she  was  at  home  during  the
    evening when she heard people approaching the house through  her  front
    gate. The house was attacked, she summoned  help  from  her  neighbours
    who, using firearms, fired in the  air  and  the  attackers,  whom  she
    believed to be militia, fled.  The following morning the appellant took
    her children and fled to the  house  of  a  friend  in  the  Al  Ademia
    District where she remained for  two  days  after  which  her  friend's
    husband took them to the northern city of Mosul.   She  remained  there
    until 14th September 2006 during which time an agent was found to  help
    her leave the country.  On 15th September 2006 they were taken  by  car
    north into Turkey and from there, omitting the detail,  to  the  United
    Kingdom. In her asylum interview when she was asked  why  she  had  not
    fled to Syria and Jordan (Q52). Her reply was:

        "They flee and stay on the  border.   I  cannot  do  that  with  my
        children.  They just stay in the street."

Background Evidence

14. As it is not disputed that the appellant  is  a  stateless  Palestinian
    whose country of former habitual residence is  Iraq,  it  is  important
    that  we  set  out  some  relevant  background  materials  relating  to
    Palestinians in Iraq.

15.  The Human Rights Watch Report September 2006  entitled  'The  Perilous
    Situation of Palestinians in Iraq' (Volume  18)  recounts  the  drastic
    deterioration in security for Palestinians in Iraq following  the  fall
    of the Saddam  Hussein  Government.   Militant  groups,  mostly  Shi'a,
    targeted the predominately Sunni minority  community  of  Palestinians,
    attacking  their  buildings,  committing  several  dozen  murders   and
    threatening harm unless they immediately left Iraq.  It  is  stated  in
    addition  that  Palestinians  were  subjected  to  new  and   extremely
    burdensome registration requirements:

        "...providing a venue for bureaucratic hostility.  And unlike Iraqi
        citizens at risk, who are  largely  able  to  find  refuge  abroad,
        Palestinians have nowhere to flee: countries in  the  region  (with
        rare, temporary exceptions) have kept their borders  firmly  closed
        to fleeing Iraqi Palestinians.  And the international community has
        done little to help ease their plight".

    In a document contained in the Home Office  appeal  bundle  dated  19th
    October 2006 and headed 'Hardship goes on  for  Palestinians  on  Iraq-
    Syria border' it is reported  that  350  Iraqi  Palestinians  had  been
    stranded on the Syrian border (on  the  Syrian  side)  for  almost  six
    months and no solution to their suffering seemed to be at hand  as  the
    Syrian authorities were reluctant to admit them, fearing an exodus from
    war-torn Iraq.  Palestinians, fleeing sectarian violence  in  Iraq  and
    threats to  their  lives  by  militants,  were  camping  at  the  Tanaf
    checkpoint on the Syrian border in 85 tents erected for them by  United
    Nations refugee agencies.  They included 137 children and 90 women  and
    the situation was getting  worse  as  winter  approached.   The  report
    further states that scores of Iraqis had attacked Palestinian homes  in
    Baghdad seeing them as Saddam supporters.  Many  Palestinians  in  Iraq
    had been threatened by militants and told to leave the  country.   Many
    had fled Iraq or gone into hiding.  Some of them had  been  interviewed
    for the purpose of this report and  had  said  that  Palestinians  were
    considered to be terrorists by some sections of the Iraqi people.  They
    complained  that  living  in  the  camp  on  the  border  was  a  "real
    catastrophe", there was no education for the  children  and  the  tents
    could not protect them from the winter cold.  Others had camped on  the
    Iraq-Jordan border where they had been stranded for two months though a
    few had been allowed to enter as a "humanitarian" gesture.

16. There is further background evidence before us in a report in the  form
    of an  Aide-  Memoire  presented  by  UNHCR  in  December  2006  headed
    'Protecting Palestinians in Iraq and seeking Humanitarian Solutions for
    Those Who Fled the Country'.    Immediately we  see  reference  to  the
    concerns expressed by the Palestinian community  in  Baghdad  over  the
    renewal of their  residence  permits  and  the  confiscation  of  their
    documents (para 3).  There is further reference to Palestinians in Iraq
    being regarded as refugees and  to  the  UNHCR  assisting  hundreds  of
    Palestinian families who have been evicted from their homes in  Baghdad
    and receiving many reports  suggesting  that  Palestinians  had  become
    subject to discriminatory and violent acts, forcing  some  of  them  to
    leave the country in search of safety abroad.  Page  2  of  the  report
    refers to deteriorating  conditions,  including  widespread  abduction,
    kidnapping and extra-judicial  killings  and  at  page  3  there  is  a
    'Section (IV)' on the compelling situation of Palestinian refugees  who
    fled Iraq.  It is stated that almost all  Palestinians  in  Iraq  would
    like to leave the country.  Many had  turned  to  people  smugglers  to
    achieve this option.   However,  they  were  said  to  be  experiencing
    difficulties in relocating since  countries  are  unwilling  to  accept
    their travel documents.

17. The Aide-memoire states that as  at  December  2006  there  were  three
    groups of Palestinian refugees who were in a precarious  situation  and
    in need of a humanitarian solution.  First, the Palestinians  who  fled
    Iraq and who were stranded in the  desert  no-man's  land  border  area
    between Iraq and Jordan.  Some were later allowed to enter  Jordan  and
    were accommodated in a refugee camp.  A limited number of  others  were
    allowed to enter based on marriages with Jordanians and  another  group
    were returned to Baghdad.  148 still remained in a camp in  very  harsh
    weather conditions, with no prospects for the future.  Second, a  group
    of about 300 Palestinians who fled Iraq were accommodated in a  refugee
    camp in north eastern Syria.  They had been allowed  entry  into  Syria
    and accommodated in a camp where they  received  basic  assistance  and
    their freedom of movement was limited.  They depended  on  humanitarian
    aid and it was not clear what status they would be  granted  in  Syria.
    Third, about 320 Palestinian people were stranded in  the  Tanf  border
    area between Iraq and Syria.  They included children and pregnant women
    who had arrived at the Syrian border  in  small  groups  following  the
    admission of the above group into the El Hol Camp.  They too complained
    of acts of harassment and abuse in Iraq.  The Tanf site was  unsuitable
    for the provision of adequate humanitarian assistance and lacked  basic
    infrastructure making living conditions of the group miserable  despite
    efforts made by UNHCR to provide  basic  services.   Admission  of  the
    group into Syria had been denied by the Syrian authorities.   With  the
    onset of winter the living conditions of the  group  were  expected  to
    further deteriorate and a more prolonged stay in the area was  said  to
    be extremely difficult to sustain rendering the need for a solution  to
    the plight of these persons urgent.

18. The UNHCR  Aide  -  Memoire  also  states,  as  regards  the  issue  of
    availability for  Palestinians  of  a  relocation  alternative  in  the
    northern Governorates of Iraq, that such alternative is not feasible on
    an individual basis due to the  lack  of  family  links  and  community
    support, which  would  lead  to  inability  to  access  basic  services
    essential for livelihood.  This option would only  become  feasible  if
    fully endorsed  by  the  local  authorities  in  those  three  northern
    Governorates  (KRG)  and  their  firm  commitment  to  grant  effective
    protection to Palestinians and to ensure their access to  basic  social
    services and work permits.

19. The conclusion of the UNHCR in this Aide-Memoire is stated as  follows.
    Palestinians inside Iraq as well  as  those  who  have  fled  into  the
    neighbouring States were facing a dire  protection  situation,  lacking
    basic protection as refugees. The  situation  of  Palestinian  refugees
    inside Iraq had become untenable, while those who had fled into  Jordan
    and  Syria  were  living  in  conditions  which  were   degrading   and
    precarious.  Inside Iraq, Palestinians  suffered  the  same  insecurity
    affecting the  entire  Iraqi  population,  and  are  also  specifically
    targeted for serious discriminatory treatment  and  acts  of  violence.
    Being a large foreign minority and a high  profile  group,  and  having
    benefited from a large number of privileges under  the  former  regime,
    Palestinian refugees  were  particularly  vulnerable  to  human  rights
    violations, which could well reach the threshold of persecution.  There
    was no adequate protection from tribal or other social affiliations, or
    from the state authorities.

20. A document headed 'Iraq updates' dated 23rd January 2007 at page  9  to
    10 of the same bundle contains a Reuters Report from Arbil in  the  KRG
    dated 23rd January 2007.  First  there  is  reference  to  a  Christian
    shopkeeper who  fled  Baghdad  after  being  beaten  in  his  shop  and
    permanently injured.  He had reached Arbil in the  relatively  peaceful
    Iraqi Kurdistan and was now begging for work.  The report  goes  on  to
    describe how tens  of  thousands  of  people  have  fled  Baghdad,  the
    "epicentre of violence of Iraq".  The United Nations  had  launched  an
    appeal for aid for Iraqis who had fled their homes  saying  that  about
    one in eight Iraqis was now displaced, the largest exodus and long-term
    movement of people in the Middle East since the creation of  Israel  in
    1948.  Many, including non-Kurds, had taken refuge  in  Kurdistan  -  a
    largely autonomous region in the north  that  has  been  a  haven  from
    attacks plaguing other areas since the US invasion  of  2003.   It  was
    reported that over the past two weeks more than 9,000 people  travelled
    to  Arbil  escaping  from  Baghdad  as  refugees,  mainly  Sunnis   and
    Christians.  This comment is attributed to the  head  of  the  disaster
    relief programme in Arbil, part of the Iraqi Red Crescent.  It is  also
    reported that the UN says that nearly  500,000  people  fled  to  other
    areas within Iraq in 2006, mostly since the  February  bombing  of  the
    Shi'ite shrine in Samarra prompting a surge in  violence.   The  report
    goes on to deal with what is described as the  "brain  drain".   It  is
    stated  that  hundreds  more  families  -  particularly   of   doctors,
    professors and businessmen - had found jobs in Arbil and  had  declined
    handouts as a result.

21. In this report there is no mention of any significant difficulty facing
    those fleeing to the north and no reference to any  rejection  or  ill-
    treatment of any of them, although it was  stated  that  many  refugees
    arriving in the north lacked proper  resources  and  help  despite  the
    authorities providing some logistical help, such as transferring ration
    cards so families could get subsidised food.  They  had  urged  the  UN
    bodies in the north to help build a camp for those who could not afford
    to pay to rent a house.   Concerned  by  the  flood  of  refugees,  the
    Kurdish authorities had imposed new restrictions on who could settle in
    the area, for instance requiring a Kurdish Sponsor for each family.

22. There is further assistance in  the  Respondent's  documentary  bundle,
    contained within the Operational Guidance Note: Iraq (OGN)  (page  87).
    There  it  is  reported  that  the  security  situation  in  the   KRG-
    administered northern areas remains largely unaffected by the  fall  of
    the Saddam regime and relatively stable in comparison to the centre and
    the other  Governorates  of  Kirkuk  and  Mosul.   In  the  KRG,  where
    insurgent attacks are markedly lower, it is said that it can be  argued
    that protection is  at  a  reasonably  effective  level  and  there  is
    sufficiency of protection.  It is also stated  that  ease  of  movement
    within  Iraq  varies  from  place  to  place  depending   on   security
    restrictions, and is the same for all Iraqis.  However, the  same  Note
    states that as a result of the recent rise in Islamic extremism  single
    women may be unable to move around freely if unaccompanied and may  not
    be able to settle in areas where they have no family ties as  they  are
    unlikely to be able to access resources without support.

23. In the  COIS April 2007 report at page 192 it is stated that there were
    an estimated 34,000 Palestinian refugees  living  in  Iraq,  mainly  in
    Baghdad, and often with  a  good  level  of  education.   The  loss  of
    privileges they previously enjoyed had seriously affected their ability
    to  provide  for  themselves  since  the  removal  of  Saddam  Hussein.
    (32.08).There is a reference to the UNAMI Report of June  2006  stating
    that the situation of Palestinians in Iraq continued to be  of  serious
    concern.  They had not received the same protection because segments of
    the Iraqi population felt that they received favourable treatment  from
    the former regime and they had faced  serious  repercussions  including
    threats and harassment (32.09).  The post-Saddam Iraqi authorities  had
    done little to protect Iraqi Palestinians and some elements within  the
    government had actively contributed to their insecurity.  The  Minister
    of Displacement and Migration had  reportedly  said  that  Palestinians
    were not welcome in Iraq and should leave.  Where previously  they  had
    little trouble obtaining and maintaining residency status, the Ministry
    of Interior had ordered them to obtain  short-term  residency  permits,
    treating  them  as  non-resident  foreigners  instead   of   recognised
    refugees.  The residency requirements are onerous and it can take  days
    or weeks to renew their permits which are only valid  for  one  to  two
    months (32.10).  It was widely reported that they were  also  perceived
    as supporters of the previous regime or the insurgency and subjected to
    a variety of human rights violations.  There were some cases  of  Iraqi
    troops reportedly detaining Palestinians and  torturing  and  extorting
    money from them.

24. We also had more recent evidence from the UNHCR  in  the  form  of  its
    August 2007 report referred to  earlier.   At  'Annex  IX:  Attacks  on
    Palestinian Refugees in Iraq'  there  is  an  overview  of  reports  of
    attacks gathered by the UNHCR from 23 September  2006  to  28  February
    2007. Said to be non-exhaustive, it sets out  details  of  the  attacks
    with information on abduction, persons injured and persons killed  (all
    Palestinians).  Also included are details showing that  a  further  678
    Palestinians  fled  to  the  border  camps  described  above,   usually
    following traumatic events such as mortar attacks on their homes, death
    threats from militia, release after abduction and detention  or  murder
    of family or friends.  The same report  includes  details  of  some  47
    Palestinians murdered and 77 grievously injured after severe beating or
    torture.

25. The August 2007 report also deals with the plight of  refugees  in  the
    context of internal relocation to the three Northern Governorates (KRG)
    at page 171-173.  Whilst Palestinians  are  not  named  as  a  specific
    group, those who may not be able to find protection upon relocation  in
    the KRG (even if they could overcome  various  difficulties  in  safely
    reaching there) include the following categories: those with no family,
    community, political or business links to the KRG;  former  Ba'athists,
    unless their background had been cleared; single women and female heads
    of household, if not accompanied by  male  relatives  and/or  receiving
    financial assistance from relatives.

26. In the same August 2007 UNHCR report there is  reference  to  those  of
    Sunni Arab  origin,  in  particular  Palestinians,  having  come  under
    increased pressure due to their perceived affiliation with  the  former
    regime and the ongoing Sunni-led insurgency. There have been consistent
    allegations of Arab refugees becoming targets for false accusations  in
    the media, arbitrary detention, extra-judicial executions  and  torture
    by militias, and evictions. Shi'ite  dominated  Iraqi  Security  Forces
    (ISF) and militias have been identified as the main perpetrators of the
    attacks.  Currently it  is  said  the  Iraqi  authorities  are  neither
    willing nor able to provide effective protection. Also  many  of  these
    people do not hold  valid  documentation,  limiting  their  freedom  of
    movement, access to services and putting them at risk of detention. The
    report states that while "effective protection" should be linked to the
    seeking of viable durable solutions, the current security and political
    climate as well as economic conditions in Iraq do  not  allow  for  the
    refugees' local integration.  Palestinian refugees make up the  largest
    refugee group in Iraq. They have been targeted since the  fall  of  the
    former regime. Security incidents  against  Palestinian  refugees  have
    steadily risen since the  22  February  2006  Samarra  bombing  and  in
    December 2006 there  was  a  sharp  increase  of  reports  of  threats,
    abductions and killings. Between November 2006 and January 2007,  UNHCR
    received reports of 37 Palestinians killed  in  targeted  attacks.  The
    rise in attacks has led to increasing numbers of  Palestinians  fleeing
    to the Iraqi-Syrian border. The vast majority of those who have managed
    to flee the country have done so illegally through  the  use  of  false
    documents and through the assistance of smugglers.

27. The conclusion reached by Amnesty  International  in  an  October  2007
    report is that Palestinian refugees in  Iraq  have  been  subjected  to
    gross  human  rights  abuses,  including  abduction,  hostage   taking,
    unlawful killing, torture and  ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of  armed
    militia groups  said  to  be  linked  to  some  political  parties  and
    religious groups.  They have been targeted as a minority group  because
    of the reported preferential treatment that  they  received  under  the
    previous government of Saddam Hussein and because of its discrimination
    and human rights abuses against the Shi'a.  As mainly Sunni  Arabs  the
    Palestinians have also been suspected  of  supporting  or  sympathising
    with Sunni Iraqis involved in the insurgency against the  predominately
    Shi'a Government and the Multi National Forces  in  Iraq  (MNF-I).   At
    least 2,100 Palestinian refugees are stranded in makeshift camps on the
    border with Syria in what are described as "horrendous conditions" with
    no apparent solution for their plight.  About 15,000 more  Palestinians
    are still in Iraq and are vulnerable to attacks  by  armed  groups  and
    serious human rights violations by Iraqi security forces.  They are  in
    desperate need of protection according to Amnesty International.   Both
    the Iraqi Government and the MNF, according to  Amnesty  International,
    have been unable or unwilling to provide effective  protection  to  the
    Palestinian community.  UNHCR was noted as having called on  the  Iraqi
    authorities and the MNF-I on numerous occasions  to  provide  increased
    security and legal protection for Palestinian refugees in Iraq.

28. Another important source is the COI Service  response  document   dated
    1/11/07  which  deals  with  the  situation   concerning   Palestinians
    remaining in Iraq who must renew  their  residence  permits  every  two
    months at the Ministry of  the  Interior,  where  they  are  reportedly
    intimidated and humiliated by staff.  The COI Service states that  they
    were not aware of any provision for the renewal of residence  documents
    outside the country.  It  is  stated  that  the  general  situation  in
    respect of Palestinians whether documented or not appears to  be  dire,
    the latest evidence highlighting the fact that Palestinians within Iraq
    are increasingly targeted by the authorities.

29. The COI  Service  had  been  asked  by  the  Respondent  to  advise  on
    information discovered on the internet from the Institute for  War  and
    Peace Reporting (IWPR) dated 20th  January  2007  concerning  some  200
    lecturers who had left Baghdad for  the  Kurdish  north  and  the  area
    controlled by the KRG.  The reply from the COI  Service  dated  13/2/07
    reported that the IWPR was seen as a reliable source and had been  used
    in many COI Reports. It also pointed out that a Reuters  Report,  dated
    23rd January 2007, had noted that tens of thousands of people had  fled
    Baghdad, including many non-Kurds who had taken refuge in the KRG area.
      Hundreds  more  families,  particularly   doctors,   professors   and
    businessmen, had not  registered  as  refugees  and  declined  handouts
    because they had found jobs in the northern city of Arbil.

30. A report from the IWPR is attached to the reply from  the  COI  Service
    (pages 5 to 7).  That report suggests that higher education in  Baghdad
    and other troubled cities had been  dealt  a  blow  as  lecturers  fled
    sectarian violence for the Kurdish north.   There  are  edited  reports
    from some of the academics involved in that migration north, describing
    their past work in  Baghdad,  the  receipt  of  threats  from  radicals
    controlling their neighbourhood, the  death  of  colleagues  killed  by
    extremists and their eventual flight to the north.  One such teacher of
    engineering had moved to the capital  city  of  Sulaimaniyah  in  Iraqi
    Kurdistan, where he was now teaching at the city's university.   It  is
    reported that some 200 lecturers and assistant lecturers had  left  the
    capital for the relatively stable Kurdish north.  It is  also  reported
    that insurgents in Central and Southern Iraq seem to have declared  war
    on  the  country's  educational  elite  and  280  lecturers  and  other
    academics had been killed since Saddam was ousted in  April  2003.   In
    October 2006 militants had declared that lecturers and  students  would
    be targeted unless they stayed away from their colleges.   In  November
    the Dean of the College of Economics had been assassinated.   A  number
    of Higher Education Ministry employees were abducted in broad  daylight
    by gunmen masquerading as Ministry of Interior Forces.   One  of  those
    who had moved to the north, Abdul Yahab is quoted as  having  rented  a
    house for his family in Sulaimaniya and having settled  down  well  and
    feeling comfortable working there with colleagues who trust him  fully.
    Relations  between  Arab  and  Kurdish  lecturers  were  described   as
    "wonderful".  New universities had opened after the northern  provinces
    of  Sulaimaniya,  Arbil  and  Dohuk  acquired  semi-autonomous   status
    following the Kurdish  uprising  of  March  1991.   These  new  Kurdish
    universities mainly depended on local  and  "expat"  Kurdish  academics
    because they had no connection with the universities  in  the  rest  of
    Iraq.  The relocation of Arab lecturers after  2003  had  reinvigorated
    academic life there, prompting the  Kurdish  education  authorities  to
    expand several  colleges  to  meet  growing  local  demand  for  higher
    education.  The Dean of the College of Economy  and  Administration  in
    Sulaimaniya said that at that college alone there were eleven lecturers
    and assistant lecturers from central and southern Iraq.   They  were  a
    great help, especially in supervising masters  and  doctoral  students.
    It is further reported that the Kurdistan Regional Government sought to
    encourage  Arab  lecturers  to  relocate  by  offering  them  financial
    incentives.  Individuals were handed  bonuses  while  those  who  bring
    their families receive additional bonuses as a housing subsidy.   There
    were some difficulties, not least with language  because  many  of  the
    students in the north speak only the Kurdish  languages  whereas  those
    from Baghdad and the south speak Arabic.  Nevertheless, in  general  it
    is stated that most people in the north agreed that the  relocation  of
    Arab lecturers had more pros than cons  for  higher  education  in  the
    Kurdistan  region.   The  Deputy  Dean  of  the  Dentistry  Faculty  at
    Sulaimaniya University, where  twelve  Arab  lecturers  taught,  valued
    their academic skills highly.

31. As regards the position of women, a UNAMI Report  of  June  2006  noted
    that violence against women was a growing problem and  that  they  were
    prevented from moving freely due to fear of harassment,  abduction  and
    rape.  Many women had been  attacked  by  religious  conservatives  and
    others had been killed outright.   Amnesty  International  reported  in
    2005 that violence and threats had directly  affected  women  and  been
    specifically aimed at women.  UNAMI reported in December 2006 that  the
    situation for women remained fraught  and  that  they  were  reportedly
    living with heightened levels of threats to their  lives  and  physical
    integrity and  a  Human  Rights  Report  had  charted  an  increase  in
    kidnapping and killing of women (25.19 to 25.25).

31.  We should also mention  that  evidence  concerning  the  conditions  in
    Baghdad at the material time  when  the  appellant  fled  the  city  in
    September 2006, is to be found in the Human  Rights  Watch  Report  6th
    October 2006 and in the August 2007 UNHCR report. This refers to  death
    threats issued to Palestinians in Baghdad if they  did  not  leave  the
    country within 72 hours, underscoring  the  constant  violence  against
    Palestinian refugees in Iraq following  the  overthrow  of  the  Saddam
    Hussein Government.  Trucks with loud speakers were  reported  to  have
    passed through Al-Dura neighbourhood on 25th and  30th  September  2006
    issuing death threats against Palestinians.

Existing Country Guidance

32. Risk to Palestinians in Iraq was considered by the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal in JA (Ethnic  Palestinian-Iraq-Objective  Evidence)  Iraq  CG
    [2005] UKIAT 00045, where it was concluded that  the  totality  of  the
    "objective evidence" then available, did not show that a Palestinian in
    Iraq faced a real risk of persecution or breach of human rights  purely
    on account of their ethnicity.  We note that the Immigration  Judge  at
    the original hearing of this appeal in December 2006, noted  this  case
    and made two observations.  First  that  reports  of  violence  against
    Palestinians were based primarily on  eviction  from  their  homes  and
    second, that there was no "subsequent  adverse  material"  which  would
    show a worsening of the situation of ethnic Palestinians in Iraq.

Legal framework

33.  The  Refugee  or  Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations S12006/2525 together with the Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, Cmnd6918,  which  in  part  implement  EU
    Council Directive 2004/93/EC on minimum standards for the qualification
    and status of third country nationals of stateless persons as  refugees
    or as persons who  otherwise  need  international  protection  and  the
    content of the protection granted, came into force on 9th October 2006.



34. The Protection Regulations set out, inter alia, definitions of acts  of
    persecution (reg  5), actors of persecution or serious harm (reg 3) and
    actors of protection (reg 4).   Regulation  4  in  its  material  parts
    states:

         "(1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a person eligible
         for humanitarian protection, protection from persecution or serious
         harm can be provided by:

              a) The State; or

              b) Any party  or  organisation,  including  any  international
                 organisation, controlling the State or a  substantial  part
                 of the territory of the State.

        2) Protection shall be regarded  as  generally  provided  when  the
           actors mentioned in paragraph 1(a) and (b) take reasonable steps
           to prevent the persecution  or  suffering  of  serious  harm  by
           operating  an  effective  legal  system   for   the   detection,
           prosecution and punishment of acts constituting  persecution  or
           serious harm, and the person  mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)  has
           access to such protection.

            ......."

35.   The  amended  Immigration  Rules  contain  among  other   provisions,
    paragraph 339K which deals with the approach to past persecution in the
    following terms:

        "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
               persecution or serious harm, or to direct  threats  of  such
               persecution or such harm, will  be  regarded  as  a  serious
               indication of the person's well-founded fear of  persecution
               or real risk of suffering serious  harm,  unless  there  are
               good reasons to consider that such  persecution  or  serious
               harm will not be repeated".

36. Also pertinent to  this  appeal  is  paragraph  339O  headed  "Internal
    Relocation".  This states:

        "(i) The Secretary of State will not make:

              a) a grant of asylum if in part of the  country  of  origin  a
                 person  would  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of   being
                 persecuted, and the person can reasonably  be  expected  to
                 stay in that part of the country; or

              b) a grant of  humanitarian  protection  if  in  part  of  the
                 country of return a person would not face a  real  risk  of
                 suffering serious harm, and the person  can  reasonably  be
                 expected to stay in that part of the country.

        (ii) In examining whether a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
        country of return meets the requirements in (i)  the  Secretary  of
        State, when making his decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
        humanitarian  protection,  will  have   regard   to   the   general
        circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
        personal circumstances of the person.

        (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return  to
        the country of origin or country of return".

37. In considering the proper approach to the issue of internal  relocation
    we have also to apply the principles set out  in  the  House  of  Lords
    judgments in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49.

38. The Regulations and Rules also identify the right of  a  person  to  be
    considered as to his or her eligibility for humanitarian protection and
    the provisions in relation thereto are set out at paragraph  339C.   As
    we have decided that this appeal is to be allowed on asylum grounds, it
    is not necessary to set out particulars of paragraph 339C.

39. Throughout our consideration of this appeal we have kept in  mind  that
    the burden is on the Appellant to show as regards her asylum grounds of
    appeal that returning her to Iraq would expose her to a real risk of an
    act of persecution for a reason set out in reg 6 of the 2006 Protection
    Regulations and as  regards  her  humanitarian  protection  grounds  of
    appeal, that she can show substantial grounds for believing  she  would
    face a real risk of serious harm as defined by paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules, or a real risk of a breach of  her  protected  human
    rights, in this case in particular Article 3.  We have  also  borne  in
    mind that great care must be taken before making  adverse  findings  of
    credibility in asylum cases, and should only  be  made  when  they  are
    justified in the light of the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case
    under consideration judged against the situation as at the time of  the
    hearing.

Our assessment: (a) the situation of Palestinians in Iraq

40. The current security situation in Iraq remains highly  volatile.  Areas
    of concern identified by a variety  of  sources,  including  UNHCR  are
    summarised in the Respondent's COIR Report on Iraq (April 2007, 7.01  -
    8.75) as follows:

      . Torture and ill-treatment by government agents,  armed  groups  and
        even the Multi National Force in Iraq (MNF).

      . Extra-judicial executions, targeted and indiscriminate killings  by
        government agents, MNF and armed groups.

      . Targeted attacks against alleged supporters or  associates  of  the
        Iraqi Government, the MNF and foreign construction companies.

      . Disappearance and kidnapping.

      . Widespread corruption and lack of transparency.

      . Organised crime.

      . Restrictions on freedom of movement.

      . Discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities.

      . Internal displacement.  (Page 33, 7.10).



41.  It will  be  apparent  from  our  earlier  summary  of  the  background
    evidence that there is frequent reference  to  "Palestinian  refugees",
    this term sometimes being used  to  cover  those  who  have  fled  Iraq
    (especially  to  surrounding  areas),  yet  sometimes   being  used  to
    describe even  Palestinians  living  in  Iraq.  Strictly  speaking,  of
    course, the term "refugee" can only apply to a person  who  is  outside
    his or her country of nationality or former habitual residence, but  it
    would seem that,  probably  for  historical  reasons  relating  to  the
    context in which Palestinians were displaced from their  homeland  into
    surrounding countries, the term is used more broadly and we have sought
    to bear that fact in mind when analysing the materials  we  had  before
    us.

42.  The conclusions we reach below are based  very  largely  on  background
    evidence almost all  of  which  refers  to  "Palestinians"  or  "ethnic
    Palestinians" without specifying whether they are or are not  stateless
    persons. As far as we can tell, the vast majority  of  Palestinians  in
    Iraq are in fact stateless persons, but, in  the  absence  of  specific
    data about this, we cannot rule out that there may be  a  small  number
    who have Iraqi nationality or some other  nationality.  However,  since
    the   background   evidence   identifies   serious   difficulties   for
    Palestinians in Iraq, without differentiation, we do not think it would
    be correct to confine our findings as to the category  of  persons  who
    are at risk on return to  "stateless  Palestinians".  But  our  finding
    about risk to ethnic Palestinians can only be about ethnic Palestinians
    in general. Without the benefit of more  specific  evidence  we  cannot
    exclude that there  may  be  Palestinians  from  Iraq  who  have  Iraqi
    nationality and who as a result, may, exceptionally be  less  at  risk,
    because, for  example,  they  are  perceived  to  have  integrated.  We
    emphasise, however, that in our view it would only  be  in  exceptional
    cases that an ethnic Palestinian would not be at real risk.

43.  We consider it justified, on the basis of  recent  background  reports,
    to conclude that among the categories of those  who  particularly  face
    difficulties  on  return  are  ethnic  Palestinians.  Currently  ethnic
    Palestinians in Iraq in general face a real  risk  of  persecution  and
    treatment contrary to Article  3  ECHR.  Whilst  each  case  is  to  be
    considered on its merits, it would only be in exceptional cases that an
    ethnic Palestinian would not be at real risk.

44.  We reach the above conclusion for three main reasons. Each of  them  is
    informed by the knowledge that according to reliable sources the number
    of Palestinians in Iraq is  relatively  quite  small  compared  to  the
    population of Iraq as a whole, estimated  as  being  in  2006  some  27
    million. According to IRIN, 5 March 2006 the  figures  for  Palestinian
    refugees living in Iraq were estimated at 34,000.

45.  First, there is the extensive  evidence  indicating  that  Palestinians
    have been one of the targets for insurgent, principally Shi'ia militia,
    attacks. It appears that the attack in February 2006  upon  two  sacred
    Shi'ite shrines in Samarra  by  suspected  terrorists  from  the  Sunni
    population, was a cause for Palestinians to be  vilified  and  seen  as
    legitimate targets for Shi'ite  militia  attacks.  These  attacks  have
    involved not only killings but also attacks  on  their  home  or  other
    buildings and a pattern  of  issuing  threats  intended  to  impel  the
    recipients to leave Iraq or face violent consequences.  (see  e.g.  the
    COI report at para 32.13).  Amidst the widespread politically motivated
    and criminal violence in Iraq, Palestinians had been targeted more than
    other minorities.

46.  Second, with very few  exceptions  Palestinians  in  Iraq  are  persons
    classified as foreigners who face  particular  obstacles  in  obtaining
    documentation. We have already noted that  the  Interior  Ministry  has
    consistently refused to renew their  residence  permits  and  this  has
    meant  that  their  presence  within  Iraq  is   technically   illegal.
    Palestinian families are required to appear before  the  Department  of
    Residency every one to three months and when  they  do  sometimes  face
    official abuse and confiscation of their documents.

47.  Third there is significant  evidence  of  Palestinians  in  Iraq  being
    forced to flee  to  surrounding  countries  and  of  other  Palestinian
    finding themselves unable to flee despite serious dangers, as the  only
    documents they had were either Iraqi travel  documents  or  Palestinian
    passports  and  these  documents  were  not  accepted  by  neighbouring
    countries, Jordan and Syria in particular (see  COI  32.16  to  32.18).
    Earlier we highlighted the concerns  of  UNHCR  and  others  about  the
    plight of those Palestinian  refugees  who  sought  entry  into  Syria.
    Significantly, although UNHCR has assisted in the care  of  a  sizeable
    number of Iraqis who have returned to Iraq having fled  earlier,  there
    is no indication that UNHCR has regarded  Iraq  as  a  safe  place  for
    Palestinian refugees to return.

48.  We noted earlier the grim reading given in  the  Amnesty  International
    Report of October 2007 which  documents  human  rights  abuses  against
    Palestinian refugees in  some  detail  including  murder  by  shooting,
    bodies left in the street, extensive  use  of  torture,  including  the
    drilling of holes in the body, beating with cables, electric shocks and
    burning with cigarettes.

     Country guidance

 49. We have examined the available country guidance cases  on  Iraq.  Since
    the reporting of JA (Ethnic Palestinian-Iraq-Objective  Evidence)  Iraq
    CG [2005] UKIAT 00045 there has  been  a  considerable  volume  of  new
    evidence, much of which relates to events since the Samarra bombing  of
    February 2006. In the light of  that  evidence,  we  consider  that  JA
    should no longer be treated as authoritative. We find there is a wealth
    of evidence before us showing how the situation in Iraq  has  seriously
    deteriorated for ethnic Palestinians since JA was heard; this  evidence
    is no longer based  primarily  on  eviction  by  landlords  and  others
    harbouring a grievance due to housing privileges granted by the  former
    regime.

50.  However, so far as the other country guidance cases referred to by  the
    Immigration Judge in the Stage 1 determination, we are  satisfied  that
    the background evidence  before  us  continues  to  fully  support  the
    guidance referred to in those cases. (Since  we  heard  this  case  the
    Tribunal has also reported as country guidance the case of KH  (Article
    15(c) Qualification Directive) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00023, but  nothing
    we say is inconsistent with it.)

Our assessment: (b) the appellant's appeal

    Credibility and Findings of Fact

51. The issues central to the Appellant's appeal are succinctly  stated  in
    the Respondent's skeleton argument as follows.

    The Appellant states inter alia that she is at  risk  on  return  as  a
    result of:

  . Her alleged involvement with the Ba'ath Party.

  . Her husband's alleged involvement with the Ba'ath Party.

  . Her status as a single woman.

  . Her status as an academic.

  . Her nationality as a Palestinian.

52.     The Respondent's skeleton  makes  clear,  although  no  reasons  are
    given, that she did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a  credible
    witness. It also contains a  submission  on  'internal  relocation'  in
    which it is contended that, even if she is found credible, it would not
    be unduly harsh for her to relocate.  There then follows a reference to
    Palestinians whether documented or undocumented and a reference to  the
    case of JA.

53. A number of facts about the Appellant are not in dispute: that she is a
    stateless Palestinian from Iraq; that she was awarded a PhD in  Physics
    at the University of Technology Applied Science Department, Baghdad, in
    2003; that she was also employed there as a university lecturer;   that
    she is of the Sunni Muslim faith.


54.  Having heard the Appellant give evidence, during which she  was  cross-
    examined at length, and having considered it in the light  of  all  the
    documentary  evidence  before  us   and   the   submissions   by   both
    representatives, we have concluded that the she is a credible  witness.
    Our reasons are as follows.

55.  The evidence she gave of her and her  husband's  connections  with  the
    former Ba'ath Party was broadly consistent and  was  supported  by  the
    documents she submitted. It was  also  consonant  with  the  background
    evidence. No serious challenge was made to her  evidence  that  at  the
    time of the regime change following the removal of  Saddam  Hussein  in
    April 2003, her husband had reached the high rank of 'Odow Firka'.  Her
    own position in the Party was corroborated by the document she produced
    at her asylum interview entitled 'Identity Card  for  Saddam  Hussein's
    Friends' issued by the Central Security Office in 1998. We can find  no
    reason to doubt the authenticity of this document which the  Respondent
    has had the opportunity to analyse.

56.  We have paid careful attention to the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that her account of her  level  within  the  Party  differed
    significantly between earlier and later statements.  In order to assess
    these we need first to summarise her earliest and later accounts.

57.  Her earliest statement described her  progress  from  'sympathiser'  in
    1989 to 'Active  Udo'  in  1999.   Closely  questioned  in  her  asylum
    interview about this matter  (Q26-43),  she  explained  that  the  main
    reason for joining the Party in 1989 was the desire  of  the  Party  to
    liberate Palestine. She said that she held a specific position  in  the
    Party namely that of 'Odow' (Q30) and described the rise in her  status
    and responsibility from the mere attendance at meetings to  the  giving
    of lectures to members and attendance at demonstrations (Q31-33).   She
    was asked next , "Would you  say  you  were  well-known?"  (Q34).   Her
    response was to describe  the  distinction  between  the  two  branches
    within the Party.  The branch to which she was recruited was  primarily
    for Arabs and included many Palestinians, but they were  not  part  of,
    and did not meet with, the  Iraqi  branch,  which  comprised  of  Iraqi
    nationals like her husband.  As a result few members, if  any,  of  the
    Iraq  community  knew  of  her  status  within  the  Party   but   many
    Palestinians did (Q34-38).  She also described the rank  or  status  of
    her husband as 'Odow Firka', a classification or  rank  which  we  find
    referred to in  the  background  evidence  as  "firqa",  a  division  -
    relating to all cells within a district office or factory (to which  we
    were not referred but which is an important detail in  the  context  of
    this credibility assessment).

58. In her third  witness  statement  (24th  September  2007)  (Appellant's
    Bundle page 19 paragraph 2) she said she was unable to return  to  Iraq
    as she is a Palestinian, an academic, a single woman and   "....   both
    my husband and myself were high level members of the Ba'ath Party".  At
    first glance that does appear to be  at  odds  with  her  earliest  two
    accounts of her  status  referred  to  above.  However,  to  keep  that
    statement in context, it is necessary  to  continue  into  paragraph  3
    (page 20) where she again clearly relates her advancement in the Ba'ath
    Party but also describes how she was made a 'Friend of  the  President'
    upon attaining the rank of 'Active Udo' in 1998 (earlier she said  1999
    (B24)). We conclude that she has made an error in the  first  statement
    (B24) when she described that promotion  as  being  in  1999.  We  also
    accept that she did not state in her earlier accounts that as a 'Friend
    of the President' she attended about twenty marches and that the public
    would know that she was a 'Friend of the President'.  However, we  note
    that at her asylum interview she  made  it  clear  to  the  Immigration
    Officer that she had been awarded that status and during the  interview
    she handed the original proof of that, in  the  form  of  the  identity
    card, to the interviewing officer. Whilst we recognise that  new  facts
    arose in that second witness statement, that of itself does not  amount
    to inconsistency.

59. She was cross-examined further about her status in the Ba'ath Party and
    how well-known this would be to the community.  Miss  Graham  drew  her
    attention to the earliest account she gave (statement 4th October 2006)
    where at paragraph 17 she described returning to her home in May  2004.
    Specifically her attention was drawn to the  middle  of  the  paragraph
    where she stated: "Therefore it was not well-known that I  was  a  high
    ranking member of the Ba'ath Party as all my  activities  were  carried
    out away from the Iraqi Ba'ath Party  members  and  related  only  with
    Palestinian people."  That was compared by the Presenting Officer  with
    the answer she later gave in her  account  at  asylum  interview  (Q34)
    where she was asked, "Would you say you were well-known?"  To this  she
    had replied "......very little of the Iraqis know I was a member".  The
    Appellant was invited to comment on the fact that on the one  hand  she
    appeared to be saying she was a "high ranking  member"  of  the  Ba'ath
    Party and later she appeared to be saying that very  few  Iraqi  people
    knew she was a member of the Ba'ath Party.  Her response was to explain
    again that there existed two  sections  of  the  Party  under  the  old
    regime.  The first was political and the other was  national,  and  she
    was involved with the national section of the Party, her  husband  with
    the political.  The following question was then put to her :

        "But the tenor of your evidence in the papers is that  you  weren't
        well-known?"

           Her reply was:

        "I said compared with my husband - he was well-known.  I wasn't  as
        well-known as my husband."

60.  Our conclusions about this area of difficulty in her  accounts  can  be
    briefly stated.  First the Appellant has  always  maintained  that  she
    reached a level within the Ba'ath  Party  which  involved  some  modest
    promotions.  She has never claimed to have had a major role or to  have
    been  active  beyond  demonstrations.   To  that  extent  there  is  no
    inconsistency in her accounts.  Secondly, she has always been at  pains
    to describe the difference between the two sections within  the  Ba'ath
    Party and that she was concerned not with the  political  section,  but
    with the national side of the organisation of which  many  Palestinians
    were members.  Thirdly, she has always been open  about  receiving  the
    status of 'Friend of the President' and produced evidence  of  that  at
    her interview.

61.  We accept that her evidence about being a  'Friend  of  the  President'
    and appearing at demonstrations appears to  be  inconsistent  with  the
    claim that she was not "well-known" as a member or activist within  the
    wider community.  However, when it was suggested to her by Miss  Graham
    that the tenor of her evidence was that she  was  not  well-known,  she
    explained that when compared with her husband's status and role  within
    the Ba'ath Party, she was by no means well-known. And, having looked at
    all that evidence  in  the  round  we  reach  the  conclusion  that  by
    comparison with her husband she was not a  significant  figure  in  the
    Ba'ath Party in the same way and to the same extent.   Furthermore,  it
    has always been her case that the de-Ba'athification law, legislated on
    5th May 2003, resulted in reprisal attacks against high ranking  Ba'ath
    Party members including her husband.  For that  reason  he  was  driven
    into hiding on the farm  in  Al  Hila  Province  leaving  her  and  the
    children with her brother-in-law in the Al Ademia District in May 2003.
     The Appellant herself not being caught by that law was able to  remain
    with the brother-in-law and after a year returned to her own home.  She
    gave this information in her earliest account of 4th October 2006 which
    was provided to the Home Office with her  SEF  application  form,  and,
    whilst we have not seen the  actual  legislation,  it  has  never  been
    contradicted by the Respondent.

62.  Taking all those matters into account we  conclude  that  there  was  a
    distinction between herself and her  husband  which  permitted  her  to
    remain in the community, albeit initially with a brother-in-law  in  Al
    Ademia, whilst her husband had to remain in  hiding.   This  of  course
    ended when she was forced to flee after the attack upon  her  house  on
    6th September 2006.

63.  Our conclusions as to her credibility  concerning  this  central  issue
    and her knowledge of the Ba'ath Party, lead us  to  conclude  that  her
    husband was involved in the Party, though to a higher degree  than  she
    was, as described in her statement.  We are prepared to accept that her
    husband was driven into hiding as described and that  he  did  maintain
    contact with her in the way she has  described  until  his  ambush  and
    kidnap on  1st  July  2006.   Her  evidence  on  this  topic  has  been
    consistent throughout and is consistent  with  background  evidence  we
    have seen concerning the targeting of former high ranking Ba'ath  Party
    members and the de-Ba'athification process:  see Home Office OGN  Iraq,
    February 2007).

64.   There is further evidence corroborating other aspects of  her  account
    in  relation  to  the  renewal  of  residence  permits   and   reported
    intimidation by the Ministry of  Interior  and  staff  (page  66).   As
    already noted, the situation  for  Palestinians  worsened  considerably
    after the bombings in Samarra on 22nd  February  2006  which  triggered
    widespread sectarian violence between Shi'a and Sunni  Muslims  leading
    to the killing  of  thousands  of  civilians.   Palestinians  were  not
    spared.  On the contrary, hatred of them increased  and  they  suffered
    numerous attacks in the weeks and months following  the  bombing  (page
    66).

65.  In cross-examination she was questioned about  why  she  had  not  fled
    into hiding with her husband and in line with her previous accounts she
    said that in the beginning those who were targeted were more  prominent
    and known members of the 'old' Party of Saddam, like her  husband,  but
    not their families.  Later the situation worsened  and  reprisals  were
    aimed at anyone with "slight contact" with  the  old  regime.   If  she
    returned now she believed that she would be remembered in her locality,
    for the reasons which led to her having to leave the  country.   We  do
    not find any of this inconsistent with what she  had  said  in  earlier
    statements.  She was explaining that she is in fear of  return  because
    she believed that whoever was responsible for the kidnap of her husband
    and of the threats to her and the attack upon her  house  would  repeat
    the targeting of  her.   We  conclude  that  there  is  no  significant
    inconsistency about  her  evidence  on  these  matters  which  we  have
    analysed with great care.

66.  We also accept the Appellant's account of her return home in  May  2004
    which was encouraged by the  assurances  she  said  she  received  from
    governing authorities, that Palestinians would not be  the  victims  of
    reprisal.  She also returned to her work at the  university.   However,
    she did experience discrimination in the form  of  verbal  insults  and
    abuse including accusations of being an agent of Saddam  Hussein.   She
    believed this was the product of the hatred of  Palestinians  by  Shi'a
    militia who perceived them as having been favoured  by  the  regime  of
    Saddam Hussein.  We do not find  it  surprising  that  she  became  the
    target of increasing abuse and threats, particularly as we have already
    noted, sectarian violence escalated after the attacks  upon  the  Shi'a
    holy shrines in February 2006.

67.  Miss Graham  raised  a  number  of  challenges  to  this  part  of  the
    Appellant's account.  First,  that  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was admitting that her husband was  well-known  as  a  senior
    Ba'ath Party member in the area where they lived, it was  not  credible
    that she would return there in May  2004.   Second,  that  it  was  not
    plausible that if she had returned and  then  experienced  her  husband
    being kidnapped and  threats being made against her, she would not have
    relocated rather than continue to live in Baghdad. Third, if the kidnap
    story was true, one would have expected she would have reported  it  to
    the authorities.

68.   The  first  of  these  submissions  is  somewhat  undermined  by   the
    Respondent's own background evidence in  the  Iraq  OGN  section  3.11.
    which indicates that while since  the  fall  of  Saddam  the  level  of
    affiliation or rank held within the Ba'ath Party  has  sometimes  be  a
    determining factor regarding who is targeted, it is generally difficult
    to pinpoint exactly why a particular individual may be targeted.   Even
    low ranking officials of  the  Ba'ath  Party  are  said  to  have  been
    targeted because of the activities  they  were  involved  in  (3.11.2).
    Thousands of such party members are  said  to  have  lost  their  jobs,
    irrespective of their level of association with the Party.  Others  are
    said  to  have  claimed  they  had  been  systematically  targeted  for
    assassination by militia parties.  Many  attacks  appeared  to  be  the
    result of personal vendettas against members of the Party.

69.  It is also stated that the UNHCR in  October  2005  noted  that  whilst
    many Iraqis suffered harassment then as a result of their previous  low
    or  mid  level  membership  in  the  Party,  that  harassment  may  not
    necessarily reach the level of  persecution  (3.11.3).   Reference  was
    also made to  the  IAT  case  of  OH  [2004]  UKIAT  00254,  15/9/2004,
    involving a member of the Ba'ath Party whose father  had  been  a  more
    senior member and whose activities had resulted in arrests,  executions
    and deportation.  The appellant had fled from Iraq  after  refusing  to
    join the former Fidayi Saddam group (prior to the fall  of  the  Saddam
    regime) and the IAT concluded that  there  would  be  no  risk  to  the
    appellant on return in September 2004 (3.11.10).  In conclusion  it  is
    noted that whilst many Iraqis today suffer harassment as  a  result  of
    their previous membership of the Ba'ath Party, it is unlikely that this
    harassment will reach the level of persecution.  To establish  a  well-
    founded fear, a claimant will need to show that their  activities  have
    brought (and will bring) them to the adverse attention  of  those  they
    fear, whether locally through their direct  actions,  or,  on  a  wider
    stage because they are inextricably associated with the abuses  of  the
    former regime (3.11.11).  In the light of this background evidence,  we
    consider that the fact that her husband  was  well-known  as  a  senior
    Ba'ath Party member in the area where she lived, does  not  suffice  to
    undermine the credibility of her account.

70.  For the same and additional reasons we are unable to  accept  that  the
    Appellant's credibility is undermined by the fact that  she  failed  to
    relocate soon after the threats began in 2006 and her husband was  then
    kidnapped.  In cross-examination it was put to the Appellant  that  she
    could have returned to Al Ademia District to live with the  brother-in-
    law.  Asked why she did not do that, she said by early 2006  Al  Ademia
    District  had  become  a  "war  zone"  with  bodies   everywhere,   and
    furthermore, it was so close to her home district that those  who  were
    threatening her would know where she had gone.  It is also worth noting
    that when she was questioned at interview (C19) as to why she  did  not
    go back to her brother-in-law's place (in Al Ademia) after  the  attack
    on her house, she said it was because she was scared  they  would  look
    for her and find her there because her brother-in-law was known  (Q84).
    She went on to add that he was a former member of the Ba'ath Party  and
    he had to leave his home because all his friends who had been with  him
    in the Party had been killed (Q85 to Q86).  Whilst this particular part
    of the interview was not drawn to her attention  in  cross-examination,
    it has significance in the context of the submission  that  failing  to
    relocate to Al Ademia  between  April  and  July  2006  undermined  her
    credibility. We note that her evidence was that she did take refuge  in
    Al Ademia the morning after  she  says  her  house  was  attacked,  but
    observe that that was at the home of her friend and not her brother-in-
    law.  (see first statement 4/10/06 paragraph 25).  It was her  friend's
    husband who took her on to Mosul two days later on 9th September  2006.
    It has never been put to her that she  could  have  lived  safely  with
    those friends in Al Ademia and, given that  they were mere friends, not
    family members, we do not think it was reasonable to expect friends  to
    be able to provide shelter and hiding for  any  significant  length  of
    time.  We find that the Appellant has given a reasonable explanation as
    to why she remained living in her home, despite the discomfort and  the
    danger, until 7th September 2006.

71.   It was further put to the Appellant   in  cross-examination  that  she
    had safely relocated to Mosul.  However, her evidence was only that she
    had gone there in order to gain assistance to leave the country.

72.  We are therefore unable to give any weight to the  submission  by  Miss
    Graham that her claim to be unable to relocate generally  within  Iraq,
    flies in the face of her claims that she  previously  relocated  within
    Iraq successfully on three occasions. She had not.

73. As to why she did  not  report  the  kidnap  to  the  authorities,  the
    Appellant's response to the question she was asked about this was  that
    she did not have any faith in the ability of the authorities to provide
    protection in such circumstances.  Again, as  we  have  already  noted,
    there is an abundance of background evidence before us indicating  that
    at this time there was widespread violence and disorder and a  lack  of
    security, particularly after the February bombing of  holy  shrines  in
    Samarra which prompted a surge in  violence:  see  e.g.  the  Iraq  OGN
    12/2/2007, particularly paragraph 3.7.3  (where  it  is  reported  that
    militias, at times linked to political parties which are also  part  of
    the government, continue to operate outside the law) and also paragraph
    3.7.4 (where it is reported that there  are  growing  indications  that
    persecution by state employees, including  in  the  form  of  arbitrary
    arrest, unlawful detention, torture, ill-treatment as  well  as  extra-
    judicial executions was taking place in Iraq, in particular by  Shi'ite
    dominated police  commanders  who  had  been  accused  of  deliberately
    targeting Sunnis).  The Iraqi authorities had admitted such  incidents,
    but were not able to stop this.  In particular Baghdad suffered from  a
    high rate of criminality, with criminal gangs being  involved  in  road
    ambushes, smuggling, stealing and kidnappings  for  high  ransom.   The
    reasons for this included general insecurity, the lack  of  enforcement
    and  criminal  impunity,  high  unemployment  and  a  large  number  of
    criminals that Saddam Hussein freed  in  an  amnesty  in  October  2002
    (3.7.4). We also note that from the background  evidence  it  is  clear
    that there had been some  infiltration  of  the  Iraqi  authorities  by
    Shi'ite insurgents hostile to those of  the  Sunni  faith.  We  do  not
    therefore regard it as implausible that the Appellant  did  not  report
    this kidnapping to the local authority.

74.  As we have already noted above,  the  background  evidence  makes  very
    clear the drastic decline in security for Palestinians after  the  fall
    of the old Saddam regime, and the hostility towards them by  government
    officials (see also 'Iraq:  Human  Rights  Abuses  against  Palestinian
    Refugees Amnesty International October 2007 - Respondent's  documentary
    bundle 2 page 62).  That  report  discloses  that  the  forces  of  the
    Interior Ministry were directly involved in some of  the  abuses  (page
    70).  When cross-examined on the point of failing to report the alleged
    kidnapping, the Appellant responded, "Do you really think  there  is  a
    government that will protect us?"  She was not pressed further  on  the
    point.  We note that in a report from Human Rights  Watch  October  6th
    2006 headed 'Iraq: Palestinians targeted with death threats'  there  is
    evidence that over the past two years successive Iraqi Governments have
    done little to protect Palestinian refugees and  have  often  displayed
    open hostility to them, claiming they are  involved  in  terrorism  and
    supporting the insurgency.  The Ministry also subject  Palestinians  to
    harassment rather than affording them the treatment to which they  were
    entitled. In the context of the background documentary evidence we  are
    not of the view that a failure to report  her  husband's  kidnap  is  a
    matter which can properly be held against her credibility.

75.  The alleged attack upon her home on the evening of 6th  September  2006
    was also challenged by the  Presenting  Officer  in  cross-examination.
    Miss Graham asked what had happened that night and she replied that she
    was in the house with her children when she  heard  noises  and  voices
    saying "Death to all people with Saddam".  She said she had a  bell  in
    the house which was connected to her neighbours and she rang  the  bell
    to alert them.  Before that she had heard the front gate  being  opened
    as they approached the house.  In her  street  there  was  a  group  of
    neighbours who she described as "armed neighbourhood watch" and,  after
    raising the alarm they came to her assistance and began shooting in the
    air which caused the  attackers  to  run  away.   Asked  whether  these
    attackers were armed, she said "Most definitely".  She  confirmed  that
    the neighbours frightened them off.  She was asked if she actually  saw
    the armed attackers and said she did not but she heard them approaching
    when the gate opened. She said she was almost certain  that  they  were
    Shi'ites who considered Palestinians like herself to be "disbelievers".
     That was the extent of the challenge put to her in  cross-examination.
    In her submissions Miss Graham stated that the account of the  raid  on
    the house was not credible,  first  because  armed  men  would  not  be
    frightened off by neighbours and secondly because the  reference  to  a
    "special bell" had not been previously mentioned in her  first  witness
    statement or her interview.

76.  The Appellant described the attack on the house in her first  statement
    (dated 4/10/06) in the following terms:

        "On 6th September 2006 an armed group attacked my house during  the
        evening.  They tried to break in however I was screaming and asking
        for help from the neighbours.  The neighbours rushed to help me and
        the militia fled away.  The next morning  I  went  to  stay  at  my
        friend's house in Al Ademia District.  ..."

77.  On 30th October 2006 she described the incident  again  in  her  asylum
    interview at Q65 as follows:

        "My husband was kidnapped while he was coming to see  us  in  July.
        In September 2006 they broke the door, entered the  garden  of  the
        house, the neighbours started shooting in the sky to scare them and
        then the armed people they escaped  and  couldn't  enter  into  the
        internal door".

78.  Asked if it was the neighbours who scared them off she said  "Exactly".
    She then went on to describe how  she  left  the  house  the  following
    morning taking her children and  going  to  stay  with  her  friend  as
    already detailed above.

79.  As already noted there is an abundance of  background  evidence  before
    us as to the very poor state of security in Baghdad at that  particular
    time. Therefore we do not find it at all surprising that members of the
    appellant's local community had formed a "neighbourhood watch" and that
    they  were  themselves  armed.   In  those  circumstances  we  have  no
    difficulty in understanding how a group of would-be attackers could  be
    scared off by such an armed neighbourhood watch.  The matter  to  which
    we  must  give  careful  consideration  is  the  submission  that   the
    appellant's account has been inconsistent and lacks credibility because
    of the mention in her oral evidence of a bell being used to  alert  the
    neighbours.  It is correct, as Miss Graham pointed out, that this  bell
    had not been mentioned in the earlier account.  However, in her  asylum
    interview no questions  were  put  to  her  about  how  the  neighbours
    discovered what was happening and began  to  shoot  and  in  all  other
    respects the particulars she gave of the attack have not varied in  any
    significant detail.  The noise which alerted her was the noise  of  the
    attackers approaching through the entrance gate.  The voices which  she
    heard and the words spoken were not identical  but  very  similar.   We
    would not expect someone in a  frightening  situation  to  be  able  to
    remember and repeat word perfect precisely what  was  said.   She  said
    that she immediately alerted neighbours.  The neighbours rushed to help
    and  the  "militia"  fled.   In  the  interview  she  referred  to  the
    neighbours "shooting in the sky" as she did in her oral evidence.   She
    did not mention the  shooting  in  the  initial  statement.   She  did,
    however, say that the neighbours rushed to help and the  militia  fled.
    For these reasons and bearing in mind she was a lone woman  with  three
    small children in an area which was  vulnerable  to  threats,  attacks,
    kidnap etc, we do not find it implausible that she would  have  such  a
    means of communicating to neighbours if she got into difficulty.

80.  The more general question as to why she did not move out  of  her  home
    if in fact she was receiving such dire threats as  she  claims  between
    February and September 2006, and in the light of the alleged kidnap and
    the alleged  murder  of  her  university  colleague,  requires  further
    consideration.  We can do no better than point again to the  background
    evidence in relation to Palestinians in Iraq which we set out in detail
    above. We do not have difficulty   understanding  how  this  particular
    appellant felt that there was no reasonable alternative open to her and
    her children and that they  should  remain  in  their  home,  with  the
    support of their 'neighbourhood watch' as long as they  could,  despite
    the advancing threats to their safety.

81.  In the light of that evidence we are  better  able  to  understand  the
    reason why the Appellant stayed on  for  so  long  in  her  home  until
    effectively being driven out by the attack on the  house  in  September
    2006.  We also bear in mind the answer she gave when asked in interview
    why she had not fled Iraq earlier (Q56).  She said that it was  because
    she always had hope at the  beginning  that  the  situation  would  get
    better and she would remain in work.  Then, when she eventually decided
    to get out, they (the  Iraq  authorities)  refused  to  grant  her  the
    nationality or to use an Iraqi passport or even  to  renew  her  travel
    documents. We further bear in mind that it has  always  been  her  case
    that until July 2006 she was able to maintain contact with her fugitive
    husband who was visiting periodically under disguise.  If  that  is  so
    that was a further reason why she would want to  remain  in  her  home,
    difficult as it may have been.  Then in July 2006 came  the  kidnap  of
    her husband whilst leaving after one of the  visits.   That  particular
    part of her account is one which she has maintained from the very first
    opportunity to provide any explanation for leaving the country.  In the
    screening interview of 20th September 2006 she made  reference  to  the
    kidnapping of her husband on 1st July 2006  and went on to say that the
    reason for coming to the United Kingdom was because  her  life  was  in
    danger and her husband had been kidnapped.

82.  Taking all those matters into account, we conclude that this  Appellant
    with her three young children was in a very difficult situation between
    February and September 2006.  It is clear to us,  from  the  background
    evidence to  which  we  have  referred,  that  many  other  Palestinian
    families in Iraq, particularly in Baghdad, were in a similar  dangerous
    and difficult situation.   Some remained in Baghdad,  others  fled  the
    country, and others fled to the border  with  Jordan  or  Syria.   This
    Appellant remained in her home, as, according  to  background  evidence
    already noted, so did many others, and was  able  to  maintain  contact
    with her husband.  From the beginning of  July  all  that  changed  and
    within two months she felt compelled to flee the country.  In  all  the
    circumstances we do not find the reasons she has given for  staying  on
    so long and for not attempting to reach the border camps  in  no-man's-
    land, implausible.

83.  In summary it is the Appellant's case, and always has  been,  that  she
    was able to return to her job at  the  university  whilst  her  husband
    remained in hiding.  Although she suffered  unpleasant  discrimination,
    things took a drastic downward turn following the bombings  at  Samarra
    in February 2006.  Thereafter sectarian violence increased to what  she
    described as "civil war" and she began to receive death threats herself
    at her place of work and at home.  A university colleague, who received
    similar threats, was found dead in the street having been tortured  and
    murdered in May 2006.  She left her university post but remained in her
    home and on 1st July 2006 her  husband  was  kidnapped  in  the  street
    following an undercover visit to her  home.   On  15th  July  2006  she
    sought help from the Palestinian Embassy and was supplied with a letter
    which she provided to the Immigration Officer  at  interview.   On  6th
    September 2006 came the attempted attack upon her home, which  we  have
    found is put in context by the background evidence.  The following  day
    she abandoned her home and eventually fled the country using  documents
    provided by a smuggling agent.

84.  The letter the Appellant produced dated 15th April 2006 and  purporting
    to be from the Al Mukhtar Army was the subject of a specific  challenge
    by Miss Graham who put it to the  appellant  that  it  "smacked"  of  a
    document specifically concocted for the hearing.   This  the  appellant
    denied.  The question suggested that it was a document submitted  after
    the decision to refuse her claim and  in  preparation  for  her  appeal
    hearing.  That cannot be  correct  because  we  note  from  the  asylum
    interview form at C6 that the Immigration Officer had recorded that the
    appellant produced to the Officer that day "three threatening  letters,
    a copy of a degree certificate, a Ba'ath Party membership card and  two
    university cards". Miss Graham made the submission  that  the  document
    was not credible because firstly it was dated and secondly it contained
    details of the Appellant's employment.  In response, Mr Lewis submitted
    that by including specific details the authors of the  letter  make  it
    clear that they know exactly who and where she is.  Secondly  regarding
    the dating of the document the author is lending credence  through  the
    use of "officialdom" to the  organisation  named  in  the  letter.   He
    submitted there was nothing about the letter which gave rise to  doubts
    about the authenticity of it.  Other documents produced by her had been
    accepted by the Respondent and part of the Appellant's history had been
    accepted on the strength of those  documents.   He  submitted  that  we
    should draw the inference that this also was a credible document.

85.  We can see no reason to doubt the authenticity of the letter by  reason
    of the fact that the letter has been dated by  the  author  or  on  the
    basis that the author has  included  details  of  her  employment.   We
    accept the submission of Mr Lewis, that by  including  details  of  the
    employment those issuing the letter made clear that they knew precisely
    where the Appellant worked.  Bearing in mind the threat  was  that  she
    must "abandon" her job and leave Iraq and also bearing in mind that she
    was given the ultimatum of "three days" to do this,  we  conclude  that
    the inclusion of the  details  of  her  employment  and  the  date  the
    "ultimatum" was issued were necessary particulars for  the  purpose  of
    reinforcing the threat.

86.  We have also taken account of the final  document  in  the  Appellant's
    Bundle, the origin of which is not altogether clear but emanates from a
    website (evidence about which was adduced by the respondent: see  paras
    29-30  above)  publicising  a  campaign  against  the  oppression   and
    persecution  of  academics  in  Iraq.   Claiming  the  existence  of  a
    systematic campaign  to  liquidate  Iraqi  academics  which  was  still
    continuing in 2006, a list of over 250  professors  and  lecturers  who
    have been assassinated or disappeared, is produced with the report that
    hundreds of others have also disappeared - all seen as meaning that the
    Iraqi academic community was being destroyed.   On that list  are  many
    from Baghdad universities but about fourteen from what is described  as
    the 'Engineering or Technology College', two in particular being killed
    in May 2006 (page 168).  We cannot say that this is the same Faculty as
    the one where the Appellant was employed, but  in  name  it  has  close
    similarity.

87.  We also have a duty to take account, as  damaging  the  credibility  of
    the Appellant, the fact that she entered  the  United  Kingdom  relying
    upon false travel documents with the assistance of  an  agent  (Section
    8(3)(b) Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Treatment of  Offenders,  etc)
    Act 2004).  Whilst we have weighed the various parts  of  the  evidence
    relied upon by both sides in the manner described above, we  have  been
    careful not to reach  premature  conclusions.   We  are  alert  to  the
    principle that credibility is a holistic exercise of judgment requiring
    us to consider all the relevant evidence in reaching a conclusion.  The
    same is true of the documentary evidence which we have analysed in  the
    context of the evidence as a whole.  Looking at  the  totality  of  the
    evidence we find that in the end it hangs together as  a  credible  and
    plausible account.  Having regard to the findings we have  made  above,
    we do not find  that  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant  is  at  all
    undermined by the statutory presumption in this case.   For  all  these
    reasons we conclude that what the Appellant has told us  is  reasonably
    likely to have happened.   In  our  judgment  her  account  provides  a
    credible, factual basis for the asylum and human  rights  claims  which
    she has made.

Risks facing the appellant

88.  In the light of our findings on  the  Appellant's  credibility  we  can
    move straight to the assessment of risk on return.

89.  Miss Graham submitted that if we did find the  Appellant  credible,  we
    should nevertheless find that the fear which she has expressed was of a
    general lack of security and not of targeted ill-treatment.  It  seemed
    to be widespread crime and violence which she feared and in  any  event
    she had lived in Al Ademia District safely for a year between May  2003
    and May 2004.  On her  own  evidence  her  activities  were  not  known
    amongst the Iraqi community generally.  From the background evidence it
    was clear that former Ba'athists are only at risk if they  carried  out
    activities for the Ba'ath Party, and  if  those  activities  were  well
    known, and the appellant does not fall into that category.   She  could
    safely relocate either to the brother-in-law in Al  Ademia  or  to  the
    friend in the same district.  Likewise she had proved  that  she  could
    reach Mosul safely and it therefore followed that  she  could  relocate
    and live safely there. Those she claimed to fear would  not  even  know
    that she had returned.  We should consider it as pure speculation  that
    they would be able to locate her.  Miss Graham further  submitted  that
    if we did not accept she could relocate to the  places  where  she  had
    already stayed after leaving home, she could  relocate  safely  to  the
    territory of the  Kurdistan  Regional  Government  (KRG)  and  we  were
    referred to the COI Service Request form dated  1/2/07  and  the  reply
    dated 13/2/07 together with associated documentary background evidence.
    As an Arab from Baghdad, the appellant could, she  submitted,  relocate
    to the northern KRG. There was, she said, "cogent evidence" in support,
    namely that the KRG authorities are "actively encouraging" academics to
    the area. Miss Graham's submissions have now to be  viewed  along  with
    the written Respondent's submissions  provided  post-hearing  with  the
    August 2007 UNHCR Report.

90.  We were not persuaded by these submissions. As we pointed out  to  Miss
    Graham at the hearing, if we accepted the appellant  as  credible,  she
    has been targeted by something like five organisations. In our view she
    patently experienced past acts of persecution and  there  are  no  good
    reasons for considering that on return she would not face a  repetition
    of such acts in her home area.

91.  Of central importance in our judgement is  that  the  Appellant  as  an
    ethnic Palestinian will face targeting by insurgents. We  have  already
    referred to the background evidence  showing  that  there  have  almost
    daily attacks on Palestinians. We remind ourselves that the  number  of
    ethnic Palestinians in Iraq is relatively small. In our view there  are
    no particular facts about her that would mean that she was less at risk
    than are stateless Palestinians generally.

92.  The findings we have just made suffice for the appellant to succeed  in
    her appeal. For completeness, however, we would add that even if we had
    not found the level of difficulties facing ethnic Palestinians in  Iraq
    currently to cross the threshold of persecution, we  would  still  have
    allowed her appeal, in view of the fact that she has several additional
    characteristics that would increase the risk she faces  on  return.  We
    would emphasise that we do not  consider  that  any  of  these,  either
    singly or jointly, give rise to persecution; but they are  relevant  to
    her particular risk profile.

93.  In the first place, she is a former member of the Ba'ath Party and  the
    widow of a former Ba'ath Party member. Whilst the  background  evidence
    falls short of demonstrating that such persons per se face a real  risk
    of persecution or serious harm, it does indicate that persons  in  this
    category have been among the categories of persons targeted in  revenge
    attacks and that a significant number of them  have  been  killed:  the
    April COIS report informs us that in November 2006  the  number  killed
    since the start of 2006 had reached 1,556 and none of those  cases  had
    been  investigated  (17.25).   Militiamen  have  demanded  that  former
    Ba'athists fly white flags to atone for their party membership and  let
    their neighbours know they  have  renounced  their  pasts.   Those  who
    refuse often end up dead (17.26).

94.  As we were preparing this  determination  we  were  aware  through  the
    latest media reports, that there have been further developments in  the
    process of de-Ba'athification and that some former  senior  members  of
    the Ba'ath Party are now being offered posts  by  the  new  government.
    However, none of this relates to Palestinians.

95.  A further characteristic which we consider would add to  the  level  of
    risk which the Appellant will face on return relates to her  status  as
    an academic.  We have  already  set  out  the  evidence  before  us  in
    relation to the ill-treatment of academics  and  to  the  possibilities
    open to them of relocation.  In particular we considered  the  Brussels
    Tribunal Report at page 159 to 173  Appellant's  Bundle.   That  report
    claimed that  there  was  a  systematic  campaign  to  liquidate  Iraqi
    academics,  with  the  assassination  of   over   250   academics   and
    disappearance of hundreds of others.  That Tribunal  also  stated  that
    the  wave  of  assassinations  was  "non-partisan  and   non-sectarian,
    targeting  women  as  well  as  men,  countrywide,  indiscriminate   of
    expertise: professors of geography, history and  Arabic  literature  as
    well as science are among the dead".  According  to  that  Tribunal  no
    suspects have been apprehended in connection with the assassinations as
    at the time of the report in early 2006.  There  then  follows  a  long
    list of the names of the victims together with a brief rsum of  their
    academic post, qualifications, university or college and  date  of  the
    incident.

96.  That evidence combined with the Respondent's  own  background  evidence
    in relation to  the  so-called  "brain  drain"  and  the  migration  of
    academics and other professionals to the north of Iraq,  indicates that
    the appellant's background as an academic would add  to  the  risk  she
    would face on return (see Respondent's Bundle (2) page 4 to 11).

97.  In addition, as a further characteristic that would add  to  the  level
    of risk she faced, the Appellant is a woman who will be returning as  a
    lone woman with children. As we have already noted, there are  respects
    in which women are more exposed to certain types  of  violent  attacks,
    attacks including kidnapping, rape,  forced  prostitution,  trafficking
    and murder.

98.  Although the Constitution of Iraq purports to  prohibit  all  forms  of
    violence and abuse in the family,  school  and  society,  the  lack  of
    security and proper law enforcement and the escalation of the  internal
    conflict have resulted in a climate of fear and violence.  Within  this
    women have become common targets  of  a  number  of  types  of  violent
    attacks including kidnapping, rape,  forced  prostitution,  trafficking
    and murder.  The August 2007 UNHCR report in particular indicates  that
    her position as a lone woman would add to her difficulties: this report
    states (see page 13) that  the  security,  economic  and  human  rights
    situation of women had dramatically declined and continues  to  worsen,
    since the fall of the previous regime

99.  The volume of evidence  before  us  satisfies  us  entirely  that  this
    appellant has made out her case as regards risk to her in her home area
    of Iraq.

    Internal relocation

100. Turning to the question of whether the appellant has a viable  internal
    relocation alternative,  we  have  already  explained  why  we  do  not
    consider that she had a viable option of relocation within  Central  or
    Southern Iraq. Our survey and assessment of the evidence in relation to
    the potential relocation to the  camps  on  the  Syrian  and  Jordanian
    border lead us to the clear conclusion that firstly these camps  cannot
    be regarded as within the protection of the "country  of  origin".   In
    any event, even if they could be so regarded, in our judgement it would
    be unduly harsh in any event  to  expect  her  to  go  with  her  three
    children to live in such no-man's-land camps.

101. So far as concerns whether the appellant  could  safely  or  reasonably
    relocate to the area of the KRG in northern  Iraq,  we  find  that  her
    Palestinian ethnicity means that she could not.  Furthermore,  even  if
    she could gain access, her being an ex-Ba'ath Party member and a single
    woman (with children) would be additional factors likely to  compromise
    both her safety and the  conditions in which she would have to live  in
    the KRG.

102. Whilst we accept that many academics, especially Arab  academics,  have
    been able to relocate to the KRG there is nothing to indicate that they
    include  Palestinians.   Additionally,  it  would  appear  that   those
    academics who have been encouraged to relocate to the KRG have done  so
    mainly as a result of a process of recruitment that  contacts  them  in
    Baghdad, whereas on our finding it would be unsafe for  this  appellant
    to return to Baghdad (or indeed anywhere else).

103.     On the evidence  before  us  we  conclude  that  there  can  be  no
    reasonable expectation that this appellant can either stay in  her  own
    home area or relocate anywhere else in Iraq.  In any event, there is  a
    real risk that a person  of  her  profile  and  in  her  situation,  in
    attempting to move around Iraq would  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    insurgents or be at serious risk when encountering any checkpoints.

104.  In  conclusion,  the  appellant  has  satisfied  us  to  the  required
    standard, that she is a person who at present  faces  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on account of her husband's alleged  involvement  with  the
    Ba'ath Party  combined  with  her  own  activity;  her  position  as  a
    stateless Palestinian who will face documentation problems; her  status
    as an academic and her status as a single woman (with  children).   She
    will be unable to access the KRG or any other alternative  location  in
    Iraq and even if she could, she is still likely to be targeted.

105. As we are satisfied that the appellant has made out  her  asylum  claim
    it is not  appropriate  to  deal  with  the  question  of  humanitarian
    protection as they are mutually exclusive.

106. Under Article 3 of the ECHR we  have  to  decide  whether  there  is  a
    breach of the prohibition on torture or inhuman or degrading  treatment
    or punishment by returning the appellant to Iraq.  In the light of  the
    facts which we find established as detailed above,  we  find  that  the
    appellant has also established that there is  a  real  risk  she  would
    suffer such inhuman or degrading treatment in breach of  Article  3  if
    returned to Iraq at this time.  The  decision  appealed  against  would
    cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of the law and its obligations
    under the 1950 Convention.

Decision

We allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

We allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Storey                           Date



Appendix: Background Country Materials

Amnesty International Report October 2007
Human Rights Watch, "Iraq: Palestinians Targeted With Death Threats", 2003
Joint  British  Danish  Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Baghdad  and  Amman   on
Conditions in Iraq, 8th September 2004
Human Rights Watch, Nowhere to Flee: the perilous situation of  Palestinians
in Iraq, September 2006
UNHCR  Aide-Memoire,   Protecting   Palestinians   in   Iraq   and   Seeking
Humanitarian Solutions for Those Who Fled the Country,  December 2006
"Iraq Kurdistan Offers Safe Haven for Fleeing Arabs", IWPR 13.10.06
FMR 26: "Can Palestinian refugees in Iraq find  protection?"  by  G  Wengert
and M Alfaro, circa 2007.
UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI): Human Rights Report  1  April  -  30
June 2007
Various press cuttings 19 October 2006- 20 January 07
COI  Service  Country  of  Origin  Information  Request  1.02.07   (internal
relocation for Arab Academics to the KRG)
Operational Guidance Note Iraq 12.02.07
Iraq Country Policy Bulletin 1/2007 (27.02.07)
US State Department on Iraq, 6 March 2007
US State Department Report on Israel  and  the  Occupied  Territories  March
2007
COI Report Iraq 30 April 2007
COI Service Country of Origin Information Request 1.11.07
Brussels Tribunal
UNHCR's Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing  the  International  Protection
Needs of Iraqi Asylum-Seekers August 2007 (UNHCR August 2007 Report)

