
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

     GW (EEA reg 21: 'fundamental interests') Netherlands [2009] UKAIT 00050



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Procession House                                   Date of
Hearing: 12 October 2009


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                     Senior Immigration Judge Pinkerton
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     GW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER, HEATHROW
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Arfan Khan, instructed by C T Emezie
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Miss Giovannetti, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor

What are the 'fundamental interests' of a society within the meaning of  reg
21 (a threat to which may justify the exclusion of an  EEA  national)  is  a
question to be determined by reference to  the  legal  rules  governing  the
society in question, for it is unlikely that conduct that is subject  to  no
prohibition can be regarded as threatening those interests.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. G W (the Appellant) is a national of the Netherlands.  He  appeals  to
      this tribunal against the decision of the Respondent  on  12  February
      2009 refusing to admit  him  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Although  the
      decision was formally made by an  Immigration  Officer,  there  is  no
      doubt that it was made with the consent of and on the instructions  of
      the Secretary of State and for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal,  Miss
      Giovannetti, who represents the  Respondent,  has  referred  to  those
      individuals equally.

   2. Prior to the  Hearing  the  Tribunal  had  the  benefit  of  receiving
      skeleton arguments as follows: a skeleton argument on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant running to ninety-one paragraphs  on  thirty-four  pages;  a
      response to that by Miss Giovannetti, on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,
      running to twenty-three paragraphs on seven pages; and in response  to
      that a further skeleton  argument  from  Mr  Khan  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant, running to ninety-seven paragraphs on fourteen  pages.   We
      have read all those: and in view of the copious information that  they
      gave us, on the position of the Appellant in particular, we began  the
      hearing by suggesting that we should hear from Miss Giovanetti  first.
      After taking brief oral evidence we did so; and in the result we  have
      not needed to call on Mr Khan.

   3. The Appellant is a member of the Dutch Parliament.  He is  the  leader
      of his party which is, we understand, the  eleventh  largest  in  that
      Parliament.  His views, to which we refer in a moment, may  be  shared
      by all the members of his party, but this we  do  not  know.   We  are
      concerned with the views he holds personally.  He is strongly  opposed
      to what he sees as the Islamicization of  Europe.   He  expresses  his
      views in a manner which any right  thinking  person  would  regard  as
      offensive to the religion of Islam and its founder.   His  aim  as  he
      declares it is in particular to persuade others that the religion  and
      culture of Islam is not one that should be tolerated or followed.   He
      has made a film called 'Fitna'  which  interposes  readings  from  the
      Koran, the holy book of Islam, with  images  of  atrocities  committed
      around the world, with the implication that the relevant suras of  the
      Koran encourage or permit the  acts  portrayed.   His  activities,  by
      showing the film and expressing his views,  have  caused  concern  and
      debate in many  countries.   We  were  referred  in  particular  to  a
      condemnation of his views and of the film made on behalf of the United
      Nations by the Secretary-General last year.

   4. The appellant proposed to visit the United Kingdom.  He was to be  the
      guest of Baroness Cox and Lord  Pearson  of  Rannoch,  who  gave  oral
      evidence before us.  The visit was to take place on 12  February  this
      year.  Lord  Rannoch  told  us  what  the  visit  would  entail.   The
      Appellant was to attend a Committee Room at the House of Lords and  to
      show his film, 'Fitna', and to be available for a question and  answer
      session.  The meeting was to be open to all members of either House of
      Parliament who wished to attend, and to anybody else  holding  a  pass
      for the Palace of Westminster.  That meeting was,  we  were  told,  to
      last for about an hour.  The Appellant was then to go across the  road
      to the premises which are,  in  essence,  the  House  of  Lords  press
      conference room. There was to be a similar meeting on those  premises.
      It was primarily to be intended for the press but was to  be  open  to
      the public.  Again the film was to be shown and the Appellant would be
      available to take part in a question and answer session which  was  to
      be chaired by Baroness Cox.  That was the proposal.

   5. On 10 February 2009, two days before those events were to take  place,
      an official writing on behalf of the SSHD, wrote to the Appellant  via
      the British Embassy in The Hague.  The letter reads as follows:

           "The purpose of this letter is to inform you that the SSHD is of
           the view that your presence in the  UK  would  pose  a  genuine,
           present,  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  one   of   the
           fundamental interests of society.  The SSHD  is  satisfied  that
           your statements about Muslims and their beliefs, as expressed in
           your  film  'Fitna'  and  elsewhere,  would  threaten  community
           harmony, and therefore public  security  in  the  UK.   You  are
           advised that, should you travel to the UK and seek admission, an
           immigration officer will take into account the SSHD's view.   If
           in accordance with Regulation 21  of  the  Immigration  European
           Economic Area  Regulations  2006,  the  immigration  officer  is
           satisfied that your exclusion is justified on grounds on  public
           policy and/or public security, you will be refused admission  to
           the UK under Regulation 19.  You would have a  right  of  appeal
           against any refusal of admission exercisable  from  outside  the
           UK. "

   6. Despite the contents of that letter the Appellant travelled to the  UK
      with the intention of carrying out the  programme  to  which  we  have
      alluded.  After an interview at the airport, he was refused admission.
       The Notice of Refusal is the decision against  which  he  appeals  in
      these proceedings.  The substantive part of it reads as follows:

           "You have sought admission to the UK under EC law in  accordance
           with Regulation 11 of the  Immigration  European  Economic  Area
           Regulations 2006, on the grounds that you are a Dutch  national.
           However, I am satisfied that  your  exclusion  is  justified  on
           grounds of public policy and public security for  the  following
           reasons.

           As a result of your previous activities in the  Netherlands  you
           are  to   be   prosecuted   for   incitement   to   hatred   and
           discrimination.  These are grounds similar  to  inciting  racial
           and religious hatred under English law.  While you have not been
           convicted of any criminal offence, as an Immigration  Officer  I
           am obliged to balance your right to free  movement  against  the
           threat your presence in the UK could pose to public  safety  and
           public order.  I understand that during your stay in the UK  you
           intend to  attend  the  screening  of  your  film  'Fitna'  that
           promotes the views against Muslims and their belief which form a
           basis for the Amsterdam appeals court's decision that you should
           be prosecuted in the Netherlands.

           After considering the purpose of your proposed stay, and  noting
           the  high  level  of  public  attention  your  activities   have
           previously attracted within the Netherlands,  I  have  concluded
           that there is a considerable risk that your presence in  the  UK
           would threaten community harmony and therefore public  security.
           In light of this I consider that your presence could foster hate
           and lead to inter-community violence within the  UK.   Therefore
           in accordance with Regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations,  I
           am  denying  you  admission  under  Regulation   19   of   those
           Regulations.  This decision attracts  limited  right  of  appeal
           from abroad and you are now liable for removal from the UK."

   7. The Appellant was duly removed, or  at  any  rate  went  back  to  the
      Netherlands, and exercised his right of appeal.  The challenge to  the
      decision of 12 February is by way of appeal on the  grounds  that  the
      Appellant has a right of free movement  and  a  right  of  freedom  of
      expression and of association.  Our task is to decide whether  in  the
      circumstances of  the  present  case,  the  Appellant's  exclusion  is
      justified and appropriate.





   The Law.

   8. The regulations to which the Notice of Decision  makes  reference  are
      the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006   (SI
      1003/2006). Regulation 11(1) is as follows:

           "An EEA National must be admitted to the UK if  he  produces  on
           arrival a valid national identity card or passport issued by  an
           EEA state."

   9. Part 4 of  the  Regulations  is  headed:  "Refusal  of  admission  and
      removal, etc".  Regulation 19 has as its first paragraph:

           "A person is not entitled to be admitted to the UK by virtue  of
           Regulation 11 if his exclusion is justified on grounds of public
           policy, public security or  public  health  in  accordance  with
           Regulation 21."

  10.   For completeness we will add para (3):

           "Subject  to paras 4 and 5, a person who has been  admitted  to,
           or acquired a right to reside in, the UK under these Regulations
           may be removed from the United Kingdom if
                 (a) he does not have, or ceases to have, a right to  reside
           under these Regulations, or
                 (b) he would otherwise be entitled  to  reside  in  the  UK
           under these Regulations but the Secretary of State  has  decided
           that his removal is justified on the grounds of  public  policy,
           public security or public health in accordance  with  Regulation
           21."

  11. We need to read reg 21 almost in full.  We omit paras 6 and 7.

               "21(1) In this regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA
                 decision taken on the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                 security or public health.
                (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to  serve  economic
                ends.
                (3) A relevant decision may not be taken  in  respect  of  a
                person with a permanent right of residence under  Regulation
                15 except on serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                security.
                (4)  A  relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  except   on
                imperative grounds of public security in respect of  an  EEA
                national who
                     (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                 period  of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                 decision; or
                     (b) is under the age of eighteen,
                 unless the relevant  decision  is  necessary  in  his  best
                 interests as provided for in the Convention on  the  Rights
                 of the Child ... .
                 (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on  the  grounds  of
                 public policy or public security it shall, in  addition  to
                 complying with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,
                 be taken in accordance with the following principles:
                     (a) the decision must comply  with  the  principle  of
                     proportionality.
                     (b)  the decision must be  based  exclusively  on  the
                     personal conduct of the person concerned.
                     (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned  must
                     represent a genuine, present, and sufficiently serious
                     threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of
                     society.
                     (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the  case
                     or  which  relate   to   considerations   of   general
                     prevention do not justify the decision.
                     (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                     themselves justify the decision".

  12. The Articles of the European Convention on Human Rights  dealing  with
      freedom of expression and freedom of association are amongst those  in
      the  Schedule  to  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  and  so   constitute
      'Convention rights' in the law of the UK.  We need read  only  Article
      10 which is headed Freedom of Expression:

           "(1) Everyone has the right  to  freedom  of  expression.   This
           right shall include freedom to hold opinions, and to receive and
           impart information and  ideas  without  interference  by  public
           authority and regardless of frontiers.  This Article  shall  not
           prevent states from requiring  the  licensing  of  broadcasting,
           television, or cinema enterprises.
           (2) The exercise of these freedoms, since  it  carries  with  it
           duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities,
           conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed  by  law
           and are necessary in a democratic society, in the  interests  of
           national security, territorial integrity, or public safety,  for
           the prevention of disorder  or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
           health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights
           of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received
           in confidence or for maintaining the authority and  impartiality
           of the judiciary."

  13. We should say that Article 2 of protocol 4, which was relied on by  Mr
      Khan in his skeleton argument, has not been ratified by the UK.  It is
      not scheduled to the Human Rights Act 1998.  It is not part of English
      law and plays no part in our decision.

   The Interpretation of Regulation 21

  14. It is clear that we are concerned primarily with interpreting  reg  21
      of the EEA Regulations.   Miss  Giovannetti  points  out,  and  it  is
      indeed uncontentious, that in determining whether a person  should  be
      allowed to enter, or be removed from, the UK in pursuance of  reg  21,
      there is an ascending difficulty, if we may so put  it,  arising  from
      paras (3) and (4) of that regulation. The more firmly anchored in  the
      United Kingdom  an  individual  is,  the  greater  the  considerations
      necessary to justify his removal, or refusal of admission.   A  person
      who merely intends a short visit is on the bottom rung of the  ladder.
      The decision must nevertheless comply with, in particular,  paras  (2)
      and (5) of reg 21; but when we are looking  to  see  what  within  reg
      21(5)(c) is a "sufficiently  serious  threat,  affecting  one  of  the
      fundamental interests of society", we must look at what is  sufficient
      for the purpose of the refusal of entry of the  person  who  does  not
      have a fixed right to reside in the UK  but  merely  intends  a  short
      visit.

  15. Having said that, in interpreting the provisions  applicable  to  this
      appeal for the purposes of applying them, we come at once to  a  point
      of considerable difficulty.  What is  precisely  meant  by  Regulation
      21(5)(c)?  In particular, does the phrase, "a threat affecting one  of
      the fundamental interests of society" necessarily imply a threat to do
      something which is prohibited by  law?   Or,  does  it  have  a  wider
      meaning, justifying exclusions by reference to  this  provision,  even
      where there is no suggestion that the individual will  contravene  the
      law?  We are told that there is no authority on this point.

  16. Mr Khan takes it as a given that there must be a real prospect that  a
      crime will be committed.  Miss  Giovannetti's  primary  submission  is
      that no such thing is necessary.  In our view the true  position  lies
      somewhere between those two extremes but very much nearer to Mr Khan's
      position than Miss Giovannetti's.  In our judgement it would  be  very
      rare indeed for a state to  be  able  to  establish  that  prospective
      activity falls within Regulation 21(5)(c) when it is not prohibited by
      the law of the state in  question.    We  use  the  word  "prohibited"
      rather than referring specifically to the criminal law,  in  order  to
      encompass such matters as breach of the peace in  England  and  Wales.
      As the House of Lords most recently expounded in R (Laporte)  v  Chief
      Constable of  Gloucestershire [2006] UKHL 55, a breach of the peace is
      not a crime in English law; but it is also not  permitted.   A  person
      committing or about to commit a breach of the peace may be, and indeed
      should be, prevented from doing so, by  any  other  person:  see  Lord
      Bingham's speech at [29]).  For the purposes of reg 21(5)(c)  we  draw
      no distinction between an activity so prohibited and an action subject
      to the penalties of the criminal law.  We do,  however,  think  it  is
      right to distinguish, between actions that are prohibited and  actions
      that are not prohibited.

  17. We reach that conclusion for two reasons. The first depends firmly  on
      the wording of the regulation.  The threat has to be one which affects
      one of the fundamental interests of society.  In a society as  closely
      regulated as the United  Kingdom  is,  but  probably  in  any  society
      governed by the rule of law, it is  one  of  the  functions  of  legal
      regulation to protect the fundamental interests of  society.   If  one
      wants to discover what interests are  regarded  as  fundamental  in  a
      society it is appropriate to look at  the  legal  provisions  in  that
      society.  It is therefore highly unlikely that a matter which  is  not
      governed by law  is  a  matter  which  is  properly  regarded  as  the
      fundamental interests of that society.  That is the first reason.

  18. The second reason is perhaps only another way of looking at the first.
       It depends largely on discrimination.  The matter can  be  tested  by
      imagining that in Laporte's case, the travel to the proposed  site  of
      demonstration was by air, instead of being by coach, and that  amongst
      the demonstrators was, as well  as  UK  nationals,  a  Dutchman.   The
      decision in Laporte is that at the time when  the  demonstrators  were
      restrained there was, at any rate in the  case  of  the  claimant,  no
      justification for applying any prohibition to her.  Had  the  position
      had been that she was travelling by air with a Dutchman, the  proposal
      is that he could  have  been  stopped  at  the  airport,  because  he,
      intending to do precisely the same thing, might pose a threat  to  one
      of the fundamental interests of society.  That would be discrimination
      between  the  British  citizen  and  the  Dutchman.   It  would  be  a
      discrimination which could not be objectively  justified  because  the
      threat, if it was a threat,  would  be  being  posed  by  the  British
      citizen  at  the  very  time  the  Dutchman  was  refused  entry.    A
      distinction of that sort is prima facie illegal in European  law;  but
      it is also a matter of common sense.  It is difficult, very  difficult
      in our view, to see that something which could be done  with  impunity
      by a British citizen (in the example we  give,  travelling  towards  a
      proposed demonstration) is something which,  when  done  by  a  non-UK
      national, poses a threat to the fundamental interests of society.

  19. For those  reasons  therefore  we  have  concluded  that  for  present
      purposes, reg 21(5)(c) refers only to  conduct  which  is  prohibited.
      Having reached that conclusion, we immediately find  another  question
      of interpretation, albeit one which is not as difficult as  the  last.
      Alongside  the  principles  relating  to  breach  of  the  peace,  the
      regulation of public order as a matter of the criminal law, is largely
      contained in the Public Order Act 1986 as amended a number  of  times.
      It is, as we understand it, common ground between the parties that  no
      other provisions of the criminal law are  of  any  relevance  for  the
      purposes of this appeal and, specifically, Miss  Giovannetti  did  not
      ask us to consider the Appellant's respective criminality in any other
      context.

  20. It follows, from what we have said at the beginning of this  judgement
      about the Appellant's views and their expression, that his conduct  is
      likely to be conduct amounting to criticism in the strongest terms  of
      the Muslim religion.  For  that  reason  Mr  Khan  has  engaged  in  a
      detailed consideration of the amendments to the 1986 Act introduced by
      the Racial and Religious Hatred Act 2006.  That Act inserts a new Part
      3A into the 1986 Act, headed: "Hatred  against  persons  on  religious
      grounds", and makes provisions prohibiting conduct under a  number  of
      head on that basis.

  21. Section 29J is headed "Protection of freedom of expression" and is  as
      follows:

           "Nothing in this part shall be read or given  effect  in  a  way
           which  prohibits  or   restricts   discussion,   criticism,   or
           expressions of antipathy, dislike, ridicule, insult or abuse  of
           particular religions, or  the  beliefs  or  practices  of  their
           adherents or of any  other  belief  system  or  the  beliefs  or
           practices  of  its  adherents,  or  proselytising,   or   urging
           adherents of a different religion  or  belief  system  to  cease
           practising their religion or belief system."

  22.  Mr Khan refers in his skeleton argument to the explanatory note,  and
      he submits in writing as follows:

           " 24.  It follows therefore that a speech which falls within 29J
           is protected speech and  in  such  a  case  no  public  disorder
           offence can be committed under the Public Order Act 1986."

  23.  We reject that submission.  It is  clearly  too  wide.   Section  29J
      prevents the conduct which it describes from being  an  offence  under
      Part 3A.  It does not permit conduct that would amount to  an  offence
      under the sections of the Public Order Act 1986 that  are  not  within
      Part 3A.

  24. We turn therefore to those other parts.  If there is a prospect of the
      Appellant's conduct amounting to conduct prohibited  by  the  criminal
      law the offence would be one under s 4, s  4A  or  s  5  of  the  Act.
      Sections 4 and 4A require a specific intent.  Section 5 does not,  but
      it presents other difficulties.  It is as follows:

           "5(1)  A person is guilty of an offence if he
                 (a)  uses  threatening,  abusive  or  insulting  words   or
           behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or
                 (b)  displays  any   writing,   sign   or   other   visible
           representation which is threatening, abusive or insulting,
           within the hearing or sight of a  person  likely  to  be  caused
           harassment, alarm or distress thereby."

  25. The other subsections include provisions relating to the commission of
      the offence in private premises such as a dwelling-house, and provide,
      in certain circumstances, for a specific defence.  But it does  appear
      to be clear that the offence under s 5 is committed only  in  relation
      to persons who are present, which appears to mean  physically  present
      at the time of the expression in question.

  26. Miss Giovannetti does not retreat from her submission that  the  s  4A
      offence, and perhaps the s 4 offence, might  be  committed.   But  the
      offence under s 5 is clearly the one that is  most  likely  to  be  of
      concern, and we repeat that a breach of the peace, or potential breach
      of the peace, is also capable of falling within reg 21(5)(c).

   Assessing the Threat

  27. In deciding whether there  is  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
      serious threat, posed by the admission of the Appellant to the  United
      Kingdom, we must look at the evidence.  Miss Giovannetti  asks  us  to
      give deference  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  and  the  Immigration
      Officer's views; but it is very difficult to see how that it is to  be
      done in an appeal on the merits, such as this is, when the  evidential
      basis for those views is largely undisclosed, or, if it has been fully
      disclosed in the letter of 10 February and the decision under  appeal,
      is so sparse and so vague as it is, and in being directed to community
      harmony independent of  the  commission  of  any  prohibited  act,  is
      perhaps misjudged or misguided.  It is right for us  to  look  at  the
      evidence and reach our own view on it.

  28. It seems to us that so far from pointing towards  the  application  of
      reg 21(5)(c), the evidence points in the opposite direction.  There is
      simply nothing to suggest that the Appellant's presence is  likely  to
      cause any difficulties at all.  He lives and works and  expresses  his
      views in the Netherlands, a country with a by no  means  insignificant
      immigrant Muslim population; and we have been told of no public  order
      difficulties there.  He has visited other European  countries  and  we
      have not been told of any public order difficulty.  He has visited the
      United Kingdom on at least one previous occasion  and  there  were  no
      public order difficulties.  His  views,  and  the  film  'Fitna',  are
      available throughout the world, by the Internet, by publications,  and
      by news reports.  For the purposes of this appeal it is  important  to
      note that the film has been shown and discussed in the United  Kingdom
      particularly, but probably not only, at the meetings it  was  proposed
      he attend on 12 February 2009, and  which  went  ahead  in  the  event
      without him.  There were no public order or  other  difficulties.  The
      only difficulties of which we have  been  told  have  been  in  Muslim
      countries which the  Appellant  has  not  visited.   The  Respondent's
      written evidence refers generally to Muslim countries; specifically in
      the  course  of  her  submissions  Miss  Giovannetti  referred  to   a
      demonstration of some sort in Iran.  We are surprised if it is  to  be
      said that what happens in Iran is therefore likely to  happen  in  the
      United Kingdom.

  29. The invocation of reg 21(5)(c) in this appeal is therefore on a  basis
      that is not only entirely speculative: it is contrary to the available
      evidence.  Despite the nature of the Appellant's views, and the vigour
      with which they are expressed, it does not appear that his conduct  in
      expressing them represents a threat affecting one of  the  fundamental
      interests of society.  And that is, as we see it, the  case  even  if,
      contrary to our view, reg 21(5)(c) encompasses  conduct  that  is  not
      prohibited.

  30. We have not yet, however, dealt with two matters that Miss Giovannetti
      on behalf of the Respondent particularly urges upon us.  The first  is
      that the position in the Netherlands itself may not be as  anodyne  as
      the evidence  to  which  we  have  already  referred  suggests.  After
      considerable hesitation, and following a  decision  of  the  Amsterdam
      Court of Appeal, a prosecution of the Appellant  has  commenced  under
      Dutch Penal Code Articles relating to public order.  That decision has
      been taken since the Appellant's last recorded visit here in 2008.

  31. We do not, however, find the fact that a prosecution has commenced  is
      of any assistance in determining this appeal.  A prosecution is not  a
      conviction.  Evidence supporting a prosecution cannot be  regarded  as
      having been accepted as true by the criminal court.  Even a conviction
      of an offence under the law of the Netherlands would not,  of  itself,
      show that the Appellant posed in this  country  a  threat  within  the
      ambit of Regulation 21(5)(c) even without  taking  into  consideration
      the further requirement of  Regulation  21(5)(e).   It  is  of  course
      possible that evidence may be given to,  or  accepted  by,  the  Dutch
      court in the future; and in that case it may constitute a matter to be
      taken into consideration in relation to any future  decision  made  in
      respect of  the  Appellant.   The  evidence  before  us,  however,  in
      relation to those proceedings, does not affect the matter one  way  or
      the other.

  32. A second additional factor is rather more troublesome, not in terms of
      the decision we make, but because of what it appears  to  imply  about
      the arguments being adduced on behalf of the Respondent.  It  is  said
      that the presence of the Appellant in  this  country  along  with  the
      expression of his views is an untried situation.  As  it  is,  he  has
      been here before, and his views have been expressed here  before,  but
      the two have not  previously  happened  together.    Miss  Giovannetti
      asked us to take into consideration the new risk posed.  She said that
      if the Government was seen as having  made  a  decision  allowing  the
      Appellant to enter the United Kingdom -  "welcomed" was the  word  she
      used in argument -  there might be an additional risk to public  order
      and community harmony, above those previously experienced.

  33. The first thing  to  say  about  that  is  that  it  remains  entirely
      speculative, and does not advance the respondent's  argument  at  all.
      That is not what is troubling.  What is, is the following.

  34. First, if there was disquiet about the Appellant having been  welcomed
      into this country, that is, allowed by some executive  act  to  enter,
      the disquiet would surely be with  the  government.   Criticism  of  a
      government decision is entirely proper in a democratic society and  to
      characterise it as "community disharmony" that ought not to be allowed
      to occur is entirely inappropriate.  We hope that that  was  not  what
      Miss Giovannetti was arguing on behalf of the  Respondent.   It  would
      have been entirely unworthy.

  35. But, secondly, there is, as the Respondent well knows, no question  of
      welcoming the Appellant to the  United  Kingdom.   The  constitutional
      structure and the legal foundations  of  this  country  have  entirely
      changed since 1997.  As a result of the 2006  Regulations,  introduced
      by the present government, a Dutchman has almost  the  same  right  to
      visit London as a Yorkshireman has; and  as  a  result  of  the  Human
      Rights Act  1998,  a  Dutchman  has  the  same  right  of  freedom  of
      expression as a Yorkshireman has.  It should be the government's  role
      to celebrate, publicise, and promote its reforms rather than to ignore
      them or misrepresent them, or allow them to be misrepresented.  If the
      Appellant comes to the UK it is in the exercise of a  right  given  to
      him by the 2006 Regulations, a right of free movement given by the  UK
      government to all citizens of all countries of the European Union.  No
      question of leave to enter, or of "welcoming" arises.

   Freedom of Speech: the Interference

  36. We turn now to issues directly relating to proportionality and freedom
      of expression.  We set out Article 10  earlier.  We  remind  ourselves
      that the test for the assessment of the proportionality of a  decision
      which   affects   freedom   of   expression    is    that    expressed
      (uncontroversially  as  far  as  we  understand  it)  by  Laws  LJ  in
      Tabernacle v  Secretary of State for Defence [2009] EWCA  Civ  23,  at
      [39].  In that case the decision under challenge was comprised in  by-
      laws relating to camping at Aldermaston.  Laws LJ with whom the  other
      members of the Court agreed, said this:

           "In the light of all these considerations, I consider that if he
           is to show compliance  with  his  obligations  under  the  Human
           Rights  Act,  the  Secretary  of  State   must   demonstrate   a
           substantial objective justification for paragraph 7(2)(f) of the
           2007 Bylaws, amounting to an undoubted pressing social need."

  37. We must now  look  at  the  decision  of  highest  national  authority
      relating to Article  10  in  an  immigration  context.   That  is  the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in R (Farrakhan) v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2002]  EWCA  Civ   606.   In  that  case  the
      claimant was a citizen of the  United  States  and  the  leader  of  a
      religious, social and political group known as the  Nation  of  Islam.
      He was excluded from the United Kingdom following directions given  by
      the Secretary of State.  He applied for judicial review to  quash  the
      exclusion order and cited Article 10 of  the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights as supporting his claim to a right to  enter  the  UK  in
      order to have the freedom to express views to, and receive views from,
      his followers and to engage with them.

  38. The decision of the Court of Appeal is based  to  a  large  extent  on
      conclusions relating to the proper role of the Secretary of State, who
      in that case had set out at some  length  the  basis  upon  which  the
      decision was made' and sought to support it by  substantial  evidence.
      But in the course of  the  judgement  of  the  Court,  given  by  Lord
      Phillips MR, at [77], he said this:

           "The  other  factor  of  great  relevance   to   the   test   of
           proportionality is the very limited extent to which the right of
           freedom of expression  of  Mr  Farrakhan  was  restricted.   The
           reality is that it was a particular forum which  was  denied  to
           him rather than the freedom to express his views.   Furthermore,
           no restriction was placed on his  disseminating  information  or
           opinions within the UK by communication other than his  presence
           within the country.  In  making  this  observation,  we  do  not
           ignore the fact that freedom of expression extends to  receiving
           as well as imparting views and information and that those within
           this country were not able to receive these  from  Mr  Farrakhan
           face to face."

      That was evidently part of the consideration, an important part as  it
      is described, which led to the Court of  Appeal  rejecting  the  claim
      made on behalf of the claimant in that case.

  39. At first sight the distinction made in para 77  between  a  particular
      forum being denied to a person, rather than the freedom to express his
      views, seems to pose  considerable  difficulties  for  the  Appellant.
      That is because it is part of the background of the present case  that
      the  Appellant's  views,  including  the  film  'Fitna',  are   widely
      available in this country; and there  is  and  probably  could  be  no
      proposal to prevent their dissemination by any means  other  than  the
      Appellant's presence  here.   He  too,  therefore,  might  perhaps  be
      regarded as restricted only in the forum of  expression,  rather  than
      the content of what he says.  But it appears to us that the difficulty
      posed by Farrakhan's case is for a number  of  reasons  more  apparent
      than real.

  40. The first is that in  Tabernacle,  Laws  LJ  expresses  caution  about
      regarding the distinction between forum and content as a rigorous one.
       At [35] he says this:

           "In my judgement, the supposed distinction between  the  essence
           of a protest and the manner and form of its exercise, has to  be
           treated with considerable care.  In some cases it will be  real,
           in other  insubstantial.   It  all  depends  on  the  particular
           facts."

      That was a case in which, of course, the mode of protest was  camping,
      and camping in a particular place.  The judgement  of  the  Court  was
      that for the purposes of the expression for which freedom was claimed,
      being able to camp in the particular place  was  the  content  of  the
      protest and not only its form.

  41. With that caution in mind, we turn to the crucial distinction  between
      Farrakhan's case and the present.

  42. Farrakhan was a citizen of the United States of America.   He  had  no
      right to enter the United Kingdom other than in accordance with  leave
      given as the exercise of a positive decision  in  his  favour  by  the
      Secretary of State.  As he had no underlying right to enter the United
      Kingdom, Article 10, granting him freedom of expression, had to do all
      the work of constructing a right to  enter  that  might  override  the
      Secretary of State's decision excluding him.  Article  10  is  not  in
      substance a provision about immigration and it may not  be  surprising
      that in the context of the decision in Farrakhan, Article 10 failed to
      give a  right  powerful  enough  to  override  the  exclusion  of  the
      claimant.

  43. This case is entirely different.  As a Dutch national,  the  Appellant
      has an underlying right to come to the UK pursuant to  the  provisions
      of reg 11 of the EEA Regulations.  He has  that  right  unless  he  is
      validly prohibited from exercising it by a decision  taken  under  reg
      19, with reference to reg 21.  His Article 10 rights, accordingly only
      supplement a prima facie right to enter.  They do  not  of  themselves
      have to constitute or give rise  to  that  right.   It  seems  to  us,
      therefore, that in the case of a claimant who is a citizen  of  an  EU
      country,  a  considerably  smaller  infringement  of  the   right   of
      expression, may assist him, because it may be sufficient to show  that
      his prima facie right of free movement should prevail.

  44. There is  another  important  difference  between  Farrakhan  and  the
      present case.  Farrakhan was, as we have said, the leader of  a  group
      whose members he sought to  address  by  visiting  the  UK.   To  that
      extent, although his visit was said to have  political  and  religious
      dimensions if it took place, it was a private visit.  It was to be the
      visit of a leader to meet his members.  That is not  the  position  in
      the present case.  The purpose of the Appellant's proposed  visit  was
      to meet parliamentarians and other  policy-  and  decision-makers  and
      publicisers.  There was to be a question and answer session  in  which
      individuals would have an opportunity to challenge the  Appellant  and
      to see what his answers were.  And his purpose was clearly to  see  if
      others might be persuaded to take the same view as he does.  That is a
      function of a public nature in a sense  that  the  proposed  visit  by
      Farrakhan was not.  The proposal was to exercise the rights of freedom
      of expression for what may be  regarded  as  one  of  the  fundamental
      reasons for which those rights exist.

  45. What then, are those rights?  As Sedley  LJ  said  in  Redmond-Bate  v
      Director of Public Prosecutions 7 BHRC  375, a  decision  of  23  July
      1999:

           "Free  speech  includes  not  only  the  inoffensive,  but   the
           irritating, the contentious, the eccentric, the  heretical,  the
           unwelcome and the provocative, providing it does not  intend  to
           provoke violence.  Freedom only to speak  inoffensively  is  not
           worth having."

  46. But the matter goes further than that, because freedom of speech in  a
      democratic society is one of the ways in which  democracy  works.   It
      would be very rare for a government to be justified in restricting the
      freedom of expression of an opinion which might inform  the  votes  of
      voters as well as the law of lawmakers and the policy of policymakers.
       That is why the right to freedom of speech is a strong right.  It  is
      why the test is the high test set out by Laws  LJ  in  Tabernacle,  to
      which we have referred.  It is in accordance with that test  and  with
      the considerations to which we have just  referred  that  we  consider
      whether the decision in the present case could be justified.

  47. In Farrakhan's case, because there was, as we  would  say,  a  private
      function to the meeting, because the  claimant  was  a  United  States
      citizen, and because  the  restriction  was  only  as  to  forum,  the
      provisions of Article 10 were said not to be sufficient  to  give  the
      claimant a right to enter, despite the encroachment on his Article  10
      rights.  In other words, the interference with those rights was not in
      that case substantial enough to constitute an interference that  could
      not be justified under the  provisions  of  the  second  paragraph  of
      Article 10.

  48. In contrast, and because of the aspects of it that we have identified,
      we consider that in the present case the restriction  imposed  on  the
      Appellant by the refusal to admit him to  the  UK  was  a  substantive
      interference  with  his  right  of  freedom  of  expression.   It  was
      substantive because the proposed exercise of freedom of expression was
      one to  which  the  highest  value  ought  to  be  given  and  it  was
      substantive because the right to  freedom  of  movement  supports  the
      right of freedom of expression which he sought to exercise.

   Freedom of Speech: Proportionality and Justification of Interference

  49. We must therefore look to see whether there has been  or  could  be  a
      justification of the interference of that right.  We  refer  again  to
      the evidence.  The evidence is not that any particular  purpose  would
      be served by his exclusion.   There  is,  as  we  have  found  on  the
      evidence, no demonstrable threat to any of the values protected by the
      law of the UK.

  50. We have been referred to the decision of the European Court  of  Human
      Rights in IA v Turkey 45 EHRR 703.  That is  a  decision  in  which  a
      conviction under the blasphemy law of Turkey  was  challenged  by  the
      claimant.   He  had  published  a  book  criticising  Islam,  and  the
      criticism was  evidently  in  strong  and  offensive  terms.   He  was
      convicted under the applicable Turkish  law  and  claimed  before  the
      European Court that his conviction was a violation of his rights under
      Article 10.   He failed in that claim.  The Court took the  view  that
      Turkey was entitled to have the criminal law that it did, and to apply
      in the way that it had done.  There was no doubt in that case that the
      decision made by the  Turkish  Court  was  a  decision  which  was  in
      accordance with the Turkish legal order.

  51.  Miss Giovannetti points  out  that  the  Court  reminded  itself  and
      decided that although the rights  under  Article  10  are  strong  and
      broad, there are limits.  As it is put in  the  head-note,  those  who
      chose to exercise the freedom to manifest  their  religion  could  not
      reasonably expect to be  exempt  from  all  criticism.   They  had  to
      tolerate and accept the denial by others or  their  religious  beliefs
      and even the propagation of doctrines hostile to their faith.  But the
      case concerned not only comments that offended and  shocked,  or  were
      provocative opinion, but also an abusive  attack  on  the  Prophet  of
      Islam.  The measure, that is to say, the  existence  of  the  criminal
      statute and the conviction under it,  had  been  intended  to  provide
      protection against offensive attacks on matters regarded as sacred  by
      Muslims.  In that respect it had met  a  pressing  social  need.   The
      authorities could not be said to  have  overstepped  their  margin  of
      appreciation and the reasons given by the  Turkish  court  to  justify
      the measure had been relevant and sufficient.

  52. As Miss Giovannetti correctly points out, that case strongly draws the
      distinction at the Strasbourg level  between  criticism,  even  strong
      criticism and the expression  of  views  in  a  way  which  is  merely
      offensive.  But it does not appear to us to assist very greatly in the
      present case.

  53. That was a case where the effect of the national law was  to  prohibit
      the statement from being made.  The criminal law of  Turkey  prevented
      the claimant, IA, from writing, publishing and selling the  statements
      he  had  done.   He  claimed  that  Article  10  gave  him   a   right
      nevertheless.  There is no suggestion here  that  the  United  Kingdom
      proposes to (or could) prevent the statements made  by  the  Appellant
      from being made.  The question is only whether the Appellant should be
      admitted to the United Kingdom; and that admission would take place in
      the context of a state which, whether obliged to do so  or  willingly,
      accepts the fact that statements of the form made  by  the  Appellant,
      and indeed statements made by him, are lawfully in  circulation  here.
      So the first reason why we consider that no proper  justification  has
      been shown, is that in the circumstance  of  this  case,  and  on  the
      evidence before us, the measure is not demonstrated to have any effect
      at all.

  54. Secondly, the Appellant's exclusion is not necessary.  There  are  two
      reasons why we say that.  The first is that, as we  indicated  earlier
      in this determination, reg 19(3) has, mutatis mutandis, and  with  the
      addition of another factor,  precisely  the  same  considerations  for
      removal of a European National from the UK as apply to refusal of  his
      admission.  It is therefore highly unlikely to be necessary to exclude
      somebody on a speculative basis about what may happen, given that,  if
      there is, after his admission, any real ground  for  apprehending  the
      threat, he can be removed under reg 19(3) by  reference  to  the  same
      considerations as are invoked here.

  55. The other factor  is  the  existence  in  this  country  of  effective
      enforcement of law and order. The police forces in particular are well
      able to protect a right as fundamental in a democratic society as that
      of freedom of expression, and to prevent that right being exercised in
      a way which damages in fact, or threatens to  damage  any  fundamental
      interest of our society.

  56. For the reasons we have given, our conclusions are as follows.

      1.  Regulation 21(5)(c) incorporates a reference to conduct prohibited
      in the state in question, and there is no reason on  the  evidence  to
      suppose that that regulation as so interpreted applies to the  present
      case.

      2.  Secondly, if we are wrong about that, there is  in  any  event  no
      demonstrable risk of community disharmony or disorder arising from the
      Appellant's arrival.

      3.  Thirdly, even if reg 21(5)(c) applied, the decision would fail the
      test of proportionality, imposed generally by the European  Union  law
      and specifically by Regulation 21(5)(a).

      For those reasons the Appellant's appeal is allowed.



                                                                       [pic]

                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                            Date: 17 October
                                                                        2009

