

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

            CD (s. 10 curtailment: right of appeal) India [2008] UKAIT 00055


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 4 April 2008                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE

                                   Between

                                     CD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Nasin, Counsel, instructed by Messrs FLK
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L. Kalaher, Home Office Presenting Officer

A decision under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  that
involves the invalidation of any leave to enter or remain is to  be  treated
for the purposes of the 2002 Act as  a  curtailment  of  that  leave  within
section 82(2)(e), with the result that a  person  may  appeal  against  that
decision whilst he is in the United Kingdom, whether or not he has  made  an
asylum claim or a human rights claim.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, a citizen of India born on 17 July  1978,  was  granted
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a student on 31 October  2005.
    On 30 March 2006 he was granted leave to enter as a  student  until  31
    March 2007.

2.    On 21 February 2007, the appellant applied for leave to  remain  as  a
    student at Lloyds College, London, E7, studying for a BBA in Accounting
    and Finance.  On 1 April 2007 the appellant was granted leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom as a student until 30 March  2008,  in  order  to
    study at Lloyds College.

3.    On  13  December  2007,  however,  the  respondent  decided  that  the
    appellant  should  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions because it had  come  to  the  respondent's  attention  that
    Lloyds College was not a bona fide education establishment.   According
    to the respondent's letter, which accompanied her notice of decision:-

        "As part of an application for leave to remain as a student  signed
        by on you on 21 February 2007 you submitted a letter  of  enrolment
        from Lloyds College dated 21 February 2007  stating  that  you  had
        enrolled for a BBA Accounting and Finance course commencing  on  16
        January 2006 until  January  2009.   We  are  aware  from  our  own
        enquiries that Lloyds College is not, and never has  been,  a  bona
        fide educational establishment and that it is reasonable to believe
        that this would have been known to  any  person  claiming  to  have
        studied or enrolled there.

        Therefore,  we  are  satisfied,  on  the  basis  of  the   evidence
        available, that you have obtained leave to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom by means of deception.

        A decision has also been taken to remove you and spouse [sic]  from
        the United Kingdom pursuant to powers contained in Section 10(1)(b)
        of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  Enclosed are forms  IS151A
        which sets out [sic]  your  immigration  status  and  liability  to
        detention.  You may appeal against the decision to remove  you  and
        your spouse under Section 82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 2002 from abroad, on the basis of one  or  more  of  the
        grounds of appeal contained within form IS151A  Part  2  Notice  of
        Decision, attached.  In accordance with Section 10(8) of that  Act,
        this decision invalidates any leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom that you and your spouse have been granted.  You and
        your spouse may wish to take note of the conditions  of  the  'One-
        Stop' procedure set out in form IS75 and complete and  return  IS76
        if appropriate.  Both forms are attached.

        You and your spouse now  have  no  basis  of  stay  in  the  United
        Kingdom, and should make arrangements to leave the  United  Kingdom
        without delay.  If you and your spouse do not  depart  voluntarily,
        directions for your removal may be made."

4.    At the hearing  before  the  Immigration  Judge,  the  appellant  gave
    evidence.  He told the Immigration Judge that he was not satisfied with
    the  management  and  educational  standards  of  Lloyds  College  and,
    consequently, on 23 April 2007, he  decided  that  he  should  move  to
    Stevens College of Technology and Management, where he remained on  the
    same BBA course.

5.    Relying upon a letter of 21 February 2007 from Lloyds  College,  which
    gave the DfES reference number of 21933, the  Immigration  Judge  found
    that, certainly when the  appellant  applied  for  his  further  leave,
    Lloyds College was on the DfES register.   It  appeared  to  be  common
    ground before the Immigration Judge  that  at  some  subsequent  point,
    which the respondent was unable to identify, the college had ceased  to
    be on the register.  The significance  of  being  on  the  register  is
    apparent from paragraph 57(i) of the Immigration Rules, which  requires
    a person to have been accepted for a course of study  which  is  to  be
    provided by an organisation which is included  on  the  Department  for
    Education and Skills' Register of Education and Training Providers.

6.    The relevant provisions of section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999 are as follows:-

        "(1)     A person who is not a British citizen may be removed  from
             the United Kingdom, in accordance with directions given  by  an
             Immigration Officer, if -

            ...

            (b)  he uses deception in seeking (whether successfully or not)
                 leave to remain.

        (8) When a person is notified that a  decision  has  been  made  to
             remove him in accordance with this  section,  the  notification
             invalidates any leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
             previously given to him."

7.    It is common ground that  the  service  upon  the  appellant  of  form
    IS151A constituted notification for the purposes of section 10(8).   At
    paragraph 9 of the determination, the Immigration Judge found:-

        "9.      It seems to me to be not only draconian but plainly  wrong
             on the part of the respondent to  suggest  that  the  appellant
             obtained leave to remain by means of deception.  I reached that
             conclusion on the basis of the  evidence  before  me  that,  in
             February  2007  and  at  the  time  of  the  appellant's   last
             application for leave (21.2.08), Lloyds College was  indeed  on
             the  DfES  register  being  given  the   number   21933   (A15,
             respondent's bundle).  The respondent  is  wrong  to  say  that
             Lloyds  College  'never  has  been  a  bona  fide   educational
             establishment...'  It seems little short  of  astonishing  that
             the respondent would  seek  to  apply  such  legislation  to  a
             student with an exemplary past record who has fallen foul of  a
             failing College.  If the  respondent  had  taken  the  time  to
             research the  facts  she  would  have  discovered  that  Lloyds
             College was on the register certainly  in  February  2007  when
             [the appellant] last applied - indeed the evidence was  in  the
             respondent's bundle."

8.    The Immigration Judge went on to opine that the  same  predicament  as
    faced the appellant "must apply to many students from overseas who have
    spent a great deal of money and put much effort into their studies.  It
    is not suggested that [the appellant] is a poor student who has  failed
    to produce evidence of the taking and passing of relevant examinations.
     He is facing removal because,  the  respondent  submits,  he  employed
    deception.  For the reasons I have outlined that cannot be right."

9.    At  paragraph  11,  the  Immigration  Judge  accordingly  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal, with the result that he found that  "the  variation
    of leave application remains outstanding  before  the  respondent".   I
    have to say that it is unclear whether the appellant has made  such  an
    application.   It  is  possible  that,  in  saying  what  he  did,  the
    Immigration Judge considered that the grounds of  appeal  in  some  way
    constituted such an application since, at paragraph 10, he  found  that
    the appellant "had a legitimate expectation that the notice  of  appeal
    would receive proper attention from the Secretary of State".   I  shall
    return to this matter in due course.

10.   The respondent's grounds do not seek  to  criticise  the  findings  of
    fact of the Immigration Judge, including the finding that the appellant
    had not  used  deception  in  seeking  his  further  leave  to  remain.
    Instead,  the  grounds  assert  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had   no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  The immigration decision is  said  by
    the appellant  to  fall  within  section  82(2)(g)  of  the  2002  Act.
    Accordingly, section 92 provides that there is no in-country  right  of
    appeal, unless the appellant has made an asylum claim or a human rights
    claim.  The respondent considers that "It is clear that  in  this  case
    the appellant has not made such a claim" and this was not contested  by
    Mr Nasin at the reconsideration hearing.

11.   For reasons that will become apparent, it is convenient  here  to  set
    out not only section 82(2)(g) but also section 82(2)(e)::-

        "(2)     In this Part 'immigration decision' means -

                 ...

                 (e)    variation of a person's leave to enter or remain in
                 the United Kingdom if when the variation takes  effect  the
                 person has no leave to enter or remain;

            ...

            (g)  a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
                 Kingdom by way of directions under section  10(1)(a),  (b),
                 (ba) or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  (c.33)
                 (removal of person unlawfully in United Kingdom)".

12.   The relevant provisions of section 92 are:-

        "(1)     A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he is in
             the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to which this
             section applies.

        (2) This section  applies  to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
             decision of a kind specified in  section  82(2)(c),  (d),  (e),
             (f), (ha) and (j).

        ...

        (4) This section also applies to an appeal against  an  immigration
             decision if the appellant -

           (a)   has made an asylum claim, or a human rights  claim,  while
                 in the United Kingdom, or

           (b)   is an EEA national or a member of the  family  of  an  EEA
                 national and makes a claim to the Secretary of  State  that
                 the decision breaches  the  appellant's  rights  under  the
                 Community Treaties in respect of entry to or  residence  in
                 the United Kingdom."

13.   At the present time, the definitions  of  "asylum  claim"  and  "human
    rights claim" in section 113 of the 2002 Act read as follows  (although
    they  are  prospectively  amended  by  the  Immigration,   Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006):-

        "'asylum claim' means a claim made by a person to the Secretary  of
        State at a place designated by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  to
        remove the person from or  to  require  him  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
        Refugee Convention,

        ...

        'human rights claim'  means  a  claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
        Secretary of State at a place designated by the Secretary of  State
        that to remove the person from or require him to leave  the  United
        Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
        1998 (c.42) (public authority not to act contrary to Convention) as
        being incompatible with his Convention rights."

14.   For the appellant, Mr Nasin submitted that the appellant  had  an  in-
    country right of appeal because, in his notice of appeal, the appellant
    had raised a human rights claim.

15.   The problem with that submission is that a human rights claim made  in
    this way cannot be said to have been made to the Secretary of State. In
    ST (s92(4)(a): meaning of "has made") Turkey [2007]  UKAIT  00085,  the
    Tribunal (at paragraph 11) said that:-

        "As the Tribunal pointed out in SS &  Others  Turkey  [2006]  UKAIT
        00074, the requirement that the claim be made to the  Secretary  of
        State means that if the only claim is in  grounds  of  appeal,  the
        requirements of s113 are met if the appeal was  to  an  Adjudicator
        before 4 [April] 2005 because the appeals process was then that  an
        in-country appeal had to be lodged with the Secretary of State.   A
        claim made only in grounds of appeal to this Tribunal, however,  is
        not lodged with the Secretary of State and  cannot  therefore  meet
        the requirements of s113."

16.   Mr Nasin's alternative submission, however,  is  much  more  powerful.
    This is to the effect that the decision which the  respondent  took  in
    the present case, however else it might  be  categorised,  amounted  in
    practice to a "variation of a person's leave to enter or remain in  the
    United Kingdom" such that "when the variation takes effect  the  person
    has no leave to  enter  or  remain"  and,  thus,  fell  within  section
    82(2)(e) of the 2002 Act.  As can  be  seen,  an  immigration  decision
    under section 82(2)(e) is a decision of a  kind  to  which  section  92
    applies, with the result that there is an in-country right  of  appeal,
    regardless of whether the appellant has made an asylum claim or a human
    rights claim.

17.   For the respondent, Ms Kalaher submitted that, on a  proper  analysis,
    the respondent had not varied  the  appellant's  leave  to  remain,  as
    described in section 82(2)(e), but had made a decision that was of  the
    kind described in section 82(2)(g).  So far as  section  10(8)  of  the
    1999 Act was concerned, the notification of that  immigration  decision
    had invalidated the appellant's leave to remain, which was not the same
    as curtailing the appellant's leave under section 82(1)(e).

18.   On the facts as she perceived them to be, the  respondent  could  have
    curtailed the appellant's  leave  to  remain.   Paragraph  323  of  the
    Immigration Rules provides, inter alia, that a person's leave to  enter
    or remain may be curtailed:-

        "(i)     on any of the grounds  set  out  in  paragraph  322(2)-(5)
             above; or

        (ii)     if he ceases to meet the requirements of the  Rules  under
             which his leave to enter or remain was granted."

19.   Paragraph 322(2) and (3) are:-

        "(2)     the making of false  representations  or  the  failure  to
             disclose any material fact for the purpose of  obtaining  leave
             to enter or a previous variation of leave.

        (3) failure to comply with any conditions attached to the grant  of
             leave to enter or remain."

20.   In the present case,  the  respondent  did  not  proceed  under  those
    provisions, which undoubtedly would have fallen within section 82(2)(e)
    and thus have afforded the appellant an  in-country  right  of  appeal.
    Instead, she invoked section 10 of the 1999 Act and  thereby  not  only
    achieved the de facto termination of the appellant's  leave  to  remain
    but also took  an  important  step  towards  securing  the  appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom.

21.   At this point, I should record  that  it  was  common  ground  at  the
    reconsideration hearing that, whatever else  the  immigration  decision
    might have been, it was not a refusal to vary the appellant's leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  (section  82(2)(d)).   The  respondent's
    grounds criticise the Immigration Judge for purporting  to  record,  at
    paragraph 1 of the determination, that the decision was  to  refuse  to
    vary leave to remain.  However, it is plain from  that  paragraph  that
    the Immigration  Judge  also  recognised  that  the  decision  involved
    removal.  In saying what he did in paragraph 1, the  Immigration  Judge
    was, no doubt,  following  what  was  said  on  the  respondent's  form
    ICD.1989 05/05, which, under the heading "Decision",  stated  that  "On
    13/12/07 a decision was made to refuse to vary leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom".  In the circumstances, the Immigration  Judge's  error
    was perhaps understandable; but, in any event, it was not material.

22.   If a person has never had any leave to enter or remain in  the  United
    Kingdom, or has no such leave at the date of the  immigration  decision
    in question, there is plainly a policy justification for limiting  that
    person's right of appeal, in the way provided in section 92 of the 2002
    Act.  If, however, a person does have such leave,  the  position  would
    seem to be otherwise, else the variation of a person's leave  to  enter
    or remain, so that leave is curtailed, would not  sensibly  sit  within
    section 92(2).  Where, on the very same facts as could give rise  to  a
    decision to curtail, the respondent instead decides to  invoke  section
    10 of the 1999 Act, with precisely the same effect in practice, so  far
    as the person in question is concerned, in that his  current  leave  is
    brought to an end by operation of section 10(8), it is very hard to see
    how Parliament could have intended that person to be deprived of an in-
    country right of appeal.  The fact that such a  person  might,  in  the
    absence of an in-country right of appeal, be able to apply for judicial
    review against the decision of the respondent to remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom is in no sense an answer. The fact that section 10(8) of
    the 1999 Act uses the word "invalidates", in  relation  to  any  extant
    leave, does not preclude the immigration decision from  falling  within
    section 82(2)(e), as well as  section  82(2)(g).  If  the  position  is
    equivocal, then as the Tribunal has said in GO (Right of appeal: ss  89
    and 92) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00025, any ambiguity in provisions dealing
    with rights of appeal should be resolved by a construction  that  would
    preserve rather than remove those rights.

23.   I have therefore  concluded  that  the  immigration  decision  in  the
    present case, whilst falling within section 82(2)(g),  is  also  to  be
    categorised as one which falls within section 82(2)(e).  Whatever  else
    it did, the administrative process that the respondent chose to  adopt,
    by invalidating the appellant's leave to remain in the United  Kingdom,
    constituted a curtailment of that leave, just as if paragraph  323  had
    been invoked.  The appellant, accordingly, had an in-country  right  of
    appeal.

24.   As I have already indicated, no issue is taken  with  the  Immigration
    Judge's findings of fact.  In view of those findings,  it  is  manifest
    that the respondent had no basis for making a decision by reference  to
    section 10 of the 1999 Act, that the appellant should be  removed  from
    the United Kingdom by way of directions.  The appellant  had  not  used
    deception in seeking leave to remain.

25.   The appeal  accordingly  fell  to  be  allowed.   As  I  have  already
    mentioned, the Immigration Judge, at paragraph 11 of the determination,
    appears to have been of  the  view  that  the  appellant  had  made  an
    application for  variation  of  leave,  which,  in  the  light  of  the
    Immigration  Judge's  decision,   remained   outstanding   before   the
    respondent.  As far as I can see, there is no such application.  If  in
    fact there is, this determination will not have any effect upon it.  If
    there is not, the last part of paragraph 11 of the Immigration  Judge's
    determination can be disregarded.

26.    There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the
    Immigration Judge and (subject to what is said above) I order  that  it
    shall stand.


Signed

Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane

