

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

          NO (Post-Study Work - award needed by date of application) Nigeria
                                                          [2009] UKAIT 00054


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House                     |                             |
|on 8th September 2009                         |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER


                                   Between


                                     NO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr J S Ogolo, solicitor, Joves Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J Saunders, Home Office presenting officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This determination supplements the determination of  the  Tribunal  in  KAN
(Post-Study Work - degree award required) India  [2009]  UKAIT  00022.  The
requirement of paragraph 245Z and paragraphs 51 to 55 of Appendix A  of  HC
395 as amended is that in order to be entitled to points the applicant must
have been awarded the requisite qualification in respect  of  which  points
are claimed by the date of the application.


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 13th  April  1978.   His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent,  made  on  3rd  November
    2008, refusing his application to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant under paragraph 245Z  of  HC 395,  as
    amended, was dismissed under the immigration rules and on human  rights
    grounds under article 8 of the ECHR, after  a  hearing  by  Immigration
    Judge P A Grant-Hutchison, in a determination promulgated on 23rd  June
    2009.

 2. The background to this appeal is that on 16th June 2006  the  appellant
    was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom until 31st  October  2008
    as a student.  On 2nd October 2008 he applied for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.   As  Mr
    Saunders pointed out during the hearing before me, the qualification in
    respect of which the appellant claimed 20 points in his application was
    a United Kingdom recognised degree at post-graduate level.   In  answer
    to question G2 in the appellant's application form, it was stated to be
    a Master's Degree in Energy Futures -  Oil  and  Gas,  awarded  by  the
    School of Engineering (at the University of Aberdeen).   The  appellant
    claimed 20 points in respect of having  studied  at  a  United  Kingdom
    institution, that is to say the University of Aberdeen.  He claimed  20
    points in respect of having leave to remain as  a  student  during  his
    period  of  study  and  15  points  on  the  basis  that  the  eligible
    qualification was obtained  in  the  twelve  month  period  immediately
    before submitting the application. Section K1 of the  application  form
    stated that the applicant must have  made  the  application  for  entry
    clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
    within 12 months of obtaining the relevant qualification. It went on to
    say:

         "Please tick the box to confirm that the applicant obtained his/her
         eligible qualification in the 12 month  period  immediately  before
         submitting this application."

    The appellant ticked the box.

 3. In support of his application the appellant submitted a letter from  Dr
    Thangavel Thevar, the coordinator of the MSc (Energy Futures) programme
    in the School of Engineering  at  the  University  of  Aberdeen,  which
    confirmed that the appellant was  currently  a  full-time  MSc  (Energy
    Futures - Oil and Gas) student in the School of Engineering, University
    of Aberdeen.  The letter read as follows:

         "This letter is to confirm that Mr. O is currently a full time  Msc
         (Energy Futures-Oil and Gas)  student  in  School  of  Engineering,
         University of Aberdeen.  The programme  runs  from  18th September
         2007 to 30th September 2008.

         Mr. O has satisfied all requirements  for  the  award  of  a  Post-
         Graduate diploma.  He is  currently  working  on  his  dissertation
         which is due for submission on 30th September 2008.  Subject to his
         successful completion of the dissertation, he  will  be  awarded  a
         Master's degree in November 2008."

 4. During the hearing before me Mr Ogolo suggested that the appellant  had
    earned the necessary points in respect of the award of a  post-graduate
    diploma but it is perfectly plain from the appellant's application form
    that he did not  make  the  application  based  upon  the  award  of  a
    postgraduate diploma and Mr Ogolo was not able to point to any evidence
    before the immigration judge, or me  for  that  matter,  that  a  post-
    graduate diploma had in fact been awarded to the appellant,  so  as  to
    comply with the requirements of the immigration rules.

 5. It is clear from the letter of refusal, dated 3rd November  2008,  that
    the Secretary of State refused the application  because  the  appellant
    had failed to provide a certificate or letter confirming  that  he  had
    been awarded the Master's degree he claimed.  This meant that he failed
    to obtain  20  points  for  his  qualification  and  failed  to  obtain
    15 points for having obtained the award within twelve  months  of  his
    application.

 6. In the respondent's bundle before the immigration  judge  there  was  a
    certificate from the University of Aberdeen showing that the degree  of
    Master of Science in Energy Futures (Oil and Gas)  was  conferred  upon
    the appellant on  28th  November  2008.   The  appellant  attended  the
    hearing and I am prepared to accept that he showed to  the  immigration
    judge the original certificate which he had with  him  at  the  hearing
    before me.  In paragraph 11 of his determination the immigration  judge
    said this:

         "Ultimately the only matter that was in dispute between the parties
         was whether or not the Appellant could claim 15 points  for  having
         obtained an appropriate qualification.   Whereas  I  can  perfectly
         understand why the Appellant applied when he did, as  a  matter  of
         fact he did not, as is required, obtain his degree  in  the  twelve
         months prior to application.  Indeed the letter from the University
         of Aberdeen only states that he  will  obtain  his  degree  if  his
         dissertation is successfully completed.  I am  prepared  to  accept
         that the Appellant did indeed obtain his degree but that has little
         effect on the respondent's decision as it was obtained out with the
         relevant period."

 7. In paragraph 13 he said that for the reasons stated above  he  did  not
    accept the reasons given by the respondent  in  the  refusal  to  allow
    entry clearance (sic) to the appellant.  He said the appellant had  not
    discharged the burden of proof and the reasons given by the  respondent
    did justify the refusal.

 8. The appellant applied  for  reconsideration  of  the  appeal  on  three
    grounds.  The first was that there was an inherent contradiction in the
    statement  by  the  immigration  judge   in   paragraph   13   of   his
    determination, that  he  did  not  accept  the  reasons  given  by  the
    respondent in the refusal to allow entry clearance to the appellant and
    his statement that the appellant had not discharged the burden of proof
    and the reasons given by the respondent did justify the  refusal.   The
    second ground asserted that on the date of the application, 2nd October
    2008, the appellant submitted a letter from the  university  confirming
    that  he  qualified  for  the   post-graduate   diploma   pending   his
    dissertation to be awarded the Master's degree.   It  said  the  letter
    clearly indicated the date of award and the board.   It  was  therefore
    the appellant's case that on the date of application he  satisfied  the
    requirements under the rules  except  that  he  had  not  obtained  the
    original certificate for the master's award.  The third ground was that
    the immigration judge failed  to  address  the  appellant's  article  8
    rights.

 9. On 10th July 2009 Senior Immigration Judge Warr ordered reconsideration
    for the following reasons:-

         "The first  sentence  of  the  ante-penultimate  paragraph  of  the
         determination may be contradictory (sporting a redundant "not")  or
         it may be that the judge was not satisfied  with  all  the  reasons
         advanced by the respondent for the decision  (see  paragraph  11  -
         some of the respondent's reasons appear to have been dropped.)

         In the premises it is appropriate to order reconsideration."

10. At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Saunders  agreed  that  there  was  a
    contradiction in paragraph 13 of the  determination  but  he  submitted
    that it did not amount to a material error of law.  I  agree.  He  also
    submitted, as was the case, that there were no grounds of appeal  under
    article 8 of the ECHR.  Mr Saunders submitted  the  letter  which  the
    appellant attached to his application did not satisfy the  requirements
    of the immigration rules since at  the  date  of  the  application  the
    appellant had not been awarded a Master's degree.

11. Mr Ogolo submitted that the letter satisfied the rules.

12. Paragraph 245Z of HC 395, as amended, provides that in order to qualify
    for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant, an applicant
    must have a minimum of 75 points under paragraphs 51 to 58 of  Appendix
    A.  Paragraph 51 of Appendix A states that an  applicant  applying  for
    entry clearance or leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant must score 75 points for attributes.  Paragraph  52  says  that
    available points are shown in Table 9.  Table 9 shows that an applicant
    is entitled to 20 points if  he  has  been  awarded  a  United  Kingdom
    recognised bachelor or  postgraduate  degree.   It  shows  that  he  is
    entitled to 20 points if he studied for his award at a  United  Kingdom
    institution that was a United Kingdom recognised or listed body.  He is
    entitled to 20 points if his periods of United  Kingdom  study  towards
    his eligible award were undertaken while he had entry clearance,  leave
    to enter or leave to remain in the United Kingdom and 15 points  if  he
    made the application for entry clearance or leave to remain as a Tier 1
    (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  within  twelve  months  of  obtaining  the
    relevant qualification.  Paragraph 54  says  that  specified  documents
    must be provided as evidence of the qualification.  Paragraph  55  says
    that a qualification will have been deemed to have been  'obtained'  on
    the date on which the applicant was first notified in  writing  by  the
    awarding institution, that the qualification had been awarded.

13. The first issue to be decided is whether the appellant was entitled  to
    rely upon post-decision evidence that he had been awarded an MSc by the
    University of Aberdeen.  Section 85(4) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 provides as follows:

         "On an appeal under  section  82(1),  83(2)  or  83A(2)  against  a
         decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter  which
         it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,  including
         evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the  date  of  the
         decision."

14. In paragraph 7 of their determination in EA (Section  85(4)  explained)
    Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00013 the Tribunal said this:

         "It is thus not open to an appellant to argue simply that,  on  the
         date of the hearing, he meets the requirements of  the  immigration
         rules.  He can succeed only if he shows that the decision that  was
         made was one which was  not  in  accordance  with  the  immigration
         rules.  Section 85(4) allows him  to  show  that  by  reference  to
         evidence of matters postdating the decision itself, and it may well
         be that the effect is that the question for the Tribunal in an  in-
         country case is whether the decision can be justified as a  correct
         one at the date of the hearing.  But that does not  mean  that  the
         Tribunal  is  the  primary  decision-maker.   The  Tribunal's  task
         remains that of hearing appeals against  decisions  actually  made.
         The correct interpretation of s85(4) is perhaps best  indicated  by
         saying that the appellant cannot succeed by showing that  he  would
         be granted leave if he made an  application  on  the  date  of  the
         hearing: he can succeed only by showing that he  would  be  granted
         leave if he made, on the date of the hearing, the same  application
         as  that  which  resulted  in  the  decision  under  appeal.    The
         subsection does not permit an appellant to change  his  case  under
         the Immigration Rules for being allowed to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  (That is, of course, without prejudice to the  fact  that
         s84(1) may  allow  the  appeal  to  succeed  on  different  grounds
         entirely.)"

15. This passage from the determination of the Tribunal in EA was quoted in
    paragraph 9 of his determination but the immigration judge did  not  go
    on to consider expressly what the effect of it should  have  been  upon
    his determination of  the  appeal.   On  the  one  hand  he  said  that
    ultimately the only matter that was in dispute between the parties  was
    whether or not the appellant could claim 15 points for having  obtained
    an appropriate qualification but on the other hand went on to say  that
    he was prepared to accept the appellant did indeed  obtain  his  degree
    but that had little effect on  the  respondent's  decision  as  it  was
    obtained out with the relevant period.

16. In paragraph 74 of their determination in NA &  Others  (Tier  1  Post-
    Study Work-funds) [2009] UKAIT 00025 the Tribunal said this:

         "Thus it can be seen that nothing in the Immigration Rules  dealing
         with Points Based applications or in the Policy Guidance,  has  the
         effect of rendering s.85(4)'s potential application to Tier 1 (Post-
         Study  Work)  appeals  nugatory.  If  it  had  been  intended  that
         applicants  could  not  succeed  unless  they  had  submitted   the
         specified documents at the time of applying that  could  have  been
         specified; but it was not. The nature  of  the  decision  concerned
         (one whose substance relates  in  part  to  an  historic  timeline)
         limits the scope of application of this sub-section, but  does  not
         exclude it entirely. Neither the  Rules  nor  the  Policy  Guidance
         stipulates anything either  about  the  reception  of  evidence  on
         appeal, which (for in-country appeals) is governed by s.85(4)."

    The Tribunal's  reference  to  an  historic  timeline  related  to  the
    requirement that an appellant should have had �800 in funds at the date
    of the decision and three months immediately prior thereto.

17. The effect of the decision of the Tribunal in NA & Others  is  that  an
    appellant can rely upon post-decision evidence, that is to say evidence
    adduced at the hearing, to show that he had the necessary funds at  and
    prior to the date of the application but not at  any  subsequent  time.
    Thus evidence that he had the  necessary  funds  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing and three months immediately prior thereto is not admissible to
    show compliance with the requirements of the immigration rules.

   18. Table 9 of Appendix A makes provision for the award of 15 points if:

         "The applicant made the application for entry clearance or leave to
         remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant within  12  months  of
         obtaining the relevant qualification."

19. In my view  this  provision  clearly  requires  an  applicant  to  have
    obtained the relevant qualification by the date of the application, and
    not more than 12  months  before.  It  disentitles  an  applicant  from
    relying upon a qualification which he hopes to obtain  in  the  future.
    This is borne out by the provisions of the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  of
    the Points Based System - Policy Guidance which state that an applicant
    can claim 15 points if the qualification  for  which  he  is  claiming
    points was obtained within the twelve  months  immediately  before  his
    application for entry clearance or leave to remain under Tier 1  (Post-
    Study Work).

20. It is worth noting  that  the  application  form  which  the  appellant
    completed asked at question G1 "What qualification does  the  applicant
    have (my underlining)?"  and  at  G2  asked  for  the  details  of  the
    applicant's qualification.

21. Unless an applicant is applying for leave to remain and has or was last
    granted, leave to remain as a participant in the International Graduate
    Scheme (or its predecessor) or as a participant in  the  Fresh  Talent:
    Working  in  Scotland  Scheme,  he  cannot  score  the  75  points  for
    attributes required by paragraph 51 of Appendix A unless he obtains  15
    points on account of having made the application within  12  months  of
    obtaining the relevant qualification.

22. In KAN (Post-Study Work - degree award  required)  India  [2009]  UKAIT
    00022  it  was  held  that  the  requirements  of  paragraph  245Z  and
    paragraphs 51 to 55 of Appendix A of HC 395, as amended, were  that  in
    order to be entitled to points an applicant must have been awarded  the
    requisite qualification in respect of which points  were  claimed.   It
    was not sufficient to show that the qualification would be awarded.  As
    the appellant in that case had not obtained the relevant  qualification
    by the date of the original hearing the determination did not  strictly
    deal  with  the  issue  whether  an  appellant  could   rely   upon   a
    qualification obtained after the date of the application.

23. In my view, for the reasons which I have given, in order to satisfy the
    requirements of paragraph  51  of  Appendix  A  there  is  an  historic
    timeline applicable to  the  date  by  which  an  applicant  must  have
    obtained the qualification he relies upon, and that date is the date of
    the application.

24. This determination supplements the determination  of  the  Tribunal  in
    KAN. The requirement of paragraph 245Z  and  paragraphs  51  to  55  of
    Appendix A of HC 395 as amended is that in  order  to  be  entitled  to
    points the applicant must have been awarded the requisite qualification
    in respect of which points are claimed by the date of the  application.



25. In this case the appellant had not been awarded the MSc  for  which  he
    was studying at the date  of  the  application  since  he  had  yet  to
    complete his dissertation, upon which the award depended.

26. In these in these circumstances the immigration judge did  not  make  a
    material error of law in his determination of the appeal.   There  were
    no human rights grounds of appeal under article 8 of the ECHR  so  that
    his decision dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds was  otiose.
    His determination dismissing the appeal  under  the  immigration  rules
    shall stand.


Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Spencer
