
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Shah ('Cart' judicial review: nature and consequences)  [2018]  UKUT  00051
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2017                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                                 ISRAR SHAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B. Singh, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Malik Law
                  Chambers (Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) A judicial review challenge to the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
refuse permission to appeal a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  a
challenge to  the  lawfulness  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision.  It  is
emphatically not an opportunity for a party to raise new grounds  of  appeal
against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

(2) Whether or not a person succeeds in obtaining  permission  of  the  High
Court under CPR 54.7A to judicially review a decision to  refuse  permission
to appeal, with the consequence that the  decision  is  quashed,  the  Upper
Tribunal will need to be satisfied that there is an  error  of  law  in  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal before that decision can  be  disturbed.
Judicial review grounds which fail to show the decision refusing  permission
was wrong in law are highly unlikely to lead to such a result.

(3) Those responsible for drafting judicial review grounds which  are  found
by the Upper Tribunal to contain misrepresentations or other  falsities  may
be referred by that Tribunal to the High Court,  for  consideration  whether
an explanation is required from the solicitors and/or counsel involved.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


          Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 22 April  1978.   He
       arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 March  1981  when  he  was  just
       under three years old.  The reason for his entry  was  to  join  his
       father. In December 1999, the appellant was granted indefinite leave
       to remain.


    2.  The  appellant  attempted  to   become   a   British   Citizen   by
       naturalisation in 2005 but was refused by the respondent as a result
       of his criminal convictions.


    3. The existence of  those  pre-2005  convictions  is  acknowledged  in
       paragraph 6 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge,  which
       is the subject of this appeal.  There,  the  judge  said  that  "the
       appellant's offending history is not in dispute, it is set out  here
       and given the agreement  of  the  parties,  and  antecedent  details
       before me, I make findings of fact to reflect his relatively lengthy
       offending history  as  set  out  in  the  Police  National  Computer
       Printout provided to me".


    4. Three convictions, arising after the refusal of  the  naturalisation
       application,  were  said  by  the  judge  to  be  "advanced  by  the
       respondent as particularly pertinent".  These are:-

                 1) April 2006: six months  custody  for  four  offences  of
                    common assault;
                 2) February 2007: twelve weeks custody  for  assault  on  a
                    constable;
                 3) March 2016: 40 months custody for robbery.


    5. On 12 October  2016,  the  respondent  served  on  the  appellant  a
       deportation decision, pursuant section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act
       2007. The appellant responded with submissions, which  were  treated
       by the respondent as a human rights claim.  The respondent concluded
       that the appellant did not forward any exceptions towards  automatic
       deportation containing section 32(5) of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.
       The appellant appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, whose decision we have just mentioned.






       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    6. The judge's findings and reasons are set out at paragraph 22  to  73
       of his decision.  The judge noted that  the  appellant  married  his
       wife  in  Pakistan  in  1996.   They  have  three   children,   born
       respectively in February 1998. March 2001 and  November  2013.   The
       children are all British citizens.


    7. At paragraph 24, the judge noted that he had read  the  comments  of
       the  sentencing  judge,  who  imposed  the  sentence  of  40  months
       imprisonment for robbery.  During the course  of  the  robbery,  the
       sentencing judge noted that the appellant used a weapon,  comprising
       a lump of wood with a spike on the end, which caused injury  to  his
       victim.  The First-tier Tribunal judge noted that the appellant  had
       an alcohol  problem,  which  the  sentencing  judge  regarded  as  a
       mitigating factor, in this particular case.


    8. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the appellant's remorse  to
       be genuine and that he had become drug-free whilst  in  custody,  in
       that he was being given methadone to  treat  his  heroin  addiction.
       The  judge  considered  that  the  appellant's  drug   and   alcohol
       dependency were long-standing issues. His family had sent him to the
       Priory Rehabilitation Unit in 2013, in order to try to  address  the
       appellant's addictions, but without success.


    9. The support of the appellant from his wife and family had  been,  in
       the  judge's  words,  "unfailing   and   remains   constant".    The
       appellant's  father  had  a  nine-bedroom  family  home  where   the
       appellant could live in the future.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
       appellant's motivation to address his addiction was "higher than  it
       has been previously".

   10. Despite all this, the judge found, in paragraph 32, that the  length
       of the appellant's addiction "as corroborated  by  his  lengthy  and
       persistent criminal offending, is significant, the addictions are of
       long-standing".  Accordingly, despite the  express  resolve  of  the
       appellant, the judge found that there was  "a  significant  risk  of
       relapse from his present progress in custody in view of his previous
       self-confessed  relapse  from  drug  rehabilitation,  and   previous
       inabilities to break addictions despite motivation and support to do
       so."

   11. The judge noted that in June 2006, the appellant received a decision
       to make a deportation order, which was subsequently  withdrawn.   In
       April 2007, the appellant had received a warning  letter  after  his
       twelve-week sentence was imposed.  This indicated that revocation of
       the appellant's indefinite leave to remain would be considered if he
       came to the adverse attention of  the  authorities.   This  led  the
       judge to conclude:-


          "In my  judgment,  the  perilous  consequences  of  his  continued
             offending were abundantly clear, despite those warnings he was
             unable to shake the addiction that bedevils him,  that  is  an
             indicator of the depths of that addiction and is reflected  in
             the risk that I  find  of  further  relapses  in  the  future"
             (paragraph 33).

   12.  The judge found that  the  appellant's  marriage  was  genuine  and
       subsisting. The appellant's wife gave  evidence,  making  clear  her
       commitment. She said she had last been in Pakistan two  and  a  half
       years ago and that her father and brother remain  in  that  country.
       However, according to the appellant's wife, "her father only  barely
       gets on with the appellant and could not support him  in  the  event
       that he had to return to Pakistan". (Paragraph 34).


   13. At paragraph 35, the judge began his assessment of the  position  of
       the appellant's children, bearing in  mind  the  duties  imposed  by
       section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  In
       particular,  the  judge  had  read  "the  heartfelt  letter  of  the
       appellant's older boys".  The judge accepted that  the  boys  "would
       miss their father deeply, and would wish to help him.  They  clearly
       have some insight into their father's difficulties and  wish  to  be
       able to support him in the future".


   14. The appellant's oldest child, having become an adult, was "acting to
       an extent as a father  figure  in  the  absence  from  home  of  the
       appellant.  But I do not find that he is [in any  way]  an  adequate
       substitute for his father" (paragraph 36).

   15.  The middle child was  not  behaving  well  at  school.   There  was
       evidence that the appellant's absence was having an  adverse  impact
       on the child.  The judge made a further finding that there would  be
       a "self-evident impact" on the youngest of the children, as a result
       of the appellant's absence.

   16. The judge, accordingly, concluded at paragraph 38 that it  would  be
       in the best interests of each of the children for the  appellant  to
       be able to live with the family unit.  The judge concluded that  the
       children, having lived their entire lives in the United Kingdom  and
       having no real or practical knowledge of Pakistan, could  not  enjoy
       the full support of the welfare state in the United Kingdom, if they
       were to leave with  the  appellant.   Although  regular  Skype  type
       contact between the appellant and the children would be possible, it
       would not remove the risk of adverse impact, as  identified  by  the
       judge.

   17. So far as the appellant's wife was concerned, the deportation of the
       appellant would have "a severe impact upon" her  marriage.   Indeed,
       the  judge  found,  that,  despite  contact  during   holidays   and
       electronic communication at other times, "deportation might be fatal
       to a marriage".

   18. At paragraph 43, the  judge  reiterated  the  adverse  impact  which
       deportation would have on the children, finding additionally that  a
       strain would be placed upon the appellant's wife "as  the  remaining
       parent".

   19. At paragraph 46, the judge noted  that  the  appellant's  continuing
       treatment by medication for his heart.  The judge noted  that  there
       was no evidence that such medication was unavailable in Pakistan and
       he found in any event the appellant's family would be able to assist
       in the funding of such medication.

   20. Applying RG (automatic deport - section  33(2)(a)  exception)  Nepal
       [2010] UKUT 273,  the  judge  gave  "careful  consideration  to  the
       factors set out at paragraph 70-73 of Maslov v Austria  [2009]  INLR
       47 ECHR". (Paragraph 48).  Particular care was required in  relation
       to consideration of the Article 8 impact on those who were  lawfully
       resident in the United Kingdom at the  time  when  the  offence  was
       committed.  The judge noted that the appellant's wife children  were
       lawfully resident at that time.

   21. In paragraph 49, the judge identified that a requirement in Maslov v
       Austria was to strike a fair balance between an appellant's right to
       family and private life and the prevention of  disorder  and  crime.
       In doing so, the relevant criteria were (i) the nature  and  gravity
       of the claimant's offences; (ii) the length of his stay in the  host
       country; (iii) any period which elapsed between  the  commission  of
       the offences and the impugned measure  and  the  claimant's  conduct
       during that period; and (iv) the solidity of  the  social,  cultural
       and  family  ties  with  the  host  country  and  the   country   of
       destination.

   22. At paragraph 50, the judge noted  the  gravity  of  the  offence  of
       robbery committed by the appellant, including what was described  as
       a "serious offence of violence".   The  judge  also  considered  the
       robbery offence as  constituting  "an  escalation  in  the  type  of
       offending undertaken by the appellant".   On  the  other  hand,  the
       judge expressly noted that the appellant  had  been  in  the  United
       Kingdom for 37 years since he was two years of age.   In  effect  he
       has been raised and spent almost all of his life in  the  UK".   The
       appellant, however, had a "lengthy record  of  offending  over  many
       years, and the nature of the offending is escalating".

   23. At paragraph 51, the judge kept in mind the judgment of Lord Reed in
       Hesham Ali  [Iraq] v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 in which Lord Reed endorsed
       a "structured approach to proportionality".  According to Lord Reed,
       "the critical issue for the Tribunal  would  generally  be  whether,
       giving due weight to the strength of  the  public  interest  in  the
       deportation of the offender in the case before  it,  the  article  8
       claim is sufficiently strong to add  weight.   In  general,  only  a
       claim  which  is  very  strong  indeed  -  very  compelling...  will
       succeed".

   24. In paragraph 53, the judge began his analysis, by reference  to  the
       Immigration Rules.  At  paragraph  53,  the  judge  noted  that  the
       appellant, having received a sentence of  40  months'  imprisonment,
       fell within paragraph 398(b) of the Rules and that  accordingly  the
       judge needed to consider the provisions of paragraph 399.

   25. Given that the appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
       relationship with the child under the age of 18,  who  was  British,
       the judge considered whether it  would  be  "unduly  harsh  for  his
       children to live in Pakistan".  In light of the judge's findings, as
       set  out  earlier,  he  concluded  that  "despite   their   father's
       offending, ... it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  them  to  live  in
       Pakistan".

   26. The next question, addressed by  the  judge  at  paragraph  55,  was
       whether it would be unduly harsh for the children "to remain in  the
       United Kingdom".  Again,  the  judge  had  regard  to  his  previous
       findings.  He recognised the likelihood of emotional impact upon the
       children, if parted again from their father.  The judge continued:-


             "But I must  also  take  account  of  the  significant  public
             interest as set out in the law that I must apply.  There is  a
             strong  public  interest  in  the   deportation   of   foreign
             criminals.  The present  case  is  concerned  with  persistent
             offending,  escalating  in  its  nature,  and  consisting   of
             significant violence.  I  note  my  findings  as  to  risk  of
             relapse and further offending.  When balancing  all  of  these
             matters I do not find that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
             appellant's children to remain in the United  Kingdom  without
             their father."


   27. The judge then turned to paragraph 399(b).  He reiterated  that  the
       appellant had a genuine and subsisting marriage with his wife in the
       United Kingdom and that they married when their immigration position
       was settled and lawful.  The  judge  recognised  that  it  would  be
       unduly harsh for the wife to accompany  the  appellant  to  Pakistan
       "because of their children and the need for their children to remain
       in the United Kingdom".  Accordingly, the judge acknowledged that he
       had  to  consider  whether  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh  for   the
       appellant's wife to remain in the UK without him".  As to this,  the
       judge found as follows:-


             "Again I keep in mind that such a course would  be  a  profound
             and fatal impact to their marriage.  But they will be  able  to
             remain in contact and there is no bar to  visits  and  holidays
             such that direct contact continues.  But again I remind  myself
             of  the  observations  above  as  to  the  seriousness  of  the
             offending, risk of  relapse  and  the  public  interest.   When
             weighing all of those factors I do not find that  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to remain in  the  United
             Kingdom when her husband is deported." (paragraph 56)

   28. At paragraph 57  of  the  decision,  the  judge  moved  to  consider
       paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules.  The judge noted  that  the
       appellant had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most
       of his life and was socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the
       country.  The judge further observed that the appellant  had  family
       support and  financial  support  from  his  parents  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  Although his wife's relatives were living in Pakistan  and
       he accepted that these  persons  could  not  offer  the  appellant's
       financial support and would be ashamed of deportation of their  son-
       in-law, the judge did find that "his wife's family offer at least  a
       degree of support".


   29. At paragraph 58, the judge noted that it was not suggested that  the
       appellant lacked "applicable language skills, he would  be  locating
       to a country in which he was born, and he has Pakistani nationality.
       I also find that his family supporting in United Kingdom will ensure
       appropriate access to medical treatment in Pakistan."   At paragraph
       59, the judge noted that the fact that alcohol was  not  as  readily
       available in Pakistan as it was in the United Kingdom,  "may  assist
       his rehabilitation and it is not a bar to deportation".


   30. In paragraph 61, the judge reminded himself that, in examining those
       circumstances, he had found the appellant  to  have  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with his wife  and  children.   Accordingly,
       the  judge  acknowledged  that  he  "must  balance   the   potential
       interference with family life and with the separate and  overlapping
       article 8 interests of the appellant's wife and  children  with  the
       strong public interest and the deportation of foreign criminals such
       as the appellant".


   31. At paragraph 62, the judge applied the judgments  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal AJ (Zimbabwe) and VH (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012, in which
       it was held that it would be rare for the best interests of a  child
       to  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting   foreign
       criminals.  It would undermine the specific exemptions and rules  if
       the interests of the child in  maintaining  a  close  and  immediate
       relationship with the deportee were,  as  a  matter  of  course,  to
       "trump" the strong public interest in deportation.   Paragraph  399A
       of the rules identified, according  to  the  court,  the  particular
       circumstances where it was accepted the interests of the child would
       outweigh the public interest in deportation.   The  conditions  were
       onerous and would only rarely arise.  Emotional damage  to  a  child
       would not be unusual whenever a parent was deported  and  the  child
       unable to live with that  parent  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom.
       Separating a parent and child could not, without  more,  be  a  good
       reason to outweigh the very powerful public interest in deportation.



   32. The judge said that "I find such a powerful public interest in  this
       case and that informs my assessment of the  proportionality  of  the
       suggested interference with the article 8 rights for concern".   The
       judge recognised the impact of deportation of the  appellant's  wife
       and children.  It would carry a risk of emotional damage  and  would
       split  a  family  unit  that  was  living  together  prior  to   the
       appellant's incarceration.   The  particular  offence  in  question,
       however, was according to the judge, very serious, as was  reflected
       in the prison sentence imposed. It also represented "the culmination
       of an escalation of offending despite warnings of  possible  removal
       of status in the UK" (paragraph 63).

   33. At paragraph 64, the judge began his consideration of  section  117C
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Given that the
       appellant had received a sentence of  40  months  imprisonment,  the
       judge noted  that  he  must  consider  the  proportionality  of  his
       deportation by reference to the exceptions set out in that  section.
       The judge referred to NA (Pakistan) & others [2016] EWCA Civ 662  as
       holding that the general scheme in  section  117C  (2)  to  (7)  was
       similar to that set out in the Immigration Rules, which also drew  a
       distinction between those sentenced to less or more than four years.
        Medium offenders under section 117C could escape deportation if  it
       fell  within  the  safety  net  of  "Exception  1"  (long  residence
       provisions) or Exception 2 "(parents/partner provisions)".   Serious
       offenders could not make use of those "safety nets".

   34. In paragraph 65, the judge noted that the appellant was "a so-called
       medium offender".  He reminded himself that this meant the appellant
       was required to be deported unless Exception No. 1 or Exception No 2
       applied.  Exception  No  1  required  the  appellant  to  have  been
       lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life; to  be
       socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom;  and  that
       there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
       integration in the country to which he was proposed to be  deported.
       The judge said that "I have set out my reasons above in paragraph 57-
       60 explaining why there is no such very significant obstacle" in the
       case of the appellant.


   35. In paragraph 66, the judge turned to Exception No 2.   This  applies
       where the proposed has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
       qualifying partner or a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
       with a qualifying child.  In such  a  case,  the  exception  applies
       where the effect of deportation on the partner  or  child  would  be
       unduly harsh.  As to this, the judge stated that  "my  reasoning  on
       this question has been set out in paragraphs 54-56 above. I  do  not
       find that the effect of deportation would be unduly harsh".

   36. In paragraph 67,  the  judge  weighed  the  proportionality  of  the
       potential impact upon  the  Article  8  Rights  of  "all  concerned,
       against the public interest".  The judge noted  that  the  balancing
       exercise takes account of the fact that  the  appellant's  wife  and
       children  "are  undoubtedly  in  a  position  in  which  their  best
       interests  individually  and  separately  would  be  served  by  the
       appellant remaining.   His  deportation  risks  emotional  harm  and
       considerable practical difficulties".   The  judge  also  recognised
       that "the fundamental nature of family life of  all  concerned  will
       change considerably and possibly in  some  respects  irrevocably.  I
       note the status of the children and appellant's wife from the length
       of time that has been spent in the UK".

   37. At paragraph 69, the judge also noted the  appellant's  progress  in
       custody, which was achieved despite "his continued  denial  of  full
       responsibility" for his offence.

   38. On the other side of the balance was  the  fact  that  this  "was  a
       serious offence of significant impact upon the victim and  involving
       violence".  The judge considered that the  strength  of  the  public
       interest in deportation of a person convicted of such an offence was
       "clearly reflected in the applicable provisions and decisions as set
       out previously".

   39. The judge held, in conclusion, that the appellant had not  made  out
       any of  the  exceptions  to  deportation.   He  concluded  that  the
       proposed interference in the family life of the appellant  and  that
       of his family was, in all circumstances, "not disproportionate  when
       all of the reasons and factors above were weighed, and the  guidance
       of the public interest is taken into account".






       Permission to appeal: the First-tier Tribunal

   40. Following receipt of First Tier Tribunal's decision,  the  appellant
       applied to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal.  In those grounds, an assertion was  made  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal judge had failed "to sufficiently  identify  the
       level of seriousness of the offence with reference to the sentencing
       guideline" and that this "renders the consideration  of  the  unduly
       harsh sentence unsafe".  The grounds also contended that  the  judge
       failed to give adequate reasons,  including  for  the  finding  that
       there  were  not  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
       integration in Pakistan.

   41. On 3 April 2017,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  permission  to
       appeal.  The appellant then sought permission  to  appeal  from  the
       Upper Tribunal.




       Permission to appeal: the Upper Tribunal

   42. The grounds of application to the Upper Tribunal  began  by  stating
       that the First-tier Tribunal's decision was unlawful under section 6
       of the Human Rights Act 1998.  It then contended that the judge  had
       "made a mistake as to a material fact which could be established  by
       objective and uncontentious evidence, where fairness resulted from a
       fact that a mistake  was  made".    One  searches  in  vain  in  the
       remainder of grounds for any  explanation  of  this  assertion.  The
       grounds do not return to it and the  only  conclusion  that  can  be
       drawn is that this particular challenge was inserted in error.

   43. The  third  challenge  in  the  grounds  was  a  repetition  of  the
       contention that the decision was unlawful under  section  6  of  the
       1998 Act.  The fourth challenge can  be  summarised  as  an  alleged
       failure on the part of the First-tier Tribunal "to give  reasons  or
       adequate reasons for findings on material matters".

   44. Paragraph 5 of the grounds contended  that  "the  appellants"  (sic)
       submit that the respondent has "only considered their  private  life
       under the Immigration Rules".  What this has to do with the decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal is unclear.  In any event, even a  glance
       at the respondent's decision of 12 October 2016 serves to show  that
       this contention is false.   The  respondent  directly  engaged  with
       Article 8 issues, in reaching her decision.

   45. At paragraph 7 of the grounds, the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was
       said to have "failed to consider the issue of fairness properly with
       regard to the evidence and the determination".  The case of  Marghia
       [2014] UKUT 366 (IAC) is cited in this regard.  But  no  explanation
       whatsoever is given as to why the judge had failed to consider  "the
       issue of fairness".

   46. The grounds then returned to a matter raised in the  application  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal;  namely  that  the
       judge "failed to sufficiently identify the level of  seriousness  of
       the offence with reference  to  the  Sentencing  Guidelines".   This
       criticism finds no reflection in any case law  to  which  the  Upper
       Tribunal's attention has been drawn.  It is, in any event, perfectly
       apparent from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the judge
       was acutely aware of the nature and seriousness of  the  appellant's
       offence of robbery, which was  the  catalyst  for  the  decision  to
       deport.

   47. The grounds then attempted to criticise the judge for a  failure  to
       give adequate reasons, including in relation to the issue  of  "very
       significant obstacles" to integration.  Although  the  judge  "found
       that the appellant (sic) can be financially supported by his family;
       however the FJ has not considered the practicality  with  regard  to
       relevant factors.  Such as, albeit  not  limited  to,  the  age  and
       ability of the family members in the  UK  and  the  length  of  time
       financial support is expected to continue".   As is plain  from  the
       decision, however, the judge had heard oral evidence on this  matter
       and made a clear finding on it in paragraph 57 of his decision.

   48. The final challenge in the grounds was that the judge  had  "made  a
       misdirection of law on the material matter - children".  The grounds
       contended  that  the  judge  had  "failed  to  undertake  sufficient
       consideration of the children's welfare and best interests".  Again,
       a reading of the determination makes it abundantly  plain  that  the
       issue of the children had been considered  carefully  and  in  great
       detail by the judge.

   49. Unsurprisingly,  the  Upper  Tribunal,  faced  with  these  grounds,
       refused permission to appeal on 25 April 2017.  The  refusing  judge
       said this:-

          "2. Contrary to the assertion made in the grounds, the judge  gave
             detailed consideration to all relevant matters in  considering
             the appellant's human rights claim, including the  nature  and
             seriousness of his offending, the risk  of  re-offending,  the
             previously withdrawn deportation order and the best  interests
             of his children.  With regard to  the  appellant's,  wife  and
             children, the judge gave particularly careful consideration to
             the question of whether it would be unduly harsh for  them  to
             be separated from him.  His conclusions in that respect,  [55]
             and [56], referred back to his earlier  findings  at  [35]  to
             [44] considering the impact upon them, of his deportation, but
             also to a proper account  at  [55]  and  [56]  of  the  public
             interest, thus consistent with the  relevant  case  law.   The
             judge gave full and cogent reasons for his  findings  and  the
             conclusions that he reached were unarguably fully and properly
             open to him on the evidence before him.  The  grounds  do  not
             disclose any arguable errors of law in the judge's decision".

   50. Both sets of grounds, as well as grounds of appeal to the First-tier
       Tribunal, attached to the notice of appeal, were  settled  by  Malik
       Law Chambers.




       Judicial  review  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision   to   refuse
       permission to appeal




   51. Following the refusal by the Upper Tribunal of the  application  for
       permission  to  appeal,  Malik  Law  Chambers,  on  behalf  of   the
       appellant, filed an application in the High Court for permission  to
       bring judicial  review  proceedings  against  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       refusal.


   52. Two grounds of challenge were set out in the grounds of  application
       to the High Court. The first was that the First-tier  Tribunal  "had
       erred in law in its assessment of  'very  significant  obstacles  to
       interrogation'  (sic)  stipulation  in   Paragraph   399A   of   the
       Immigration Rules".

   53. Paragraph 5 of the Judicial Review grounds states that the Court  of
       Appeal  "has  recently  granted  permission  to  appeal...  in   two
       appeals".  The solicitors were said to be the same  in  the  present
       case "and the arguments that are made below are exactly  the  same".
       This factor was said in the  grounds  to  satisfy  the  "second-tier
       appeals  test"  which  is  a  feature  of  "Cart"  judicial   review
       challenges of the present type.

   54. At paragraph 13 of the Judicial Review grounds, we find the argument
       which is said to be "the same" in the present case as in  the  cases
       where the Court  of  Appeal  had  granted  permission.   The  ground
       involves  the  respondent's  policy   "Immigration   -   Directorate
       Instructions, Family Life (as a partner or parent) and private life:
       (10) route on very significant obstacles to integration".  Paragraph
       15 of the grounds sets out para 8.2.3.4 of these instructions  under
       the rubric "assessing whether there are very  significant  obstacles
       with integration into the country of return".  The decision maker is
       told that he or she must consider all the reasons put forward by the
       applicant as to why there would  be  obstacles  to  integration  and
       consider these individually and accumulatively.


   55.   Further considerations are said to include the  person's  exposure
       to a level of understanding of the cultural norms in the country  of
       return.  This involves having regard to where the person  has  spent
       time in the United Kingdom. Where such time has been  spent  "living
       mainly amongst the diaspora community from that country, ... it  may
       be reasonable to conclude that they have  cultural  ties  with  that
       country even if they have never lived there or have been absent from
       that country for a lengthy period."


   56. Other factors are the length of time spent in the country of  return
       and family, friends and social network. A person with  such  family,
       friends and network in the country of return "should be able to turn
       to them to support to help them to integrate in that country".


   57. Paragraph 16 of the judicial review grounds submits that the use  of
       the phrases "must" and "should" in the instructions  "clearly  means
       that it is mandatory to give express and clear consideration to  the
       listed factors".  At paragraph 18, the submission is made  that  the
       appellant has a basic public  right  to  have  the  case  considered
       "under the above referred policy".  It is then submitted that it  is
       "clear that the factors listed in this said  policy  have  not  been
       considered at all by the FTT in  assessing  where  there  are  "very
       significant   obstacles   to   his   integration"   into   Pakistan.
       Accordingly, the submission is made  that  "the  FTT's  decision  is
       wrong in law.  The UT should have granted permission to appeal".


   58. The second ground of application to the  High  Court  was  that,  in
       paragraph 55 of the determination, the First-tier Tribunal judge had
       said "the present case is concerned with persistent offending".  The
       grounds of application submit that this "was a material misdirection
       in law".  Reference is made to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
       Achege [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC), which gave guidance as  to  whether  a
       person could be regarded as a "persistent offender" for the  purpose
       of the Rules and the 2002 Act.  The appellant was said "not to be  a
       persistent offender in this sense".  He is not  a  person  who  just
       keeps on breaking the law.   He  has  three  convictions.  They  are
       serious, of course. However, those convictions do  not  make  him  a
       persistent offender.  It is noted that there is  a  gap  of  some  9
       years between his second and third convictions.  The FTT's  decision
       is therefore wrong in law".

   59. In August 2017, a deputy judge of the High Court granted  permission
       to bring judicial review.  Given that  there  was  then  no  request
       under CPR 54.7A(9) for a substantive hearing, the  decision  of  the
       Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to appeal was quashed,  pursuant
       to the CPR, on 21 August 2017.

   60. On 12 September 2017, the Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
       Immigration and Asylum Chamber granted permission, in the  light  of
       the decision of the High Court in  this  case.   Significantly,  the
       Vice President said that "The parties are reminded  that  the  Upper
       Tribunal's task is that set out in s.12 of the 2007 Act".






       Discussion

   61. The  first  point  that  emerges  from  this  unfortunately  lengthy
       procedural history is that both  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
       Upper Tribunal  were  right  to  refuse  permission  to  appeal,  by
       reference to the grounds of challenge contained  in  the  respective
       applications for permission  to  those  Tribunals.   The  First-tier
       Tribunal judge had plainly undertaken a comprehensive  and  rigorous
       analysis of the evidence, by reference to  the  relevant  law.   The
       judge weighed the public interest in deportation, having  regard  to
       the appellant's criminality, against the factors relied upon by  the
       appellant for resisting deportation.  These involved the effects  on
       him  of  deportation,  including  whether  there   would   be   very
       significant obstacles to integration, as well as the effects on  his
       wife and children,  both  in  their  own  respective  right  and  in
       conjunction with his.  The analysis of the judge proceeded, first by
       reference to the Immigration Rules and then by reference to  Article
       8, having regard to the provisions of section  117(C)  of  the  2002
       Act.

   62. A judicial review challenge to the decision of the Upper Tribunal to
       refuse permission to appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
       a challenge to the lawfulness of the Upper Tribunal's decision.   It
       is emphatically not an opportunity for a party to raise new  grounds
       of appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   63. That, however, is precisely what the judicial review grounds in  the
       present case attempted to achieve and regrettably  did  achieve,  to
       the extent that the deputy judge was persuaded to  grant  permission
       on the basis of them.


   64.  Up to that point, the criticism of the First-tier Tribunal  judge's
       approach to the issue of "very significant obstacles to integration"
       had been on the basis that the judge had allegedly  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons for  his  decision.   That  challenge  was  rightly
       rejected by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal  and  is
       manifestly  not  made  out.   The  judge  was  well  aware  of   the
       considerable length of time that the  appellant  had  spent  in  the
       United Kingdom.  Having considered all the  evidence,  however,  the
       judge made an unarguably sound finding in this regard at  paragraphs
       57-60 of his decision.

   65. For the first time, the judicial review grounds raised  an  entirely
       different basis of challenge  in  respect  of  the  issue  of  "very
       significant obstacles to integration"; namely, that  the  respondent
       had issued instructions to case workers as to how they should assess
       the matter and that the First-tier Tribunal judge had not considered
       "the factors listed  in  the  said  policy"  (paragraph  18  of  the
       judicial review grounds).

   66. There is, however, no indication whatsoever  that  the  instructions
       were drawn to the attention of the First-tier Tribunal judge.  It is
       trite law that a person seeking to rely upon a policy should draw it
       to the attention of the Tribunal.  In any event, the  categorisation
       of the instructions as a policy is misconceived.  In the immigration
       field, a policy of the  respondent  concerns  the  circumstances  in
       which the respondent may be expected, as a general matter, to  grant
       leave to remain or take some other decision  under  the  Immigration
       Acts.  Here, the instruction is merely a form  of  aide  memoire  to
       case workers  on  how  to  consider  whether  there  will  "be  very
       significant obstacles to integration"  in  a  particular  case.  The
       judge's own assessment of the  matter  was  not  rendered  defective
       because he did not  adopt  this  aide  memoire.  What  mattered  was
       whether he considered all relevant factors. Strikingly, the judicial
       review grounds do not begin to explain why the  judge's  conclusions
       on this issue might have been different, had he been referred to the
       instructions.

   67. The Upper Tribunal has not  been  told,  either  by  Mr  Singh,  who
       appeared on 7 November, or otherwise, how it is said that the  cases
       apparently pending in the Court of Appeal are "exactly the same"  as
       the present case. As far as can be ascertained, the Court of  Appeal
       granted permission so that it might  consider  the  construction  of
       paragraph 276ADE(vi), whose wording corresponds to that in paragraph
       399A(c); namely "very significant obstacles to integration ...".


   68. The grant of permission in those cases, however, does not  begin  to
       explain why, on the  facts  of  the  present  case,  the  First-tier
       Tribunal judge's decision on paragraph 399A(c) should  thereby  have
       become arguably wrong in law or why the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision
       refusing permission to appeal should likewise be regarded as legally
       flawed. In particular, we have not been told that the reason for the
       Court of Appeal's grants of permission involved a claim, of the kind
       raised in  the  present  judicial  review  grounds,  concerning  the
       significance of the respondent's instructions to case workers.  This
       is particularly pertinent, since the Court of Appeal has already had
       occasion  to  consider  the  meaning  of  "integration"  in  section
       117C(4)(c) of the 2002 Act in Kamara v Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813, in which it held:


            "It is not appropriate  to  treat  the  statutory  language  as
            subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient  for  a
            court  or  tribunal  simply  to  direct  itself  in  the  terms
            Parliament has chosen to use" (paragraph 14).


   69. The wording in section 117C(4)(c) is materially identical to that in
       paragraph 399A(c) of the Immigration Rules. It is manifest that  the
       judge in the present case directed himself precisely by reference to
       the relevant words in those rules. The argument  being  advanced  in
       the judicial review grounds appears, therefore,  to  amount  to  the
       proposition that, because the Court of Appeal will in due course  be
       considering  the  meaning  of  the  expression   "very   significant
       obstacles to integration", every case in which  the  expression  has
       fallen to be construed and applied by judicial fact-finders must  be
       regarded as arguably wrong in law.  Such an  argument  is  obviously
       bogus. It is inimical to  the  proper  operation  of  any  appellate
       system.


   70.  We therefore make our decision on the basis that:-

           (a) the appellant did not challenge the respondent's deportation
           decision by reference  to  an  alleged  failure  to  follow  the
           instructions to case workers;
           (b)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was   not   shown   those
           instructions and told that he should follow them in reaching his
           own  decision  on  whether  there  would  be  very   significant
           obstacles to the appellant's integration in Pakistan;
           (c) neither the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal nor
           those to the Upper Tribunal referred  to  the  instructions,  in
           relation to whether an arguable error of law had  been  made  by
           the First-tier Tribunal judge;
           (d) accordingly, the  issue  of  the  respondent's  instructions
           cannot  be  raised  as  a  new  ground  of  appeal  without  the
           permission of the Upper Tribunal, which the appellant has in any
           event not sought;
           (e) in any event, the fact that the judge did not have regard to
           the instructions was not an error of law on his part, let  alone
           a material one.

   71. The second ground in the judicial review  application  concerns  the
       observation of the First-tier Tribunal judge at paragraph 55 of  his
       decision, that  "the  present  case  is  concerned  with  persistent
       offending".  The contention is that the judge erred in this  regard,
       in that the judge apparently failed to follow the  decision  of  the
       Upper Tribunal in Achege.


   72. At paragraph 21 of the judicial review grounds, it is  asserted,  in
       terms, that the appellant "has three conventions" (sic - presumably,
       convictions).  It is contended that those three convictions "do  not
       make him a persistent offender".


   73. Once again, this ground fails to disclose any error on the  part  of
       the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  refusing  permission  to   appeal.    The
       allegation that the judge erred in law by referring  to  "persistent
       offending, escalating in its nature" in paragraph 55 of the decision
       finds no expression whatsoever in the grounds of appeal to the Upper
       Tribunal (or to the First-tier Tribunal).

   74. Furthermore, and in any event, the  criticism  of  paragraph  55  is
       completely misconceived. Achege was  concerned  with  the  issue  of
       whether a person, who has not been sentenced to imprisonment of  one
       or more years, may, nevertheless, be treated for the purposes of the
       Immigration Acts as a "foreign criminal".  In the present case,  the
       appellant had, of course, been convicted of an  offence  of  robbery
       and sentenced to  40  months  imprisonment.  He  was,  therefore,  a
       "foreign criminal" on that basis.

   75. The point the First-tier Tribunal judge was making in  paragraph  55
       was  that,  looking  at  the  overall  criminal  activities  of  the
       appellant, in the context of weighing the  strength  of  the  public
       interest in deportation, it was relevant to note that he had engaged
       in persistent offending, which had escalated in its nature.

   76. The assertion in paragraph 21 of the judicial  review  grounds  that
       the appellant has only three convictions is patently false.   As  we
       have recorded at the beginning our decision, (see paragraph 3 above)
       the First-tier Tribunal judge stated that the appellant's  offending
       history  "is  not  in  dispute".   The  judge  had  before  him  the
       antecedent details of the  appellant,  as  set  out  in  the  Police
       National Computer printout.  The three convictions mentioned at  (1)
       to (3) of paragraph 6 of the decision were  merely  the  ones  which
       were advanced by the respondent as "particularly  pertinent  in  the
       present decision".

   77. We do not appear to have  the  Police  National  Computer  printout.
       However, we have no reason at  all  to  doubt  what  the  First-tier
       Tribunal judge said about it at paragraph 6.  On  the  contrary,  we
       note that in paragraph 52 of the respondent's  deportation  decision
       of 12 October 2016, it is said that:-


              "between 2002 and 2016 you have received 18  convictions  for
             33 offences.  The  fact  that  you  have  repeatedly  offended
             without  being  deterred  by  your  previous  convictions   or
             sentences indicates that you have a lack  of  regard  for  the
             law, a lack of regards for your  offending  behaviour,  and  a
             lack of understanding of the negative  impact  your  offending
             behaviour has on others".

   78. Mr Singh, who appeared for the appellant on  7  November,  had  been
       instructed only the day before.  He had had no previous  involvement
       in this case.  Mr Singh,  quite  understandably,  found  himself  in
       difficulty in advancing the criticisms of the judge, as set  out  in
       the judicial review grounds. He acknowledged  that  the  appellant's
       challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision was, in  essence,  a
       perversity challenge. As such, we have no hesitation in finding that
       the challenge must fail. There is nothing remotely perverse  in  the
       judge's decision.


   79. As will be apparent, the Tribunal considers that the judicial review
       grounds in the present case were seriously  problematic.  The  Upper
       Tribunal's practice, following the quashing of the Upper  Tribunal's
       refusal of permission to appeal, is to grant such permission, in the
       light of the observations of the High Court, unless it  is  apparent
       from the documentation then available to the Tribunal that the  High
       Court may have been misled as to the  actual  position.  In  such  a
       case, the outstanding permission  application  is  listed  for  oral
       hearing.


   80.  It  is,  however,  important  to  stress  the  following   matters.
       Regardless  of  the  fact  that  a  person  succeeds  in   obtaining
       permission under CPR 54.7A to judicially review a  decision  of  the
       Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to appeal, with the  consequence
       that the decision is quashed, the Upper Tribunal  will  nevertheless
       need to be satisfied that there is an error of law in the First-tier
       Tribunal's decision,  before  that  decision  can  be  disturbed[1].
       Judicial review grounds which, upon analysis, fail to show that  the
       decision to refuse permission was wrong in law are  highly  unlikely
       to lead to such a result. Those responsible  for  drafting  judicial
       review grounds which, upon comprehensive analysis at  a  hearing  of
       the kind described in paragraph 79 above or (as in the present case)
       following the grant of permission to appeal, are  found  to  contain
       misrepresentations or other falsities may be referred by  the  Upper
       Tribunal to the High Court, for that Court to  consider  whether  to
       require an explanation from the solicitors and/or counsel  concerned
       (see Hamid v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWHC
       3070 (Admin)).




       Decision

   81. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no  error  of  law.
       The appeal is dismissed.

                               Signed




                               2 January 2018






                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber



                           -----------------------
[1] See the Vice President's observation, cited in paragraph 60 above.

