

                                             Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                                      SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran
                            CG [2009] UKAIT 00053

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (Piccadilly)              |                             |
|On 6 May 2009                                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                          IMMIGRATION JUDGE BRUNNEN


                                   Between

                                     SB

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cole of Cole & Yousaf Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer



       i) Events in Iran following the 12 June 2009 presidential  elections
          have led to a government crackdown on persons seen to be  opposed
          to the present government and the Iranian  judiciary  has  become
          even less independent. Persons who are likely to be perceived  by
          the  authorities  in  Iran  as  being  actively  associated  with
          protests against the June 12 election results  may  face  a  real
          risk of persecution or ill treatment, although much  will  depend
          on the particular circumstances.


      ii) Iranians facing enforced return do not in  general  face  a  real
          risk of persecution or ill-treatment. That remains the case  even
          if they exited Iran illegally. Having exited  Iran  illegally  is
          not a significant risk factor, although if it is the case that  a
          person would face difficulties with  the  authorities  for  other
          reasons, such a history could be a factor adding to the level  of
          difficulties he or she is likely to face.

     iii) Being a person who has left Iran when  facing  court  proceedings
          (other  than  ordinary  civil  proceedings)  is  a  risk  factor,
          although much will depend on the particular facts relating to the
          nature of the offence(s) involved and  other  circumstances.  The
          more the offences for which a person faces trial are likely to be
          viewed as political, the greater the  level  of  risk  likely  to
          arise as a result. Given the emphasis placed both by  the  expert
          report from Dr Kakhki and  the  April  2009  Danish  fact-finding
          report's  sources on the degree of risk varying according to  the
          nature of the court proceedings, being involved in ongoing  court
          proceedings is not in itself  something that  will  automatically
          result in ill-treatment; rather it is properly to  be  considered
          as a risk factor to be taken into account along with others.

      iv) Being a person involved in court  proceedings  in  Iran  who  has
          engaged in conduct likely to be seen as insulting either  to  the
          judiciary or the justice system or the  government  or  to  Islam
          constitutes another risk factor indicating an increased level  of
          risk of persecution or ill treatment on return.

       v) Being accused of anti-Islamic conduct likewise also constitutes a
          significant risk factor.

      vi) This case replaces AD (Risk-Illegal  Departure)  Iran  CG  [2003]
          UKAIT 00107.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a national of Iran born on 22 June 1971. On 9 January
   2007 the respondent decided to remove him as an illegal entrant from  the
   United Kingdom having refused to  grant  him  asylum.   His  appeal  came
   before Immigration Judge (IJ)  Hague  who  in  a  determination  notified
   following a hearing  on  23  February  2007  dismissed  his  appeal.   He
   successfully obtained an order for  reconsideration  and  in  a  decision
   dated 7 September 2007 Senior Immigration Judge (SIJ) Lane found  he  had
   materially erred in law: see  Appendix  A.  When  his  case  came  before
   Immigration  Judge  Foudy  as  second-stage  reconsideration  she   again
   dismissed his appeal.  The appellant obtained permission to appeal to the
   Court of Appeal, Laws LJ remitting it by consent back  to  the  Tribunal.
   The statement of reasons for disposal by consent states at para 5:

    "5.  The Respondent considers that the Tribunal made a  material  error
         of law by re-opening  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  credibility
         despite the findings of the first  Immigration  Judge  (ground  1).
         Further, or in the alternative, the respondent considers  that  the
         Tribunal made a material  error  of  law  by  not  considering  the
         medical evidence submitted by  the  Appellant  when  assessing  the
         Appellant's  oral  evidence   and   credibility   (ground   2(ii)).
         Accordingly the parties agree that this matter should  be  remitted
         to the Tribunal to consider the appellant's case  with  respect  to
         the assessment of risk on return to Iran in light of  the  positive
         credibility findings of the  first  Immigration  Judge,  which  the
         parties agree shall stand. "

2. The positive credibility findings here referred to  were  those  made  by
the first IJ, IJ Hague. As set out by him at para 7  of  his  determination,
they were as follows:

      "7.     The appellant's account can be  summarised  thus.   He  began
          military service in 1989 and was posted to serve in a Sepah unit.
           His duties involved guarding political prisoners.  The sound  of
          the ill treatment of prisoners was  distressing  to  him  and  he
          asked his superior officer, Haji Karimi, for  transfer  to  other
          duties.  The refusal resulted in a scuffle  between  the  two  in
          which the officer's nose accidentally got broken.  The  appellant
          was court martialed, sentenced to four months custody  and  given
          an extra ten months military service.  During the period  of  his
          detention he was subjected to beatings  and  interrogations.   On
          release he was sent to serve out his  time  at  the  Sepah  Yekum
          headquarters in Ahwaz.  Haji Karimi who was still his  commanding
          officer was vindictive and ensured that the appellant  had  extra
          duties and restricted leave.  Towards the end of  the  period  of
          military service a building that the appellant was  guarding  was
          burnt and the files therein destroyed.  He was arrested and  held
          without charge for eight months, before being given bail upon his
          father persuading a neighbour to lodge the deeds of his house  as
          surety. On release the Appellant went on to complete his military
          service and then was discharged but he  was  not  issued  with  a
          "completion card".  As a consequence of this he has  been  unable
          to obtain a driving licence, to take  work  in  nationally  owned
          companies, to marry or to open a bank account. The arson case has
          never  been  brought  to  court  and  he  remains  on  bail.   In
          consequence the neighbour's house deeds remain as surety  in  the
          court file.  The neighbour has died  and  his  children  wish  to
          divide the estate up, but are unable  to  do  so  and  have  been
          putting pressure upon the Appellant to get  the  deeds  released.
          The Appellant has been unable to do so as the courts insist  that
          it is a matter for the Sepah and the Sepah insist that  it  is  a
          matter for the court.  On 7/10/06 the  Appellant  went  to  court
          with his neighbour in order to demonstrate to  him  that  he  was
          doing everything that he could. The judge told him that he had no
          power and that it was a matter for the Sepah, and  the  appellant
          responded by telling the judge that although he professed  to  do
          justice it was only a lie.  That night the  authorities  came  to
          his home when he was out.  They told  his  mother  that  he  must
          surrender to them as he is guilty of anti  Islamic  conduct.   He
          decided to flee the country fearing the treatment  the  he  would
          receive."

3. The medical evidence referred to in the statement  of  reasons  consisted
in a  report  dated  19  December  2007  by  Dr  Michael  Scott  who  is  an
established expert in the assessment and treatment of  patients  with  post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  His report concluded that  the  appellant
was suffering from severe PTSD and that this was a  consequence  of  torture
in Iran. There was also a letter from Miss V C Lees, a  Consultant  in  Hand
and Plastic Surgery, dated 21 December 2007.  She stated that the  appellant
had alleged he was  tortured  in  Iran  13  years  ago,  sustaining  a  deep
laceration to the base of the palm affecting his ulnar nerve.

4. In addition to the medical  evidence  from  late  2007  the  parties  had
adduced  a  considerable  number  of  background  documents   dealing   with
conditions in Iran, including a 1 November 2007 report  by  Gozaar  (Freedom
House) entitled "The Judiciary: A stronghold  of  Authoritarianism",  and  a
Human Rights Watch World Report 2007: Iran,  dated 11 January  2007.   There
was also produced very late in the day, on 1  May  2009,  an  expert  report
from Dr Mohammad M H Kakhki. Subsequent to the hearing we sent a  memorandum
to the parties dated 24 July 2009  pointing  out  that  in  view  of  recent
political events in Iran we wanted further evidence  and/or  submissions  on
(i) the likely impact on the appellant's case of recent events in  Iran  and
(ii) the issue of whether an Iranian returnee will  currently  face  a  real
risk of serious harm merely by virtue of being someone who left the  country
illegally or being someone  who  faces  court  proceedings  and/or  judicial
punishment.

5. At the hearing itself Miss Johnstone  had  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
should confine itself to the evidence that  was  before  IJ  Hague,  as  the
appellant had not  lodged  any  Rule  32(2)  notice  under  the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and  in  any  event  the  expert
report had not been served in accordance with Tribunal directions.  Mr  Cole
for the appellant submitted that we should admit all of  the  evidence  that
had been produced.  He apologised for the  late  production  of  the  expert
report, which was due to delay on the part of the expert.

6. Following those submissions we told the parties that we would  delay  our
final  decision  on  admission  of  post-hearing  evidence  until  we   were
determining the case, but would want submissions from  the  parties  on  the
further evidence.  We briefly adjourned  to  give  Miss  Johnstone  time  to
consider the expert report.

7. We have decided to admit all the  post-hearing  evidence.   It  is  clear
from the Statement of Reasons for  disposal  by  consent  by  the  Court  of
Appeal that the parties agreed that specific regard should  be  had  to  the
medical evidence.  It is also clear from the decision of SIJ Lane finding  a
material error of law that the Tribunal was concerned  that  a  decision  on
risk on return be made in the light of the  latest  evidence  about  country
conditions, and indeed it would be contrary to  Ravichandran principles  not
to decide an asylum appeal in the light  of  evidence  on  conditions  in  a
country currrently: see Saber (AP) (Appellant v the Secretary of  State  for
the Home Department) [2007] UKHL 57, para  13).   Miss  Johnstone  is  right
that the appellant's representatives   never  lodged  a  formal  Rule  32(2)
notice, but it is clear from the file that they intended to produce  further
evidence and that they gave advance notice they were seeking first  medical,
and,  more  recently,  expert  evidence.   In  all  the   circumstances   we
considered we should exercise our discretion to admit the further  evidence;
indeed, as already noted, we also took  the  step  post-hearing  of  seeking
further evidence from the parties on two issues specifically  to  ensure  we
could address the significance of recent events in Iran arising out  of  the
June 12, 2009 presidential elections.

8. As regards the  expert's  original  report,  we  note  that  it  was  not
submitted within the time  limits  specified  by  the  Tribunal  in  written
directions.  That  was  reprehensible,  but  we  were  satisfied  that   its
relevance to the case  justified  our  admitting  it  into  evidence.   Miss
Johnstone had plainly had  an  opportunity  to  consider  it  prior  to  the
hearing (she  spoke  of  checking  details  concerning  the  expert  on  the
internet), but in any event we afforded her additional time to  consider  it
before making her submissions. There is now, as a result of our  memorandum,
a further report from the same expert.

9. So far as concerns evidence relating  to  conditions  in  Iran  then,  we
shall have regard to all the evidence  now  before  us,  including  evidence
post-dating the hearing before IJ Hague. The position  so  far  as  concerns
evidence relating  to  the  appellant's  particular  circumstances  is  less
straightforward.  As already noted, we are  obliged  by  the  terms  of  the
consent order to consider the further medical  evidence,  although  that  is
now two years  old.   However,  we  also  have  further  evidence  from  the
appellant, including the summary given by IJ Foudy of  his  evidence  before
her and a further witness statement from him dated 13 December 2007. In  the
light of the clear agreement endorsed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  that  the
assessment we make of risk in relation to Iran for this appellant is  to  be
made "in the light  of  the  positive  credibility  findings  of  the  first
Immigration Judge", we consider it would be inappropriate to have regard  to
this further evidence.  We are reinforced in that  view  by  the  fact  that
before SIJ Lane the Presenting Officer representing the respondent  on  that
occasion conceded that the  findings  of  fact  made  by  IJ  Hague  on  the
appellant's history were sufficiently clear to enable risk assessment to  be
made by reference to them; the appellant's representatives  did  not  demur.
Had we decided to hear oral evidence from  the  appellant  that  would  also
have carried the risk that we then fell into the same error as IJ Foudy,  in
making findings at variance with those made by IJ Hague, when we  have  been
expressly directed that such findings are to  stand.   We  remind  ourselves
that we have to conduct a reconsideration not a rehearing  of  this  appeal:
see DK (Serbia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1747.

10. In the event we did not need to make a ruling on whether  to  hear  from
the appellant, since Mr Cole stated that he would not be calling him.


The two expert reports by Dr Kakhki

11. Dr Kakhki is a special adviser  to  the  Centre  for  Criminal  Law  and
Justice at Durham University where  he  also  lectures  on  Comparative  Law
focusing on Islamic and Iranian justice systems. He is also an Associate  of
the Centre for Iranian Studies at the same university. Under  the  aegis  of
this institution he has provided analysis for the Advisory Panel on  Country
Information (APCI) of recent COIS reports on Iran. Since 2003  he  has  been
providing expert opinions on Iranian law and  procedure  to  various  courts
and tribunals. In his report dated 1 May 2009  Dr  Kakhki  states  that  the
fact that the appellant had made a statement  alleging  impropriety  by  the
Iranian judiciary in finalising his 13 year court  case  and  returning  the
bail property would render him liable to face charges of contempt of  court.
 The contents of his  remarks  would  be  seen  directly  or  indirectly  as
insulting towards the Iranian judiciary or government. The  next  judge  who
dealt with him could rely on a number of provisions of  the  Penal  Code  to
punish him for his insults. Its provisions included:  Article  609  (  which
stipulates that anyone who insults any of the leaders of the three  branches
of the government, or presidential deputies, or ministers,  or  any  of  the
members of the parliament, or any of the staff of  the  ministries,  or  any
other state  employees,  while  they  are  on  duty,  will  be  punished  by
imprisonment from three to six months or flogging of 74 lashes or a fine  of
50,000 to 1,000,000 Rials); Article  698  (which  concerns  the  intentional
creation of "anxiety and unease in the public's mind", "false  rumours",  or
writing about "acts which are not true", even if  it  is  a  quotation;  the
punishment under this article is either imprisonment for between two  months
to two years, or up to 74 lashes);  Article 513 (which makes it  an  offence
to  "insult"  religion; this  can be punished by either the  death  penalty,
or imprisonment  for  between  one  and  five  years);  Article  500  (which
stipulates that, anyone who promulgates any propaganda against  the  regime,
to the benefit of dissident groups or organisations, will  be  sentenced  to
three months to one year's imprisonment); and Article  514  (which  declares
that: "anyone who, in any manner, insults the Founder  of  Islamic  Republic
of Iran, Imam Khomeini, or the current supreme Leader of  the  country  will
be sentenced to between six months and two years imprisonment.").

12. Dr Kakhki considers that one or more of these offences would  be  likely
to impact on the appellant in the following way:


      "Therefore, as there is no separation between the State, including the
      judiciary, and religion, expression  against  the  key  parts  of  the
      government/judiciary may also be seen as a threat to the foundation of
      the regime.   The fact that the statement was made in front of a Judge
      and his neighbour, [in a court] usually involving other  officials  or
      the public, the statement may be characterised as an attempt to spread
      'false rumours' in society pursuant to Article 698.  This is [because]
      one interpretation of the appellant's  statement  is  that  the  court
      system was not acting in individuals' best  interests  but  rather  in
      that of the government.  In addition, denying  the  authority  of  the
      government may be interpreted as a claim against national security and
      insult to religion per Articles 500 and 513 as rejecting the authority
      of the court as the extension of the state [and so] can be seen as  an
      attempt to undermine the regime.  It is also important to consider the
      location and context of  these  statements,  namely  the  court,  with
      Article 609 applying to insult of judicial officials while they are on
      duty; this is the equivalent of 'contempt of court'".


13. In  Dr  Kakhki's  opinion,  the  above  crimes  will  be  tried  at  the
Revolutionary Court, which is known for  its  procedural  improprieties  and
mistreatment. This Court was notorious for its  disregard  of  international
standards of fairness. As to the  accusations  he  faces  concerning  arson,
these would be tried in the  Military  Court  "as  there  is  no  difference
between a conscript  and  a  permanent  member  in  terms  of  jurisdiction,
especially as military property was involved in this case."

14. Dr Kakhki also deals with  the  past  and  current  functions  of  Sepah
Pasdaran (the Iranian  Revolutionary  Guards  Corps).  Having  outlined  its
recent history, he notes that among its various  roles,  Sepah  collaborates
with the regular military and this may sometimes involve the  secondment  of
military personnel to  Sepah,  as  suggested  in  the  appellant's  account.
Their  functions  may  include  guarding   Sepah's  installations,  as  also
highlighted in the appellant's account.

15. With regard to Sepah's relationship with the judiciary,  he  notes  that
it mainly works alongside the Courts and that it can  collaborate,  formally
or informally, with the Military Courts as they belong to the same  security
sector within the country.   Sepah enjoys very close ties to the  government
and religious authorities,  the  Judiciary  is  very  much  subject  to  the
influence of these two groups.  This was exemplified by  a  recent  case  in
which  members  of  Basij,  a  militia  group  affiliated  with  Sepah,  had
committed murder yet received extensive protection from the judiciary.

16. Dr  Kakhki  also  touches  on  the  significance  to  the  case  of  the
appellant's lack of a Military Completion Card:

      "The Card, as the  name  implies,  is  granted  to  those  who  [have]
      finished their military service.  One  role  of  the  Card  is  to  be
      evidence that all outstanding commitments have  been  resolved  before
      leaving the military.  If there was an unsettled matter following [the
      appellant's] clashes with the Sepah, including the  warehouse  he  was
      guarding having  [been]  burnt  down  and  [there  being]  outstanding
      proceedings existing against him, then he would  not  be  entitled  to
      receive it.  The function of the Card is  crucial  throughout  society
      including applying for  governmental  jobs,  passport,  marriage,  any
      transactions requiring Notary Office verification etc. All in all,  it
      is very difficult to lead a reasonable lifestyle in Iran without  this
      card."


17. Dr Kakhki then refers to the ample evidence from reputable human  rights
organisations  that  torture  is  standard  practice   when   dealing   with
prisoners, and many detainees are subjected to  its  various  forms  in  the
first phase of their interrogations. "The specific  nature  of  the  torture
that a person receives depends on who he is and  what  the  charges  against
him are." He observes that prison conditions in Iran are inadequate both  at
the investigatory stages as well as when serving the eventual sentence.


18. Dr Kakhki concludes:

    "Given the above information regarding the systematic use of torture by
    the Iranian authorities including against critics of the government  as
    well as the inaction by the judiciary even with regard  to  confessions
    recognised as having been procured through abuse, it is  possible  that
    [the  appellant]  would  face  ill-treatment  if  returned   to   Iran,
    particularly due to the aggravating factor of having left  the  country
    illegally and his past record of activities."

19. He states that he also doubts that  there  would  be  medical  treatment
available for the appellant's PTSD as noted in the medical report.

20. So far as concerns the appellant's position  in  relation  to  his  exit
from Iran, it was likely that he would  not  have  been  able  to  obtain  a
passport in the normal way because among the documents  males  must  produce
was their  certificate  of  completion  of  military  service  or  exemption
certificate.  Also, they must not have been forbidden from leaving  Iran  by
either the  Judiciary  or  any  other  relevant  government  authority  (for
military personnel, a special procedure is required in order to  allow  them
to leave the country).

21. As regards the likely consequences of illegal exit, Dr Kakhki  had  this
to say:

         "... according to Article 34 [of the Penal Code], any  Iranian  who
         leaves the country illegally, without a valid passport  or  similar
         travel documents, will be sentenced to between one and three  years
         imprisonment, or will receive a fine between  100,000  and  500,000
         Rials.  The  assigned  punishment  in  this  article  is  called  a
         "Taaziri" punishment (a deterrent), the severity of which is at the
         discretion of the presiding Judge. The  Iranian  Judiciary  believe
         that the "Taaziri" punishment serves firstly to prevent the  guilty
         party  from  re-offending,  and  secondly  to  benefit  society  by
         deterring  potential  criminals  from  committing  that  particular
         crime.


         In order to proceed [sic] the cases relating to illegal  departure,
         a special court is located  in  the  Tehran  Airport.   Its  branch
         number is given as 1610. If an  Iranian  arrives  in  the  country,
         without a passport or any valid travel documents, the official will
         arrest them and take them to this court.  The  court  assesses  the
         background of the individual, the date of their departure from  the
         country, the reason for their illegal departure,  their  connection
         with any organisations or groups, whether they applied  for  asylum
         in  other  countries  and  if  so  their  reasons,  and  any  other
         particular circumstances. Dependent on the outcome of  the  court's
         investigation, the judge will decide the severity of the punishment
         within the parameters of Article 34.  This procedure  also  applies
         to people who are deported back to Iran, not in the possession of a
         passport containing an exit visa; in this case the Iranian  Embassy
         will issue them with a document confirming their nationality."


22. In light of the above Dr Kakhki  believed  that  if  the  appellant  had
exited illegally this would lead to his prosecution upon return.

23. In a supplementary report dated 2 September 2009,  Dr  Kakhki  describes
and analyses  recent  events  in  Iran  in  the  wake  of  the  presidential
elections of 12 June 2009  in  which  the  incumbent  President  Ahmadinejad
faced a reformist  candidate,  Mr  Hussein  Mousavi.  The  reaction  by  the
supporters of Mousavi to the announcement  that  President  Ahmadinejad  had
been  re-elected  with  a  62%  margin  was  dramatic.  There   were   major
demonstrations of a size not seen since the Iranian Revolution of 1979.  The
demonstrators alleged  vote  rigging  and  election  fraud.  The  government
reaction was  repressive.  There  was  a  heavy  involvement  of  parastatal
(mainly  Basij)  forces  and  a  crackdown  on  protestors  in  Teheran  and
elsewhere. A number of people were killed in clashes  with  the  police  and
Basij  militia.  There  were:  mass  arrests   including   of   ringleaders;
restrictions on foreign and  domestic  journalists;  disruptions  of  mobile
networks; and blocking of some internet sites.  The  government  has  sought
to blame the protests on "foreign interference" in Iran's affairs by the  UK
and other Western countries. His report notes that on  28  June  nine  local
staff  members  of  the  British  embassy  in  Teheran  were  arrested   for
"inflaming post-election tensions in  Iran".  Mousavi,  along  with  another
candidate, Karroubi, and former President Mohammad Khatami,  have  continued
to reject the election results.  The  powerful  Revolutionary  Guard  (Sepah
Pasdaran) had already made clear prior to the elections that  it  would  not
tolerate the formation of a post-election political  force  under  Mousavi's
"green movement" and their position had  been  strengthened  by  the  recent
disorders, as the government has had to lean on them  more  for  support  in
retaining public order  and  power.  Sepah  has  recently  cracked  down  on
dissent within its own ranks. The recent  reorganisation  of  the  judiciary
reflects a move towards greater militarisation and more  extensive  security
service influence. The government is pursuing a strategy  of  "mass  trials"
of those involved in  the  protests,  with  frequent  "forced  confessions".
There are credible reports that those arrested and detained in the  protests
have been tortured.

24. In Dr Kakhki's opinion  the  result  of  recent  events  is  that  those
connected to Britain are now viewed with a default level of  suspicion.  The
implications of such suspicions may, he states, be even  greater  where  the
individual  in  question  has  a  prior  record  of  dissent   or   relevant
criminality. The issue of foreign association and that of the level of  risk
in  the  post-election  environment  are  closely  intertwined;  the   legal
consequences  have  not  been  limited  to   those   employed   by   British
embassy/organisations, but have also  extended  to  Iranians  with  UK  ties
through residency and education. He cites the examples of  Mousavi  activist
Mohammadezra and her husband, two Oxford University students, who  had  been
arrested and detained at Teheran airport when trying to  leave  the  country
(report in The Guardian, 19 June  2009).  He  cites  a  timesonline  article
(undated)  referring  to  filming  by   Iranian   embassy   staff   of   the
demonstrations in London around  the  time  of  the  June  polls.  He  cites
Nazenin Ansari, the diplomatic editor of Kayhan, a Persian weekly  newspaper
in London saying she has been investigating claims that a number of  British
Iranians have "disappeared"  since  the  elections.  The  same  report  also
refers to someone called Marayam, 32, a student from East  London,  a  maths
student who had been detained when in Teheran for  four  days  in  a  police
cell during a holiday to visit her family,  before  being  released  without
charge. He writes:


         "The situation of those returning from the UK may  be  particularly
         perilous as their point of origin would be  clear  and,  where  the
         individual had left the country illegally,  the  authorities  would
         have  the  opportunity   to   investigate   fully,   checking   the
         individual's name against those wanted by the authorities."


25. Dealing with the appellant's circumstances, Dr Kakhki is firmly  of  the
view that these recent events will have heightened the level and  degree  of
risk he would face on return. Dr Kakhki  says  he  considered  that  if  the
appellant were an individual with a record of  both  recent  and  historical
criminal activity/critical expression, he would at least  undergo  extensive
interrogation to determine the purpose and nature of his stay in the UK.  He
also considered that one impact of the post-election turmoil was a shift  in
the priorities of the court system, from more routine case loads  (including
older claims still not resolved) to "the  deluge  of  new  criminal  matters
arising from  the  recent  events".  This  would  impact  not  just  on  the
Revolutionary  Court,  prosecuting  national  security  offences,  but  also
Public Criminal Courts (dealing with public order offences such as  rioting)
and  the  Military  Court  (where  military  persons,  property   etc.   are
involved). In effect this could delay the appellant's ability  to  have  his
outstanding arson case heard by months or even years,  even  assuming  there
would be no external impediment in the hearing.


 The Danish Immigration Service report April 2009

26. Materials produced by the appellant's  representatives  in  response  to
the Tribunal's memorandum included excerpts of a report dated 30 April  2009
by the Danish Immigration Service, "Human Rights Situation  for  Minorities,
Women and Converts, and Entry and Exit Procedures,  ID  Cards,  Summons  and
Reporting, etc". This report was based on fact-finding carried  out  between
24 August-2 September 2008  by  a  delegation  who  consulted  a  number  of
Iranian officials and other individuals and bodies. Those consulted  on  the
question of exit from  and  entry  to  Iran  were:  H.  Mirfakhar,  Director
General,  Consular  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs;   Said   Hamid
Sajdrabi, the person  in  charge  of  passport  control  at  Imam  Khomeneni
International Airport, Immigration Police;  several  western  embassies;  an
international organisation in Iran  and  an  international  organisation  in
Turkey in relation to obtaining information on  the  procedures,  rules  and
regulations on exiting and  entering  Iran.  The  two  government  officials
confirmed that if a person has a case pending before a  court,  they  cannot
leave Iran and their names would be on a list at the airport so as  to  stop
them being able to leave the country. If a person on the  list  has  already
left Iran, the person may face problems on return. Mirfakhar stated to  them
that "[t]he seriousness of the problems depends on  the  crime  that  caused
the person to appear on the list".  On illegal exit the report  went  on  to
say:

    "7.4 Illegal exit
    The sources were consulted on the matter of return to Iran of  Iranians
    who have left the country illegally. Mirfakhar informed that  a  person
    who has left Iran illegally and who is not registered on  the  list  of
    people, who  cannot  leave  Iran,  will  not  face  problems  with  the
    authorities upon return, though the person may be fined. It was  added,
    that a person who has committed a crime and  has  left  Iran  illegally
    will only be prosecuted for the crime previously committed and not  for
    leaving the country illegally. However,  a  western  embassy...  stated
    that a fine is given for leaving the country illegally.  The  fine  for
    illegal exit can run up to 50 million Iranian  Rial  which  amounts  to
    approximately 5,000 USD. To the knowledge of the  embassy,  people  who
    have left Iran illegally are not detained upon return. The embassy  did
    not know what happens if a person  is  unable  to  pay  the  fine.  The
    Attorney at Law confirmed  that  there  is  a  fine  for  leaving  Iran
    illegally. However, he believed  the  fine  to  be  around  200-300  US
    dollars. It was added that if a person has outstanding issues with  the
    authorities (other than leaving illegally) he or she may very likely be
    punished for these upon return. The punishment  will  be  according  to
    law. However, it may also come  to  a  stricter  punishment  since  the
    person has left Iran illegally. It was  further  explained  that  if  a
    person continues  to  leave  Iran  illegally  the  penalty  might  rise
    accordingly. Hence, continuous illegal departures from Iran will result
    in harsher criminal punishment. A western embassy ... informed that  an
    Iranian citizen can return even if he  or  she  has  left  the  country
    illegally. The embassy explained that the  punishment  a  person  might
    face upon return depends on the acts committed before leaving  Iran.  A
    fine may be given for illegal exit. The embassy did not know  the  size
    of the fine. Mahdavi stated that only a small number of Iranians  leave
    the country illegally. The fine for leaving Iran  illegally  is  a  few
    hundred dollars and there is no other punishment. This statement is  in
    contrast to the information given by a  western  embassy  ...  and  the
    Attorney at Law. Both sources knew of high numbers of Iranians who have
    left Iran illegally. According to Sajdrabi, a person who has left  Iran
    illegally will be subjected to the  laws  and  regulations  that  cover
    these issues. When  asked  to  specify  this,  Sajdrabi  repeated  that
    Iranian laws and regulations will be applied in accordance."

Other incidents of problems encountered on return to Iran by  persons  since
the June 2009 election demonstrations

27. Given Dr Kakhki's mention in his latest report of examples  of  problems
facing persons on return in recent months, it is helpful  next  to  set  out
documents  contained  in  the  appellant's  further  bundle   submitted   in
September 2009. A  report  dated  8  July  2009  by  www.iranhumanrights.org
refers to a report they had received from Defenders for Human Rights  Centre
(DHRC)  in  Iran  concerning  Bijan  Khajehpour,  a  business  and  economic
consultant of international renown who was said to  have  been  arrested  at
Teheran airport following his return from abroad; he was not known,  it  was
stated, to have been  involved  in  any  political  activities.  An  Amnesty
International news report dated 22  July  2009  refers  to  the  same  case,
mentioning that during his trips abroad  he  spoke  to  trade  officials  in
Vienna and met the Iran British Business Chamber  in  London.  The  same  AI
report mentions that a French national,  Clotilde  Reiss,  was  detained  at
Teheran airport in Iran, on her way home to France on 1 July: "The  24  year
old is accused of espionage in connection with photographs she  took  during
a demonstration in the city  of  Esfahan  in  which  she  participated  last
month...".

Other background reports

28. In response to the Tribunal's memorandum of 24 July 2009 the  respondent
submitted a copy of the August 2009  COIS  report,  pointing  out  that  the
report helped with events up to 6 August 2009 and that para 27.14  "gives  a
fairly comprehensive account of the procedures  an undocumented  Iranian  is
likely to face when returning to Iran". Para 27.14,  we  note,  quotes  from
the  Advisory  Panel  on  Country  Information  (APCI)  review  of  the  COI
Service's COI Report of August 2008 undertaken by  Dr  Reza  Molavi  and  Dr
Kakhki of the Centre of Iranian Studies at Durham University as follows:

      "According  to  Article  34,  any  Iranian  who  leaves  the   country
       illegally, without a valid passport or similar travel documents, will
       be sentenced to between one and three  years  imprisonment,  or  will
       receive a fine between  100,000  and  500,000  Rials.   In  order  to
       proceed [sic] the cases relating  to  illegal  departure,  a  special
       court is located in Mehrabad Airport in Tehran.  Its branch number is
       given as 1610.   If an Iranian arrives  in  the  country,  without  a
       passport or any valid travel documents, the official will arrest them
       and take them to this court.  The court assesses  the  background  of
       the individual, the date of their departure  from  the  country,  the
       reason  for  their  illegal  departure,  their  connection  with  any
       organisations or groups and any other circumstances.  The judge  will
       decide the severity  of  the  punishment  within  the  parameters  of
       Article 34. This procedure also applies to people  who  are  deported
       back to Iran, not in the possession of a passport containing an  exit
       visa; in this case  the  Iranian  Embassy  will  issue  them  with  a
       document confirming their nationality....illegal departure  is  often
       prosecuted in conjunction with  other,  unrelated  offences.  Such  a
       methodology appears to suggest that it is the investigation into  the
       facts surrounding the  easily  observable  and  provable  offence  of
       illegal departure, namely the motive for such an act (as  a  decision
       to depart illegally suggests a desire to escape  prosecutorial/police
       detection for past illegal deeds), that  eventually  results  in  the
       discovery  of  the  underlying  offence,  leading   to   a   combined
       prosecution." [6a] (p76)

29. At para 9.01 this report cites he same two academics' summary  portrayal
       of the Iranian security forces:

       "Iran  maintains  an  extensive  network  of  internal  security  and
       intelligence services.  The  main  parts  of  the  domestic  security
       apparatus are made up of the Ministry of Intelligence  and  Security,
       the Basij Resistance Force, the intelligence  unit  of  the  [Iranian
       Revolutionary Guards Corps] IRGC,  and  the  law  enforcement  forces
       within the Ministry of Interior  that  largely  are  responsible  for
       providing police and border control. The leadership of each of  these
       organizations appears to be fragmented and dispersed  among  several,
       often  competing,  political  factions.  Public  information  on  all
       Iranian security and intelligence forces  is  extremely  limited  and
       subject to political manipulation.


       Key to most paramilitary and intelligence forces in Iran is the IRGC,
       as it  holds  control  over  several  other  organizations  or  parts
       thereof. All security organizations without exception report  to  the
       Supreme National Security Council (SNSC), as the highest body in  the
       political chain of command."

30. The same COIS report also quotes from  major  country  reports  on  Iran
assessing the situation in Iran up to early 2009, including  this  from  the
US State Department, 25 February 2009:

    "The government's poor human rights record worsened, and  it  continued
    to commit numerous serious  abuses.  The  government  severely  limited
    citizens' right to change their government peacefully through free  and
    fair elections. The government executed numerous persons  for  criminal
    convictions as juveniles and after unfair trials. Security forces  were
    implicated in custodial deaths and committed other acts of  politically
    motivated violence,  including  torture.  The  government  administered
    severe officially sanctioned punishments, including death  by  stoning,
    amputation, and flogging. Vigilante groups with ties to the  government
    committed acts of violence. Prison conditions remained  poor.  Security
    forces arbitrarily arrested and  detained  individuals,  often  holding
    them  incommunicado.   Authorities   held   political   prisoners   and
    intensified  a  crackdown  against  women's  rights  reformers,  ethnic
    minority rights activists, student activists, and religious minorities.
    There was a lack of judicial independence and fair public  trials.  The
    government severely restricted civil liberties, including  freedoms  of
    speech, expression, assembly, association, movement, and  privacy,  and
    it  placed  severe  restrictions  on  freedom  of  religion.   Official
    corruption and a lack of government  transparency  persisted.  Violence
    and  legal  and  societal  discrimination  against  women,  ethnic  and
    religious minorities, and  homosexuals;  trafficking  in  persons;  and
    incitement to anti-Semitism remained problems. The government  severely
    restricted workers' rights, including freedom of  association  and  the
    right to organize and bargain collectively, and arrested numerous union
    organizers. Child labour remained a serious problem.  On  December  18,
    for the sixth consecutive year, the UN General Assembly (UNGA)  adopted
    a resolution on Iran expressing 'deep  concern  at  ongoing  systematic
    violations of human rights'." [4a] (Introduction)

31. The COIS report also mentions the Amnesty International report  on  Iran
for 2009, released on 28 May 2009 in which it is  noted,  inter  alia,  that
"[t]orture and other ill-treatment of detainees were  common  and  committed
with impunity".

 32.  Para 11.03 of the August 2009 COIS quotes from a  recent  USSD  Report
description of the Iranian court system:

     "There are several court systems. The two most active  are  traditional
       courts, which adjudicate civil and  criminal  offences,  and  Islamic
       revolutionary courts. The latter try offences viewed  as  potentially
       threatening to the Islamic Republic, including threats to internal or
       external  security,  narcotics  and  economic  crimes,  and  official
       corruption. A special clerical court examines alleged  transgressions
       within the clerical establishment, and a military court  investigates
       crimes connected with military or  security  duties.  A  press  court
       hears  complaints  against  publishers,  editors,  and  writers.  The
       Supreme Court has review authority over some cases, including appeals
       of death sentences." [4a] (Section 1e) ...
       The military courts deal with cases  concerning  military  personnel,
       including members of the revolutionary guard, Basij and the like, who
       have broken the law."

33. Mention should also be made  of  a  2001  Amnesty  International  report
entitled "Iran: A legal system that fails to protect freedom  of  expression
and association", discussing laws used in Iran to silence dissent.  Although
now an old report, it is still seen by Dr  Kakhki  and  leading  reports  as
reflecting the current position. It states:

    "At least nine laws, many of which are vague  and  overlap,  deal  with
    criticism, insult and defamation notably of  state  officials;  and  at
    least one deals with the  dissemination  of  "false  information".  The
    punishments for  such  charges  include  imprisonment  and  the  cruel,
    inhuman and degrading punishment of flogging ....


    The Penal Code addresses the issues of  criticism  and  insult  in  the
    vaguely worded Articles 514, 608  and  609.  Article  514  singles  out
    "insults" made against the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the  first
    Leader of the Islamic  Republic  of  Iran,  Article  608  provides  for
    flogging and a fine as punishment for "insulting others, such as  using
    foul language or indecent words..." Article 609 states  that  criticism
    of a wide range of state officials  in  connection  with  carrying  out
    their work can be punished by a fine, 74 lashes or  between  three  and
    six months' imprisonment  for  insult.   Once  again,  the  Penal  Code
    provides no guidance regarding what determines "criticism" or "insult".




    Article 697 of the Penal Code considers defamation.   It states that if
    an individual makes allegations of an act that "can  be  considered  an
    offence according to law", but cannot  prove  that  it  is  true,  that
    person  will  be  sentenced  to  between  one  month  and  one   year's
    imprisonment or 74 lashes or a sentence combining the two. However,  if
    the statements are proven,  but  the  judge  concludes  that  it  is  a
    "propagation of obscenities", the person will also be sentenced.


    Article 698 concerns the dissemination of false information or  rumours
    with the intention of causing anxiety or unease in the  public's  mind.
    This is punishable by  flogging  or  imprisonment.   In  October  2001,
    Fatemeh Govar'i [f], a journalist and member of the  Dr  'Ali  Shariati
    Cultural Studies Centre  (Daftar-e  Pajohesh-ha-ye  Farhangi-ye  Doktor
    'Ali Shari'ati), was sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment  and  50
    lashes by a General court in  Qazvin,  in  central  Iran,  for  charges
    including "spreading falsehood" in connection  with  an  interview  she
    gave to the weekly journal, Velayat-e-Qazvin..."

34. The same Amnesty International report observes that:


         "Under Article 513, offences considered to amount to an "insult" to
         religion can be punished by death or prison terms  of  between  one
         and five years. Similarly, Articles 6 and  26  of  the  Press  Code
         proscribe "writings containing apostasy and matters against Islamic
         standards [and] "the true religion of  Islam...",  but  state  that
         such cases will be heard in a criminal  court.  Article  6  of  the
         Press  Code  specifically  states  that  those  convicted  will  be
         "assigned punishments according to Article 698 of the Penal  Code."
         This article concerns the  intentional  creation  of  "anxiety  and
         unease in public's mind", "false rumours" or  writing  about  "acts
         which are not true", even if it is a quotation,  and  provides  for
         between two months and two years' imprisonment or up to 74 lashes.


         Neither the Penal Code nor Press  Code  specifically  defines  what
         activities constitute insult to religion, and both have  been  used
         to punish people for the expression of their opinion...."


35. In an article by Majid Mohammadi entitled, "The Judiciary: A  Stronghold
of Authoritarianism" Issue 15, November 2007 - Aban 1386 - Justice  and  the
Judicial System, the author describes the judiciary in Iran  as  subject  to
control and manipulation by the clerics:

    " By appointing loyal members  of  their  inner  circles  to  Judiciary
    positions and purging it  of  independent  judges,  the  administration
    ensured a monopoly on the judiciary by the true believers of the ruling
    ideology.  This monopoly gave clerics the power  to  implement  Islamic
    decrees within the judicial system  in  a  bid  to  wield  totalitarian
    control over the people."

36. The author adds:

    "In Iran, the Judiciary is structurally aloof from social developments,
    acting  as  the  government's  tool  to  settle  social  conflicts  and
    political challenges while remaining untouched by public opinion. Since
    all Judiciary officials, including judges, prosecutors and even lawyers
    are appointed (per article 187 of the Third Development Plan Law), they
    are only accountable to the person  who  appoints  them,  and  are  not
    accountable to other individuals or bodies. In political  trials  which
    play a  role  in  shaping  public  opinion,  Judiciary  officials  have
    refrained from offering any explanations to the people.  They have only
    alluded to the Leaders' speeches, stating that the arrested individuals
    had been aiding the enemy."

   37. The recent media reports submitted by the appellant's representatives
   in September 2009 (in terms very similar  to  Dr  Kakhki's  depiction  of
   events since the June 12 elections) highlight the fact  that  the  regime
   has arrested hundreds of opposition and reformist activists  as  well  as
   journalists and human rights defenders (a  spokesman  for  the  Judiciary
   said on August 11 that security forces had detained around  4,000  people
   in the post-election period) and had engaged in an organised campaign  to
   discredit  and  criminalise  those  undertaking  peaceful  protest.   The
   protesters have been portrayed as having been "controlled by  foreigners"
   through Voice of America and BBC broadcasts and to have been  manipulated
   by a Western-sponsored conspiracy designed to  overthrow  the  government
   with a "velvet revolution" similar to that  tried  in  Czechoslovakia  in
   1968. Britain is branded by Iran's leaders  as  the  "Little  Satan".  In
   recent months the focus has been convening en masse "show trials" of  the
   protestors  before  the  Revolutionary  Court  ,  which   often   feature
   confessions by the accused to the effect that  they  had  been  duped  by
   "foreign-led plots" against the Islamic Republic orchestrated by  the  UK
   and America.  According to Amnesty International press reports, over  100
   Iranians have faced or will face grossly unfair  trials  arising  out  of
   these events. According to iranhumanrights.org the abuse of detainees has
   been widespread, affecting  as  many  as  2,500  persons  who  have  been
   detained as conspirators. The new head of the judiciary, Ayatollah  Sadeq
   Larijani (appointed in early August 2009), is described  as  a  hardliner
   intent on doing the regime's bidding.

Submissions

38. The submissions at the hearing were as follows.  Miss  Johnstone  relied
on the respondent's reasons for  refusal.   As  regard  the  incidents  that
occurred during the appellant's national service, she urged that  we  follow
IJ Hague's finding that they were "now so old  that  they  have  no  bearing
upon his asylum claim" (para 10).  When considering the expert report by  Dr
Kakhki, she urged us to take into  account  the  negative  views  about  him
expressed by the then President of the Immigration and Asylum  Tribunal,  Mr
Justice Ouselely, in MS (Fresh Evidence) Iran [2004]  UKIAT  00130.  In  any
event, she added,  the  expert  report  clearly  acknowledged  that  persons
charged under Iranian law for anti-Islamic  conduct  had  possible  defences
and in the appellant's case he would be able to point to the fact  that  his
outburst in court was the result of frustration  over  a  delay  lasting  13
years in being given a decision by the military court.  It  was  clear  from
the amount of money he had used to leave Iran  that  he  could  arrange  for
good legal representation in Iran.  The only examples given  by  the  expert
of  persons  convicted  for  anti-Islamic  offences  were  either  mid-level
government officials or  academics.   By  contrast  the  appellant  held  no
government or academic position and had no  media  profile.   The  appellant
had previously only come before a military court and, despite  the  expert's
view to the contrary, there was no good reason why  that  same  court  would
not continue to deal with the appellant,  considering  him  for  example  as
having been in contempt of court.   The  expert's  report  had  lacunae,  in
particular he did not deal with what the implications for the  appellant  of
the visit to his home by officials and  he  did  not  consider  the  medical
evidence, and the (potentially discrepant) evidence arising from  Miss  Lees
having been told by the appellant that he had had surgery  to  his  hand  at
the time when the injury to it was sustained.  The  expert's  views  on  the
consequences to a returnee of having exited  illegally  were  at  odds  with
Tribunal country guidance.  The expert appears not to have  understood  that
the  appellant  would  only  be  returned   with   some   form   of   travel
documentation.

39.  Miss Johnstone pointed out that in his SEF and  asylum  interviews  the
appellant had made no mention of injury to his hand or of  torture  or  ill-
treatment.  IJ Hague made no mention of the appellant saying he had  a  hand
injury.  Dr  Scott's  opinion  covered  matters  he  himself  accepted  were
outside his expertise.  Neither he nor Miss  Lees  followed  medical  report
protocol of making findings which graded injuries as  "consistent  with"  or
"highly consistent with" the claimed causes, nor did they address  the  fact
that the appellant had been a welder.  She accepted from Dr  Scott's  report
that the appellant suffered from PTSD at the time  of  the  report  but  his
diagnosis was that the appellant's psychological state was affected  by  his
anxieties about the possible outcome of his asylum case and it was odd  that
there was no up-to-date medical evidence.

40. On return, submitted Miss Johnstone, the appellant would certainly  face
questioning, but it was unlikely he would face detention as  the  court  had
allowed him to remain at liberty after his court outburst and, according  to
his asylum interview, they had only told him to report  to  Sepah.   In  any
event, even if detained there was no reason to think it would result in ill-
treatment.  He would not  automatically  be  found  guilty.   There  was  no
reason to think someone like him, a person with no political profile,  would
be ill-treated.

41. Mr Cole submitted that on the  strength  of  IJ  Hague's  findings,  the
appellant had already experienced  persecution,  including  beatings,  being
held for eight months without charge in solitary confinement,  subjected  to
excessive court delay and bail with adverse consequences for his  access  to
social services;  and  facing  a  charge  (anti-Islamic  conduct)  that  was
contrary to ECHR norms.  Further, on return he would be regarded as a  bail-
jumper and someone who had exited illegally.  It was unrealistic to  suppose
he would not face further  detention  and  ill-treatment  during  the  court
procedures.  It was likely he would  be  convicted  on  a  charge  of  anti-
Islamic conduct and face lashings as a result.  To  consider  that  all  his
problems would be solved by getting a good lawyer in Iran was fanciful.   On
IJ Hague's findings the appellant was disposed to deal with  authorities  in
Iran in a "counter productive" manner.  As  to  the  medical  evidence,  its
importance lay not in  its  observations  on  his  hand  injury  and/or  its
causation, but on the fact that he was  severely  traumatised,  although  he
accepted Dr Scott's report was now 18 months old.

42. The case law contained in the bundles should, he said, be  treated  with
caution in view of its vintage but in any event it made clear that whilst  a
person facing return to Iran could not succeed in a claim  to  face  a  real
risk of persecution or ill-treatment solely  on  account  of  having  exited
illegally or of facing court proceedings likely to  entail  detention,  they
did confirm that such factors,  in  conjunction  with  the  additional  risk
factors,  could  establish  such  a  real  risk.   In  this  regard  it  was
noteworthy that on the basis of  the  background  evidence  the  appellant's
offence of "anti-Islamic" conduct was  one  which  in  the  Iranian  context
would be viewed in political terms.



43. It is for the  appellant  to  prove  that  he  is  entitled  to  refugee
protection, humanitarian protection and Article 3  ECHR  protection  to  the
standard of reasonable degree of likelihood or real risk. We  must  consider
his case in the context of the evidence as a whole.

Our Assessment: general issues

Insulting the judiciary

44. Previous Tribunal country guidance  cases  have  assessed  with  various
aspects of the Iranian legal system and court  system:  see  e.g.  RM  &  BB
(Homosexuals) Iran CG [2005].  Building on previous Tribunal assessments  it
is only necessary here for us to update certain matters. The  major  country
reports and the expert evidence  of  Dr  Kakhki  now  before  us  concur  in
viewing the Iranian judiciary as lacking in independence and  subject  to  a
number of political pressures. Events since June 2009, with the  appointment
of a new hardliner as head of the judiciary, appear to  have  increased  the
susceptibility of the judiciary  to  political  influence  by  the  security
forces and current leadership.  So far as concerns the  likely  response  of
the judiciary to someone who has insulted a judge in an  Iranian  court,  in
the absence of more evidence giving specific incidents of  persons  recently
punished for insults in this context, it is difficult to  make  any  precise
findings, but we would accept that  judges in the various courts would  have
regard to numerous provisions in their Penal Code that could be  brought  to
bear against an individual who had conducted  himself  in  court  in  a  way
likely to  be  considered  insulting  to  the  presiding  judge  or  to  the
judiciary or justice  system  generally.  In  our  view  a  person  who  had
conducted himself in an Iranian court in a  manner  likely  to  be  seen  as
insulting either to the judiciary or the government or to Islam  would  face
an increased level of risk on return.   In  our  view,  engagement  in  such
conduct is to be regarded as a significant risk factor.

Anti-Islamic conduct

45. It is plain from the background evidence before us  that  being  accused
of anti-Islamic conduct amounts to a significant risk factor in  respect  of
likely treatment a person will face on return.  Both  Dr  Kakhki's  evidence
and that from established  sources  such  as  Amnesty  International,  Human
Rights Watch and the US State Department reports concur on this.

Ongoing court proceedings

46. One  of  the  questions  the  Tribunal  posed  to  the  parties  in  its
memorandum was whether an Iranian returnee would currently face a real  risk
of  serious  harm  merely  by  virtue  of  being  someone  who  faces  court
proceedings and/or judicial punishment. (We refer here to court  proceedings
other than ordinary civil proceedings).  It is apparent  from  the  evidence
collected by the Danish Immigration Service in  August/September  2008  that
it is likely that the Iranian authorities hold lists  of  those  subject  to
ongoing court proceedings and utilise them for various  purposes,  including
the monitoring of departures from and arrivals  into  the  country.  In  the
event of a person involved in ongoing court proceedings who  has  left  Iran
but then faces return, it is clear that such  a  history  is  likely  to  be
picked up through records held at the airport and that  in  consequence  the
person concerned will face a closer interrogation than  otherwise.  However,
both by Dr Kakhki and the sources consulted by the  authors  of  the  Danish
fact-finding report of April 2009 consider that the degree  of  risk  varies
according to the nature of the court proceedings.  This  persuades  us  that
being involved in ongoing court proceedings is not in itself something  that
will automatically result in ill-treatment; it  constitutes  a  risk  factor
but one which has to be considered in  the  light  of  all  the  surrounding
circumstances. The more the offences for which  a  person  faces  trial  are
likely to be viewed as political, the greater the level of  risk  likely  to
arise as a result.

Illegal exit

47. The other question the Tribunal posed to the parties in  its  memorandum
was whether an Iranian returnee would currently face a real risk of  serious
harm merely by virtue of being someone who left  the  country  illegally  or
being someone who faces court  proceedings  and/or  judicial  punishment  in
Iran in the light of the June 2009  election  events.  This  is  a  question
which the Tribunal has faced in a number of past country guidance  cases  on
Iran, in particular AD (Risk-Illegal Departure) Iran CG [2003]  UKAIT  00107
and the answer in  every  case  has  been  that  the  authorities  will  not
perceive illegal exit as such to be a reason for  ill-treating  a  returnee.
Although the parties sought to assist us with further evidence  relating  to
this issue, they have not made submissions as to the extent  to  which  that
evidence has altered the position, so we must decide the matter as  best  we
can in the light of all the evidence.

48. We would observe that there is some tension  in  the  recent  background
evidence as to the precise  position  as  regards  the  consequences  of  an
illegal exit. In particular, there is a  clear  difference  of  view  as  to
whether the discovery by the authorities at  the  point  of  return  that  a
person exited illegally will cause any significant difficulties. On the  one
hand, there are sources (as cited in  the  most  recent  Danish  Immigration
Service report) which consider that illegal exit is  regarded  as  a  matter
that in itself might cause a person to face a  relatively  modest  fine  but
nothing more untoward than that. That position is also that which  has  been
taken in Tribunal country guidance cases for some time. On the  other  hand,
Dr Kakhki in certain passages of his APCI  review  (co-written  by  Dr  Reza
Molavi)  and in his evidence to us   considers  that  discovery  of  illegal
exit results in the person being arrested  and  taken  to  a  special  court
located in Teheran airport. Dr Kakhki says that this procedure is likely  to
be used not just for persons who arrive without  a  passport  or  any  valid
travel documents but "people who are deported  back  to  Iran,  not  in  the
possession of a passport containing an exit visa; in this case  the  Iranian
Embassy will issue them with a document confirming their nationality".

49. So far as concerns the position prior to June 2009, we do  not  consider
that the evidence taken as a whole indicates that the mere fact  of  a  past
illegal exit is viewed by  the  authorities  in  Iran  as  a  reason  to  do
anything other than impose  a  relatively  modest  fine  on  the  individual
concerned. If it had been otherwise, we consider that this would  have  been
noted by the non-governmental sources consulted by  the  Danish  Immigration
Service and would also have become known, through local informants,  to  one
or more of the international human rights organisations who closely  monitor
events in Iran. We do not know what  is(are)   the  source(s)  on  which  Dr
Kakhki (and his colleague) relies (rely) for his account and  we  note  that
he himself does not seek to address its apparent conflict in at  least  some
respects with the descriptions given in other sources. That is  in  contrast
to many other observations set out in his report which  are  squarely  based
on established sources.

50. In any event, we note that even on Dr Kakhki's account, whether  or  not
an individual taken before this court suffers adverse  consequences  depends
on the outcome of  the  court's  investigation.  It  is  apparent  from  the
questions Dr Kakhki describes as being asked by those  who  run  this  court
that they consider that the mere fact of  illegal  exit  is  not  enough  to
result in adverse treatment. Those questions indicate that they are  looking
for persons who have a particular profile, criminal and/or political.

51. It is strongly suggested in Dr Kakhki's most recent report  that  events
in 2009 have altered the likely position for returnees.  As  already  noted,
he considers that those connected to Britain are now  likely  to  be  viewed
with  greater  suspicion.  He  also  cites,  with  apparent  approval,   the
diplomatic editor of Kayhan, whose view  is  that  the  situation  of  those
returning from the UK "may be particularly  perilous".  Whilst  we  have  no
difficulty  accepting  that  as  a  result  of  recent  events  the  Iranian
government has sought to blame the UK (and US) governments for inciting  the
anti-regime protests, we are unable to accept  that  this  has  led  to  any
significant change in the treatment of returnees.  If there had been such  a
change we consider that there  would  have  been  a  significant  number  of
incidents reported by one or more of the websites  monitoring  human  rights
in Iran showing that persons were experiencing difficulties  merely  on  the
basis that they were a returnee, or a returnee from the UK. Yet of the  only
two examples Dr Kakhki provides, one concerns a  Mousavi  activist  and  her
husband and  both  examples  appear  to  concern  persons  who  are  British
citizens or persons in the UK with valid leave  facing  difficulties  whilst
paying a visit to Iran, not Iranians returning. We ourselves have  extracted
from the further bundle of evidence sent by  the  appellant's  solicitors  a
mention of two other cases involving persons detained at Teheran airport  on
return,  one  concerning  a  business  and  economic  consultant   with   an
international reputation, the other concerning a French national accused  of
espionage.  In  the  former  case,  the  details  given  indicate  that  the
gentleman was someone with high-profile business  connections,  so  it  does
not help us much in considering the likely situation for ordinary  returnees
and the second was someone who had taken photographs at a demonstration.  We
appreciate that we are considering very recent events and that  the  Iranian
authorities may take action against individuals hidden from the public  eye.
Equally, however, we take into account that persons returning to  Iran  will
normally have family or friends who will have been forewarned of their  date
and time of return and would be in a position to notify human rights  bodies
if such persons disappeared or emerged having met  with  ill  treatment.  We
consider that the above examples are far too slender  a  basis  for  drawing
any safe inferences concerning likely risk on return for returnees as  such.
Given that the government has demonised  Britain,  we  would  have  expected
that if returnees from the  UK  generally  were  meeting  with  difficulties
there would have been significant documentation in  background  sources.  If
the diplomatic editor of Kayhan in June/July was investigating  claims  that
a number of British Iranians  have  "disappeared"  since  the  elections  in
June, it seems to us significant that several months later  nothing  further
has come to light to indicate that those  investigations  produced  anything
of note. The evidence afforded by the above examples is far more  consistent
with an inference that it is only persons who are considered  to  have  some
political profile connected with recent events who now face a  greater  risk
on return. For these reasons we do not think  it  would  be  justifiable  to
describe "being a returnee from the UK" or some  such  category  even  as  a
risk factor. (We would also observe, although we do not include  it  in  our
assessment of risk, that the same analysts who highlight the recent  Iranian
government's attempt to blame the 2009  protests  on  a  UK-led  conspiracy,
also emphasise that those in power know this is merely rhetoric designed  to
divert people's attention away from the level of opposition and  to  justify
punitive action against those involved in the protests.).

52. What we derive from our above analysis is that the most likely  position
is as follows.   Illegal  exit  is  not  a  factor  which  in  itself  is  a
significant risk factor, although if it is the  case  that  a  person  would
face difficulties with the authorities for other  reasons,  it  could  be  a
factor adding to risk. Normally illegal exit is  considered  as  an  offence
attracting only a fine involving a relatively modest sum of money;  however,
matters can become more problematic when the person is (or is discovered  to
be) someone involved in ongoing court  proceedings  or  someone  who  has  a
previous criminal record or someone who is viewed in a  political  light  as
having views contrary to that of the current regime.  Given the updating  we
have now done of the evidence on this issue, the case  of  AD  (Risk-Illegal
Departure) Iran CG [2003] UKAIT is to  be  treated  as  historical  guidance
only.

Risk factors generally

53. We do not seek in this determination to conduct a  comprehensive  review
of existing Tribunal country guidance on Iran.  However,  we  are  satisfied
from the ground  we  have  had  to  traverse  in  order  to  deal  with  the
appellant's case, that it is possible  to  say  the  following,  by  way  of
summary on issues of risk on return:


       i) Events in Iran following the 12 June 2009 presidential  elections
          have led to a government crackdown on persons seen to be  opposed
          to the present government and the Iranian  judiciary  has  become
          even less independent. Persons who are likely to be perceived  by
          the  authorities  in  Iran  as  being  actively  associated  with
          protests against the June 12 election results  may  face  a  real
          risk of persecution or ill treatment, although much  will  depend
          on the particular circumstances.


      ii) Iranians facing enforced return do not in  general  face  a  real
          risk of persecution or ill-treatment. That remains the case  even
          if they exited Iran illegally. Having exited  illegally  Iran  is
          not a significant risk factor, although if it is the case that  a
          person would face difficulties with  the  authorities  for  other
          reasons, such a history could be a factor adding to the level  of
          difficulties he or she is likely to face.

     iii) Being a person who has left Iran when  facing  court  proceedings
          (other  than  ordinary  civil  proceedings)  is  a  risk  factor,
          although much will depend on the particular facts relating to the
          nature of the offence(s) involved and  other  circumstances.  The
          more the offences for which a person faces trial are likely to be
          viewed as political, the greater the  level  of  risk  likely  to
          arise as a result. Given the emphasis placed both by  the  expert
          report from Dr Kakhki and  the  April  2009  Danish  fact-finding
          report's  sources on the degree of risk varying according to  the
          nature of the court proceedings, being involved in ongoing  court
          proceedings is not in itself something  that  will  automatically
          result in ill-treatment; rather it is properly to  be  considered
          as a risk factor to be taken into account along with others.

      iv) Being a person involved in court  proceedings  in  Iran  who  has
          engaged in conduct likely to be seen as insulting either  to  the
          judiciary or the justice system or the  government  or  to  Islam
          constitutes another risk factor indicating an increased level  of
          risk of persecution or ill treatment on return.

       v) Being accused of anti-Islamic conduct likewise also constitutes a
          significant risk factor.

      vi) This case replaces AD (Risk-Illegal  Departure)  Iran  CG  [2003]
          UKAIT 00107.


Our Assessment: the appellant's case

54. Subject to our earlier comments, we must decide this case in  the  light
of all the evidence before us.  The onus of proof is  on  the  appellant  to
show that he faces a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  or  ill-
treatment. We must bear in mind that were we to find the appellant  suffered
past  persecution  or  serious  harm,  Article  4(4)  of  the  Qualification
Directive  (paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration  Rules)  states  that  the
appellant's persecution is to  be  treated  as  a  "serious  indication"  of
continuing risk "unless  there  are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
persecution will not be repeated ".

55. As already noted,  this  is  a  reconsideration  hearing  in  which  the
respondent earlier conceded that sufficiently clear  findings  of  fact  had
been made by IJ Hague in respect of the appellant's  past  experiences,  and
we are obliged by the terms of the consent order to decide it in  the  light
of  IJ  Hague's  positive  credibility  findings.    We   use   the   phrase
"sufficiently clear"  because, whilst IJ Hague's findings do not set out  in
detail what he accepted, his determination at para 8  records  that  he  saw
fit to proceed "on the basis that events have occurred broadly  in  the  way
he [the appellant] describes". It would  go  directly  against  the  consent
order were we to seek to circumscribe that  proposition  except  insofar  as
was done by IJ Hague.   It  is  true  that  IJ  Hague's  acceptance  of  the
appellant's account was immediately qualified by the words  "although  I  am
cautious of his tendency to overstate and self justify";  and  that  earlier
in the same paragraph he had made clear that he regarded as embellished  the
appellant's claim that when the authorities came  to  arrest  him  they  had
carried away his younger brother as a hostage and had attended in  excessive
numbers.  However, there are no other respects in  which  he  qualifies  the
appellant's account.

56. One other finding which we considered primary so far  as  IJ  Hague  was
concerned related to the appellant's personality and disposition.  Alongside
his tendency to embellish, overstate and self-justify, the IJ found that  "a
lack of diplomacy may have aggravated his problems" (para 8) and  that  "the
appearance is that he has approached matters in  a  headstrong  and  counter
productive way, with consequences to his own detriment" (para 9).   At  para
11  he  stated  that  "the  likelihood  is  that  he  has  been  clumsy  and
counterproductive in his efforts to resolve those difficulties [a  reference
to problems over his discharge from National Service and over his bail]".

57.  Having  explained  what  we  take  to  be  the  positive  findings   on
credibility which we must accept, it is important  to  clarify  their  outer
limits.  In our view they do not and cannot extend to IJ Hague's  evaluation
of the implications of the appellant's past experiences for risk on  return.
 They do not extend, therefore, to IJ Hague's opinion  that  the  incidents
that occurred during the appellant's national service "are now so  old  they
have no bearing upon his asylum claim". That is  an  opinion  that  goes  to
risk assessment and  if  accepted  would  run  counter  to  the  requirement
stipulated at para 339K of the Immigration Rules that  past  persecution  or
serious harm (assuming for the moment his past  experiences  did  amount  to
such) may be a serious indication of future risk.  In the  same  league  are
the IJ's comments at para 9 that "it  would  have  been  sensible  [for  the
appellant] to seek advice  on  whether  the  neighbour  could  withdraw  his
surety", at para 10 that the plain clothed men who came to  his  house  were
"[p]ossibly ... the equivalent of tipstaffs" and his observation at para  11
that:

         "I find it difficult to accept that he has provoked such  hostility
         that he faces significant ill-treatment.  An apology to  the  court
         should have suggested itself as a remedy.  I find it  difficult  to
         accept that his departure from the country was occasioned by fear".




58. These are not primary findings  of  fact  as  to  the  appellant's  past
experiences, but value-judgment seeking to convey  the  IJ's  assessment  of
risk.  As such we must  disregard  them.  We  have  to  do  so  because  his
assessment was found by Senior Immigration Judge  Lane  to  be  vitiated  by
legal  error,  in  having  been  made  without  taking  proper  account   of
background country evidence then before him.

59. We take into account the medical report.  We  think  it  unwarranted  to
attach  any  particular  weight  to  apparent  discrepancies   between   the
appellant's account to Miss Lees and that he gave otherwise  about  injuries
to his hand, as her summary of his account was sketchy, but  we  agree  with
Miss Johnstone that insofar as the evidence  of  both  medical  experts   is
advanced to support the appellant's  case  that  in  the  past  he  suffered
torture and a hand injury in particular, it is of very limited value  as  Dr
Scott had no expertise in such injuries and  neither  took  account  of  his
past occupation.  At the same time, we note  that  Miss  Johnstone  did  not
dispute its core finding that in  late  2007  the  appellant  suffered  from
severe PTSD.

60. As regard the expert reports  by  Dr  Kakhki,  we  have  regard  to  the
comments made by the IAT President in MS although  it  remains,  of  course,
that in general terms each report by an expert stands to  be  considered  on
its merits, unless, of course, past criticism is in very  strong  terms.  We
note that Dr Kakhki was one of the  country experts chosen to assist on  the
former APCI (Advisory Panel  on  Country  Information),  in  its  review  of
August COIS reports on Iran.  For the reasons  given  earlier,  we  did  not
find that  either  of  his  reports  provided  much  substantiated  evidence
specific to the issue of risk on return for returnees  from  Iran  generally
and we  did  not  find  that  his  latest  report  demonstrated  a  properly
empirical approach to the evidence he drew on to suggest recent  events  had
resulted in  a  significant  change  in  relation  to  risk  on  return  for
returnees as such (including failed asylum  seekers).  In  stating  that  he
considered that as a result of recent events those associated  with  the  UK
would be more likely to face risk on return, he appears to be too  ready  to
rely   on   sources   without   seeking   to   check   whether   they    are
corroborated/substantiated and to be too  ready  to  jumble  together  quite
different items of evidence (those concerning returnees as  such  and  those
concerning  returnees  with  some  type  of  profile)  and  to  draw   over-
generalised inferences from them.  None of these criticisms means,  however,
that we did not derive considerable benefit  from  his  reports  insofar  as
they conveyed his own expertise regarding the  Iranian  justice  system  and
helpfully drew  together what is known  about  current  aspects  of  Iranian
society and its justice system from other background sources.

61. The  first  issue  we  must  decide  is  whether  the  appellant's  past
experiences amount to persecution or ill-treatment. We have  no  doubt  that
they do. According to IJ Hague's summary, when he  was  court-martialled  he
was detained for  four  months  during  which  time  he  was  "subjected  to
beatings and interrogation".   Irrespective  of  whether  what  he  suffered
could be said to amount to torture, it was clearly a  form  of  inhuman  and
degrading treatment.  Following his  becoming  a  suspect  for  arson  on  a
military installation he was then held for eight months without charge  (for
some of which time his answers at interview state that he  was  in  solitary
confinement).  The court proceedings against him have been subject to  delay
lasting for some 13  years,  a  period  which  on  any  reckoning  has  been
excessive, and has had adverse consequences for his civil status,  since  he
has not been able to obtain a military completion certificate.  Even  if  we
had not found his experience of physical beatings in detention to amount  to
ill-treatment,  these  other  factors  taken  together  with  the  beatings,
certainly cross the threshold of a minimum level of severity.

62. Having found that the appellant has  experienced  past  persecution,  we
turn to examine whether there are good  reasons  to  consider  such  conduct
would not be repeated.  In our judgment there is a real risk of further ill-
treatment. In this context three features of  his  particular  circumstances
are of particular importance.  First,  there  is  his  previous  history  of
difficulties with the authorities just recounted.  He will be known to  them
as someone who has been the subject of  a  court  martial,  two  periods  of
military detention and as someone who has spent  a  considerable  period  on
bail awaiting possible trial and has  not  as  yet  been  given  a  military
completion  certificate.   By  leaving  Iran  he  has  plainly  broken   the
conditions of his bail.  It is also reasonably clear that he has  left  Iran
illegally without ever having been granted passport facilities  due  to  his
non-completion of National Service.

63. The second feature of importance relates to the implications for him  of
the events of 2005.  On the basis of IJ Hague's  finding  he  had  told  the
military court judge that although he (the military judge) professed  to  do
justice it was only a lie. In consequence of  this  outburst  officials  had
come to his home when he was out, telling his mother that he must  surrender
to them as he was guilty of anti-Islamic conduct.  Whether or not what  they
said meant they would have arrested him there and then (had he been in),  or
simply that they required him to  report  to  the  military  court,  we  are
satisfied that such conduct would lead to him facing  further  interrogation
and detention.  In addition to having jumped his existing bail he  had  then
failed to surrender to the authorities who we know had branded  him  "guilty
of anti-Islamic conduct".  To our mind it  is  reasonably  likely  that  his
failure to surrender  himself  would  give  the  authorities  an  additional
reason to punish  him.   Given  that  his  longstanding  problems  over  the
lodgement by neighbours of deeds for  their  house  as  bail  involved  both
Sepah and the military court, we  think  that  Sepah  would  have  (at  some
point) some direct involvement in ensuring he faced punishment for his anti-
Islamic conduct.  We do not think it necessarily matters  whether  he  would
face punishment in a Military Court only or also instead in a  Revolutionary
Court. Nor do we think it necessarily matters whether he  will  face  actual
prosecution for anti-Islamic behaviour. All that matters, so far as risk  on
return is concerned, is that the authorities will view him as  someone  they
must punish. That  punishment  may  take  the  form  of  prosecution  and/or
conviction and/or lashings or a fixed period of detention.  But  on  any  of
these possible scenarios there would be an indefinite  period  of  detention
whilst they investigated his case further. Whatever  view  they  took  about
whether to detain him in the past, his failure to report to the  authorities
and his action in fleeing Iran, are likely to cause them to take an  adverse
view of him on his return and subject him to ill treatment.

64. Why we see his likely further detention for an uncertain period  as  the
key  to  this  case  brings  us  to  the  third  feature  of  his   personal
circumstances which we consider particularly pertinent to  the  question  of
risk on return.  It relates to the appellant's personality and  disposition.
As is accepted by Miss Johnstone  the  appellant  has  in  the  recent  past
suffered from severe PTSD.   Lacking as we do  any  medical  evidence  since
the reports made by Dr Scott and Miss Lees in late  2007,  we  do  not  know
whether he has continued to suffer from that condition.  What  we  do  know,
however, is that having seen and heard  the  appellant  and  considered  his
past experiences in depth IJ  Hague  found  him  to  be  someone  who  lacks
diplomacy and who in relation to his dealings with the  Iranian  authorities
"has approached matters in a headstrong and  counter  productive  way,  with
consequences to his own detriment".  Bearing in  mind  that  we  have  vivid
illustrations of this in the form of his earlier periods of  detention  and,
in 2006, in the form of his own  outburst  before  the  military  court,  we
consider that the appellant is very likely to behave in much  the  same  way
on return.  Whereas possibly an Iranian returnee of normal  disposition  may
be able, on his own or with legal help to  negotiate  his  way  out  of  his
current difficulties, including his bail jumping and  failure  to  surrender
to the authorities, we are strongly persuaded that this appellant  will  not
take the same approach and that as before, in  IJ  Hague's  words,  it  will
have "consequences to his own detriment."

65. Given the above findings it is not strictly necessary for us to  examine
whether his  having  exited  Iran  illegally  would  add  to  his  level  of
difficulties. Earlier, we examined the general issue of whether  an  Iranian
returnee will face a real risk of serious harm merely  by  virtue  of  being
someone who has left the country illegally. Our conclusion was  that  it  is
not a significant risk factor, although, if it is the  case  that  a  person
would face difficulties with the  authorities  for  other  reasons,  such  a
history could be a factor adding to the level of difficulties he or  she  is
likely to face. We consider that the fact  (which  the  Iranian  authorities
will quickly be able to establish) that the appellant  left  Iran  illegally
is likely to add at least to some extent to the level  of  risk  he  already
faces for other reasons, particularly given that he left  by  jumping  bail.
As already noted, we also consider that in encounters with the  authorities,
because of his truculent disposition towards authority, he  is  very  likely
to aggravate his own difficulties in their eyes.

66. In reaching the above conclusions we attach particular  significance  to
the background country evidence relating to present-day Iran.   Although  we
approach the expert reports by Dr Kakhki with caution, we consider that  his
report  is  useful  in  highlighting  what  is  conveyed  by  the  US  State
Department Reports on Iran,  Freedom  House,  Human  Rights  Watch,  Amnesty
International and UN General Assembly reports, as well  as  reputable  media
sources such as the Washington Post.  In relation to the  appellant's   past
experiences IJ Hague has already, very properly, noted that  "[his]  account
is broadly consistent with the description of  the  courts,  Sepah  and  the
bail system set out in the  COIS  report".  The  latter  is,  of  course,  a
compendium of a whole  range  of  established  sources  and  materials.   In
relation to the further evidence we have before us  we  consider  that  Iran
remains a country in which a person considered by those in authority  to  be
guilty of anti-Islamic conduct will face a real risk of  ill-treatment.   So
far  from  ameliorating  the  appellant's  difficulties,   the   appellant's
inevitable  need  to  engage  further  with  the  Iranian  justice   system,
dominated by an increasingly authoritarian judiciary subject  to  influences
from the security services, is only likely to add to the degree of  risk  he
would otherwise face.

67. Accordingly we conclude that the appellant faces a real risk  on  return
of persecution, serious harm and ill-treatment.

68. It remains to consider whether such persecution would be for  a  Refugee
Convention  reason.   We  do  not  consider  that   the   appellant's   past
persecution arising from his  detention  when  undergoing  military  service
manifested such a reason.  However, we  find  that  the  risk  he  faces  on
return will be on account of religion and political opinion.  The fact  that
persons in authority have branded him  guilty  of  anti-Islamic  conduct  is
sufficient to demonstrate that.

69. For the above reasons we conclude:

     The IJ materially erred in law.

     The decision we substitute for his is to allow the  appellant's  appeal
    on asylum and Article 3 grounds.


Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge Storey

                                 APPENDIX A

DECISION BY SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE (signed 7 September 2007)

REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW
IN THE DETERMINATION by

APPELLANT:        SB

DATE OF RECONSIDERATION HEARING:    5 September 2007


1.   At the reconsideration hearing on 5 September 2007 the  Tribunal  found
    that there was a material error of law  in  the  determination  of  the
    Immigration Judge.

2.   As conceded by Mr Wood, the Immigration Judge, having  found  that  the
    appellant's account of his experiences in Iran was reasonably likely to
    be true, failed to make proper findings as to risk on  return  to  that
    country; in  particular,  whether  the  Iranian  authorities  would  be
    reasonably likely to proceed against him for anti-Islamic  conduct,  in
    connection with the appellant's outburst in court in 2006.

3.   The Tribunal was unable on 5  September  to  proceed  to  substitute  a
    fresh decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.  Although, on the  basis
    of Mr Wood's concession that the Immigration  Judge  made  sufficiently
    clear findings about the appellant in Iran,  and  that  those  findings
    should stand, the Tribunal would have expected on that day to have been
    presented with evidence and detailed submissions as to the  outstanding
    issues on risk on return, Mr Ahmed was in the difficulty that both  he
    and his instructing solicitors had only very recently  been  instructed
    by the appellant (who had previously represented himself)  and  certain
    case law upon which Mr Wood intended to rely had not been  successfully
    received by fax in London.   The  Tribunal  accordingly  adjourned  the
    reconsideration to be completed in Manchester.

                      APPENDIX B: BACKGROUND MATERIALS

|Amnesty International, Iran: A legal system that fails to protect |
|freedom of expression and association, 2001                       |
|Human Rights Watch World Report 2007: Iran, dated 11 January      |
|2007.Gozaar (Freedom House)                                       |
|Report by Gozaar (Freedom House), The Judiciary: A stronghold of  |
|Authoritarianism, 1 November 2007                                 |
|Article by Majid Mohammadi entitled, "The Judiciary: A Stronghold |
|of Authoritarianism", Issue 15, November 2007 - Aban 1386 -       |
|Justice and the Judicial System,                                  |
|COIS Report August 2008                                           |
|US State Department Report for 2008 (February 2009)               |

|Danish Immigration Service, Human Rights Situation for Minorities,|
|Women and Converts, and                                           |
|Entry and Exit Procedures, ID Cards, Summons and Reporting, etc., |
|30/04/2009 [excerpt]                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Amnesty International Report, 28 May 2009                         |
|Amnesty International, Iran: Violence against demonstrators marks |
|new presidential term,                                            |
|14/06/2009                                                        |
|UK /foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), Foreign Secretary      |
|statement on the Iranian                                          |
|elections, 15/06/2009                                             |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: End Violence Against Peaceful Protests  |
|(Security Forces shoot                                            |
|and Kill Protesters in Tehran and Shiraz),   15/06/2009           |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Seven Reported Killed in iran    |
|Clashes, 16/06/2009                                               |
|Rooz Online, Savage attack on student Dormitories, 16/06/2009     |
|EurasiaNet, Iran: Hardliners Double Down On Repression, But       |
|Protest Numbers Keep                                              |
|Growing, 16/06/2009                                               |
|Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights   |
|(OHCHR), Human rights chief experts gravely concerned at killings |
|and arrests in Iran, 19/06/2009 rights experts gravel concerned at|
|killings and arrests in Iran, 19/06/2009 ____________________  23 |
|Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights   |
|(OCCHR), UN human rights chief concerned about manner of arrests, |
|and possible use of excessive force in Iran, 19/06/2009           |
|Amnesty International, Opposition leaders detained in Iran,       |
|19/06/2009                                                        |
|Amnesty International, Iran's supreme leader condones violent     |
|police crackdown on protesters, 19/06/2009                        |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: Halt the Crackdown, 19/06/2009          |
|Reporters Sans Frontiers (Reporters Without Borders), Repression  |
|stepped up yet again as Iran becomes world's biggest prison for   |
|journalists, 21/06/2009                                           |
|International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, Human Rights     |
|Organization Provides the Names of Prominent Detainees, Calls for |
|Their Release, 23/06/2009                                         |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, The British in Iran; Useful      |
|Villains, 23/06/2009                                              |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: Violent Crackdown on Protesters Widens, |
|23/06/2009                                                        |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Iranian Government Intensifies   |
|Countrywide Crackdown, 25/06/2009                                 |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: Night Raids Terrorize Civilians,        |
|26/06/2009                                                        |
|Voice of America News, Iran Arrests Local British Embassy         |
|Employees, 28/06/2009                                             |
|UK Foreign And Commonwealth Office (FCO), EU Foreign Ministers    |
|call on Iran to release Embassy staff immediately, 28/06/2009     |
|Voice of America News, Iran Releases 5 British Embassy Staff,     |
|29/06/2009                                                        |
|UK Parliament House of Commons, Commons Hansard Debates 30 June   |
|2009: Oral Answers to Questions - Iran, 30/06/2009                |
|Voice of America News, Brown: Iran Using Britain as Scapegoat for |
|Political Unrest, 01/07/2009                                      |
|Voice of America News, Iran's Supreme Leader Blasts Alleged       |
|'Western meddling' in Iran, 06/07/2009                            |
|Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights   |
|(OHCHR), UN experts gravely concerned by mass arrests in Iran,    |
|07/07/2009                                                        |
|UK Parliament |House of Commons, Commons Hansard debates 08 July  |
|2009                                                              |
|(Westminster Hall): Human Rights (Iran), 08/07/2009 [Excerpt]     |
|Report dated 8 July 2009 by www.iranhumanrights.org               |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: Detainees Describe Beatings, pressure to|
|Confess, 08/07/2009                                               |
|International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, Widespread       |
|Arbitrary Arrests and Disappearances Continue, 08/07/2009         |
|UK Parliament House of Commons, Commons Hansard Debates 09 July   |
|2009                                                              |
|(Westminster Hall): Global Security (Iran), 09/07/2009 [Excerpt]  |
|Amnesty International, Iran: Hundreds of detainees at risk of     |
|torture and other ill-treatment: list of detainees, 13/07/2009    |
|International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, Death Toll       |
|Apparently Far Exceeds Government Claims, 15/07/2009              |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: Halt Moves to Curtail Lawyers,          |
|16/07/2009                                                        |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran; Stop 'Framing' Government Critics,      |
|21/07/2009                                                        |
|Amnesty International, Arrests and deaths continue in Iran as     |
|authorities tighten grip, 22/07/2009.                             |
|Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture (UK), Iran: |
|The cycle of torture and oppression, 22/07/2009                   |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: Stop arresting, Intimidating Rights     |
|Lawyers, 26/07/2009                                               |
|International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, Tales of Torture,|
|Violence Continue to be heard from Iran, 31/07/2009               |
|Voice of America News, Trial Begins for Iran Election Protesters, |
|01/08/2009                                                        |
|Voice of America News, Post-Election Detainees on Trial in Iran,  |
|02/08/2009                                                        |
|Amnesty International, Over 100 Iranians face grossly unfair      |
|trials, 04/08/2009                                                |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: Show Trial Exposes Arbitrary Detention, |
|04/08/2009                                                        |
|UK Home Office Country of Origin Information Service, Iran COI    |
|Report August 2009,                                               |
|06/08/2009 [Excerpt]                                              |
|Voice of America News, Iran Tries Second Group of Election        |
|Protesters, 08/08/2009                                            |
|International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, Torture and      |
|Ill-Treatment Systematic, Not Result of "Negligence" and          |
|"Carelessness", 10/08/2009                                        |
|Amnesty International, Iran: Open Tehran trial to international   |
|observers, Amnesty International challenges, 11/08/2009           |
|Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights   |
|(OHCHR), Iran: detainees subjected to torture and ill-treatment to|
|extract confessions, warn UN Experts, 13/08/2009                  |
|Reporters Sans Frontieres (Reporters Without Borders), Details    |
|emerge about show trial detainees being denied their rights,      |
|13/08/2009                                                        |
|Amnesty International, Urgent Action 214/09 - Iran: Mass trial of |
|protestors undermining justice, 13/08/2009                        |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: Investigate Security Chiefs in          |
|Post-Election Abuse, 14/08/2009                                   |
|Voice of America news, Iran's Supreme Leader Names New Hardline   |
|Judiciary Chief, 15/08/2009                                       |
|Amnesty International, Iran: Supreme Leader must act on torture,  |
|says Amnesty International, 15/08/2009                            |
|Voice of America News, Iran Puts 28 More Detainees on Trial,      |
|16/08/2009                                                        |
|Voice of America News, Iran Prosecutes Top Reform Figures in Mass |
|Trial, 25/08/2009                                                 |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Iranian Reformist Leader's Son    |
|Talks About Court Appearance, 25/08/2009                          |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty; New Prison-Rape Allegations in   |
|Iran Bring Practice To Light,                                     |
|26/08/2009                                                        |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty; Iranian Nobel Laureate Ebadi     |
|Condemns Reformists' Trials as 'Illegal', 27/08/2009              |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty; Iran's Ahmadinejad Calls For     |
|Prosecution Of Opposition Leaders, 28/08/2009                     |
|Voice of America News, Iranian President Calls for Prosecution of |
|Opposition Leaders, 28/08/2009                                    |
|Human Rights Watch, Iran: New Judiciary Chief Should Tackle Rights|
|Abuses, 28/08/2009                                                |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty; Tehran's Hard-Line Prosecutor    |
|Moved to State Role, But Little Changes, 31/08/2009               |
|COIS Report, August 2009                                          |
|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty; Supreme Leader Stokes Fears of   |
|New Cultural Revolution In Iran, 03/09.2009                       |
|Rooz Online (France), Security Forces Searching for Whistle       |
|Blowers, 03/09/2009                                               |

