


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                SA (long residence concession) Bangladesh [2009] UKAIT 00051


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 12 February 2009                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb



                                   Between

                                     SA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M S Alam, Legal Representative from Capital
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Miss T Karunatilake, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. Where a more timely decision could have been made in respect of a  person
who had already accrued the relevant period of  residence  during  the  time
when the (previous) long residence concession was still in  force,  i.e.  up
to 1 March 2006, that concession is a relevant factor in an Article 8  claim
(see FH (Bangladesh) [2009] EWCA Civ  385).  But  in  deciding  whether  the
decision was in accordance with  the  law,  that  concession  cannot  assist
someone who only applied (and was only in a  position  to  apply)  for  long
residence after its withdrawal: see LL(China) [2009] EWCA Civ 617.

2. The recent revision in Home Office policy, as set out in the  April  2009
IDIs dealing with long  residence,  means  that  there  is,  once  again,  a
situation in which immigration rules dealing with  long  residence  co-exist
with a policy concession (set out in  these  IDIs)  that  in  at  least  one
respect is more generous. But in   deciding  whether  the  decision  is  "in
accordance with the law", the  revived  policy  will  not  assist  those  in
respect of whom  a decision was made  before it came (back) into  existence:
see AG and  Others  (Policies;  executive  discretions;  Tribunal's  powers)
Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  In a determination  notified
    on 3  July  2008  Immigration  Judge  (IJ)  T  Davidson  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision dated 4  May  2008  refusing  the
    appellant's application to vary his leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    long residence.  The appellant had come to the  UK  as  a  student  and
    received a number  of  grants  of  limited  leave  to  remain  in  that
    capacity. In respect of one of them  made  in  1999,  however,  he  had
    applied a short number of days late.  The IJ considered that because of
    the consequent break of sixteen days when the appellant  did  not  have
    leave to remain, he had not been lawfully resident continuously for ten
    years as  required  by  paragraph  276A  of  Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.

2.   It is  necessary  to  give  more  precise  particulars.  The  appellant
    entered the UK on 9 October 1997 and was granted leave to remain  as  a
    student until 31 July 1998.  On 6 July  1998  he  was  granted  further
    leave to remain until 30 September 1999.   In  early  October  1999  he
    applied for further leave to  remain.   The  respondent  accepted  that
    application, albeit late, and granted him further leave to remain  from
    16 October 1999 until 30 September 2000.   Subsequent  extensions  were
    granted up to 31 January 2008.  It is common  ground,  therefore,  that
    unless his continuity of residence had been broken in October 1999,  he
    met the requirements of paragraph 276A in full.

3.   The IJ found at para 28  that  the  appellant's  continuity  of  lawful
    residence had been  broken  in  early  October  1999.  The  appellant's
    grounds for reconsideration  challenged  this  finding  on  three  main
    bases. First the decision of the IJ was said to be contrary to  a  Home
    Office Immigration Directorate Instructions (IDIs)  dealing  with  long
    residence which allow for a short delay provided that  the  application
    is  subsequently  granted.   Second  it  was   contended   that   "para
    276A(b)(ii) defines lawful residence as continuous  residence  pursuant
    to temporary admission ... where LTR [Leave to Remain] is  subsequently
    granted".  The appellant's third ground had two limbs: the first argued
    that the respondent, by subsequently  granting  the  appellant  further
    leave  to  remain  in  October  1999,  had  regularised  any  break  in
    continuity, so that the residence requirement was satisfied; the second
    contended that, by repeatedly granting the appellant further leave, the
    respondent had created a legitimate expectation  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant that his presence in the UK had been  lawful  and  continuous
    for the requisite period.

4.   The appellant had also invoked a fourth ground, alleging  that  the  IJ
    had erred in concluding that Article 8 was not engaged  in  this  case,
    despite finding that the appellant did have a private life. However, Mr
    Alam confirmed that the Article 8 ground was no longer relied on.

5.   In a decision dated 1 December  2008  Senior  Immigration  Judge  (SIJ)
    Storey found that the IJ had materially erred in  law  because  he  had
    failed to take sufficient steps  to  establish  whether  there  was  in
    existence at the relevant time a concessionary policy whose effect  was
    to disregard short periods of delay in submitting  an  application  for
    further leave to remain for other purposes, where  the  application  is
    subsequently granted. It was thus that the matter came  before  us  for
    (second-stage) reconsideration.

Our Decision

6.   The contents of the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules  HC  395
    governing long residence are set  out  at  paragraphs  276A  and  276B.
    These state:

              "Long residence in the United Kingdom

                  276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276E:
             a)   'continuous residence'  means  residence  in  the  United
                 Kingdom for an unbroken period, and for  these  purposes  a
                 period shall not be considered to have been broken where an
                 applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for a period of
                 6 months or  less  at  any  one  time,  provided  that  the
                 applicant in question has existing limited leave  to  enter
                 or remain upon their departure and  return,  but  shall  be
                 considered to have been broken if the applicant:
                  (i)  has been removed under Schedule 2 of  the  1971  Act,
                      section 10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported or  has
                      left the United Kingdom having been refused leave  to
                      enter or remain here; or
                  (ii)     has left the United Kingdom  and,  on  doing  so,
                      evidenced a clear intention not to return; or
                  (iii)    left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which
                      he could have had no reasonable  expectation  at  the
                      time of leaving that he would  lawfully  be  able  to
                      return; or
                  (iv)      has  been  convicted  of  an  offence  and   was
                      sentenced to a period of imprisonment or was directed
                      to be detained in an institution other than a  prison
                      (including,  in  particular,   a   hospital   or   an
                      institution for young offenders), provided  that  the
                      sentence in question was not a suspended sentence; or
                  (v)  has spent a total of more than 18 months absent  from
                      the United Kingdom during the period in question.
             (b)  "lawful residence" means residence  which  is  continuous
                  residence pursuant to:
                  (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or
                  (ii)     temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971
                       Act where leave to enter or  remain  is  subsequently
                       granted; or
                  (iii)    an exemption from immigration control,  including
                       where  an  exemption  ceases  to  apply  if   it   is
                       immediately followed by a grant of leave to enter  or
                       remain.
             ...


             "Requirements for indefinite leave to remain on the  ground  of
             long residence in the United Kingdom
              276B.   The  requirements  to  be  met  by  an  applicant  for
             indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence  in
             the United Kingdom are that:
             (i)    (a)    he has had at least 10 years  continuous  lawful
                       residence in the United Kingdom;
                      or
                  (b)  he has had at least 14 years continuous residence  in
                       the United Kingdom, excluding any period spent in the
                       United  Kingdom  following  service  of   notice   of
                       liability to removal  or  notice  of  a  decision  to
                       remove by way of directions  under  paragraphs  8  to
                       10A, or 12 to 14, of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration
                       Act 1971 or section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
                       Act 1999 Act, or of a notice of intention  to  deport
                       him from the United Kingdom; and
             (ii)     having regard to the public  interest  there  are  no
                  reasons why it would be undesirable for him to  be  given
                  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of   long
                  residence, taking into account his:
                  (a)  age; and
                  (b)  strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
                  (c)   personal  history,  including  character,   conduct,
                       associations and employment record; and
                  (d)  domestic circumstances; and
                  (e)  previous  criminal  record  and  the  nature  of  any
                       offence of which the person has been convicted; and
                  (f)  compassionate circumstances; and
                  (g)  any representations received on the person's  behalf;
             and
             (iii)    the applicant has sufficient knowledge of the English
                 language and sufficient knowledge about life in the  United
                 Kingdom, unless he is under the age of 18  or  aged  65  or
                 over at the time he makes his application."
7.   In order to decide what decision to substitute for that of the  IJ,  we
    first consider the appellant's position under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    second his position under Home Office policy, third, his  position   in
    relation to any legitimate expectation.

The issue of whether there was a break in continuity of lawful residence

8.   In the course of submissions, both before the IJ and before  us,  there
    was some argument as to the precise date on which the appellant applied
    for further leave to remain in early October  1999.   The  Home  Office
    file suggested the appellant had applied in person on 12 October  1999;
    Mr Alam suggested at several points that in fact it was an earlier date
    by several days.  In our judgment, for the purposes of this appeal, the
    precise date in October 1999 when he applied does not matter.  Even  on
    the earliest possible date on which Mr Alam stated the appellant  could
    be said to have applied (namely 7 October 1999, the date he signed  the
    application form) he was already six or seven days late. His  leave  to
    remain expired on 30 September 1999.

9.   In any event, once an application  is  made  after  expiry  of  limited
    leave to remain the respondent is  not  obliged  to  reach  a  decision
    within any particular period, certainly not within a few  days.   There
    was nothing unlawful about no decision being made until 16 October 1999
    to grant the appellant further leave to remain beginning on 16  October
    1999 and continuing until 30 September 2000.   The  bare  fact  of  the
    matter is that there was a relatively short  period  during  which  the
    appellant had no valid leave, between  1  October  -  15  October  1999
    inclusive.

10.  Mr Alam appeared to suggest during his submissions that it  would  have
    been open to the respondent to have  backdated  the  grant  of  further
    leave to remain to this appellant to 1 October 1999. But  there  is  no
    power in law for the respondent  to  have  done  any  such  thing.   Of
    course, if the appellant had applied in  time  i.e.  on  or  before  30
    September 1999, his leave would have  been  automatically  extended  by
    operation of s.3C of the Immigration  Act  1971  as  amended.  But  his
    application was out of time. If an appellant has  no  extant  leave  to
    remain he can be granted further leave to remain,  but  only  from  the
    date when the respondent makes that decision.

11.  Mr Alam sought to argue that whatever the  position  under  immigration
    law at large, paragraphs 276A-B themselves make clear that a  break  in
    lawful residence can be or is to be disregarded. He prayed in  aid  the
    wording contained in paragraph 276A(b)(ii),  which  defines  lawful  as
    "continuous residence pursuant to ...  (ii) temporary admission  within
    Section 11  of  the  1971  Act  where  leave  to  enter  or  remain  is
    subsequently granted ...". However, this appellant never had  temporary
    admission within s.11 of the 1971 Act.

12.  Mr Alam submitted in the alternative that paragraph 276A(b)(ii)  should
    assist the appellant by analogy.  He  argued  that  just  as  the  rule
    allowed for short periods (of up to six months) of absence abroad to be
    disregarded, so it must have intended that short  periods  of  overstay
    could  be disregarded.  However, we can find no basis for casting aside
    the plain and unambiguous wording of para  276A(b).  This  subparagraph
    exhaustively defines what lawful residence is for the purposes  of  the
    long residence rule; it does not say that the three situations set  out
    are merely examples.  Indeed, if Mr Alam were right  and  para  276A(b)
    was read as allowing a period of overstay to be disregarded, then there
    would be no reason in principle why it could not be (nonsensically)  as
    long as nine years and 364 days.  Nor would there would ever have  been
    a need for the policy concession that was made between April  2003  and
    March 2006 (a matter we deal with below at para 14-18).

13.   We  see  no  merit  whatsoever  in  Mr  Alam's  submissions  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276A of the Rules  were  met  notwithstanding
    the clear break in the appellant's period of lawful residence.

 Pre-existing Home Office Policy

14.  Mr Alam also submitted that we should  consider  whether  the  decision
    could be said to be not in accordance with the law  by  virtue  of  the
    appellant standing to benefit from  the  long  residence  concessionary
    policy. As we know from the reported Tribunal decision, OS  (10  years'
    lawful residence) Hong Kong [2006] UKAIT  00031,  there  was  a  period
    during which the Immigration Rules on long residence co-existed with  a
    concessionary policy that  did  contain  a  specific  provision  making
    allowance for  persons  who  had  broken  their  continuity  of  lawful
    residence by virtue of applying for an extension of leave  a  few  days
    late.  The concession in question was set out at paragraph 6(3)  of  OS
    as follows:

         "Lawful residence


         Where a person has completed ten years continuous lawful  residence
         he should normally be granted indefinite leave  to  remain  without
         enquiry.


         When considering whether  a  person  has  remained  in  the  United
         Kingdom  lawfully  for  ten  years,  the  following   breaches   of
         conditions made for the  purpose  of  this   concession  should  be
         considered as lawful:


            . A short delay  in  submitting  an  application  provided  the
              application is subsequently granted."

  15. However, as  Miss  Karunatilake  confirmed  to  us,  this  policy  was
      withdrawn by the respondent on 1 March 2006, a date  well  before  the
      appellant  applied  for  consideration  under  the  Immigration  Rules
      dealing  with  long  residence  (namely  paragraphs   276A-C).    Miss
      Karunatilake, in response to directions  made  prior  to  the  hearing
      before us,  also  confirmed,  contrary  to  what  the  respondent  had
      intimated earlier, that there had never been a generic policy excusing
      short  delays  by  immigration  applicants  of  any   kind   who   are
      subsequently granted leave to remain.



  16. Mr Alam sought to argue that the respondent had not demonstrated  that
      the policy concession had not remained on  the  IND  website  after  1
      March 2006, but  the  long  and  short  of  the  matter  is  that  the
      respondent had formally cancelled the policy on 1 March 2006 and there
      is nothing to show that it was not in fact withdrawn as at that date.

  17. Mr Alam also submitted that even if the policy had been cancelled on 1
      March 2006, the appellant was entitled to benefit from it  because  at
      the relevant date when he applied late, i.e. October 1999, the  policy
      was still in place.  However, even assuming the  same  policy  was  in
      place then (neither party was able to  assist  us  with  a  definitive
      answer  on  that),  the  policy  was  one  whose  material  scope   of
      application only covered those who had  completed  ten  years'  lawful
      residence.  The policy said nothing  about  those  who  had  still  to
      complete ten years' lawful residence.  At that time the appellant  had
      only completed some four years of lawful residence and was plainly not
      eligible for long residence.


Legitimate expectation


  18. At the hearing Mr Alam also relied on the contention that the decision
      was not in accordance with the law because  it  was  contrary  to  the
      appellant's legitimate expectation that his short  delay  in  applying
      for  further  leave  to  remain  would  later  be   disregarded.   The
      expectation was said to arise from the fact that  the  respondent  had
      condoned any breach of  immigration  law  by  deciding  to  grant  him
      further leave to remain shortly after. However, there had  never  been
      such a legitimate expectation.  So far  as  the  policy  that  was  in
      existence between April 2003  and  1  March  2006  was  concerned,  it
      contained no promise that it would carry on forever.  So  far  as  the
      decision to grant further leave to  remain  on  16  October  1999  was
      concerned, it did not contain or imply a promise that the  appellant's
      period of overstay would be disregarded for all  purposes  thereafter.
      It only indicated that the respondent had decided not to treat it as a
      reason for refusing to grant further leave to remain as a student.


  19. In short, none of the appellant's submissions made in this case  (save
      for that concerned with a recent change in Home Office  policy)  stand
      scrutiny.

  20. As a postscript we would add that  since  the  hearing  the  Court  of
      Appeal has considered the long residence rule and  the  concession  in
      force until 1 March 2006 more than once.  In  FH  (Bangladesh)  [2009]
      EWCA Civ 385 their lordships were concerned with an appeal brought  on
      Article 8 grounds. They plainly saw merit in  the  submission  that  a
      person who had already accrued the relevant period of  long  residence
      during a period when the concession was still in force could expect to
      benefit from it in circumstances where a more  timely  decision  could
      have been made in his case. However, their lordships said  nothing  to
      suggest the concession could assist someone who only applied (and  was
      only in a position to apply) for long residence  after  withdrawal  of
      the policy. In LL(China) [2009] EWCA Civ 617 the Court  was  concerned
      with an appellant who in November 2007 had been refused long residence
      on the basis that during her 10 years of lawful stay she had been  out
      of the country on 27 occasions. At paras 19-20 Laws LJ, with reference
      to the long residence concession and its predecessor,  stated:
         "19. I regard all these arguments  as  entirely  misconceived.  The
         appellant made no application under the 1987  policy  or  the  2000
         concession. Had she done so it would no doubt have been  considered
         appropriately but, for reasons given by the AIT,  would  have  been
         extremely unlikely to succeed.  When  she  applied  for  indefinite
         leave to remain the new Rules were in force and had been  for  over
         four years. They cannot be regarded as analogous  to  retrospective
         legislation since they did not undermine the established rights  of
         any affected person. An immigrant might or might not  have  applied
         under the earlier policies. If he or she did not there  would  have
         been no basis for his or her getting the benefit of them by a later
         application made at a time when the new Rules were  in  force.  The
         earlier policies might have  had  the  character  of  retrospective
         legislation or something like it if they purported  to  remove  the
         basis established by earlier provisions on which an  immigrant  was
         actually enjoying a lawful residence in this country, but that they
         did not do. The fact that the new Rules altered the regime on which
         persons already here might stay is legally inoffensive, so long  at
         least as such a person had placed no reliance on any of the earlier
         provisions.
         20. In the appellant's case she applied for indefinite leave, as  I
         have said, on 10 August 1997, within the currency of her  student
         leave. That current leave was then extended, by force of  statutory
         provisions which I need not describe, while her  fresh  application
         was outstanding and until any appeal process was exhausted. Because
         of the  protracted  nature  of  the  appeal  proceedings,  she  has
         remained here pursuant and only pursuant to her  student  leave  as
         extended by statute. Her only claim to remain,  since  she  has  no
         further student leave, will have to be under  paragraph  276A-D  of
         the  Rules  which  have  had  effect,  as  I   have   said,   since
         1 April 2003. On the facts she has no case under those Rules. Any
         appeal to earlier policies is wholly artificial and in reality  the
         truth is that this lady cannot show continuous residence under  any
         of the successive regimes to which we have been referred."
  21.  Since the reasoning set out in those cases relating to  earlier  long
      residence concessions is entirely consistent with our own we  did  not
      consider  it  necessary  to  invite  the  parties  to   make   further
      submissions on their implications for this case.


   Post-decision policy


  22. Subsequent  to  the  hearing  before  us  the  appellant's  solicitors
      submitted a copy of the  relevant  section  of  the  respondent's  IDI
      dealing with long residence updated in April 2009.  They  now  include
      para 2.3.3 which states as follows:

         "2.3.3 Breaks in lawful residence and the use of discretion
         If an applicant has a single short gap in lawful residence  through
         making one single previous application out of time by  a  few  days
         (not usually more than 10 calendar days out  of  time)  caseworkers
         should use discretion granting ILR,  so  long  as  the  application
         meets all the other requirements.


         It would not usually be appropriate to exercise discretion when  an
         applicant has more than one gap in their lawful  residence  due  to
         submitting more than one of  their  previous  applications  out  of
         time, as they would not have  shown  the  necessary  commitment  to
         ensuring they have maintained lawful leave throughout their time in
         the UK.


         It may be appropriate to use  your  judgement  in  cases  where  an
         applicant has submitted a single application more than 10 days  out
         of time if there are extenuating  reasons  for  this  (e.g.  postal
         strike, hospitalisation, administrative err or on  our  part  etc).
         This must be discussed with a Senior Caseworker.


         ..."

  23. The above makes clear that the respondent has effectively decided very
      recently to revive an earlier policy concession applied in respect  of
      applicants for long residence who have made a previous application out
      of time by a few days. Its terms are not precisely the same, but  they
      are broadly similar.   This  change  in  policy  has  been  made  some
      considerable time after the date of decision in this case (which was 4
      May 2008). In a letter of 5 May 2009 the  appellant's  representatives
      submitted that as this was a second-stage reconsideration the Tribunal
      should consider the current position and conclude that  the  appellant
      could now benefit from this new policy.


  24. We cannot accept that it would be right for us to approach matters  in
      this way. In AG (Policies; executive  discretion;  Tribunal's  powers)
      Kosovo [2008] UKAIT  00082  the  Tribunal  gave  guidance  on  several
      matters relating to policies. One matter it had to address was whether
      by virtue of s.85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002 the appellant (PB) was entitled to benefit  from  a  policy  (the
      seven year policy, DP5/96) whose terms the appellant did not  meet  at
      the date of the hearing but did (appear to) meet by the  date  of  the
      hearing.  The Tribunal stated at para 66:


         "An appeal on the ground that the decision  "is  otherwise  not  in
         accordance with the law" in a case of this type is an attack on the
         decision making process and so cannot  succeed  except  by  showing
         that there was a fault in that process. Despite s.85(4), therefore,
         insofar as the appeal was based on the  policy,  it  needed  to  be
         directed to the circumstances as they  were  at  the  date  of  the
         decision, because the complaint is  that  the  Secretary  of  State
         ought at that date to have applied the policy as  it  was  on  that
         date. The fact that since the date of the decision the child's age,
         and the time she spend in the United Kingdom, have both  increased,
         is not a matter "relevant to the substance of the decision" in  the
         context of an attack on the decision-making process, and is  not  a
         matter on which any evidence could add to the  position  as  it  is
         accepted to have been at the date of the decision. "


  25. Earlier at para 45 the Tribunal drew a distinction between  assessment
      of proportionality under Article 8 and deliberation upon policies:


         "Although the assessment of proportionality under Article 8 may and
         often will raise issues similar to  those  to  be  considered  when
         ascertaining whether the Secretary of State  properly  applied  any
         relevant policy, it is  important  to  keep  the  issues  separate,
         because they are not the same. Human rights are to be considered at
         the date of the hearing; but the  argument  that  the  decision  is
         "otherwise not in accordance with the law", being an argument about
         the decision-making process,  looks  back  at  the  time  when  the
         decisions was taken, and to the responsibility of the person taking
         it then. Between the date of the  decision  and  the  date  of  the
         hearing the facts  may  have  changed,  and  the  policy  may  have
         changed. The human rights argument has to be made and  assessed  on
         the basis of today's facts; and issues of proportionality  have  to
         be determined on the basis of the application of today's policy  to
         today's facts; but it is unlikely that the decision can be attacked
         on process grounds except by reference  to  yesterday's  policy  as
         applied to yesterday's facts (indeed possibly only by reference  to
         yesterday's appreciation of the facts).


  26. In this case it is not a matter of an  appellant  seeking  to  benefit
      from an existing policy whose main criteria (having a  child  who  has
      been resident in the UK for more than seven years and is  still  under
      the age of 18)) he can only hope to meet   post-decision;  rather  the
      appellant is seeking to benefit from a  subsequent  policy,  one  only
      (re) introduced  post-decision.   However,  the  underlying  principle
      articulated in AG is the same: to decide on whether a decision  is  in
      accordance with the law, one looks  at  the  date  of  decision.  That
      applies whether at the date of decision there is a policy in existence
      or  not.  In  the  instant  case,  there  was  not.  Accordingly  this
      submission must fail.


  27.  Since Mr Alam did not seek to rely on Article 8 in this case,  we  do
      not need to attempt a human rights assessment, but we would  underline
      that the Tribunal's reference in the above passage to a  human  rights
      assessment applying "today's policy to today's facts" has to  be  read
      in conjunction with earlier passages in the  determination.   It  does
      not mean the judicial decision  maker's  task  is  to  decide  whether
      today's policy was not applied (and so the appeal stands to be allowed
      on the limited basis that it remains for the  Secretary  of  State  to
      apply the policy). Nor does it mean that the judge should treat his or
      her task is to decide whether the appellant succeeds  or  fails  under
      today's policy per se. As the Tribunal noted at para 40,  analysing  R
      (on the application of Tozlukaya) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department [2006] EWCA Civ 379):

         "It is in that context that a judicial decision-maker has  to  take
         into account any applicable policy, because if  the  policy  itself
         "tells in favour of the person concerned being allowed to  stay  in
         this country" it is a factor that has to be  incorporated  into  an
         assessment of the argument going to the importance  of  immigration
         control. The decision maker is not said at  paragraph  [79]  to  be
         concerned with exercising any discretion under the policy.  Rather,
         the task is to ascertain whether  the  terms  of  the  policy  tell
         generally in favour of non-removal, because that finding, if  made,
         has an impact on the proportionality  of  the  particular  proposed
         removal".

  28. Thus when it comes to human rights assessment the  importance  of  the
      reference to "today's policy" is that the immigration judge must  have
      regard to the current position, not (as when looking  to  see  whether
      the decision was "in accordance with the law")  the  position  at  the
      date of decision. It remains relevant to consider what the appellant's
      position was, in terms  of  policy,  at  the  date  of  the  executive
      decision.  What is different when conducting the Article  8  balancing
      exercise is that the judge has also to look, inter alia,  at  what  is
      the continuing  basis  for  the  executive  decision.  He  is  obliged
      therefore to take into account the fact (if it is a fact)  that  today
      there is a policy in existence that benefits ( or appears to  benefit)
      the appellant. Taking such a matter into account  may  well  lead  the
      judge to consider that this shows that there is  no  longer  a  public
      interest, or the same level of public  interest,  in  maintaining  the
      negative immigration decision as there was previously.  That  in  turn
      will impact on the judge's decision as  to  whether  the  decision  is
      incompatible with the appellant's human rights.


  29.  As to the general position, we would observe that the recent revision
      in Home Office policy, as set out in the April 2009 IDIs dealing  with
      long residence, means that there is, once again, a situation in  which
      immigration rules dealing with long residence co-exist with  a  policy
      concession (set out in the IDIs) that in at least one respect is  more
      generous. Quite why, given the resumption after three  years  of  very
      much the same policy, the Secretary of State chose to  discontinue  it
      previously, is not a matter for us (although it might  be  a  question
      the appellant, through  his  representatives,  may  wish  to  ask  the
      Secretary of State with a view  to  having  his  case  reviewed  on  a
      discretionary basis). Nor is it a matter for us  whether  his  precise
      length of overstay constituted under this policy "a single short  gap"
      or not.

  30. For the above reasons:


      The Immigration Judge materially erred in law.


      The decision we substitute for  his  is  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal. The decision appealed against was in accordance with the law.




Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Storey
