

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                   CT (Gurkhas: policy) Nepal [2011] UKUT
53 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 September 2010                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb


                                   Between

                                     ct

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. C Howells, instructed by N. C. Brothers & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. T Powell, Home Officer Presenting Officer

1.    The reformulation of policy in relation to family members  of  Gurkhas
   in June 2009 supersedes the statement made in the House of Commons on  29
   April 2009.
2.    The reformulated policy, as it applies  to  adult  children,  involves
   considering a number of relevant circumstances, and a consideration based
   only on the facts as they were at the date of an application a long  time
   ago may not meet the needs of the case.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nepal. She appealed to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal against the decision of the respondent on  22  December  2009
      refusing to grant  her  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom. Immigration Judge Sharp dismissed her appeal.  The  appellant
      now has permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

   2. The appellant's application was made as long ago as 3 October 2007. It
      was based on the claim that she was dependent on her father,  formerly
      a Gurkha soldier in the British Army, and now present and  settled  in
      the United Kingdom. The appellant was in the  United  Kingdom,  having
      arrived on a visitor's visa. She had a brother and a sister  remaining
      in Nepal, and another sister in Hong Kong. Her mother lived and  lives
      in the United Kingdom with her father. She is well-educated,  with  A-
      levels and subsequent qualifications in computer science. Her position
      is that she has always depended on her father for her needs.

   3. She came to the United Kingdom  in  order  to  take  part  in  "Gurkha
      Justice Week". The Immigration Judge accepted that on her arrival  she
      intended to return to Nepal. At the time her mother was still there as
      well has her brother and sister. There appears to be a family home, of
      considerable size.

   4. As we have already indicated, it was some two  years  and  two  months
      before the respondent made a decision on the appellant's  application.
      There may well have been reasons for that: in particular, as  is  well
      known, there was litigation relating to the position of  the  families
      of former Gurkha solders, culminating in the decision of  Blake  J  in
      Limbu and others v SSHD and  others  [2008]  EWHC  2261  (Admin),  and
      subsequent statements in Parliament.

   5. The letter of refusal in  the  present  case  includes  the  following
      observations:

         "In view of the fact that your mother, brother and  sister  are  in
         Nepal who you lived with  prior  to  your  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom, the Secretary of State is not satisfied that you  will  be
         living alone outside the United Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional
         circumstances and mainly dependent financially on relatives settled
         in the United Kingdom.

         Therefore, you do not satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration
         Rules for this category and it has  been  decided  to  refuse  your
         application for indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 319 with
         reference to 317(i)(f) of HC 395 (as amended).

         As it is considered that you do not meet  the  requirement  of  the
         Immigration Rules your  application  has  been  further  considered
         outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  revised  discretionary
         criteria relating to Gurkhas dependents, but the Secretary of State
         is not satisfied  that  there  are  strong  reasons  to  merit  the
         exercise of discretion in your case.

         You are over 18 and your application was based  on  the  fact  that
         your father is a former Gurkha soldier who is present  and  settled
         in the United Kingdom, the Secretary of State is not satisfied that
         the variation of leave that you sought is for  a  purpose  that  is
         covered  by  the  Immigration  Rules  or  that  you  qualify  under
         discretionary criteria, and it has  been  decided  to  refuse  your
         application under paragraph 322(1) on HC 395 (as amended)."

   6. The letter goes on to reach conclusions adverse to  the  appellant  on
      Articles 3, 8 and 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights and to
      list a chronology.

   7. The appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  based  on
      paragraph 317 of Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules,  HC  395,
      the Gurkha policy, and Article 8.  The  Immigration  Judge  took  into
      account oral and documentary evidence, which  revealed  amongst  other
      things that the  family  situation  had  changed  somewhat  since  the
      application was made. He concluded that, even taking  account  of  the
      family circumstances as they were at the time of  the  hearing  before
      him, the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 317.  He
      went on to consider the application  of  the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights to her  case  and  concluded  that  the  refusal  of  the
      appellant's  application,  and  her  subsequent  removal,  would   not
      infringe anybody's human rights.

   8. So far as issues arising under policies are concerned, he said this:

         "69.     It is not for me as part of this appeal  to  consider  the
             discretion of the respondent in general  terms  or  under  the
             policy document. I must consider the  appeal  in  relation  to
             rule 317 of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8  of  the
             ECHR. Many of the arguments  put  forward  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant in the skeleton argument and before me relate to the
             discretion of the respondent and are of  limited  significance
             to the issues that I must consider.

         ...

         85.      As to the policy in relation to the dependents of  Gurkhas
             I have already mentioned that it is not  for  me  to  consider
             this. The case was  adjourned  from  its  earlier  hearing  to
             enable it to be considered. The respondent has  therefore  had
             the opportunity to do so and has concluded that the  appellant
             does not come within the terms of the policy. This  again  may
             be disappointing for the appellant and her family. However, it
             is not a matter for me."

   9. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal challenge the  Immigration
      Judge's conclusions on paragraph 317 and on Article 8, and with (if we
      may say so) rather greater merit submit  that  the  Immigration  Judge
      erred in his approach to policies. If the respondent failed  to  apply
      his own policy correctly, the decision would not be in accordance with
      the law. It was that aspect of the grounds that Mr Howells  elaborated
      before us.

  10. Mr Howells made a number of distinct submissions.

  11. The first is that the appellant had a legitimate expectation that  she
      would not be removed from the United Kingdom, because of  a  statement
      made in Parliament on 29 April 2009. We were shown the account of  the
      relevant debate, Hansard (Commons), 29 April 2009, cols  988-993.  The
      Immigration Minister is there reported as saying this:

         "I made the position of my Right Hon.  Friend  the  Home  Secretary
         very clear:  we  cannot  envisage  circumstances  in  which  people
         involved in the applications will be deported.  In  recognition  of
         the debate this afternoon, I give again the commitment that we will
         not take action against people from the 1500 or so who do not  meet
         the  current  guidelines  until  we  have  clarity   on   the   new
         guidelines."

  12. The difficulty  with  Mr  Howells'  submission  in  relation  to  that
      statement is that, in the course of his other submissions,  he  relied
      on guidance for the treatment of such cases issued or updated in  June
      2009, that is to say after that debate. There is  no  room  for  doubt
      that the  internal  instructions  to  which  we  are  about  to  refer
      constitute the "new guidelines" to which reference  was  made  by  the
      minister. It follows that the undertaking  given  in  the  debate  was
      superseded by the issue of those new guidelines.

  13. Mr Howells' second submission related to the content and impact of the
      applicable guidance, and whether the Secretary of State  had  followed
      it. Some  confusion  was  engendered  by  his  original  reference  to
      guidance called "SET12: Former members of  HM  Forces  and  Families",
      last updated 25 June  2009,  which  had  been  said  in  his  skeleton
      argument to be the applicable guidance. It is  quite  clear,  however,
      that it is not: the opening words of that document as produced  to  us
      are as follows:

         "This is internal guidance for use by Entry Clearance Staff in  the
         handling of settlement in  the  United  Kingdom  applications  made
         outside the United Kingdom. It  is  live  document  under  constant
         review and is for information only."

  14. Thus, SET12 is the guidance applicable to  applications  from  outside
      the United Kingdom, not applications from the United Kingdom like  the
      appellant's. The guidance relevant to the appellant's  application  is
      Chapter 15, Section 2A of the Immigration Directorates'  Instructions:
      the version applicable at the date of the decision in the present case
      appears to be that dated June 2009. The  relevant  provisions  are  in
      paragraph  11-13.  Paragraph  11  adverts  to  the  Immigration  Rules
      relating  to  dependents  of  former  service   personnel   (including
      discharged Gurkhas) which apply to spouses, civil partners,  unmarried
      and same-sex partners, and child dependents. That paragraph ends  with
      the following words:

         "In addition to consideration under these provisions,  applications
         for settlement from dependents should also be considered under  the
         relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules - e.g.  paragraph  281
         (spouses and civil partners), paragraph 297  (children),  paragraph
         317 (parents, grandparents,  other  dependent  relative)  -  before
         being considered  under  the  discretionary  arrangements  set  out
         below."

  15. Paragraph 12 relates to spouses, civil partners, unmarried  and  same-
      sex partners, and paragraph 13 deals with children. It begins with the
      provision relating to those who are still under 18, and then  we  find
      this:

         "13.2 However, settlement applications from dependents over the age
         of 18 who are the children of serving foreign and  Commonwealth  HM
         Forces members (including Gurkhas) who meet the requirements  of  a
         parent should normally be  approved,  provided  the  dependant  has
         previously been granted limited leave to enter or remain in the  UK
         as part of the family unit and they wish to continue to reside  and
         be educated in the UK.

         In  exceptional  circumstances  discretion  may  be  exercised   in
         individual cases where the dependant is over  the  age  of  18.  In
         assessing whether settlement in the UK is appropriate consideration
         should be given to the following factors:

            . one parent or a relative of  the  applicant  is  present  and
              settled or being admitted for, or being granted settlement in
              the UK under the HM Forces rule;

            . the applicant has previously been granted limited leave as  a
              dependant of a member of HM Forces

            . the applicant has been, and wishes to  continue,  pursuing  a
              full time course of study in the UK.

            . Refusal of the application  would  mean  that  the  applicant
              would be living alone  outside  the  UK  and  is  financially
              dependant on the parent or relative present and  settled,  or
              being granted settlement in the UK under the HM Forces rules;

            . The applicant  would  find  it  very  difficult  to  function
              because of illness or disability without the help and support
              of their parent or close relative in the UK.

         If one or more of the factors listed above are present,  discretion
         may be exercised and settlement granted in the UK."

  16. So far as the appellant is concerned, Mr Howells accepted that we  are
      concerned with the passage beginning  "in  exceptional  circumstances"
      listing the five  bullet  points  and  continuing  below  them.  Those
      provisions envisage consideration  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and
      exercise of  discretion  in  exceptional  circumstances.  Mr  Howells'
      primary submission was that where an individual falls  within  one  or
      more of the categories identified in the bullet points,  there  is  an
      expectation that the discretion  will  be  exercised  in  his  or  her
      favour. If that is right, he submitted, the Tribunal should allow  the
      appeal with a direction that the Secretary of State  act  accordingly,
      in accordance with the principles set out  in  AG  and  others  [2007]
      UKAIT 82 at [50]:

         "For ourselves  we  have  little  doubt  that  -  contrary  to  the
         submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State before us  -  there
         are cases in which a finding that a decision is "not in  accordance
         with the law" on the ground of failure to  apply  a  policy  should
         lead to a substantive decision in the  claimant's  favour,  with  a
         direction that leave be granted. There will be no need to base such
         a decision on human rights grounds, because it is demanded  by  the
         more detailed provisions of the 2002 Act. But the cases in question
         are unusual. They are those in which (1) the  claimant  proves  the
         precise terms of the policy, which (2) creates  a  presumption,  on
         the facts of his case, in favour of granting leave, and  (3)  there
         is either nothing at all to displace the  presumption,  or  nothing
         that, under the terms of the policy, falls  for  consideration.  If
         all those factors apply to the case, the appeal should be  allowed,
         with a direction as indicated."

  17. We are unable to see that the terms of paragraph 13.2 begin to  fulfil
      the criteria there set out.  The  IDIs  simply  do  not  indicate  any
      presumption that  leave  will  be  granted  to  adult  children.  They
      indicate merely that it may be granted in  exceptional  circumstances,
      following the consideration of criteria including those  set  out.  We
      therefore reject Mr Howells' submission that this was a case in  which
      the Immigration Judge should have allowed the appeal on the basis that
      the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  required  a  decision  in   the
      appellant's favour.

  18. Although the appellant fails in that sense however, that  is  not  the
      end  of  the  matter.  It  is  clear  that  the  guidance  requires  a
      consideration of an applicant's family members, and consideration also
      of what the applicant's position would be if living outside the United
      Kingdom. In this case, as perhaps in other Gurkha family cases,  there
      was a delay between the application and the decision, during which the
      situation  of  the  appellant's  family  members  had   changed.   The
      appellant's mother came to the United Kingdom after she  did,  but  by
      the time of the appellant's application was  already  settled  in  the
      United Kingdom as the spouse of a former Gurkha. In the  period  after
      the appellant's application  but  before  the  decision,  one  of  the
      appellant's sisters came to the United Kingdom and  her  brother  also
      sought to undertake studies here. It is now said to be the  case  that
      if the appellant returns to Nepal she will be living alone.

  19. It is not suggested on the Secretary of State's behalf  that  anything
      was  done  to  ensure  that  the  information  given  in  making   the
      application was still current at the date of the decision. Ms  Powell,
      on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  did  not  seek  to  defend  the
      Secretary  of  State's  decision  from  our  suggestion  that  it  was
      defective  for  this  reason.  As  it  happens,  the  changes  in  the
      appellant's family  members'  situations  are  changes  of  which  the
      Secretary of  State  has  notice,  because  they  have  resulted  from
      immigration applications: but, in any event, it  cannot  be  right  to
      make a decision  requiring  consideration  of  current  circumstances,
      solely on the  basis  of  the  facts  as  they  were  over  two  years
      previously.

  20. For that reason only we have concluded that the Secretary  of  State's
      decision failed properly to apply the appropriate policy guidance. The
      Immigration Judge should have appreciated that, to that extent, he was
      concerned with the guidance and its application. He erred  in  law  in
      failing to take it into account.

  21. We re-make the decision. We allow the appellant's appeal on the ground
      that the decision against which she appeals was one not in  accordance
      with  the  law.  She  therefore  awaits  a  lawful  decision  on   her
      application of October 2007.




   Signed

      C M G OCKELTON
      Vice President of the Upper Tribunal,
      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

