


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

  R (on the application of Mehmood Ahmed Raja) v Secretary of State for the
                 Home Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00058 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                                                 Field House

                                                       Heard: 9 January 2015
                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                      THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF
                           Mehmood Ahmed Raja)        Applicant

                                     and

         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Applicant:     Mr. M. Karnik, of Counsel, instructed by Ahmad &
                    Williams Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. Z. Malik, of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT
                        Delivered on 28 January 2015

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill:

Introduction and background facts:

 1. The applicant is a national of Pakistan, born on 21 March  1968.  By  a
    decision served on 23 July 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge  Freeman  granted
    permission to apply for judicial review of a decision of the respondent
    of 17 May 2013 (hereafter referred to as  the  "second  decision",  for
    reasons which will become clear) to refuse the applicant's  application
    of 22 August 2011 for leave on the basis of his residence in the United
    Kingdom since the date of his arrival (said to be 14 January 1997)  and
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

 2. The Article 8 claim was based on the applicant's relationship with a Ms
    A, who arrived in the United Kingdom as a Pakistani  national  in  2003
    with her son, S, then aged 9 years.  She  had  claimed  asylum  on  the
    ground that she was at risk of persecution at the  hands  of  her  then
    husband. She was granted refugee status and is now a  British  citizen.
    The applicant and Ms A went through an Islamic marriage  on  14  August
    2006 and live together with S, now aged 20 years.

 3. The issues  that  arise  are  whether  the  respondent  has  unlawfully
    considered the applicant's application of 22 August 2011 for  leave  on
    the basis of long residence and on the basis of Article 8.

 4. The applicant's application of 22 August 2011 was first decided by  the
    respondent in a decision of 17 November 2011  (the  "first  decision").
    The first decision was the subject of a  previous  claim  for  judicial
    review, under ref: CO/2843/2012 (the "previous judicial review claim").
    The first decision did not mention the applicant's application  on  the
    basis of long residence under the then para 276  of  the  Statement  of
    Changes in the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  (the  "IRs").
    However, it dealt with the Article 8 claim.

 5. Permission was granted in the previous judicial  review  claim  by  Mr.
    John Howell QC, sitting as Deputy High Court Judge, on 17 July 2012. He
    extended time  and  said  that  it  was  at  least  arguable  that  the
    application for leave on the basis  of  long  residence  had  not  been
    addressed in the decision letter. In addition, he said that it  was  at
    least arguable that the decision maker had failed to address the nature
    of the Article 8 claim being made  because  it  appeared  that  he  had
    approached the claim as if it was based on a relationship with an adult
    child and his surviving parent or other siblings and  that  this  claim
    should fail because no evidence of special elements of  dependency  had
    been provided, whereas the Article 8 claim was based on the applicant's
    relationship with Ms.  A,  said  to  have  subsisted  since  2006,  and
    evidence had apparently been provided to show that they  had  lived  at
    the same address since 2008/2009.

 6. The parties settled the previous judicial review  claim  in  a  consent
    order signed by the parties on 23  November  2012  and  sealed  by  the
    Administrative Court  on  28  December  2012.  This  consent  order  is
    important because an important ground in the applicant's  challenge  in
    the instant claim is that the respondent's  agreement  in  the  consent
    order to reconsider her decision included not only the application  for
    leave on the basis of continuous long residence under para 276  of  the
    IRs and the application for leave as an unmarried  partner  under  para
    295D of the IRs but also the Article 8 claim. Further, it is  contended
    that the agreement to consider the applications on the basis of the IRs
    in force as at 22 August 2011 was not limited to the applications under
    the IRs but extended to the Article 8 claim.  Insofar as relevant,  the
    consent order reads:


        "WE, the solicitors for the Claimant and  the  solicitors  for  the
        Defendant in this matter, agree an Order in the following terms:-


        Upon  the  Defendant  agreeing   to   reconsider   the   Claimant's
        application for leave to remain dated 22 August 2011, as set out on
        form FLR(O) on the assumption that the  Claimant  has  applied  for
        leave to remain on  the  following  bases:  (i)  as  the  unmarried
        partner of a person settled in the UK; or  (ii)  as  the  unmarried
        partner of a person who has been granted refugee status in the  UK;
        or (iii) on the basis of continuous long residence in the UK  after
        allegedly entering the UK on 14 January 1997; and


        Upon the Defendant confirming that she will apply  the  Immigration
        Rules in force on 22 August 2011


        BY CONSENT IT IS ORDERED THAT:


     1.  This application for judicial review be withdrawn; and
     2.  There be no order as to costs."

 7. Following the consent order, the respondent wrote  to  the  applicant's
    solicitors a letter dated 9 January 2013  requesting  further  evidence
    (A28-30) to which the applicant's solicitors responded by letter  dated
    5 February 2013 with a list of documents (A25-27).

 8. The respondent then made her second decision  (mentioned  above).  This
    has been supplemented by a decision dated 17 December 2014 (the  "third
    decision") (B47-51) that was made after the applicant submitted further
    documents which were included in a bundle (bundle B) submitted for  the
    hearing of his renewed application for permission before Judge Freeman.



 9. At the hearing on 9 January 2014, I granted the applicant permission to
    enlarge the grounds of challenge so as to include a  challenge  to  the
    third decision. Mr. Malik confirmed that there was no prejudice to  the
    respondent in my doing so and that the respondent's detailed grounds of
    defence had dealt with the applicant's grounds in relation to the third
    decision.

10. Accordingly, this judicial review claim concerns the second  and  third
    decisions.

11. The first four paragraphs of the third decision are important,  because
    the applicant contends that  their  terms  obliged  the  respondent  to
    consider the further evidence of residence contained  in  Bundle  A  in
    relation to the decision on the application for leave on the  basis  of
    long residence, evidence which the applicant  contends  the  respondent
    had failed to consider.

12. The first four paragraphs of the third decision read:


        "On 22 August 2011, Jeya & Co  submitted  an  application  on  your
        behalf, for leave to remain in  the  UK  under  Article  8  of  the
        European Convention on Human Rights.  This application was  refused
        without a  right  of  appeal  on  17  November  2011  and  after  a
        reconsideration on 07 May 2013 the decision  was  maintained.   You
        have now requested a Judicial Review of this decision.  This letter
        is supplemental,  and  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the
        reconsideration of 07 May 2013.


        The Secretary of State has concluded in the decision of 07 May 2013
        that you do not qualify for leave to remain under  the  Immigration
        Rules as in force on  22  August  2011.   The  Secretary  of  State
        maintains that  decision.   For  the  reasons  already  given,  the
        Secretary of State is not satisfied that you meet the  requirements
        in paragraphs 295D and 276B of the Immigration Rules as they  stood
        at the time of your application.


        Prior to 09 July 2012, any application submitted to the Home Office
        for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of a claim under Article
        8 of the European Convention on Human Rights was considered outside
        of the Immigration  Rules.   Your  application  has  moreover  been
        considered independently under Article 8.


        As a result of the changes to the Immigration Rules which came into
        effect on 09 July 2012, the Secretary of State  will  consider  any
        Article 8 elements of an applicant's claim to remain in the  UK  in
        line with the provisions of Appendix  FM  (family  life)  and  Rule
        276ADE (private life) of the Immigration Rules."

              (my emphasis)

The grounds

13. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

14. Ground 1 is that the respondent's consideration of the  application  on
    the basis of long residence under para 276 of the Immigration Rules  as
    it existed as at 22 August 2011 was unlawful because she had failed  to
    take into account the evidence of residence in bundle A.

15.  Ground  2  is  that  the  respondent's  approach  in  considering  the
    applicant's Article 8 was unlawful, in that, she followed the  approach
    applied in assessing Article 8 claims following the amendments  to  the
    IRs effective from 9 July 2012 by HC194. It is contended that this  was
    contrary to her undertaking  in  the  consent  order  to  consider  the
    Article 8 claim "by applying the IRs in force as at 22 August 2011". In
    the alternative, it is contended that the  respondent  was  obliged  to
    follow the approach applied in assessing Article 8 claims  prior  to  9
    July 2012, pursuant to the judgment in Edgehill v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402.

16. Ground 3 is that she  failed  to  consider  relevant  evidence  in  her
    assessment of the  Article  8  claim  and  made  other  errors  in  her
    consideration of exceptionality outside the  IRs,  including  the  fact
    that she used the wrong starting point by beginning her  assessment  of
    the Article 8 claim with Appendix FM and para 276ADE. In this  respect,
    Mr. Karnik relied upon R (Khairdin) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department (NIA 2002: Part 5A)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT  00566  (IAC)  and  R
    (Adiya) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWHC  3919
    (Admin).

17. Ground 4 is that she failed to give reasons why she had  not  exercised
    her discretion in the applicant's favour to confer a  right  of  appeal
    against her decision to refuse his application of 22 August 2011.

Assessment

Ground 1

18. The first question is whether the respondent was obliged in  the  third
    decision to have taken into account the further evidence  of  residence
    that was submitted in bundle A in the period  between  the  second  and
    third decisions. The further  evidence  relied  upon  in  this  respect
    comprises of the documents in bundle A at  pages  A64,  A65,  A67,  72,
    A72A, 73 and 74 as well as the witness statements, each  dated  4  July
    2014, from the applicant, Ms. A and her son, at A1-10.

19. Mr Karnik submitted that the obligation arose from the  fact  that  the
    respondent had stated in her third decision that she  "maintained"  the
    second decision on the long residence application.

20. In my judgement, if it was clear  from  the  third  decision  that  the
    respondent had re-opened the assessment made in her second decision  of
    the long residence application, then the next  question  for  me  would
    have been whether the submission of evidence  in  bundle  A,  a  bundle
    served in the judicial review proceedings, fixes  the  respondent  with
    notice of such evidence.  However,  this  question  is  irrelevant  for
    reasons I will now explain.

21. It is plain that the respondent did not (in her third decision) re-open
    the decision on the long residence application. I agree with  Mr  Malik
    that, in stating that she was maintaining  her  decision  on  the  long
    residence application, she was  merely  confirming  that  she  was  not
    writing about the decision taken in the second  decision  on  the  long
    residence application.  The next sentence, which is underlined  in  the
    text quoted at [12], likewise confirmed that she was not writing  about
    the decision that was taken in the second decision on  the  application
    for leave as an unmarried partner. The  next  paragraph  of  the  third
    decision (the third paragraph quoted above), makes it  clear  that  the
    purpose of the letter was to inform the applicant that  his  Article  8
    claim had been reconsidered. Read as a whole,  it  is  plain  that  the
    second and third paragraphs of the third decision merely  informed  the
    applicant that the respondent was only writing to him about his Article
    8 claim.

22. Accordingly, the respondent did not overlook relevant evidence when she
    made her decision on 7 May  2013  on  the  applicant's  long  residence
    application. The further evidence  mentioned  at  [18]  above  was  not
    before her then.

23. The next argument was that, even if the relevant decision  in  relation
    to  the  long  residence  application  was  the  second  decision,  the
    respondent had overlooked relevant evidence. In this respect, Mr Karnik
    relied upon the documents in bundle  A  at  A162-166  and  the  witness
    statements at A1-10.

24. However, as I have said, the witness statements  were  submitted  after
    the second decision.  As for the documents  at  A162-A166,  it  is  not
    clear that these documents were before the respondent when she made her
    second decision. This is because the cover letter dated 5 February 2013
    from the applicant's representatives at A25-27  which  accompanied  the
    evidence submitted in response to the respondent's request for  further
    evidence of 9 January 2013, did not mention any document relevant to an
    assessment of residence that pre-dated 2010. In any event, the earliest
    document at A162-166 was a P60 for the tax year to  5  April  2007.  At
    most, this only related to residence from April 2006,  whereas  it  was
    necessary for the applicant to show continuous residence for  14  years
    prior to his application of 22 August 2011, which means he had to  show
    continuous residence from 21 August 1997. There was no evidence  before
    the respondent when she made her  second  decision  to  show  that  the
    applicant had entered the United Kingdom on 14 January 1997 as  claimed
    in his application for leave on the basis of long residence.

25. Accordingly, I reject ground 1. As at the date of the decision  on  the
    applicant's  long  residence  application  (the  date  of  the   second
    decision), the respondent did not overlook any relevant evidence.





Ground 2

26. Ground 2 is that the respondent unlawfully considered  the  applicant's
    Article 8 claim following the approach to Article 8  claims  since  the
    IRs were amended effective from 9 July 2012 by HC194.

27. I reject the first argument, that the respondent  had  in  the  consent
    order undertaken to reconsider the applicant's Article 8  claim  "under
    the [IRs]". In the first place, the consent order made  no  mention  of
    Article 8 at all. If the parties had agreed that the  Article  8  claim
    was included within the ambit  of  the  respondent's  undertaking,  one
    would expect that Article 8 would have been specifically  mentioned  in
    the consent order, especially given that the applicant was  represented
    by solicitors at the time and that he had been  granted  permission  in
    the  previous  judicial  review  claim  in  terms  which  included  his
    challenge to the lawfulness of the decision made on his Article 8 claim
    in the first decision. There is no specific mention of Article 8.

28. Furthermore, prior to 9 July 2012, Article 8 claims were not considered
    under the IRs. Accordingly,  if  the  consent  order  was  intended  to
    include the Article 8 claim, it makes no sense for the consent order to
    refer only to reconsideration taking place by reference to the IRs.

29. Importantly, it is wholly illogical  and  irrational  to  construe  the
    words "she will apply the [IRs] in force on  22  August  2011"  in  the
    consent order as meaning "she will apply the jurisprudence for  Article
    8 claims in force on 22 August 2011", as this would have meant that she
    was agreeing to reconsider the Article 8 claim by taking  into  account
    all further evidence submitted prior to the date of her reconsideration
    but applying the jurisprudence as at 22 August 2011.

30. The reality is that, although the applicant was granted  permission  in
    the previous judicial review claim which permitted him to challenge the
    lawfulness of the decision that had been made in the first decision  on
    his Article 8 claim, he entered into a consent order in terms which did
    not include the Article 8 claim. In other  words,  he  compromised  the
    claim he had against the first decision in relation to Article  8.  The
    consent order therefore brought his Article 8 challenge to an end.  The
    fact that the consent order provides that there be no order  for  costs
    further suggests that there had been some compromise on the applicant's
    part, in agreeing to the consent order.

31. I also reject the second argument, that the respondent was  obliged  to
    reconsider the Article 8 claim following the approach prior to  9  July
    2012. If the respondent had agreed to reconsider the Article 8 claim in
    accordance with the approach as at 8 July 2012, one would have expected
    to see that date in the consent order. It is not mentioned.

32. Edgehill has no application. This is  because  the  applicant  made  an
    application for leave on the basis of Article 8 on 22  August  2011.  A
    decision was made on  his  Article  8  claim  in  the  first  decision.
    Whatever the flaws in that decision, the applicant settled his judicial
    review challenge to the first decision insofar as  the  first  decision
    concerned his Article 8  claim  in  terms  which  did  not  include  an
    undertaking to reconsider his Article 8 claim. Accordingly,  there  was
    no extant application for leave on the basis of Article 8 as at 8  July
    2012. Accordingly, the transitional provisions did not apply.

33. Accordingly, I do not need to resolve  inconsistencies  said  to  exist
    between Edgehill and Haleemudeen v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558.

Ground 3

34. Ground 3 concerns the respondent's consideration of Article  8  in  the
    second and third decisions. The third decision provides  more  detailed
    reasons than the second decision, although the third decision is stated
    to be supplementary to the second decision. The second decision did not
    consider whether there were exceptional circumstances outside the  IRs.
    This was considered in the third decision.

35. For the reasons I have given in relation to  ground  2,  I  reject  the
    argument that the respondent erred in her consideration of the  Article
    8 claim, in that, she used the wrong starting point  by  beginning  her
    assessment of the Article 8 claim with Appendix  FM  and  para  276ADE.
    Accordingly, Khairdin and Adiya are not relevant.

36. The remainder of ground 3 is that the  respondent  failed  to  consider
    relevant evidence in her assessment of the Article  8  claim  and  made
    other errors in her consideration of exceptionality outside the IRs.

37. In the  third  decision,  the  respondent  considered  the  applicant's
    private life claim under para 276ADE and his Article 8 claim  based  in
    his relationship with Ms. A under Appendix FM. She then considered  his
    Article 8 claim based on his medical  condition  and  his  relationship
    with S outside the IRs, applying her guidance for considering Article 8
    claims outside the IRs, which at  the  relevant  date  provided,  inter
    alia, that "exceptional" means  "circumstances  in  which  the  refusal
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  or
    their  family  such  that  refusal  of  the  appellant  would  not   be
    proportionate".

38. It is  contended  that  the  respondent  failed  to  consider  relevant
    evidence as to the following:

    i.   Whether Ms A can re-establish herself safely in Pakistan, it being
        contended that the fact that she visited Pakistan three times  does
        not of itself mean that she will be able  to  re-establish  herself
        safely in Pakistan, and whether it would be reasonable for  her  to
        enjoy family life with the applicant in Pakistan.

    ii.  Whether family life is being enjoyed between the applicant  and  S
        (who was 20 years old at the date of the third decision), it  being
        contended that the mere fact that he is now an adult does not  mean
        that he no longer enjoys  family  life  with  his  mother  and  the
        applicant. This is because he has always lived with Ms  A,  he  has
        not established an independent life and he is  still  dependent  on
        the applicant and Ms A.

    iii. If family life was being enjoyed  between  the  applicant  and  S,
        whether it would be reasonable to expect S to return to Pakistan in
        order to enjoy family life with the applicant.

    iv.  Whether the respondent considered the applicant's Article 8  claim
        based on his medical condition. It is said that the applicant had a
        liver transplant on 12 January 2013 as a result of Hepatitis B  and
        C and that he needs further and ongoing treatment.

    v.   In assessing the private life claim under para 276ADE, whether the
        respondent overlooked the further evidence of  residence  that  had
        been submitted.

    vi.  In considering the case outside the IRs,  whether  the  respondent
        likewise overlooked the additional evidence of residence.

    vii. Whether the respondent considered on a cumulative basis all of the
        relevant circumstances in deciding that there were no  "exceptional
        circumstances" under the terms of her guidance

39. As to v., even  if  the  bundle  submitted  in  these  judicial  review
    proceedings fixes the respondent with notice of the documents contained
    within it, the further evidence of residence still did not  enable  the
    applicant to show that he had been in continuous residence for at least
    20 years as at the date of the  third  decision.  Thus,  any  error  in
    overlooking the additional evidence of residence is not material to the
    decision under paragraph 276ADE.

40. However, as to i., it is  plain  that  the  decision  maker  failed  to
    consider the witness statement of Ms A,  where  she  explained  why  it
    would be unsafe for her to return to Pakistan notwithstanding that  she
    visited Pakistan three times.  She  also  explained  why  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect her to return to Pakistan.

41. As to ii., the witness statements of the applicant, Ms A  and  her  son
    explained the relationship between the applicant and S and the three of
    them as a unit. The decision maker appears to have taken the age of  18
    years as a bright line beyond which family life is not  enjoyed,  which
    is plainly incorrect. There  was  either  a  failure  to  consider  the
    witness statements in assessing whether family life was  being  enjoyed
    with S or a failure to explain why the evidence did not show that  such
    family life was being enjoyed.

42. If family life with S was  being  enjoyed,  then  it  would  have  been
    necessary for the decision  maker  to  consider  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for S to live in Pakistan.

43. Accordingly, I am satisfied that i.-iii. are established. I cannot  say
    that, if the decision maker had not made these errors, the  applicant's
    claim under Appendix FM and under the guidance outside  the  IRs  would
    necessarily fail, although at the same time,  I  cannot  say  that  his
    claim will inevitably succeed.

44. I do not need to decide iv., vi. and vii, given that  the  relationship
    with S falls to be considered outside the IRs and that  any  assessment
    of whether there are "exceptional  circumstances"  under  the  guidance
    must be made on a cumulative basis,  which  will  include  taking  into
    account the period of residence established and any up-to-date evidence
    of the applicant's medical condition submitted to the respondent, as at
    date of the decision to be taken.

45. For the above reasons, the third decision is  unlawful  insofar  as  it
    concerns the assessment of the applicant's case under Appendix  FM  and
    under the guidance outside the IRs.





Ground 4

46. I reject ground 4, which is that the respondent failed to give  reasons
    why she had not exercised her discretion in the applicant's  favour  to
    confer a right of appeal against her decision to refuse his application
    of 22 August 2011.

47. The respondent is not obliged to make a removal  decision  of  her  own
    volition: Daley Murdock v. SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 161. She has a  Removal
    Decisions Policy (most  recently  dated  20  October  2014)  which  she
    applies. The applicant has not  requested  the  respondent  to  make  a
    removal decision under the Removal Decisions Policy.

48. In these circumstances, the respondent had  no  obligation  to  make  a
    removal decision or say why she was not making one.

     Decision

     The third decision is quashed insofar as it concerns the assessment  of
    the applicant's case under Appendix FM and under the  guidance  outside
    the IRs.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 28 January 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
