
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

   BO (Domestic worker - connection with Sponsor) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00053

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
On 22 May 2007



                                   Before

                         Mr Justice Hodge, President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste



                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mrs O Adegburin, Sponsor.
For the Respondent:  Mr S Ouseley, Presenting Officer.


Under Rule 159A an Immigration Judge should look at least at the final  year
of the domestic worker/sponsor relationship, but may also take into  account
a longer period to ascertain the extent of their connection, and  should  do
so if there is  some  temporary  aberration  in  the  final  year  from  the
established long-term pattern.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1.  The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.  The   Respondent   seeks
     reconsideration of the determination of Immigration Judge C H  Bennett,
     allowing the Appellant's appeal against his decision on 21 June 2006 to
     refuse her entry clearance under  paragraph  159A  of  the  Immigration
     Rules (HC 395 as amended) as a domestic worker of the Sponsor.

  2. Paragraph 159A states as follows.

      159A. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
      the United Kingdom as a domestic worker in a private household are
      that he:
           (i) is aged 18-65 inclusive;
           (ii) has been employed as a domestic worker for one year or more
           immediately prior to application for entry clearance under the
           same roof as his employer or in a household that the employer
           uses for himself on a regular basis and where there is evidence
           that there is a connection between employer and employee;
            (iii) that he intends to travel to the United Kingdom in the
           company of his employer, his employer's spouse or civil partner
           or his employer's minor child;
           (iv) intends to work full time as a domestic worker under the
           same roof as his employer or in a household that the employer
           uses for himself on a regular basis and where there is evidence
           that there is a connection between employer and employee;
           (v) does not intend to take employment except within the terms
           of this paragraph; and
           (vi) can maintain and accommodate himself adequately without
           recourse to public funds; and
           (vii) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in
           this capacity.


  3. The Immigration Judge's material conclusions are as follows.

           "9. Against this background, I am satisfied that  the  Appellant
           had been employed as a domestic  worker  by  the  Sponsor  since
           March 2004 - and therefore for more than one  year  before  June
           2006 (when the Appellant applied for entry clearance).  It would
           not be realistic to contend that she had, at all  times  between
           March 2004 and June 2006, been employed "under the same roof" as
           the Sponsor. I am not satisfied that she had been.  For the bulk
           of the time the Sponsor had been in the United Kingdom. But I am
           satisfied that, as at 21 June 2006, the Appellant  was  and  had
           for more than 12 months, been employed at S Street  and  in  the
           household which the Sponsor used for herself on a regular basis.
            As at June 2006 there was, or was  about  to  be,  a  temporary
           hiatus in the regularity with which the Sponsor would be able to
           use the accommodation at S Street - because  of  her  pregnancy.
           But I am not satisfied that that temporary hiatus was such as to
           lead to the conclusion that as at 21 June  2006,  the  household
           was not one which she did not use  on  a  "regular  basis".   In
           determining whether this was on a "regular basis", I  must  have
           regard to the settled order or general pattern of use  -  rather
           than which temporarily obtained  on  account  of  the  Sponsor's
           pregnancy.  And in considering the settled pattern, I take  into
           account both that one of the reasons for the  Sponsor's  regular
           visits in the past no longer obtained, i.e.  that  her  daughter
           was by that stage in the United Kingdom and that she  had  taken
           on the responsibility of  the  sub-postmastership  -  which  was
           likely to restrict the frequency with which she could travel  to
           Nigeria and the length of time for which she could  stay  there.
           As against that I accept that she  had  spent  about  one  month
           there between December 2005 and January 2006 and about a further
           one month in May/June 2006.  Because I accept that  the  Sponsor
           had employed the Appellant primarily to look after her  daughter
           but also  as  a  domestic  assistant  since  March  2004,  I  am
           satisfied that there was a connection between them.


           10. I have no reason to doubt, and I am satisfied, in the  light
           of  what  I  have  said  above  in  relation  to  the  Sponsor's
           credibility, that if  entry  clearance  had  been  granted,  the
           Appellant would have travelled to  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
           company of either the Sponsor or her husband - and that was  the
           Appellant's intention at that time.


           11. For substantially the same reason, I am  satisfied  that  it
           was the Appellant's intention to work full-time  as  a  domestic
           worker under the same roof as the Sponsor at the Sponsor's home.
           In so far as it is necessary  for  me  to  make  an  alternative
           finding, I am satisfied that that house was also  the  household
           which the Sponsor used for herself on a regular basis.  And  for
           the reason which I have given above I am  satisfied  that  there
           was a connection between the Appellant and the Sponsor,  arising
           out of the employment of the Appellant since March 2004.


           12. In the light of what I have stated  above,  I  am  satisfied
           that the Appellant did not intend to take employment other  than
           for the Sponsor and on the terms indicated, i.e.  that  she  did
           not  intend  to  take  employment  except  as  provided  for  in
           paragraph 159A.


  4. The Immigration Judge, having found that all of the other  requirements
     of the Rule had been satisfied, allowed the Appellant's appeal.

  5. An order for reconsideration was made on 29 January 2007 to enable  the
     Respondent to argue that the Immigration Judge had not properly applied
     the terms of the relevant Rule to his findings of fact  which  included
     his conclusion  that  there  had  been  a  "temporary  hiatus"  in  the
     regularity with which the Sponsor used S Street.

  6. Before us, Mr Ouseley submitted that the Immigration Judge had accepted
     that there was a hiatus within the final 12 month period and  submitted
     that spending only two months in 2006 was not enough.   In  support  of
     this submission he referred us to paragraph 15 of the determination  of
     the Tribunal in NG ("On a regular basis"  paragraph  159(ii))  Bulgaria
     [2006] UKAIT 00020, which stated as follows.

       15   However, that is plainly not the meaning  that  the  expression
           "on a regular basis" is intended  to  bear  in  the  context  of
           paragraph 159A(ii).  On the contrary, it is clearly intended  to
           bear the alternative meaning contained in  paragraph  4  of  the
           dictionary definition  set  out  above,  namely  "habitually  or
           customarily used". That was the view adopted by  the  Designated
           Immigration Judge, albeit not in precisely those terms.  It is a
           view which in our opinion he was right to adopt.  The purpose of
           the reference to "on a regular basis" in paragraph  159A(ii)  is
           to ensure  that  there  is  a  genuine  connection  between  the
           household in which the  relevant  applicant  is  employed  as  a
           domestic  worker  and  his  employer.   That  requirement  would
           scarcely be served if it were sufficient for the employer to use
           that household only on an infrequent basis.  By way of  example,
           it might be argued that attendance at the  household  on  but  a
           single occasion each year on 25 January to celebrate Burns Night
           could properly be described as "regular" attendance, but only in
           the  sense  of  being  attendance  which  recurred  at  a  fixed
           interval, and clearly not in the sense of being  attendance  for
           habitual  or  customary  use.   In  the  context  of   paragraph
           159A(ii), it is plainly the latter sense in which  the  term  is
           being used.

     Mr Ouseley submitted that the "temporary hiatus" in the  Sponsor's  use
     of S Street in the year immediately prior to the application, meant she
     was not in attendance for her "habitual or customary use".

  7. The Sponsor submitted that the facts exemplified in NG were  completely
     different from the facts in this case and  argued  that  there  was  no
     material error of law by the Immigration Judge in his analysis  of  the
     situation.  During the period of the  Appellant's  employment  by  her,
     i.e. since 2004, she had and regularly used her home in Nigeria as  the
     Immigration Judge properly accepted on the evidence before him.

  8. In considering these submissions, we would first observe that there  is
     no justification in the wording of the Rule to limit  consideration  of
     the use by the Sponsor of her home in Nigeria to a short period  before
     the application, such as to the hiatus in June 2006 due  to  pregnancy,
     as Mr Ouseley has sought to do. The purpose of the Rule is to enable an
     employer who has employed a domestic worker for at least a  year  in  a
     home overseas which he/she uses on  a  regular  basis,  to  bring  that
     employee to the UK to work for him/her here.  The Tribunal  in  NG  was
     concerned with a potential ambiguity in the meaning of "regular", as to
     whether it could embrace the infrequent occupation of a home but  in  a
     regular pattern. It correctly concluded that it did not.  That  clearly
     reflects the purpose of the Rule. It is not about property  rights  but
     about the establishment of a connection between the  employer  and  the
     employee, and it says so expressly in sub-paragraph (ii).

  9. To establish the evidence  of  such  a  connection,  subparagraph  (ii)
     requires that the employee should have been employed  by  the  employer
     for one year or more immediately prior to  the  application  for  entry
     clearance.  To assess whether an adequate connection has been made,  an
     Immigration Judge should therefore look at least at the final  year  of
     the relationship but may also take into  account  a  longer  period  to
     ascertain the extent of the connection, and should do so  if  there  is
     some temporary aberration in the final year from the established  long-
     term pattern.

 10. In this case the Appellant made her application on 16 June 2006 and her
     employment with the Sponsor began at some  unspecified  date  in  2004.
     The Immigration Judge, in paragraph 5(e) of the determination  assessed
     the evidence before him of the Sponsor's visits in the 16 month  period
     from March 2005 to June 2006 as follows.   There  was  one  month  from
     March 2005.  There were two months between  July  and  September  2005.
     There was a further month from December 2005 to January 2006.  Finally,
     in May 2006, there was a one month visit until June 2006.  Thus in  the
     period of 16 months from the beginning of  2005  until  June  2006  the
     Sponsor had spent a total of five months at her home in Nigeria,  where
     the Appellant was employed and included in that period was a  temporary
     hiatus when the Sponsor was pregnant.

 11. We can see no error of law in the Immigration Judge's  approach  or  in
     his interpretation of the Rule. He sought to establish the facts  about
     the Sponsor's visits to her home in Nigeria over a reasonable period of
     time up to the date of application (being a period  in  excess  of  the
     minimum 12 months specified in the  Rule).  He  had  reference  to  the
     reasons behind the visits, and the reason for not visiting  more  often
     in 2006. Hence his reference to a temporary hiatus  due  to  pregnancy.
     There is nothing inconsistent in his approach with either  the  wording
     of the Rule itself or the guidance of the Tribunal in NG. Then,  having
     adopted the correct approach in law, he  made  what  is  essentially  a
     finding of fact, to the effect that in his judgment,  and  taking  into
     account the impact of the Sponsor's pregnancy towards the  end  of  the
     period, this constituted the use by the Sponsor of her Nigerian home on
     a "regular basis". Ms Ouseley says that this was not enough,  but  this
     finding of fact cannot be impeached  as  an  error  of  law  unless  it
     amounts to perversity. In our view, the  Immigration  Judge  was  fully
     entitled to conclude that four separate visits amounting in total  time
     to about five out of eighteen months constituted adequate  evidence  of
     use of the property on a regular basis and of the consequent connection
     between the Appellant and the Sponsor.  It cannot properly be  said  to
     be perverse. Thus we conclude that there is no material error of law by
     the Immigration Judge.


                                  DECISION

 12. The Immigration Judge did not make a material  error  of  law  and  the
     original determination of the appeal shall stand.




      Signed                                                           Dated
                                                                 24 May 2007

                                            Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


