
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on  the  application  of  Singh)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2016] UKUT 00058 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                             2 November 2015

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE aLLEN

                                   Between

                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                               Gurbachan singh

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Ms N Mallick, instructed by Asghar & Co, appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr W Hansen, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


    JUDGE ALLEN:  This  is  an  application  for  judicial  review  of  the
    respondent's decision of 9 April 2014 refusing to grant  the  applicant
    leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Subsequently,  following
    directions from HHJ McKenna of 21 July 2014, the  applicant  filed  and
    served amended grounds of claim including reference  to  support  under
    section 21 of the National Assistance Act  1948  and  the  respondent's
    policy that a removal decision under section 10 of the Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999 could be made  when  requested  if  the  applicant  was
    receiving section 21 support.  Thereafter the respondent in a  decision
    letter of 16 October 2014 refused  the  applicant's  asylum  and  human
    rights claims and certified them.  This had the  consequence  that  the
    accompanying section 10  removal  decision  was  appealable  only  from
    outside the United Kingdom.   Subsequently  His  Honour  Judge  Anthony
    Thornton QC granted the applicant permission to amend  his  grounds  of
    claim to include a challenge to the certification decisions.


2.   Permission was granted on the papers by Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  on
    23 July 2015.  She limited the grant of  permission  on  the  following
    basis, as set out at paragraph 13 of her order.


         "13. Permission is granted limited to


                (a)    it is arguable that the applicant  should  have  been
                    served with an appealable decision on or about  9  April
                    2014;


                (b)    it is arguable that the Article 8 human rights  claim
                    refused for reasons set  out  in  the  letter  dated  16
                    October 2014 should not have been certified.


         14.  Permission to seek judicial review on  all  other  grounds  is
                refused."


3.   With regard to the first ground, Ms Mallick argued that  the  applicant
    had been  receiving  section  21  support  at  the  time  he  made  his
    application and at the time of refusal.  The Secretary of State  had  a
    policy which clearly said that when his application  was  refused  that
    should have led to a removal decision, and therefore to  an  appealable
    decision.  Prior to the sending of the Pre-Action Protocol ("PAP")  the
    applicant had informed the Secretary of State that she  had  overlooked
    his section 21 support.  The applicant had  made  a  human  rights  and
    asylum claim and was entitled to an in country right  of  appeal  under
    section 92(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the
    2002 Act").  It would be unfair and irrational in the circumstances  of
    the case for the applicant not to get a removal decision and refusal at
    the same  time.   This  was  because  of  the  wording  of  her  policy
    concerning section 21 support.  As was said in Padfield v  Ministry  of
    Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [1968] 1 AC 997, where a  statute  (and
    this applied equally to a policy, in Ms Mallick's submission) conferred
    a discretion on the Minister to exercise or not exercise a power and it
    did not express the limit or define the extent of  his  discretion  and
    did not require him to give  reasons  for  declining  to  exercise  the
    power, his discretion might nevertheless be limited to the extent  that
    it must not be so used, whether by reason  of  misconstruction  of  the
    statute or other reason, to frustrate the objects of the statute  which
    conferred it.


4.   There was a policy to provide removal directions  to  people  receiving
    section 21 support and the reason for this  was  that  it  was  in  the
    interests of the public purse to deal with such  people  swiftly.   The
    Secretary of State should have been aware of the section 21 support and
    even if she were not aware, the applicant had challenged the  Secretary
    of State's decision at the same time as the judicial review proceedings
    were begun against the local authority and therefore at the time of the
    PAP being sent to the  Secretary  of  State  she  was  aware  that  the
    applicant was in receipt of National Assistance support.  Reference was
    made to the letter at page 222 of the bundle.  In addition, there was a
    duty on the Secretary of State to enquire whether the applicant was  in
    receipt of such support and the caseworker  was  required  to  consider
    whether removal directions should have been set at the same time as the
    refusal decision, and there had been a failure to consider  a  relevant
    matter and a decision made  without  the  appropriate  enquiries  being
    made.


5.   By at least 22  May  2014  the  respondent  had  been  aware  that  the
    applicant was in receipt of section 21 support and had been at the time
    of application and decision and  indeed  still  was  until  today.   In
    response to the PAP there should have been a  removal  decision  and  a
    right of appeal within the United  Kingdom.   It  was  clear  from  the
    respondent's policy why a  removal  decision  should  have  been  made.
    There were early documents also, for example an email of 25  June  2013
    informing the Secretary of State that the applicant was in  receipt  of
    section 21  support.   The  Secretary  of  State's  chronology  omitted
    relevant matters.  It was wrong to say that support had ceased.  It had
    been suspended but no more.  The respondent had been told in 2013 about
    the section 21 support and again in the PAP letter and in the letter of
    14 May 2014.


6.   With regard to ground 2, there was also a policy on this in respect  of
    section 94.  There were five relevant  questions  set  out  there  from
    leading authorities on certification and they had not  been  addressed.
    The respondent had conceded that it was an asylum claim which had  been
    put forward by the applicant, at page 128 of the bundle.   It  was  not
    necessary to stipulate that the person was making an asylum  and  human
    rights claim.  The respondent had to look at the substance of the claim
    put forward and there were good reasons for not certifying as they  had
    only looked at the human rights claim and not the asylum claim.  In the
    JR response the Secretary of State had conceded that  an  asylum  claim
    had been made.  As the applicant had made  an  asylum  application  the
    claim should not have been certified.  He had  previously  indicated  a
    fear of return and that he  was  seeking  international  protection  as
    could be seen from page 28 and also page 19 of the bundle.   Under  the
    terms of the policy the claim should not have been certified but if  at
    all in respect of both claims and that  had  not  been  done.   If  the
    Secretary of State considered the claim to  be  clearly  unfounded  she
    should have made it clear in her previous decision that  that  was  the
    case but that had not been done in any of the  earlier  letters.   This
    was important because when she had considered  the  case  she  had  not
    thought it was bound to fail.  Section 94 did not require the Secretary
    of State when certifying to look at the  issue  of  certification  only
    when she issued an appealable decision.  This applied  irrespective  of
    whether  the  respondent  had  decided  to  issue  removal  directions.
    Certification and a removal decision would  go  hand  in  hand  if  the
    Secretary of State was right, but this was in fact the  wrong  approach
    because it would not be logical for her not to  consider  certification
    when considering the substance of the application.


7.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  not  properly  addressed  the  relevant
    criteria in deciding whether to certify.  She  had  only  done  so  now
    because it was another way to stop the  applicant  having  a  right  of
    appeal.  The reasoning did not show consideration of the five questions
    set out in the guidance, taken from ZL and VL v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 25.  Failure to do  so  meant  that
    the conclusion was irrational.  Reliance was placed  in  particular  on
    the length of time the applicant had been in the  United  Kingdom,  his
    age, being over 65, and his ill health.  These factors  meant  that  it
    could not be said that the claim was bound to  fail.   Relevant  issues
    had been drawn to the Secretary of  State's  attention  regularly  from
    2012 onwards.


8.   In his submissions Mr Hansen argued with regard  to  the  first  ground
    that the applicant could not bring  himself  within  the  requests  for
    removal decisions policy as he had already been informed he was  liable
    for removal, in 2012.  Insofar as he relied on section 21 support,  the
    policy required him to provide evidence of support  and  he  had  never
    done so.  Also, at the time of the decision refusing  to  make  removal
    directions in response to the PAP letter there was no evidence that  he
    was not being supported by Ealing: there was no evidence  that  he  was
    being.  Also further, even if he were entitled to  a  removal  decision
    under the policy, it was necessary to consider what  type  of  decision
    would have been made, and it was known that when  the  respondent  made
    the removal decision in October 2014 she  certified  the  entire  claim
    including the human rights claim and there was no reason to think  that
    any earlier decision would have been any different.  The applicant  had
    a removal decision and no in country right of appeal, but it would  not
    have been any different.


9.   It was wrong for focus to be placed, as had been, on 9 April 2014  when
    the human rights claim was refused with no right of appeal.   The  date
    of the decision  refusing  the  request  for  a  removal  decision  was
    relevant and that was 1 May 2014.  It was also relevant  that  the  PAP
    request was wrong with regard to  the  claimed  obligation  to  make  a
    removal decision when a decision refusing leave to remain was made.  It
    was clear that that was not the case from  R  (on  the  application  of
    Daley-Murdock) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA
    Civ 161 and Patel  and  Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 72.  It could not therefore be said  that  there
    should have been a removal decision when the decision  was  made  on  9
    April 2014.  It was a power to make removal directions triggered  by  a
    valid request under the policy and if it fell within the  policy.   The
    PAP request at page 135  was  a  request  with  regard  to  exceptional
    circumstances and there was no reference to support  so  that  was  the
    basis of the request and the refusal was at page 213.  Ms  Mallick  was
    seeking to get around that and the lack of evidence by saying that  the
    onus was on the Secretary of State but this was contrary to  the  terms
    of the policy where applicants were told to provide evidence and as  to
    what the Secretary of State knew, she had been told by Ealing that they
    were ceasing support from 25 April and the email put in did not do what
    was said by Ms Mallick and that the respondent therefore could  not  be
    criticised for failing to draw on inference from it.


10.  For all those reasons the applicant did not  come  within  the  policy.
    Even if a removal decision should have  been  made  earlier  the  human
    rights claim  would  have  been  certified  as  happened  when  it  was
    reconsidered in October with the asylum claim,  so  the  applicant  had
    received what he could expect.  It was clear from the  wording  of  the
    policy that it was not applicable where an applicant had  already  been
    told that he or she was liable to removal.  This was at page 110 of the
    bundle.  The relevant criteria were  set  out  at  page  113.   It  was
    accepted that there was a public law duty to follow the  policy  unless
    there was a good reason not to, but the applicant did not  fall  within
    it and if he did he would get the same decision as he had received.


11.  With regard to ground 2, the  limited  grant  of  permission  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker should be borne  in  mind.   Ms  Mallick  had  the
    problem that she sought to rely on the  applicant's  health  conditions
    but the Article 3 claim had been certified and that  certification  had
    been upheld.  Although the same facts could give rise to an  Article  8
    claim, as was clear from Baroness Hale's speech in  R  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL  27,  it  was
    very difficult to succeed on the same facts  in  a  health  case  under
    Article 8 if they could not succeed under Article  3.   The  facts  had
    therefore been considered and found  to  be  properly  certified.   The
    Article 8 issue did not get the claim anywhere.


12.  As regards the reasons for the grant  of  permission  and  the  alleged
    inconsistency  between  the  October  certification  decision  and  the
    refusal on 9 April which was not certified, it was the case that  there
    was no need to certify in April as there was no right of appeal and  it
    was clear from the policy that certification should not be done in such
    a case.  Ms Mallick had argued that  the  January  2014  claim  was  an
    asylum and human rights claim, but that was wrong as could be seen from
    the decision letter.  It was clear from that letter at page 127 of  the
    bundle that it was necessary to apply in person if there was a  claimed
    fear on return.  In reality therefore this was a thin Article  8  claim
    and could not and did not gain sustenance from the  applicant's  health
    conditions.  They had been considered and the Article  3  certification
    had been upheld.


13.  His age and the length  of  residence  did  not  take  him  beyond  the
    certification threshold.  He was an illegal entrant and had not  sought
    to regularise his status.  Representations had been made but  the  only
    leave to remain application  had  been  on  2  January  2014.   It  was
    therefore the case that his private life in the United Kingdom had been
    acquired while his status was precarious.  It was the case that he  was
    now over 65, but  although  age  was  a  factor  there  was  no  policy
    mandating a grant of leave to a person  over  65.   So  ultimately  the
    matter was to be approached as had been said  in  Khalid  and  Singh  v
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  at
    paragraph 71 that it was a point of substance ultimately.  In any event
    it was not accepted that there was a deficiency in the reasoning of the
    decision.  The October decision letter dealt fully  with  the  relevant
    issues.


14.  By way of reply Ms Mallick referred to the PAP letter at page 135  with
    specific reference to the respondent's failure to deal with section  21
    support.  The point was that in the letter the solicitors  specifically
    pointed out that the Secretary of State had failed to apply the  policy
    and the reference to the circumstances as one of the categories in  the
    policy was irrelevant.  The Secretary of State was being told that  the
    policy was not being applied and that it should be read with the letter
    of 14 May 2014 about section 21 support.  There was  no  other  way  in
    which this could be interpreted.  The letter  of  22  May  2014  was  a
    request to respond to the PAP letter so the respondent could only  come
    to one conclusion and that was to make a removal decision.  It could be
    seen from the policy that it did not require evidence of support to  be
    provided.  The solicitors' letter was sufficient  in  any  event.   The
    letter of 22 May to the Secretary of State meant that  it  was  clearly
    incumbent on her to ask the applicant's solicitors  for  evidence.   It
    was wrong to say that he was not in receipt of section 21  support  and
    the case fell squarely within the policy.


15.  With regard to ground 2 it was not just reliance on ill health but  the
    three factors referred to above.  Razgar concerned claims on the  basis
    of ill health only and therefore was not determinative  of  the  point.
    Reference was made to  the  care  assessment  report  and  the  limited
    mobility of the applicant.  He was clearly physically impaired and  the
    evidence showed that his condition was severe and  deteriorating.   The
    respondent had not addressed the certification test  properly  and  the
    matter could not be said to be cured by what was said in Khalid.


16.  I reserved my determination.


Discussion


17.  The first point concerns the argument that the respondent  should  have
    issued an appealable decision when the application for leave to  remain
    was refused.  The applicant has never had any valid leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  He claims to have entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    2000.  Accordingly he did not  have  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the  time  when  he  made  the  application  for  leave  and
    therefore the decision to refuse did not carry a right of appeal  under
    section 82 of the 2002 Act.


18.  The applicant makes his argument in respect of the respondent's  policy
    "requests for removal decisions" which was brought in  on  13  February
    2012.  This policy applies where a person has, inter alia, requested in
    a PAP letter before action  that  a  removal  decision  be  made.   The
    request for a removal decision in this case was made in the PAP  letter
    of 17 April 2014.  Under the policy the respondent will assess the case
    and serve a notice of removal if one of four situations  applies.   The
    two relevant ones in this case are:


    (1)  The applicant is  being  supported  by  the  Home  Office  or  has
         provided evidence of being supported by a  local  authority  (under
         section 21 of the National Assistance Act 1948 or section 17 of the
         Children Act 1989); or


    (2)  there are other exceptional  and  compelling  reasons  to  make  a
         removal decision at this time.


19.  The  PAP  letter  made  no  reference  to  the  former  of  these.   An
    appealable decision was sought on the basis that there were exceptional
    and compelling reasons to make a removal decision at the same  time  as
    the decision to refuse because the applicant  was  old  and  frail  and
    medically unwell having spent fourteen years in the United Kingdom, and
    would be at risk of dying if he were sent back.


20.  I  disagree  with  Ms  Mallick  that  this  can  be  taken  with  later
    communications to  mean  that  the  applicant  was  seeking  a  removal
    decision on the basis of the section 21 support.  It is clear from this
    letter that a removal decision was sought on the basis  of  exceptional
    and compelling reasons.  It is also  clear  from  the  wording  of  the
    policy, as set out above, that evidence has to be provided  of  section
    21 support.  That was not done at that time and indeed at no  time  has
    that been done.


21.  By the time of the respondent's response, on 1 May 2014, the  applicant
    had issued the judicial review claim  on  24  April,  having  therefore
    given the respondent very little time in which to respond  (the  normal
    response time is fourteen days in accordance with paragraph 20  of  the
    Protocol).  The respondent said in that letter, inter alia, that  based
    on the facts of the applicant's case she had  decided  not  to  make  a
    removal decision.  I consider that this response was properly  open  to
    her.  The matters set out in the PAP letter which I referred  to  above
    were matters which in no sense even arguably required the respondent to
    conclude that they amounted to exceptional and compelling reasons.


22.  I do not see  any  merit  in  the  argument  that  simply  because  the
    applicant was, it is said, in receipt of  ongoing  section  21  support
    that the respondent was obliged to issue an appealable decision.  It is
    clear from Ealing Borough Council's letter of 20 March 2014,  paragraph
    38, that it was proposed to withdraw the provision of accommodation and
    subsistence to the applicant on 25 April 2014.  I agree with Mr  Hansen
    that the respondent was  entitled  to  take  the  view  that  when  she
    responded to the PAP letter it was the case that the applicant  on  the
    evidence available was no longer in receipt of section 21 support (even
    if a removal decision on that basis had been requested).


23.  To this can be added further the fact that in  any  event  subsequently
    after the removal decision of 16 October 2014 the applicant had an  out
    of country right of appeal.  There is no obligation under  the  request
    for removals policy to provide an in country right of appeal, and again
    I agree with Mr Hansen that there is no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
    respondent if she had been minded to make an appealable decision  would
    not have made one that was exercisable out of country only.  But in any
    event, as I have set out above, I consider that in light of the request
    that was made to the respondent in the PAP letter and her  response  to
    that, that she was under no obligation to make an  appealable  decision
    as a consequence of the request, and therefore that ground fails.


24.  As regards the certification  of  the  human  rights  claim,  as  noted
    above, this was refused and certified in  the  decision  letter  of  16
    October 2014.  Both the Article 3 and Article 8 claims were refused and
    certified.  The second ground is based on the view  that  there  is  an
    arguable inconsistency in the decision to certify in October when  this
    was not done at the time of the earlier refusal of leave in April 2014.


25.  However,  as  the  respondent  has  pointed  out,  the  April  decision
    concerned an out of time application for leave  to  remain  on  private
    life grounds and carried no right of  appeal.   As  a  consequence  the
    respondent did not need to  consider  whether  the  claim  was  clearly
    unfounded.  In addition, as set out at  paragraph  21  of  Mr  Hansen's
    skeleton, the applicable guidance on certification provides that  there
    are a number of situations where a claim that  is  "clearly  unfounded"
    should not be certified under section 94, and the relevant  example  of
    this is the case where there  is  no  right  of  appeal  following  the
    refusal of the asylum or human rights claim.  Therefore on the basis of
    the policy it would have been entirely wrong to certify at that earlier
    stage.


26.  As regards the merits of the certification decision,  I  consider  that
    the decision to certify was properly open to the respondent.  As is set
    out above, there is no  challenge  before  me  as  permission  was  not
    granted, concerning the certification of the Article 3 claim.   I  have
    referred above to what was said by Baroness Hale in  Razgar  about  the
    likelihood of a foreign healthcare  case  succeeding  under  Article  8
    where it fails under Article 3.  I do not consider that this is such  a
    case.  The medical evidence concerning the applicant is not such as  to
    show anything like an arguable  breach  of  his  Article  8  rights  on
    return.  The reasoning is in my view perfectly  adequate,  but  in  any
    event, as was held in Singh and Khalid  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74,  if  the
    matter is in substance bound to fail then the lack of full reasoning is
    not an illegal defect.


27.  In conclusion I consider that the challenge  to  the  certification  is
    also not made out, and for the above reasons  both  grounds  of  review
    have, in my view, no merit.  Accordingly the application is refused.


28.  I  have  the  parties'  costs  schedules  but  I  will  deal  with  any
    application for permission to appeal and any  other  ancillary  matters
    when this judgment is handed down.


                                  ~~~~0~~~~

