

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
  HE (Bidoon - statelessness - risk of persecution) Kuwait CG [2006] UKAIT
                                    00051

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 March 2006                                |On 21June 2006             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before


                       SENIOR Immigration Judge ALLEN
                    DESIGNATED IMMIGRATION JUDGE McCARTHY
                                 MR A SMITH


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A White, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Neale, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Though there has been some progress in  their  situation,  stateless  Bidoon
remain at risk of persecution and  breach  of  their  Article  3  rights  in
Kuwait. There has been  no material change since BA  and  Others  (Bidoon  -
statelessness -  risk  of  persecution)   Kuwait  CG                  [2004]
UKIAT 00256 was decided.

1.   The appellant is a stateless  Bidoon from Kuwait.  He  appeals  to  the
      Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 11 January  2006
      refusing leave to enter the United Kingdom.   The  hearing  before  us
      took place on 22 March 2006.  Ms  A  White,  instructed  by  Freemans,
      appeared on behalf of the appellant and Mr I Neale appeared on  behalf
      of the Secretary of State.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 18  September  2005  and
      claimed asylum  on that day. A screening interview took  place  on  19
      September 2005 and an SEF was completed on 22  September  2005.   That
      included a detailed statement.  The appellant was  interviewed  on  20
      October 2005, and he has also provided a further  statement  dated  17
      February 2006 which formed part of the bundle.

3.   At the hearing the appellant confirmed the truth  of  the  contents  of
      the two statements. Both  had  been  interpreted  to  him  in  Arabic.
      However, although he  recalled  going  to  the  Home  Office  for  the
      interview, it had not been interpreted back to   him  so  he  did  not
      know, he said, what was on the record.

4.   Ms White referred him to documents which it was said  he  had  produced
      on arrival in the United Kingdom. Copies of these were to be found  in
      the Home Office bundle.  He confirmed that the documents  referred  to
      at A8 to A10 were the relevant documents,  and translations  of  these
      were to be found at C24 onwards. With regard to  the  attendance  card
      document at  C27  and  C28,  headed  Executive  Comittee  for  Illegal
      Residence Affairs that was not any form of residence card. C26  was  a
      translation of that document and was headed 'Executive  Committee  for
      Illegal Residence Affairs'. He  said  it  meant  that  they  were  not
      resident in a legal way and were illegal. The card expired  on  5  May
      2003. He had only shown these documents to  the  Home  Office  at  the
      short interview and not any other identification papers.

5.   As to how he  had  obtained  the  attendance  card  [as  the  Executive
      Committee for Illegal Residence Affairs document was headed], he  said
      that the government had made an announcement and  invited  all  Bidoon
      people to apply to be provided with such cards. He  did  not  remember
      exactly when that was but thought it was about five  years  ago.   His
      father had gone  and  applied  and  after  his  father  had  died  the
      appellant personally had contacted them.  He was given the card a year
      before its expiry date of 5 May 2003. The card was valid for one year.
      It was the only card that he had from the Kuwaiti government.

6.   He was asked what he had used the card for  and  he  said  it  was  for
      nothing. It was a trick by the Kuwaiti government to trap them.

7.   He was next referred to the document described as  a  summoning  order,
      at C29 and C30.  He said that a while after he left the house  one  of
      his friends had visited the house and found this document  behind  the
      door and he had taken it with him and told the  appellant   about  it.
      The appellant could not remember where he was then.   He  himself  had
      the original. He had not brought it into the United Kingdom but it had
      been posted to him and he produced an envelope and said it was  on  24
      September 2005.  He was asked how it was that he was able to show this
      document to  the Home Office on 19 September 2005  if  that  were  the
      case, and he said that what he had shown to  the  Home  Office  was  a
      photocopy and he had had the photocopy with him and this had been  the
      instruction of the agent.  He was asked whether he recalled  when  and
      where he photocopied it and he had said that he  had  not  photocopied
      it, but the agent had done it from the original and he  had  kept  the
      photocopies with him. He was asked why he had not brought the original
      with him to the United Kingdom and he said he did not know and he  had
      been instructed by the agent to do so. He had only seen  the  document
      when the agent gave it to him on the plane.  He was asked when he  had
      first seen the original document and he said that his friend showed it
      to him and his friend  got  it  at  the  house.  He  had  brought  the
      originals of the documents with him to court today. He  also  produced
      the letter from  his GP which was at A4 of his bundle.

8.   When cross-examined by Mr Neale the appellant was asked how he got  his
      birth certificate  originally. He said  that  it  was  issued  by  the
      Ministry of Health and it generally delivered a duplicate, but it  had
      not been delivered to him as he was not  a  Kuwaiti.  If  you  were  a
      Kuwaiti you could go and be  issued  with  one  or  if  you  had  good
      contacts.  He said that this was a duplicate. He was asked whether  he
      was saying it was not issued to  him  officially,  and  he  said  that
      persons who were Bidoon could not have  official  birth  certificates,
      but they gave them duplicates. He had got it approximately  two  years
      ago. He was asked why he had got it then and he said that he  had  not
      personally chosen the time but he had a friend who had offered to help
      him and had advised him to get it done and to keep it with  him.   The
      document was not recognised as an ID by the  Kuwait  authorities,  but
      his friend had told him it would benefit him to have it.  There was no
      apparent reason for that but they had been talking and his friend  had
      suggested it to him.

9.   He was asked why he thought the  attendance card was  a  trick  by  the
      Kuwaiti government. He said that when Bidoon like him were invited  to
      come and obtain IDs they were pleased about this, but  when  they  got
      them they found out it was done only to have their details. Previously
      they were not registered  and  the  authorities  did  not  have  their
      addresses or details. Now their task was easier and  they  could  come
      and get them  and arrest them.  It was clear from  the  card  that  it
      could not be used as an ID.  He was  asked  what  they  had  said  the
      purpose for which it was issued and he said they  had  not  told  them
      anything but just asked them to come and register and they  would   be
      given IDs.

10.  As regards the address on it, he was  asked  who  owned  the  house  he
      lived in and he said it was rented and it  was  an  extension,  not  a
      house, and was rented privately. People who helped those in need  were
      paying the rent.   It was the case that Kuwaitis who carried ID  cards
      were also required to register their details with the authorities.

11.  He was asked about the Medical  Foundation  letter.  He  had  kept  the
      appointment referred to on that day. They had not provided  a  report.
      He then said that he had not chosen to go on that day. He had gone  on
      18 October 2005 but he did not instigate the appointment. A nurse  had
      come to him at his previous accommodation and had seen  him  and  said
      that she would send him somewhere.  He had not been  examined  by  the
      Medical Foundation on 18 October 2005. He had not  seen  a  doctor.  A
      lady had talked to him for a while and told him to go  home  and  they
      would send him some details and later he got a letter from them saying
      that his  treatment was available from his GP's surgery so he had gone
      there and got treatment.

12.  With regard to paragraph 17 at  C22, this being  his  first  statement,
      the people who had paid money into the fund from  which the agent  was
      paid were friends.  It had been done through a friend of his  who  was
      Kuwaiti and it was likely the money had  come,  in  turn,  from  other
      Kuwaitis, as the Bidoon did not  have  money.  But  he  did  not  know
      definitely how the friend had managed to get the money.


13.  As regards what he had said at paragraph 13 about selling items on  the
      streets, he said that this was earrings and rings  and  similar  items
      which somebody in the market owned. Bidoon like him  would  sell  them
      and take him the money and get commission. In Kuwait it was  necessary
      to have a permit to sell goods in the street and he had not  had  one.
      He had sold goods anywhere in the street but not in the market. He did
      not know the procedure so he  did  not  know  whether  he  would  have
      invited prosecution in the court. It would apply also to Kuwaitis that
      if they sold goods without a  permit  on  the  street  they  would  be
      prosecuted.  However, he said that the authorities  were  particularly
      after the Bidoon. Bidoon like him moved from place to place  to  avoid
      them.

14.    Ms White had no re-examination.

15.  In his submissions Mr Neale emphasised that the appellant  had  arrived
      in the United Kingdom  unlawfully and with a  forged  French  passport
      and this was of relevance to the application of s.8 of  the  2004  Act
      and credibility.  He had also had what he said were copies of a  birth
      certificate and what appeared to be an ID card which was explained  to
      be an attendance card. The birth certificate, he had said,   could  be
      obtained by any Bidoon with influential friends, but that was what one
      would expect him to say. The evidence of that document showed that  he
      was documented and registered by the state. There was no evidence that
      such documents could readily  be  obtained  unlawfully  and  its  very
      existence indicated that the appellant as a Bidoon was registered with
      the state.

16.  As regards  the  attendance  card,  there  was  confirmation  from  the
      Kuwaiti embassy in Canada that documents of this kind had been  issued
      at the time when the appellant said.  The  appellant  said  it  was  a
      trick, but Mr Neale argued it was  simply  a  means  for  putting  the
      Bidoon population on the same basis  as  the  Kuwaiti  population  for
      administrative purposes.

17.  He referred us to page 13 of the US State Department Report  for  2006.
      There was now free education for Bidoon children and free health  care
      for the Bidoon also and  there  was  a  significant  improvement.  The
      attendance card should therefore not be seen as sinister.

18.  The appellant had claimed that he had been detained and  tortured  many
      times between 1995 and 2005, but he had failed to  seek  international
      protection until late 2005. There was no evidence of  torture   beyond
      his own  assertions.  The  Medical  Foundation   had  not  thought  it
      necessary to do any more than refer him to his GP as  the  GPs  letter
      was very brief. While in Kuwait the appellant seemed to have been able
      to support himself without his father's assistance for  a  long  time.
      What he had done without a permit was unlawful for all in  Kuwait,  he
      accepted, so  he  would  be  likely  to  run  away  when  he  saw  the
      authorities.

19.  There was a lot of objective evidence relating to  the  situation  some
      years ago, but it should be balanced against the  recent  changes  and
      also the predicament of the Kuwaiti government in dealing with a large
      influx  of  foreign   nationals   from   surrounding   under-developed
      countries. This did not excuse  human  rights  abuses  but  it  was  a
      relevant matter. Also, the appellant was able to  distinguish  himself
      from most Bidoon by the fact of the birth certificate which proved his
      descent via his parents in Kuwait.  The summons referred to a  failure
      to produce an ID and this was unpersuasive and would apply equally  to
      a Kuwaiti national.

20.  We made the point to Mr Neale that there might be an issue as  to  what
      ID  the  appellant  could   have  produced  and  he  referred  to  the
      attendance card, but it was clear from that, as we suggested  to  him,
      that it was not an ID card. Mr Neale argued that it was nevertheless a
      document showing that he was a recognised resident of Kuwait given his
      name and address. The  Kuwaiti  authorities  could  be  contrary,  but
      whether  a person was Bidoon or Kuwaiti, failure to produce  ID  would
      be seen as adverse by the authorities. He was a Bidoon who could prove
      his ancestry in Kuwait through his parents. It was argued that he  was
      documented as he had a birth certificate.  The  removal  documentation
      would show that he would be returned to Kuwait and  a  fresh  document
      would be issued to that effect.

21.  In her submissions Ms  White  referred  to  and  adopted  her  skeleton
      argument.  She  argued  that  the  appellant  was  undocumented.   The
      incidents of persecution of the appellant and his father had been  set
      out.  As it was illegal for all to  work  as  street  traders  without
      licensing she did not rely much on that,  but  argued  that  the  more
      recent arrests for lack of ID  and  having  Bidoon  leaflets  and  the
      incidents in 2004 and 2005 were incidents of persecution.   The  Human
      Rights Watch report had been referred to in BA, the  country  guidance
      case, and this was typical of the approach of Kuwait to the Bidoon.

22.  It seemed  that  the  appellant  has  been  refused  on  the  basis  of
      credibility and a claimed improvement in the situation for the  Bidoon
      in Kuwait.  It was true that as the US State Department Report  showed
      there was now medical treatment for the Bidoon in education and  there
      was some improvement, but the Tribunal should also bear  in  mind  the
      Operational Guidance Note of August 2005, in particular  at  paragraph
      3.6.11 referring to this as no more than a slight improvement.   There
      was a lack of official documentation and an inability to come  and  go
      from  Kuwait  as  other  Kuwaitis  could.   It  was  clear  from   the
      appellant's birth certificate that his parents were recorded  as  non-
      Kuwaiti so the birth certificate would be of  little  assistance.   It
      was not a document he could  use  in  order  to  obtain  the  kind  of
      documentation which would enable him to become a documented Bidoon.

23.  The Tribunal was referred to paragraphs 27 and 53 in particular  in  BA
      and also to background evidence about recent  events.   The  documents
      produced should be seen in the context of his evidence which should be
      found to be credible.  The attendance card had  expired.  The  summons
      should be accepted as being genuine.  As  regards  credibility,  there
      was a high level of consistency in his evidence.    He  had  explained
      why he had failed to leave earlier as he had no passport and left when
      it was clear that his life was under threat after the second detention
      in May 2005.  The issue of coming in on  a  forged  passport  was  not
      fatal to credibility and indeed it could be said to  corroborate  what
      he said. There had been  no significant change  in  the  situation  in
      Kuwait and it had been said by the Tribunal in BA at paragraph 3  that
      there would have to a material change of circumstances for a different
      conclusion to be reached.


CONCLUSIONS
24.  To succeed, the appellant must show a reasonable degree  of  likelihood
      or a real risk that  he  would  be  persecuted  or  his  human  rights
      breached on returning him to Kuwait, should that be possible.

25.  We consider first the issue of credibility.  Mr.  Neale  rightly  makes
      the point that the application of s.8 of the 2004 Act is in  issue  in
      this case, since the appellant entered  the  UK  in  possession  of  a
      forged French passport. This  is  a  matter  that  must  be  taken  as
      damaging to the appellant's  credibility.  In the refusal letter it is
      said that his claim to have suffered persecution  through being beaten
      and arrested is not substantiated by documentation to assist  in  this
      regard. It is also said at paragraph 16 of the refusal letter that the
      appellant had never been charged with an offence and had  always  been
      released with the help of a bribe or help from a family  member,  that
      he had never tried to leave the country despite his claim to have been
      badly treated on each occasion and also that he would  not  have  been
      able to leave as easily as claimed if he was seen as a threat  to  the
      authorities.  It is also said, at paragraph 17, that  with  regard  to
      the detention in September 2004 and May 2005 when he was told  he  had
      to obtain a passport or  he would be killed, that the  fact  that  the
      threat was not carried  entailed  that  his  account  of  the  alleged
      detentions was not credible.

26.  It is the case, as Ms White argued, that the appellant's  evidence  has
      been generally consistent, and we have had the benefit also of hearing
      him give  evidence  and  observing  him  before  us.  The  absence  of
      corroborative evidence of his claimed depression and  the  short  note
      from the doctor is, to our mind, a neutral factor. The  letter  cannot
      indicate what the source of  the  depression  is,  but  in  any  event
      serious damage to the appellant's mental health does not form part  of
      his claim, and as we say, we see it no more than as a neutral  factor,
      noting on the one hand his claimed depression as a consequence of what
      happened to him in Kuwait and on the other hand the lack  of   medical
      evidence to substantiate this.

27.  As regards the other challenges to credibility, we consider that  there
      is force in Ms White's submission that the appellant  only  sought  to
      leave when things got to the point when his life was being threatened.
      We also accept the submission that  the  cat  and  mouse  approach  of
      detention, ill-treatment and release is perfectly consistent with what
      is said in the background evidence  about  the  ways  of  the  Kuwaiti
      authorities; and we do not consider that it  forms  any  part  of  the
      appellant's claim that the authorities saw him as a threat.  The fact,
      as is said at  paragraph 17 of the reasons for  refusal  letter,  that
      there is a likelihood that he was not detained is  no  doubt  correct.
      But we have to bear in  mind  the  low  standard  of  proof.  We  have
      concluded, notwithstanding the  fact  that  use  of  a  forged  French
      passport is damaging to his credibility, that the appellant has  given
      a credible account of his experiences in Kuwait. In that latter regard
      we also see force in Ms White's submission concerning the relevance to
      credibility of the fact that the appellant, as he says, was only  able
      to leave Kuwait on the basis of forged documentation and arrive in the
      United Kingdom with that. Although it is of relevance  to  credibility
      we consider that overall it does not damage  his  credibility  to  the
      point where we do not believe the account that he has given.

28.  It is now important that we turn our attention to the country  guidance
      determination  of the IAT in  BA [2004] UKIAT  00256.    It  is  clear
      from paragraph 3 of that determination, and indeed it is a  factor  in
      all country guidance determinations, that a country guidance  decision
      is to  be  followed  unless  there  has  been  a  material  change  of
      circumstances.  In that determination the Tribunal considered  a  good
      deal of evidence in particular an expert report from Mr Abdas Shiblak,
      who had been a research fellow at the  Refugee  Study  Centre  at  the
      University of Oxford since 1992.   The  Tribunal  drew  a  distinction
      between   documented   and   undocumented   Bidoon.   The    essential
      characteristic of an undocumented Bidoon, as  mentioned  initially  in
      the determination at paragraph  53,   is  a  person  who  lacks  civil
      identification documents.  Mr Shiblak's  evidence  had  explained  the
      background to the problems of the Kuwaiti  Bidoon,  and  it  would  be
      redundant for us  to  repeat  that  or  indeed  a  lot  of  the  other
      background material which was  so  carefully  considered  in  BA.  The
      reference to Article 17 passports at paragraph 17 of the determination
      is not a material issue before us, save  in  that  the  appellant  has
      never possessed a Kuwaiti passport nor indeed, it seems, any  passport
      other than the forged French passport.  Neither has  he  possessed  an
      Article  17  Kuwaiti  passport  issued  to  those  considered  Kuwaiti
      citizens in accordance with the Nationality  Law  at  the  time  or  a
      passport granted by the Ministry  of  Interior  to  non-Kuwaiti  civil
      servants working for government  agencies  if  carrying  out  official
      duties abroad and only for the duration of the assigned mission.   The
      absence of having held such a  passport  is  therefore,  albeit  in  a
      negative sense, relevant.

29.  There is reference at paragraph  65  in  BA  to  the  UN  Human  Rights
      Committee in its concluding  observations  of  26/27  July  expressing
      particular concern about the denial to the  Bidoon  of  a  significant
      number of civil and political rights guaranteed by  the  International
      Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), in particular  Kuwaiti
      refusal  to  grant  many  Bidoons  living  in  Kuwait  any   kind   of
      nationality. There is also reference to concerns about  provisions  of
      Kuwait law involving deportation of stateless persons for  failure  to
      regularise their status and references  in  the  US  State  Department
      Report of 2002 highlight similar concerns and refer also to  the  risk
      of deportation as illegal residents for those who did not register  by
      the 27 June shut off date for naturalisation  applications.  That  was
      summarised by Mr Shiblak as follows:

             'They live under the most  appalling  conditions,  denied  the
             right to travel, free medical care, to register marriages  and
             in some cases to have a driving licence'.

30.  The Tribunal also commented at paragraph 66 that the dramatic  fall  in
      the number of Bidoon in Kuwait over the last two decades, some 120,000
      people  having  left  in  circumstances  often  tantamount  to  forced
      deportation, spoke for itself.

  31.  The  Tribunal  did  not  specify  exactly  what  it  meant  by  civil
      identification documents, and that is a matter to which we shall  have
      to return shortly.  As regards  Bidoon  who  were  seen  as  being  so
      documented,  either  on  the  basis  of   having   appropriate   civil
      identification documents or having  been  documented  as  citizens  of
      other countries, they would in the  latter  case  have  been  able  to
      obtain residency permits and other official papers.  It seems that the
      Bidoon who have civil identification documents are insulated from  the
      problems of the undocumented Bidoon. The latter's problems  are summed
      up at paragraph 69 as being prevented from working with few exceptions
      in the public or private sectors or  from  receiving  the  most  basic
      government services, and being denied  rights  to  medical  treatment,
      housing, documentation, education and driving licences.  It  is  clear
      that documented Bidoon, by contrast,  are not excluded from employment
      entirely and a small number remain in public sector employment.  There
      was restricted access but not complete exclusion from health care  but
      they could access medical clinics on payment of a fee. Bidoon children
      remained excluded  from  the  state  education  system  but  were  not
      precluded  from   private   education.   Difficulties   in   obtaining
      accommodation   appeared   to   relate   to   Bidoon   without   civil
      identification certificates.  Nor did the documented Bidoon appear  to
      experience difficulties in registering births, deaths,  marriages  and
      with driving licenses.

32.  The Tribunal  concluded  that  whereas  documented  Bidoon  experienced
      significant measures of discrimination, this  did  not  give  rise  to
      persecution, but undocumented Bidoon, who represented the majority  of
      Bidoon, were more seriously discriminated against than this, and their
      situation gave rise to a risk of persecution.

33.  An essential issue before us is whether the  improvement  that  can  be
      said now to exist in the situation for the undocumented Bidoon is such
      as to make a material difference to the previous  situation.  In  this
      regard it is common ground, to be      found at page 13 of the 2005 US
      State Department Country Report on Human Rights Practises  in  Kuwait,
      that free education for all children of Bidoon parents was approved as
      from the opening of the 2004/2005 school year.  It is also  said  that
      the Bidoon began to receive free health care. During the year the WAQF
      Health  Fund,  a  partially  government   funded   programme,   signed
      contracts with several insurance companies to pay the fees for  Bidoon
      health services.  It is said also that the legal  status  of  tens  of
      thousands of Bidoon residents remained unresolved. Since the mid-1980s
      the government had actively discriminated against the Bidoon in  areas
      such as education, employment, medical care and mobility.

34.  It is also relevant to note the Operational Guidance Note on Kuwait  of
      August 2005.  In the conclusions paragraph, paragraph  3.6.11,  it  is
      said that the most recent country  information  suggests  some  slight
      improvement for the situation  of  undocumented  Bidoon.  Though  some
      Bidoon will have evidently made very successful lives  for  themselves
      in Kuwait, others will have suffered severe  discrimination.    It  is
      said that for the discrimination to  amount  to  persecution  measures
      must involve persistent and serious ill-treatment without  just  cause
      and must be of a substantially prejudicial nature and  must  affect  a
      significant part of the  individual's  or  group's  existence  to  the
      extent that it would make their  life  intolerable  if  they  were  to
      return. It is said that most of the Kuwaiti undocumented  Bidoon  will
      fall within that category, however a few  may  not  and  if  there  is
      strong evidence that an individual has been treated differently,   and
      would  be  able  to  rise  above  the  general   discrimination   that
      undocumented Bidoons suffer, they should be  refused  asylum.   It  is
      said that such claimants may have had  access  to  employment,  health
      services and education in Kuwait.

35.  The matter is quite finely balanced.  In our view,  however,  the  more
      recent improvements in education and health care are not  such  as  to
      tip the scale.  We are conscious, as paragraph 3  of  BA  reminds  us,
      that there must have been a material change in a country  for  country
      guidance cases not to be followed. It is also  important  to  bear  in
      mind the wording of Practice Direction 18.2:

             'A reported determination of the Tribunal or one  of  the  IAT
             bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated as an  authoritative
             finding on  the  country  guidance  issue  identified  in  the
             determination, based upon the evidence before the  members  of
             the Tribunal or the IAT  that  determined  the  appeal.  As  a
             result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced by
             any later 'CG' determination,  or  is  inconsistent  with  the
             other authority that  is  binding  on  the  Tribunal,  such  a
             country guidance  case  is  authoritative  in  any  subsequent
             appeal, so far as that appeal:


             (a)  relates to the country guidance issue in question;  and
             (b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence.'


      Though these recent improvements represent changes of clear  relevance
      and may be indicative of an improving attitude  on  the  part  of  the
      authorities  towards  the  Bidoon,  nevertheless  there  remain  other
      significant problems to which we have referred  above.   There  remain
      for example the difficulties, forming part  of  the  appellant's  case
      itself, of facing charges on account of not carrying  an  ID.  In  the
      appellant's case it is clear  that  the  attendance  card  is  not  an
      identity card as it says as  much on it. We  do  not  agree  that  the
      birth  certificate can properly be regarded as  an  identity  card  or
      indeed that it can be regarded as a civil identification document.  It
      makes it clear that the appellant's parents are both  non-Kuwaiti  and
      it is, as Ms White suggested, really of  little  relevance.  It  would
      appear therefore that the appellant, like other  undocumented  Bidoon,
      is in a position where he would not be able to produce proper  ID  and
      would therefore always be at risk of  charges  of  the  kind  that  we
      accept had been brought against him being repeated. That is an  aspect
      of the risk to undocumented  Bidoon generally. We  therefore  conclude
      on the  general issue that undocumented Bidoon still face such a level
      of discrimination in a range of ways in their lives in Kuwait,  as  to
      continue to be the victims  of persecution.   There  has  not  been  a
      material  change  since  the  country  guidance  decision  in  BA  and
      accordingly we remain of the view that undocumented Bidoon are at risk
      as concluded in that determination.   We should add, returning to  the
      issue we raised at paragraph  31, that civil identification  documents
      would include residence permits and other official  papers  issued  by
      the Kuwaiti authorities, but would not include attendance  cards  such
      as that held by the appellant (which  specified  that  it  is  not  an
      identify card) or  birth  certificates  where  the  parents  were  not
      Kuwaiti nationals or legal residents.

36.  We go on to say with regard to the particular appellant before us  that
      clearly he falls into that category  for  the  reasons  that  we  have
      given. We do not consider that he can be regarded as being documented,
      given the nature of the documents he has produced as we do not  regard
      these  as  being  properly  characterised  as   civil   identification
      documents.  In his particular case,  he  faces  the  further  risk  of
      prosecution on the basis of the summons that has been    produced  and
      that is no doubt an extra factor in his case but is also, as  we  have
      set out above, an example  of  the  kind  of  risk  factors  faced  by
      undocumented Bidoon generally.

37.  We therefore conclude that the appellant has made out his  claim  under
      the Refugee Convention and under Article 3.  His appeal is allowed.




Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Allen

                    Index of Country Materials Considered

(1)  USSD Country Report on Kuwait: 2005

(2)  Home Office Operational Guidance Note on Kuwait : August 2005



                             Caselaw considered

(1)  BA and Others (Bedoon - statelessness - risk of persecution) Kuwait  CG
      [2004]  UKIAT 00256.


