
BM and AL (352D(iv); meaning of "family unit") Colombia [2007] UKAIT 00055

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 22 May 2007

                                   Before:

                         Mr Justice Hodge, President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


                                   Between

                            BM (FIRST APPELLANT)
                            AL (SECOND APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BOGATA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellants:          Mrs M Hodgson (Counsel instructed by
Beemans Solicitors)
For the Respondent:          Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer

What is a 'family unit' for the purposes of para 352D(iv) Immigration  Rules
is a question of fact. It is not limited to children who lived in  the  same
household as the refugee. But if the child belonged to another  family  unit
in the country of the refugee's  habitual  residence  it  will  be  hard  to
establish that the child was then part of two different 'family  units'  and
should properly be separated from the 'family  unit'  that  remains  in  the
country of origin.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The issue  raised  in  this  reconsideration  hearing  is  whether  the
    appellants can properly be described as having been "part of the family
    unit of" their sponsor father at the time he  left  Colombia  to  claim
    refugee status in the UK.  Immigration Judge  Vaudin  d'Imecourt  in  a
    determination promulgated on 29 December 2006  (here  called  the  2006
    appeal) found that the two appellants did not live with  their  sponsor
    father as part of his  family  unit  and  dismissed  the  appeals.   He
    decided the appellants could not satisfy the requirements of  paragraph
    352D(iv) of the Immigration Rules (HC395 as amended).

 2. There was an earlier appeal in this case against  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance for these two appellants.  This appeal (here called the  2005
    appeal) was heard by Immigration Judge Griffin at Hatton  Cross  on  20
    October 2005.   He  dismissed  both  appellants'  appeals  against  the
    refusal of entry clearance.  No appeal was lodged.  But in relation  to
    the 2006 appeal a Senior Immigration Judge ordered  reconsideration  on
    the basis that there may have been an error of law in  that  Tribunal's
    determination on the basis  that  the  appeals  raise  "an  interesting
    argument as to the true meaning of 'part of the family unit'".

The Two Appellants

 3. Both appellants are Colombian citizens.  Bleiton  the  first  appellant
    was born on 13 December 1992.  He was therefore six years old when  the
    sponsor father came to England and claimed  asylum  on  31  July  1999.
    Adder the second appellant was born on 8 August 1997.  He was therefore
    just under two years of age when the sponsor father came to the UK.  It
    is accepted that both appellants are indeed the children of the sponsor
    father.  The two appellants are  now  respectively  fourteen  and  nine
    years of age.

 4. The only direct evidence of their views before  the  Immigration  Judge
    was an undated letter from each of them in a  bundle  supplied  by  the
    sponsor father.  The letters say that they wish to join their father in
    the UK.

 5. The 2006 Tribunal accepted the evidence of the first appellant's mother
    given in an interview in Colombia on 9 November 2004.  She said she had
    never been married to the sponsor father and had never lived with  him.
    The first appellant had never lived with the father and had never lived
    anywhere other than with his mother and his  grandmother  in  Colombia.
    The first appellant's mother did say that the sponsor father maintained
    the first appellant whilst in Colombia "in the sense that he  was  very
    often with him".

 6. The second appellant's mother was also interviewed in Colombia  on  the
    same date.  The 2006 Tribunal  found  that  the  second  appellant  has
    always lived with his mother and with another brother together with the
    second appellant's grandmother  and  grandfather.   These  grandparents
    were in fact the  sponsor  father's  parents.   The  Immigration  Judge
    accepted the evidence that the sponsor father and the second  appellant
    did not live together.  As to the mother in  relation  to  the  sponsor
    father, she said: "We didn't have a stable relationship, we lived in La
    Paila but not in the same house".  The  Immigration  Judge  said  "When
    asked how come she lived and still lives with  his  parents  but  their
    son, the father of the boy, lived apart she replied that he had a  wife
    and kids."


The Sponsor Father

 7. The sponsor father came to the UK on 31 July 1997 and  claimed  asylum.
    He was granted refugee status on  8  November  2002.   The  Immigration
    Judge accepted the sponsor father's evidence that he  had  commenced  a
    relationship with his now wife Maria Naomi in 1989 or  1990  whilst  he
    was still at secondary school.  They lived together from then on  until
    the sponsor father left Colombia.  They  had  had  a  son  within  that
    relationship, Jans, who is now nine  years  of  age  and  was  born  in
    Colombia.  Maria Naomi and Jans had joined the appellant in  2000  some
    ten months after the sponsor father arrived in the UK.   They  are  now
    married and have had another child, a daughter.  The accepted  evidence
    shows that Maria Naomi was the person the  sponsor  father  had  always
    been living with as a permanent partner in Colombia and in the UK.  The
    father told the 2006 Tribunal that the mothers of  the  two  appellants
    were persons with whom he had affairs but had never lived with.

Immigration Rules

 8. The applications by both appellants in the 2006 appeal are based on the
    provisions of paragraph 352D  Immigration  Rules.   That  paragraph  is
    contained in part 11 of the Rules under  the  general  title  "Asylum".
    Paragraph 349 in relation to "Dependants" provides,

           "If the principal applicant is granted asylum and leave to enter
           or remain any spouse,  civil  partner,  unmarried  or  same  sex
           partner, or minor child will be granted leave to enter or remain
           for the same duration".


    This is no doubt the  basis  on  which  Maria  Naomi  and  the  sponsor
    father's child Jans and their daughter have been granted status here.


 9. Paragraph 352D appears under the heading "Unaccompanied  children"  and
    provides as follows,

           "352D The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                  enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or
                  remain with the parent who has been granted asylum in the
                  United Kingdom are that the applicant
                     i) is the child of a parent who has been granted asylum
                        in the United Kingdom and
                    ii) is under the age of 18, and
                   iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and
                        is not a  civil  partner,  and  has  not  formed  an
                        independent family unit; and
                    iv) was part of the family unit of  the  person  granted
                        asylum at the time that the  person  granted  asylum
                        left the country of his habitual residence in  order
                        to seek asylum ............"


10. Part 8 of the Immigration Rules under the heading "Family  Members"  in
    relation to the sub-heading "Children" sets out the requirements for  a
    child to join a  parent  present  or  settled  in  the  UK.   An  Entry
    Clearance Officer in 2004 suggested that an application might  be  made
    under paragraph 297 for the two appellants to join their father in  the
    UK.  It appears that such an application was made in 2004  as  a  claim
    under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules was considered by the 2005
    Tribunal.

The 2005 Appeal

11. There  had  been  an  application  for  entry  clearance  for  the  two
    appellants in 2004 and an appeal against the refusal of entry clearance
    which as indicated above was heard on 20 October  2005.   The  date  of
    promulgation of the determination is not clear on the  papers  but  the
    decision was promulgated in 2005.

12. In that 2005 appeal there was no appearance on behalf of the appellants
    by the sponsor father or otherwise.   The  judge  had  before  him  the
    interviews with the mothers from November 2004.  It is  unclear  if  he
    had before him notarised statements of each of the mothers dated 7 July
    2004.  In those statements they give permission  for  their  respective
    sons to join their father in the UK.   It  is  also  unclear  if  those
    notarised statements  were  before  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  who
    conducted the interviews in November 2004.  The Entry Clearance Officer
    did say that "Bleiton's mother is even prepared to sacrifice  her  role
    as the child's mother for her son's future saying her  son  would  have
    more possibilities living in the UK.  However were he to go to  the  UK
    he would be losing the stability of the emotional support and love care
    he gets from his mother and grandmother".   Immigration  Judge  Griffin
    concluded at paragraph 14 of his determination:

           "In so far as rule 352D, is concerned  there  is  absolutely  no
           evidence before me  that  the  appellants  formed  part  of  the
           sponsor's family prior to  his  going  to  the  United  Kingdom.
           Indeed the contrary seems to be the case.   At  all  times  they
           have lived with their mothers  and  all  paternal  grandparents.
           The sponsor was married to another woman, and  by  whom  he  had
           children, and it appears it was that person and  those  children
           whom he initially brought to the United Kingdom by way of family
           reunion.  I find therefore that the appellants do not  meet  the
           requirements of paragraph 352D (iv)."


13. In relation to  paragraph  297  the  Immigration  Judge  concluded  the
    requirements of this Rule were also not satisfied.  The sponsor  father
    had given no evidence that he had sole responsibility for the  children
    and the judge said "I believe the mothers have made all  the  decisions
    which have been necessary in the upbringing of both these  appellants".
    The judge had no evidence before  him  as  to  the  father's  financial
    circumstances and rejected any claim that he could afford  to  maintain
    and keep the two appellants.  He also concluded that the  accommodation
    the sponsor father had would not be big enough to accommodate  the  two
    appellants.  He therefore concluded that the requirements of  paragraph
    297 were not met.  The claim under paragraph 297 has not been  repeated
    in the appeal to the 2006 Tribunal.


The 2006 Tribunal's Decision

14. Immigration Judge Vaudin heard evidence from the sponsor father in  the
    2006 appeal.  He had before him notarised statements from both  mothers
    from 7 July 2004 as indicated above.  There was a  certificate  from  a
    police officer in Colombia from 26 September 2005 saying the  appellant
    sends money for food for the appellants.  There is a statement from  28
    November 2005 from the mother of the first appellant saying the  father
    provides for him.  There is  a  declaration  by  a  police  officer  in
    Colombia dated 27 December 2005 reporting the sponsor's claim  that  he
    provided fully for the two appellants.

15. The Immigration Judge in the 2006 appeal set out his detailed  findings
    of fact and reasons as follows:

           "13.  I find that each of these  appellants  is  a  national  of
               Colombia and that they were born in  Colombia  to  different
               mothers.  I also  find  that  the  sponsor  is  a  Columbian
               national who came to the United Kingdom in  later  1999  and
               applied for asylum which he  was  granted.   Furthermore,  I
               find that the sponsor formed  a  close  association  with  a
               woman by the name of Maria Naomi, with whom he has lived  on
               a permanent basis in the same household since 1989 or  1990.
               They have had one son of their  relationship  who  was  born
               nine years ago called Jans.  The sponsor,  Maria  Naomi  and
               Jans lived together in the same  family  unit  in  Colombia.
               When the sponsor  fled  Colombia  and  came  to  the  United
               Kingdom, Maria Naomi and Jans eventually joined him  in  the
               United Kingdom some  ten  months  after  his  arrival  here.
               Maria Naomi and the sponsor married some five years ago  and
               have had a daughter of their relationship called Nadine  who
               also lives with them.  On  the  evidence  before  me,  which
               includes  the  interview  of  the   appellants'   respective
               mothers, I find that the appellants and their sponsor father
               have  never  lived  together  as  one  family   unit.    The
               appellants are the children  of  two  women  with  whom  the
               sponsor has had what can best be described as extra  marital
               affairs.  I find that the appellants and  the  sponsor  have
               never lived together as one family unit  either  with  their
               mothers or with the sponsor's present wife.   On  the  clear
               evidence before me,  at  the  time  of  his  departure  from
               Colombia the sponsor had created a family  unit  with  Maria
               Naomi and their son Jans.  There is evidence that there  has
               been a close relationship between the sponsor  and  the  two
               appellants.  To his credit the sponsor  has  clearly  always
               cared for his two sons, who still live  in  separate  family
               units with their mothers and other  relatives  in  Colombia,
               and he has no doubt a  strong  affective  relationship  with
               them.  Looking at paragraph 352D of Rule HC 395, I note that
               subparagraph (iv) of that paragraph requires each  of  these
               appellants to show that they were part of the 'family  unit'
               of the person granted asylum at the  time  that  the  person
               granted asylum left the country of his habitual residence in
               order to seek asylum in the United Kingdom.  I  cannot  give
               to the words "family unit" any other  interpretation  except
               its very natural interpretation of one  unit  as  a  family.
               The appellants have each lived with their mothers and  other
               relatives in  completely  separate  family  units  to  their
               sponsor father's family unit with his wife and  'legitimate'
               children.  At the time of his  departure  from  Colombia,  I
               find,  on  the  evidence  before  me,  on   a   balance   of
               probabilities that the appellants did not  live  with  their
               sponsor father as part of his "family unit"."


    Given those findings the Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal.


The Parties' Submissions

16. Mrs Hodgson on behalf of the appellants submits  that  the  Immigration
    Judge erred in his interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  "family  unit"
    within paragraph 352D(iv).  She regarded it as clear that the judge was
    limiting his definition of a family unit to those members of  a  family
    who lived together.  This interpretation or definition is she said  far
    too narrow.  In her grounds for review she said,

           "In particular it is submitted that  a  family  unit  should  be
           defined by the nature of the relationship.  It is submitted that
           to exclude automatically any family members (minors) who are not
           living with both parents altogether as a unit would exclude  any
           children of a refugee who is divorced, separated or unmarried to
           the mother of the child and did not,  for  very  valid  reasons,
           live with the children, and that this approach ignores  the  now
           common situation of the "fragmented" family."


17. It was argued that the purpose behind the provisions in paragraph  352D
    was to re-establish the basic family bonds of parents and children  and
    to re-unite  members  of  an  existing  family  who  have  by  dint  of
    circumstances become fragmented.  It  was  noted  that  the  judge  had
    accepted there has been a close relationship between the sponsor father
    and the two appellants.  The sponsor father had contributed financially
    and had lived close to the two appellants when in  Colombia  and  there
    had been a strong relationship.  The judge  it  was  said  should  have
    looked at the wider relationship between the appellants and the sponsor
    and the sponsor's wife and children  when  making  the  decision  about
    whether the two appellants were part of  the  sponsor  father's  family
    unit in Colombia.

18. We were taken to various  legal  dictionary  definitions  of  the  word
    "family".  There was however no definition anywhere  that  counsel  had
    been able to find of the words "family unit".

19. Reliance was placed  on  the  UNHCR  Handbook  and  in  particular  the
    guidance given in chapter VI entitled The Principle  of  Family  Unity.
    Paragraph 185 reads,

           "185  As to which family members may benefit from the  principle
               of family unity, the minimum requirement is the inclusion of
               the  spouse  and  minor  children.    In   practice,   other
               dependants, such as aged parents or  refugees  are  normally
               considered if they are living in the same household....  The
               principle of family unity operates in favour  of  dependants
               not against them."


    The two appellants are the minor children of  the  sponsor  father.   A
    strict application of the guidance given by the  UNHCR  ought  to  mean
    that they should be admitted to the UK  as  children  of  a  recognised
    refugee.


20. It was further argued that the bond between parent and child makes  for
    family unity.  It was said the evidence in  this  case  indicates  that
    when the sponsor father left Colombia in July 1999 he had a close  bond
    with the two appellants who were then six and nearly two.  The  purpose
    behind the promotion of family unity for refugees was the need for such
    a refugee to have the same enjoyment of family life as  before  leaving
    their home country.  It was  also  said  that  the  evidence,  the  two
    undated letters, points to the  two  appellants'  wish  to  join  their
    father and the mothers were willing for that to happen.

21. The respondent argued that the two appellants  were  not  part  of  the
    sponsor father's family unit when in Colombia.  Each lived with his own
    mother and each was part of a family  unit  containing  the  particular
    appellant's mother and in each case one or other of  his  grandparents.
    The blood relationship exists but there are here three separate  family
    units.  A blood tie is not of itself enough to enable the appellants to
    enter the United Kingdom under paragraph 352D merely because  they  are
    the children of a refugee.  If the Rule had  intended  that  any  minor
    child of a refugee would be entitled to join him in the United  Kingdom
    it would have said so.  The purpose of paragraph 352D(iv)  in  relation
    to a family unit was to allow a refugee to establish  in  the  UK  such
    family unit as was in place before.  When the father left  his  country
    of origin for the UK the two appellants were not in fact  part  of  the
    sponsor father's family unit and accordingly the Immigration Judge  was
    correct to dismiss the appeal.

Discussion

22. We were not assisted by any of the definitions of "family"  which  were
    put before us by counsel  nor  were  we  referred  to  any  case  which
    suggested a definition of "family unit" for the purposes of  the  Rule.
    We consider it right to approach  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  having
    regard to the context in which the Rule  is  made  and  to  the  policy
    purpose behind it.

23. The UNHCR Handbook quotes from the Final Act  of  the  Conference  that
    adopted the 1951 Refugee Convention as follows:

           "Recommends governments to take the necessary measures  for  the
           protection of the refugee's family especially  with  a  view  to
           .....


                  i) ensuring that the unity of  the  refugee's  family  is
                     maintained particularly in cases where the head of the
                     family has  fulfilled  the  necessary  conditions  for
                     admission to a particular country ............"


    It is clear in our judgement that various paragraphs in Part 11 of  the
    Immigration Rules under the general heading "Asylum"  are  designed  to
    implement that recommendation.  Paragraph 349 as  quoted  above  allows
    the inclusion in  a  refugee's  claim  for  asylum  of  minor  children
    accompanying him together with accompanying spouses or  civil  partners
    etc.  Under the heading "Unaccompanied Children" provision is made  for
    children seeking asylum in their own right but paragraph 352D sets  out
    the requirements to be met by a minor child seeking to  join  a  person
    who has already been granted asylum in the UK.   The  policy  of  these
    provisions is indeed to  promote  family  reunion.   But  the  question
    remains what is a "family unit".


24. It was argued before us that the decision by the Immigration  Judge  in
    the 2006 appeal appears to provide that a minor child can only  qualify
    for entry to the UK as a child of a person granted asylum if that child
    can show that he or she lived in  the  same  household  as  the  asylum
    seeker prior to him leaving his country of habitual residence.   We  do
    not agree that the determination can be read in that way.  It seems  to
    us that the judge was looking at the facts of this case and deciding as
    a matter of fact whether the two appellants were part  of  the  sponsor
    father's family unit in Colombia.  He decided that as a matter of  fact
    they were not.

25. We accept that if the phrase  "family  unit"  were  to  be  limited  to
    children who were living in the same  household  as  an  asylum  seeker
    prior to his leaving his country of habitual residence then  the  Rules
    could have said so.  We acknowledge that the concept  of  a  family  is
    very wide and depends crucially on the context in  which  the  word  is
    used.  Ascendant or descendant relatives, uncles, aunts and cousins are
    always likely to be regarded as members of the  same  family.   Whether
    they form part of a family unit will depend very much on the facts.   A
    so-called nuclear family is highly likely to be  a  family  unit.   The
    child of divorced parents who spends the bulk  of  his  time  with  his
    mother and otherwise has regular contact with his father is certain  to
    be part of the mother's family unit.  Whether at the same time  he  can
    be regarded as part of the father's family unit will depend  very  much
    on the particular facts of the case.

26. In this case the purpose of preserving family unity  was  promoted  and
    implemented by the decision at the request of  the  sponsor  father  to
    allow Maria Naomi and her son Jans with  whom  the  appellant  had  co-
    habited in Colombia to come to the United Kingdom as part of his family
    unit.  There was no such application at that time in respect of the two
    appellants who were held by the Immigration Judge to  have  lived  with
    their mothers.  The Immigration  Rules  are  understandably  silent  on
    whether it is right to promote a position  where  a  child  leaves  one
    undeniable family unit with his mother to join his father in the United
    Kingdom simply on the basis that the child is a  minor.   Wide  ranging
    child care and child protection issues are  likely  to  arise  where  a
    decision to grant entry clearance potentially lead to the break up of a
    different pre-existing family unit in the country of origin.

27. We regard the issue as to what is a "family unit" for the  purposes  of
    para 352D(iv) as a question of fact.  In many cases it  will  be  clear
    that a child was part of a family unit with an  asylum  seeker  in  his
    country of habitual residence.  The child  will  have  lived  with  the
    asylum seeker and perhaps another partner.  Alternatively if there  has
    been separation the reason for that separation may well  be  associated
    with the claim of persecution and a child might still  remain  part  of
    the family unit from which the potential refugee had  been  temporarily
    separated.  Here no such claim is made.

28. If on the other hand the separation is the result of social  choice  by
    the parties and a  separate  family  unit  based  upon  the  mother  is
    created, it will be correspondingly harder to establish that a child is
    in reality a  part  of  two  different  family  units.   This  will  be
    especially so if the  child  is  young  and  the  consequence  will  be
    separation from the mother rather than family unity as envisaged by the
    UNHCR handbook.

29. We are satisfied that  the  Immigration  Judge  approached  what  is  a
    factual decision in a proper way.   While  he  did  not  spell  it  out
    precisely we are satisfied that both of  these  children  are  now  and
    were, when the sponsor left Colombia in 1999, members of a family  unit
    consisting of their mother and the relevant grandparents.  The  sponsor
    father's family unit in Colombia was his now wife  and  his  son  Jans.
    Such close contact as there was with the six year old and two year  old
    appellant children in Colombia did not in the Immigration Judge's  view
    make them part of the sponsor father's family unit.  We agree with  the
    judge's assessment of the factual background.

30. We are reinforced in that view  by  the  decision  taken  in  the  2005
    appeal.  Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002]
    UKIAT 702;
     [2003] Imm AR 1 highlights the need to  use  factual  findings  in  an
    earlier appeal within this jurisdiction as a starting point for factual
    decisions to be made in a later appeal.  The first judge had before him
    the interviews with the two mothers which took place in 2004.   It  was
    open at that time to the sponsor father to  attend  and  give  evidence
    before the judge at the 2005 appeal  but  he  did  not.   Most  of  the
    written evidence that he has produced appears to have been available to
    him prior to that hearing in October 2005.  No reasons  have  been  put
    forward as to why the evidence was not  produced  at  the  2005  appeal
    hearing.  We consider the judge at the 2005 appeal reached the  correct
    conclusion on 352D in this case on the basis of the  evidence  he  had.
    The evidence was added to somewhat for the 2006  appeal  hearing.   The
    Immigration Judge in 2006 summarised all the evidence he received fully
    and clearly.  He reached  what  we  consider  to  be  a  wholly  proper
    decision on the factual position of the sponsor and the two appellants.
     We conclude that the Immigration Judge was correct to regard  the  two
    appellants as not being part of the father's family unit in Colombia.




31. In the circumstances and for the reasons given we do not consider  that
    the Tribunal in the 2006 appeal made a material error of law and so the
    original determination dismissing the appellants' appeals stands.




                                                            MR JUSTICE HODGE
                                                                   PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:  5 June
                                                   2007
