
[pic]
First Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Cancino (costs - First-tier Tribunal - new powers) [2015] UKFTT 00059 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House, London                 |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 18 December 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

           Mr Justice McCloskey, President of the Upper Tribunal,
               sitting as a Judge of the First - tier Tribunal

                                     and

              The President, First-tier Tribunal, Mr M Clements

                                   Between

                           ERNESTO GARCIA CANCINO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Ms J Fisher (of Counsel) instructed by Visa Legal Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


[1]  Rule 9 of the 2014 Rules operates in conjunction  with  section  29  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

[2]  The only powers to award fees or  costs  available  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT") are those contained in  Rule  9  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 (the "2014 Rules").

[3]  Transitionally, Rule 9 of the 2014 Rules applies only to appeals
    coming into existence subsequent to the commencement date of 20 October
    2014.  It has no application to appeals predating this date.

[4]  It is essential to be alert  to  the  distinctions  between  the  costs
    awarding powers contained in Rule 9(2)(a) and Rule 9(2)(b) of the  2014
    Rules.

[5]  Awards of costs are always  discretionary,  even  in  cases  where  the
    qualifying conditions are satisfied.

[6]  In the ordinary course of events, where any of the offending  types  of
    conduct to which either Rule 9(2)(a) or Rule 9(2)(b) of the 2014  Rules
    applies, the FtT will normally exercise its discretion to make an order
    against the defaulting representative or party.

[7]  The onus rests on the party applying for an order under Rule 9.

[8]  There must be a causal nexus between the conduct in  question  and  the
    wasted costs claimed.

[9]  One of the supreme governing principles is  that  every  case  will  be
    unavoidably fact sensitive.  Accordingly, comparisons with other  cases
    will normally be inappropriate.

[10] Orders  for costs under Rule 9 will be very much the exception,  rather
    than the rule and will be reserved to the clearest cases.

[11] Rule  9  of  the  2014  Rules  applies  to  conduct,  whether  acts  or
    omissions, belonging to the period  commencing  on  the  date  when  an
    appeal comes into existence  and  ending  on  the  date  of  the  final
    determination thereof.

[12] The procedure for determining applications under Rule  9  of  the  2014
    Rules will be governed in the  main  by  the  principles  of  fairness,
    expedition and proportionality.


                           DECISION ON COSTS

Introduction

 1. This  is  the  judgment  of  the  panel  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed.   This  appeal,  the  substantive  disposal  whereof   was
    completed on 20 October 2014,  has  been  listed  for  the  purpose  of
    determining  the  Appellant's  application  for   costs   against   the
    Respondent (hereinafter the "Secretary of State").   Furthermore,  this
    case has been selected for the purpose of  providing  guidance  on  the
    exercise of the recently acquired power of the First-tier Tribunal (the
    "FtT") to award costs in certain circumstances.

The FtT's Power to Award Costs

 2. Until recently, the FtT was endowed with the  limited  power  to  award
    costs contained in the now repealed  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005, rule 23A whereof, operative  from  19  December
    2011, provided:

         "(1) Except as provided for in paragraph (2), the Tribunal may  not
             make an order in respect of costs (or, in Scotland,  expenses)
             pursuant  to  section  29  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
             Enforcement Act 2007 (Power to Award Costs).

         (2)  If the Tribunal allows an appeal, it may order the  respondent
             to pay to the appellant an amount no greater than -


               a) Any fee paid under  the  Fees  Order  that  has  not  been
                  refunded; and


               b) any fee which the appellant is or may  be  liable  to  pay
                  under that Order."

    Thus the FtT was enabled,  through  the  exercise  of  a  discretionary
    power, to order the Respondent to pay the successful Appellant's  fees.
    There was no costs awarding power.


 3. With effect from 20 October 2014, the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  (the  "2014
    Rules") came  into  operation,  in  substitution  for  the  predecessor
    regime.  Rule  9(1)  of  the  2014  Rules  replicates   precisely   its
    predecessor, Rule 23A of the (now superseded) 2005 Rules.  It provides:



         "(1) If the Tribunal allows an appeal, it may order a respondent to
             pay by way of costs to the Appellant an amount no greater than
             -


              (a) Any fee paid under  the  Fees  Order  that  has  not  been
             refunded; and


             (b)  any fee which the appellant is or may be  liable  to  pay
             under that Order."

    Rule 9(2) contains the  new  power  to  award  costs.  It  provides  in
material part:


         "(2) The Tribunal may otherwise make an order in respect  of  costs
only -

               a) Under section 29(4) of the 2007  Act  (wasted  costs)  and
                  costs incurred in applying for such costs; or


               b) if a person has acted unreasonably in bringing,  defending
                  or conducting proceedings."

    The whole of Rule 9 is reproduced in Appendix 1.  The new framework has
    two other basic components of which judges and  practitioners  must  be
    aware.  The first is the Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1  of  2014,
    paragraphs 29 - 35 whereof are contained in Appendix 2  hereto.   There
    is also a relevant provision of primary legislation, namely section  29
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, which provides:


         "(1) The costs of and incidental to-

             (a)  all proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal, and

             (b)  all proceedings in the Upper Tribunal, shall  be  in  the
                  discretion of the Tribunal in which the  proceedings  take
                  place.

         (2)  The relevant Tribunal shall have full power  to  determine  by
             whom and to what extent the costs are to be paid.

         (3)  Subsections (1)  and  (2)  have  effect  subject  to  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules.

         (4)  In any proceedings mentioned in subsection (1),  the  relevant
             Tribunal may-

             (a)  disallow, or

             (b)   (as  the  case  may  be)  order  the  legal   or   other
                  representative concerned to meet, the whole of any  wasted
                  costs or such  part  of  them  as  may  be  determined  in
                  accordance with Tribunal Procedure Rules.

         (5)  In subsection (4) "wasted costs" means any costs incurred by a
    party-

             (a)  as a result of any improper,  unreasonable  or  negligent
                  act or  omission  on  the  part  of  any  legal  or  other
                  representative or any employee of such a   representative,
                  or

             (b)  which, in the light of any such act or omission occurring
                  after they were incurred, the relevant Tribunal  considers
                  it is unreasonable to expect that party to pay.

         (6)  In this section "legal or other representative",  in  relation
             to a party to proceedings, means any person exercising a right
             of audience or right to conduct the proceedings on his behalf.

         (7)  In the application of this section in  relation  to  Scotland,
             any reference in this section to costs is  to  be  read  as  a
             reference to expenses."

    This is reproduced in Appendix 3.  We shall comment further on  section
    29 infra.

 4. As regards proceedings in the Upper Tribunal, the relevant provision is
    rule 10  of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  as
    amended, (contained in Appendix 4 hereto) which, so  far  as  material,
    provides as follows:

         "10.-(1) The Upper Tribunal may not make an  order  in  respect  of
         costs (or, in Scotland, expenses) in  proceedings  [transferred  or
         referred by, or on appeal from,] another tribunal except-

         (3) In other proceedings, the Upper Tribunal may not make an  order
         in respect of costs or expenses except-


         ....

              (c)  under section 29(4) of the 2007 Act (wasted  costs)  [and
             costs incurred in applying for such costs];


             (d)  if the Upper Tribunal  considers  that  a  party  or  its
             representative has acted unreasonably in  bringing,  defending
             or conducting the proceedings."


    Thus rule 10(3)(a) of the Upper Tribunal Rules mirrors rule 9(2)(a)  of
    the 2014 Rules.  However,  it  is  noteworthy  that  rule  10(3)(d)  is
    couched  in  slightly  different  language,  extending  to  a   party's
    representative.

    Exclusivity

 5. Judges and practitioners should be aware that rule 9 of the 2014  Rules
    contains the only powers to award costs exercisable by the  FtT.   Thus
    rule 9 establishes an exclusive regime.  These powers are not amplified
    in any way by section 29 of the  2007  Act.   This  is  the  effect  of
    section 29(3).  However, rule 9 and  section  29  co-exist.   We  shall
    elaborate on the nature of this relationship below.


    Discretion


 6. In every case where the FtT is contemplating either a fee award  or  an
    award of costs under rule 9, the Judge must be aware that a  discretion
    is being exercised.  This flows from the language of section 29 of  the
    2007 Act and rule 9 itself.  Judges  should  bear  in  mind  that  this
    discretion is to be exercised judicially.  Thus its exercise is  to  be
    informed  by  taking  into  account  all  material  considerations  and
    disregarding any alien, or immaterial, factors.  Furthermore,  it  must
    be exercised in  good  faith  and  in  furtherance  of  the  underlying
    statutory purpose.  The power must not be exercised irrationally.   And
    it must be exercised in a procedurally fair manner.  In short,  all  of
    the familiar standards and constraints of public law are engaged.


 7. Judges must also bear in mind that where they are  persuaded  that  the
    relevant qualifying condition is satisfied, the making of a costs order
    does not follow inexorably.  Rather, it is discretionary.   Under  rule
    9(2)(a), the qualifying condition is that the party seeking  the  order
    has incurred costs  as  a  result  of  any  improper,  unreasonable  or
    negligent  act  or  omission  on  the  part  of  any  legal  or   other
    representative or any employee of such a  representative.   Under  rule
    9(2)(b),  the  qualifying  condition  is  that  a  person   has   acted
    unreasonably in bringing, defending or conducting  proceedings.   There
    is a further, discrete discretion to be exercised.  This relates to the
    amount of costs to be specified in any order made under either limb  of
    rule 9.  We consider that, as a general rule, where it is  demonstrated
    that a measurable amount of costs has been incurred as a result of  the
    offending act or omission of the party or representative concerned, the
    whole of such amount should be specified in the order.  However, Judges
    must be aware that this does not follow automatically  and  that  there
    may be cases where, reasonably and justifiably, the order  specifies  a
    lesser sum.


 8. As the analysis in [7] above  demonstrates,  each  case  in  which  the
    exercise of either of the powers enshrined in rule  9(2)  of  the  2014
    Rules will be intensely fact sensitive.   This  consideration  will  be
    dominant in every case.  Thus comparisons with other cases in which the
    power has, or has not, been exercised are unlikely to  be  informative.
    Furthermore, there is a distinct risk that they will  suffer  from  the
    disadvantage of being anecdotal and/or  unreliable  and/or  incomplete.
    Accordingly, attempts to introduce comparisons with other cases  should
    normally be discouraged by Judges.


    Fee Awards


 9. The power to award fees is unchanged.  Rule  9(1)  replicates  verbatim
    rule 23A(2) of the former regime.  As before, this power is exercisable
    only where the appeal succeeds.  In such cases, an award of fees, of an
    amount up to  but  not  exceeding  the  fee  paid,  to  the  successful
    appellant does not follow as a matter of course. Rather,   there  is  a
    discretion to be  exercised.   This  discretion,  in  common  with  all
    discretions belonging to the domain of public law,  must  be  exercised
    taking into  account  all  material  considerations,  disregarding  all
    immaterial factors, in pursuit of  a  proper  purpose  and  within  the
    bounds of rationality.  As a general rule, the FtT, while always  being
    cognisant that a discretion is being exercised, may be expected to make
    a fee award in favour of a successful appellant. In  the  interests  of
    practical   and   efficient   case   management,    the    Respondent's
    representative should, at the conclusion of the hearing,  identify  any
    facts or factors which are said to warrant displacement of this general
    rule.  There will, in effect, be a presumption - rebuttable  -  that  a
    fees recovery order will be made in respect of a successful  appellant.
    Finally, we take  this  opportunity  to  remind  Judges  of  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance relating to fee awards (Appendix 5 hereto).


    Rule 9 (2)(a)


10. Rule 9(2) confers on the FtT two substantive, separate  costs  awarding
    powers. The first is a power  that  "wasted  costs"  are  to  be  paid.
    Wasted costs, by virtue of the statutory definition (supra), are  costs
    incurred by a party as  a  result  of  any  improper,  unreasonable  or
    negligent  act  or  omission  on  the  part  of  any  legal  or   other
    representative or any  employee  of  such  a  representative  or  costs
    incurred by a party which, in the light of any  such  act  or  omission
    occurring  after  they  were  incurred,  the  Tribunal   considers   it
    unreasonable to expect that party to pay. Careful   attention  must  be
    paid to the definition of "wasted costs" in section 29(5) of  the  2007
    Act.  This  replicates verbatim that contained in section 51(7) of  the
    Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1981 (inserted  by  section  4  of  the
    Courts and Legal Services Act 1990). It is worthy  of  note  that  this
    amended provision was introduced in the wake  of  the  White  Paper  on
    Legal Services (CM 740 1989), which expressed the  view  that  adequate
    remedies should  be  available  to  enable  the  Courts  to  deal  with
    unsatisfactory work by lawyers. The statutory amendment  introduced  in
    1990 extended the power to make wasted costs orders against  solicitors
    only to encompass all litigators and  all  advocates.  In  The  Supreme
    Court Practice 1999, Volume 2, one finds the following  commentary,  at
    paragraph 20A(403):

         "The definition of 'wasted costs' given in section  51(7)  shows  a
         preference for a version of the harsher tests found in recent  case
         law; it does not require a showing of misconduct or  gross  neglect
         but is, at its lowest, a negligence test."

         [Emphasis added.]

    Thus the twofold policy of the legislation was to lower  the  threshold
    for making a wasted costs order and to enlarge  the  class  of  persons
    against whom such order could be made.


11. Attention must also be paid  to  the  definition  of  "legal  or  other
    representative" in section 29(6) of the  2007  Act.   This  means  "any
    person  exercising  a  right  of  audience  or  right  to  conduct  the
    proceedings on his behalf".   This  definition  clearly  embraces  Home
    Office Presenting Officers.   However, we consider  that  it  does  not
    extend to unrepresented litigants or "Mackenzie" friends.  We also draw
    attention to the words "or any  employee  of  such  a  representative".
    Thus  it  will  be  no  defence  for  a  solicitor  to  seek  to  avoid
    responsibility  by  inculpating  another   solicitor   or   member   of
    secretarial or administrative staff employed by him. The responsibility
    is both personal and vicarious. Whether this  discrete  aspect  of  the
    definition includes, for example, a fellow partner or an employee of  a
    partnership are issues which may foreseeably arise and will have to  be
    determined when they materialise.

12. When considering whether to  make  a  wasted  costs  order  under  rule
    9(2)(a), the following golden rules must be observed:


    (a)  The Tribunal must be alert to the definition of "wasted costs"  in
         section 29(5) of the 2007 Act.

     (b) A discretion is being exercised: there are no rights in play.

    (c)  The discretion is to be exercised judicially.  Fundamentally  this
         requires  the  Tribunal  to  take   into   account   all   material
         considerations, to  disregard  everything  immaterial  and  to  act
         within the constraints of rationality.

    (d)  If the Tribunal finds, giving effect to the statutory  definition,
         that wasted costs have been occurred, an order does not follow as a
         matter of course: rather, the order is discretionary.


    (e)  The Tribunal must be alert to Presidential Guidance Note Number  1
         of 2014 (Appendix 4 hereto).

    (f)  Rule 9 must not be considered in isolation: rather, it operates in
         the context of the overriding objective enshrined in rule 2(2) and,
         specifically, it is incumbent on  the  Tribunal  to  seek  to  give
         effect  thereto  when  considering  the  exercise  of  the   powers
         contained in rule 9.

13. The leading authority on  wasted  costs  orders  continues  to  be  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Ridehalgh  v  Horsefield  [1994]  Ch
    205.  As this decision emphasises, the jurisdiction to make   a  wasted
    costs order is directed to the representatives  of  a  party.   In  the
    context of Tribunal proceedings, the  definition  of  "legal  or  other
    representative" in section 29(6) of the  2007  Act  must  be  carefully
    respected.  The Court  formulated the general principle in  play  thus,
    at 225f:

         "Solicitors and barristers may in certain circumstances be  ordered
         to compensate a party to litigation other than the client for  whom
         they act for costs incurred by that party as a result of acts  done
         or omitted by the solicitors or barristers in their conduct of  the
         litigation."

    As regards taxonomy, it is conduct of this kind which is under scrutiny
    in every case where a wasted costs order is contemplated. The Court  of
    Appeal (at 226b) identified that  two  public  interests,  existing  in
    tension rather than in harmony, are engaged  by  every  court's  wasted
    costs jurisdiction. The first, in summary, is that lawyers  should  not
    be deterred from pursuing their client's interests by fear of incurring
    a personal liability to their client's adversary.  The second  is  that
    litigants should not be financially  prejudiced  by  the  unjustifiable
    conduct of litigation by their adversary or their adversary's lawyers.

14. In its judgment, the Court of Appeal traced the history of  the  wasted
    costs jurisdiction. This included in particular a decision of the House
    of Lords in Myers v Elman [1940] AC 282  which  is  authority  for  the
    following propositions:

    (a)  The Court's jurisdiction to make a wasted costs  order  against  a
         solicitor is quite  distinct  from  the  disciplinary  jurisdiction
         exercised over solicitors.

    (b)  Whereas a  disciplinary  order  against  a  solicitor  requires  a
         finding that he has been personally guilty of serious  professional
         misconduct the making of a wasted costs order does not.

    (c)  The Court's jurisdiction to make a wasted costs  order  against  a
         solicitor is founded on breach of the duty owed by the solicitor to
         the Court to perform his  duty  as  an  officer  of  the  Court  in
         promoting within his own sphere the cause of justice.

    (d)  To show a breach of that duty it is  not  necessary  to  establish
         dishonesty, criminal conduct, personal obliquity or behaviour  such
         as would warrant striking a solicitor off  the  roll.   While  mere
         mistake  or  error  of  judgement  would  not  justify  an   order,
         misconduct, default or even negligence is enough if the  negligence
         is serious or gross.

         (e)  The jurisdiction is compensatory and not merely punitive.

    This decision, in retrospect, may rightly  be  considered  enlightened.
    It was pronounced in an era when there was no overriding objective  and
    when litigation was substantially less voluminous than today.  Notably,
    the principles enunciated  by  their  Lordships  were  founded  on  the
    solicitor's duty to the Court.  One can also identify in  the  speeches
    traces of what, with the passage of time,  became  the  more  developed
    doctrine of misuse of the Court's process.  Several decades  later,  of
    course, the power to make a wasted costs order became  regulated  by  a
    combination of statute and rules of Court.  One  particular  aspect  of
    these reforms was to extend the liability to an order of this Court  to
    representatives other than solicitors.

15. As the historical review in Ridehalgh shows, there  is  one  especially
    noteworthy feature of the progressive regulation of the jurisdiction of
    the High Court to make  a  wasted  costs  order  against  a  solicitor.
    Whereas the original wording of the relevant provision - order 62, rule
    8(1) of the Rules of the Supreme Court  -  employed  (inter  alia)  the
    language "misconduct or default", in 1960, this was  omitted  when  the
    rule was amended in 1986 by order 62, rule  11,  which  introduced  the
    criterion  of  a  failure  to  conduct  proceedings  "with   reasonable
    competence and expedition".  Thus a wasted costs order could be made by
    reference to the ordinary standard of negligence, rather than a  higher
    standard requiring proof of gross neglect  or  serious  dereliction  of
    duty.  The next significant development  occurred  in  1990,  as  noted
    above, when section 4 of the Courts and Legal Services Act  substituted
    a new section 51 in the Supreme Court Act 1981.  This was  followed  by
    an appropriate amendment of order 62, rule 11.

16. The history outlined above was considered by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Ridehalgh v Horsefield, prompting the  following  observation  by  Lord
    Bingham MR, at  231d :

         "There can in our view be no room  for  doubt  about  the  mischief
         against which these new provisions were aimed: this was the causing
         of loss and expense to litigants by the  unjustifiable  conduct  of
         litigation by their  or  the  other  side's  lawyers.   Where  such
         conduct is shown, Parliament clearly intended  to  arm  the  Courts
         with an effective remedy for the protection of those injured."

    For present purposes, the most significant feature of the  decision  in
    Ridehalgh  is  that  it  provides  authoritative  construction  of  the
    statutory terminology - in section 51(7) of the Supreme Court Act  1981
    - which was replicated verbatim in section 29(5) of the 2007 Act which,
    in turn, forms an intrinsic part of the regime established by rule 9 of
    the 2014 Rules.  The Court of Appeal said the following, at 232d/h:


         "Improper means what it has been understood to mean in this context
         for at least half a century.  The  adjective  covers,  but  is  not
         confined to, conduct which would  ordinarily  be  held  to  justify
         disbarment, striking off, suspension from practice or other serious
         professional penalty.   It  covers  any  significant  breach  of  a
         substantial  duty  imposed  by  a  relevant  code  of  professional
         conduct.  But it is not in our judgement limited to that.   Conduct
         which would be regarded as improper according to the  consensus  of
         professional (including judicial) opinion can be fairly stigmatised
         as such whether or not it violates the  letter  of  a  professional
         code .......


         Unreasonable also means what it has been understood to mean in this
         context  for  at  least  half  a  century.   The  expression  aptly
         describes conduct which is vexatious, designed to harass the  other
         side rather than advance the resolution of the case and it makes no
         difference that the conduct is the product of  excessive  zeal  and
         not  improper  motive.   But  conduct  cannot   be   described   as
         unreasonable  simply  because  it  leads  in  the   event   to   an
         unsuccessful  result  or  because   other   more   cautious   legal
         representatives would have acted differently.   The  acid  test  is
         whether the conduct permits of a reasonable  explanation.   If  so,
         the course adopted may be regarded  as optimistic and as reflecting
         on a practitioner's judgment, but it is not unreasonable ..........


         We are clear that negligent should be understood in an  untechnical
         way to denote failure to act with the competence reasonably  to  be
         expected of ordinary members of the profession ................  We
         would however wish firmly to discountenance any suggestion that  an
         applicant for a wasted costs  order  under  this  head  need  prove
         anything less than  he  would  have  to  prove  in  an  action  for
         negligence."

         [Emphasis added.]

    The Court then noted that, pursuant to the decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in Saif Ali  v Sidney Mitchell [1980] AC 198, the standard in  an
    action for negligence against a solicitor is "advice, acts or omissions
    in the course of  their  professional  work  which  no  member  of  the
    profession who was reasonably well informed and  competent  would  have
    given or done or omitted to do."  (At page 218D, per Lord Diplock.)

17. There is one additional feature of note in the decision  in  Ridehalgh.
    The Court of  Appeal  declined  the  invitation  to  provide  any  more
    comprehensive definition of the three adjectives in  question  and,  in
    particular, to accord to each a self  contained  meaning.   Its  reason
    clearly was that the three  species  of  unacceptable  conduct  do  not
    belong to hermetically sealed compartments.  As a result, depending  of
    course on the context,  conduct  which  is  unreasonable  may  also  be
    improper  and  conduct  which  is  negligent   will   very   often   be
    unreasonable.

18. We have dwelt at some length on the decision in Ridehalgh  in  view  of
    its unbroken nexus with rule 9 of the 2014 Rules.  The primary guidance
    which the decision provides  is  set  out  above.   The  decision  also
    provides guidance on certain ancillary issues of some importance.   The
    first, already highlighted in [6] above, is the discretionary nature of
    the jurisdiction.  Per Sir Thomas Bingham MR, at 239e:

         "Even if the Court is satisfied that  a  legal  representative  has
         acted improperly, unreasonably or negligently and that such conduct
         has caused the otherside to incur an  identifiable  sum  of  wasted
         costs, it is not bound to make an order, but in that  situation  it
         would of course have to give sustainable reasons for exercising its
         discretion against making an order."


    It seems to us uncontroversial to suggest that, in the ordinary  course
    of  events,  where  any  of  the  types  of  unacceptable  conduct   is
    demonstrated, together with the requisite causal nexus, the  discretion
    will be exercised  by  making  a  wasted  costs  order.   However,  the
    Tribunal will have to be alert that the context is one of discretionary
    choice, rather than obligation. It should also bear in  mind  the  sage
    observation of Lord Rodger in Medcalf v Weatheril [2003] 1 AC  120,  at
    [76]:


         "All kinds of mitigatory  circumstances  may  be  relevant  to  the
         exercise of that discretion."


    Secondly, it is clear that where a wasted costs order  is  sought,  the
    onus rests on the party making the application: see Ridehalgh, at 239C,
    later endorsed in Medcalf at [40], per Lord Steyn.   Thirdly,  where  a
    wasted costs application  is  made  against  a   representative,  legal
    professional privilege may, in certain contexts, arise.  The  privilege
    is, of course, that of the client and, hence,  can  be  waived  by  the
    client only.  The decisions in Ridehalgh  and  Medcalf  both  recognise
    that,  in  certain  circumstances,  this  may   result   in   a   legal
    representative being at a grave  disadvantage  in  resisting  a  wasted
    costs application.  The solution is framed in the following terms:


         "Judges who are invited to make  or  contemplate  making  a  wasted
         costs  order  must  make  full  allowance  for  the  inability   of
         respondent lawyers to tell the whole story. Where there is room for
         doubt, the respondent lawyers are entitled to the  benefit  of  it.
         It is again only when, with all allowances made, a lawyer's conduct
         of proceedings is  quite  plainly  unjustifiable  that  it  can  be
         appropriate to make a wasted costs order."

     See Ridehalgh, at pages 236 - 237, endorsed in Medcalf at [61].

    Fourthly, there must be a causal nexus between the unacceptable conduct
    alleged and the wasted costs claimed: Ridehalgh at page 237.   Fifthly,
    where a solicitor wishes to advance, in defence or mitigation, reliance
    on the advice of Counsel  this  may  be  relevant,  particularly  where
    specialist advice is concerned: Ridehalgh, at page 237.

19. The decision in Ridehalgh also endorses the adoption of a  three  stage
    test when a wasted costs application is made:

    (i)  Has the legal representative  of  whom  complaint  is  made  acted
         improperly, unreasonably or negligently?

         (ii)  If  so,  did  such  conduct  cause  the  applicant  to  incur
unnecessary costs?

    (iii)    If so, is it in all the circumstances  of  the  case  just  to
         order the legal representative to compensate the applicant for  the
         whole or any part of the relevant costs?

    We consider that the same approach should be  adopted  in  applications
    for an order under Rule 9 of the 2014 Rules.

20. One of the discrete issues addressed in Ridehalgh is worthy of separate
    and  specific  consideration.   It  concerns  the  vulnerability  of  a
    representative to  a  wasted  costs  order  in  circumstances  where  a
    hopeless case has  been  pursued.   The  principle  enunciated  in  the
    judgment is crystal clear:

         "A legal representative is not to be held to have acted improperly,
         unreasonably or negligently simply because he acts for a party  who
         pursues a claim or a defence which is plainly doomed to fail."

         (Per Sir Thomas Bingham MR at page 234.)

         The rationale of this principle is the following:

         "Legal representatives  will,  of  course,  whether  barristers  or
         solicitors, advise clients of the perceived weakness of their  case
         and of the risk of failure.  But clients are free to reject  advice
         and insist that cases be litigated.  It is rarely,  if  ever,  safe
         for a Court to assume that a hopeless case is  being  litigated  on
         the advice of the lawyers involved."

              [At page 234, emphasis added.]

    This passage highlights the distinction  which  must  be  observed,  in
    appropriate cases, between the conduct of a representative and that  of
    the legal representative's client viz a party to the  proceedings.   In
    practice, the client will almost invariably be  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the FtT.  This distinction underlines one of the key
    differences between rule 9(2)(a) and rule 9(2)(b) of  the  2014  Rules.
    Cases  in  which  there  is  a  finding  by  the  FtT  that   a   legal
    representative knowingly promoted  and  encouraged  the  pursuit  of  a
    hopeless appeal, thereby warranting a wasted  costs  order  under  rule
    9(2)(a), are likely to be rare.  Furthermore,  in  any  case  where  an
    assertion of such conduct is made, the Tribunal  should  be  especially
    alert that the burden rests on the moving party and  will  examine  the
    supporting evidence scrupulously.


21.  As the remainder of this passage makes clear, conduct on the part of  a
    legal or other representative which lapses into the  abyss  of  abusing
    (or misusing) the process of the Tribunal will not be insulated against
    a wasted costs order under rule 9(2)(a).   However, the  Tribunal  must
    always  be  alert  to  distinguish   between   the   conduct   of   the
    representative (on the  one  hand)  and  the  client  (on  the  other).
    Furthermore, it is not the function of the Tribunal to conduct  a  full
    scale disciplinary investigation, not least because it is not  equipped
    with the resources or expertise to do so.  Rather,  the  Tribunal  must
    confine itself to the evidence available to it, bearing in mind  always
    that the onus of proof rests on the moving party.  See  also,  in  this
    respect, Re O (A Minor) (Wasted Costs Application) [1994]  2  FLR  842.
    The passage in Persaud v Persaud [2003] EWCA Civ 394, at [24], on which
    reliance was placed in argument on behalf of the Respondent, is  to  be
    understood in this way.  Insofar as it was further argued that a wasted
    costs  order  can  be  made  only  where  a  representative's   conduct
    constitutes an abuse of the Court or Tribunal,  we  cannot  agree.  The
    context  in  which  this  issue  was  addressed  in  Ridehalgh  is  all
    important.  Properly understood, this serves to illuminate and  confine
    the passage in Mitchells Solicitors v Funkwerk Information Technologies
    [2008] UKEAT 0541, at [28], on which the Respondent also relied.

22. As the combined researches of both  parties'  representatives  in  this
    case have demonstrated, there are many judicial decisions belonging  to
    this sphere.  In our exposition of the governing  principles,  we  have
    quite deliberately confined ourselves to the two  leading  authorities,
    namely  Ridehalgh  and  Medcalf.   For  the  reasons  explained,  these
    authorities have a direct bearing on rule 9  of  the  2014  Rules  and,
    further, being decisions of the Court of Appeal  are  binding  on  this
    Tribunal.  A correct appreciation of the doctrine of precedent  on  the
    part of both representatives and Tribunals will,  we  trust,  serve  to
    discourage any temptation to embark upon detailed examinations of other
    decided cases in the determination of wasted costs applications.   This
    is unlikely to serve any useful purpose, descending into the less  than
    fruitful exercise of simply comparing the facts  of  the  instant  case
    with those of other cases.   While  exercises  of  this  kind  are,  as
    emphasised above, generally arid and frequently unreliable, they suffer
    from the further infirmity  of  misunderstanding  and  misapplying  the
    doctrine of precedent.


    Rule 9 (2)(b)


23. The power contained in rule 9(2)(b) is framed in language which differs
    from that of rule 9(2)(a).  Its  focus  is  that  of  parties.   It  is
    concerned only with one species of unacceptable  conduct,  namely  that
    which is unreasonable.   We  consider  that  the  question  of  whether
    conduct is unreasonable under this limb of rule 9 is to  be  determined
    precisely  in  accordance  with  the   principles   which   relate   to
    unreasonable conduct under rule 9(2)(a).  We find nothing in either the
    2007 Act or the rule itself to suggest otherwise.  Thus the basic  test
    will be whether there is a reasonable explanation for the conduct under
    scrutiny.   We  consider  that  the  words  "a   person"   include   an
    unrepresented litigant.  However, they do not extend to  a  "Mackenzie"
    friend.


24. The scope of rule 9(2)(b) is identifiable by listing the several  types
    of enquiry which, depending on the context,  may  be  required  of  the
    Tribunal.  These are:


     a. Has the Appellant acted unreasonably in bringing an appeal?


     b. Has the Appellant acted unreasonably in his conduct of the appeal?

     c. Has the Respondent acted unreasonably in defending the appeal?

     d. Has the Respondent acted unreasonably in conducting its defence of
        the appeal?


    The rule clearly embraces the whole of  the  "proceedings".   Thus  the
    period potentially under scrutiny begins on the  date  when  an  appeal
    comes into existence and ends when the appeal is finally determined  in
    the Tribunal in question.  It embraces all aspects of  the  Appellant's
    conduct in pursuing the appeal and  all  aspects  of  the  Respondent's
    conduct in defending  it.   This,  clearly,  encompasses  interlocutory
    applications and hearings and case management hearings.


25. While reiterating our emphasis on the fact sensitive  nature  of  every
    case, the following illustrations may be of assistance to Tribunals  in
    deciding whether to exercise the discretionary power conferred by  rule
    9(2)(b):

    (i)  Concessions are an  important  part  of  contemporary  litigation,
        particularly in the overburdened realm of  immigration  and  asylum
        appeals.   In  appeals  which  must  be   heard   and   determined,
        concessions on factual issues bearing on the appeal can be of great
        assistance to judges and, simultaneously, further  several  aspects
        of the overriding objective.  Occasionally, a concession may extend
        to abandoning an appeal  (by  the  Appellant)  or  withdrawing  the
        impugned  decision  (by  the   Respondent).    We   consider   that
        applications for costs against a  representative  or  party  should
        not be routine in these circumstances.  Rule 9  cannot  be  invoked
        without good reason.  To do otherwise would be to  abuse  this  new
        provision.   Accordingly,  representatives  or  parties   must   be
        conscientiously satisfied that it is appropriate to  have  recourse
        to the rule.  This  will  require,  in  every  case,  a  considered
        decision dictated by the standards, principles and  constraints  of
        good professional practice.  In every case, the fundamental enquiry
        for the Tribunal will be why the withdrawal has  occurred,  coupled
        with the related enquiry of why  it  did  not  materialise  sooner.
        This draws attention to the intrinsically fact sensitive nature  of
        every appeal.


    (ii) Subject to the above, the  belated  withdrawal  of  an  appeal  is
        unlikely to be adequately explained on the bare ground  that  legal
        advice was to  this  effect,  particularly  if  the  Appellant  was
        legally represented from the outset.  On the other hand,  a  change
        of representative  or the late engagement of  a  lawyer  might,  in
        appropriate cases, provide  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  this
        course.  Judges will be alert to the balance to be struck so as  to
        ensure that withdrawals are not discouraged.


    (iii)     A belated withdrawal of a Home Office decision is unlikely to
        be satisfactorily explained simply on the basis of  the  timing  of
        the Presenting Officer's involvement.  The Home Office is  a  large
        government department and the belated commendable conduct of one of
        its servants cannot, in this context, excuse or justify the acts or
        omissions of others  at  earlier  stages  of  the  appeal  process.
        Absent exceptional factors  or  circumstances,  a  protestation  of
        inadequate resources will be unyielding in this context.   Striking
        the appropriate balance as in (ii) above will be necessary.


    (iv) Where a Tribunal is satisfied that an appeal has been withdrawn as
        a result of the belated production of documents or  other  evidence
        by the Respondent, this could, in  certain  circumstances,  justify
        the  consequential  assessment  that  the  Respondent   had   acted
        unreasonably in conducting  its  defence  of  the  appeal,  thereby
        attracting a costs order against the Respondent under rule 9(2)(b).




    (v)  The converse applies, in principle.   Thus  where  a  Tribunal  is
        satisfied that the Respondent has withdrawn the  impugned  decision
        as a result of  the  belated  production  of  evidence  or  witness
        statements on behalf of  the  Appellant,  particularly  where  this
        involves a breach of case management directions, an order for costs
        under either limb of rule 9 could be  appropriate.   As  ever,  the
        specific context will be determinative.

26. As regards unrepresented litigants, we  consider  it  inappropriate  to
    attempt comprehensive and prescriptive guidance.  While reiterating the
    importance of the fact sensitive nature of  each  individual  case,  we
    confine ourselves to the following general  observations.   First,  the
    conduct  of  litigants  in  person  cannot  normally  be  evaluated  by
    reference to  the  standards  of  qualified  lawyers.   Thus  the  same
    standard of reasonableness cannot generally be applied.  On  the  other
    hand, the status of unrepresented  litigants  cannot  be  permitted  to
    operate as a carte blanche to misuse the process of the Tribunal.   The
    appropriate balance must be struck in every case.  In  conducting  this
    exercise, Tribunals will be alert to the distinction between pursuing a
    doomed appeal in the teeth of legal advice and doing  likewise  without
    the benefit thereof.  Judges will bear in mind that  the  consideration
    that appeals to the FtT are pursued in  the  exercise  of  a  statutory
    right is likely to carry greater weight in the  case  of  unrepresented
    litigants.  On the other hand, judges will also be alert to those cases
    where it is clear that a litigant whilst having  no  representative  on
    record has no formal or  official  legal  representative  has  had  the
    benefit of legal advice from some quarter.  This phenomenon,  where  it
    occurs, is normally discernible from the  terms  in  which  grounds  of
    appeal or written submissions, in whatever  form,  have  been  devised.
    Stated succinctly, every unrepresented litigant must, on the one  hand,
    be permitted appropriate latitude.  On the other hand, no unrepresented
    litigant can be permitted to misuse the process of the  Tribunal.   The
    overarching principle of fact sensitivity looms large once again.

The Threshold

27   The exercise of the power to make a costs order  under  either  of  the
    limbs of Rule 9 of the 2014 Rules is reserved to  the  clearest  cases.
    This is clear from Ridehalgh  v  Horsefield and more recent  decisions,
    both first instance and appellate: Gill   v   Humanware  Europe  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 799, Jackson  v  Cambridgeshire County  Council  [2011]  UKEAT
    0402 and In the matter of a Wasted Costs Order made against Joseph Hill
    and Company Solicitors [2013] EWCA Crim 775.  It suffices to quote  the
    following passage from the judgment of Openshaw J in the last mentioned
    case, in which an appeal against a wasted costs order  made  against  a
    firm of solicitors under the  Practice  Direction  (Costs  in  Criminal
    Proceedings), which enshrines the "improper, unreasonable or  negligent
    act or omission" test,  was  allowed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal.   The
    cautionary words in [46] are noteworthy:

         "We end with this footnote: there  is  an  ever  pressing  need  to
         ensure efficiency in the Courts: the Judges, the parties  and  most
         particularly  the  practitioners  all  have  a   duty   to   reduce
         unnecessary delays.  We do not doubt  that  the  power  to  make  a
         wasted costs order can  be  valuable  but  this  case,  and  others
         recently before this Court, demonstrate that it should be  reserved
         only for the clearest cases otherwise more time,  effort  and  cost
         goes into making and challenging the order than was alleged to have
         been wasted in the first place."

     This was echoed in Gill (supra) where the Court of  Appeal  highlighted
    the undesirability of detailed judicial investigation in  wasted  costs
    applications,  particularly   those   requiring   the   resolution   of
    conflicting evidence.  The varying cautionary formulations in  each  of
    these cases serves to reinforce the  admonition  contained  in  [25](i)
    above that rule 9  "cannot  be  invoked  without  good  reason".   This
    applies to both limbs of the new rule.


The Transitional Provisions Issue

28   As noted above, the 2014 Rules came into operation on 20 October  2014.
     Rule 9 is new, having  no  directly  corresponding  provision  in  the
    predecessor regime. The opening words of rule 9(1) are:

         "If the Tribunal allows an appeal ..................... "


    There is no indication in the text of whether the  wasted  costs  power
    contained in rule 9 applies to all appeals of which the FtT  is  seized
    from  20  October  2014.   Rule  46,  under  the  rubric  "Transitional
    Provisions", provides:


         "(1) The Tribunal may give any direction to ensure that proceedings
             are dealt with fairly and, in particular, may -

             (a)   Apply  any  provision  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
                  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  or  the   Asylum   and
                  Immigration Tribunal (Fast  Track  Procedure)  Rules  2005
                  which applied to the proceedings  immediately  before  the
                  date these Rules came into force; or

                  (b)  Disapply provisions of  these  Rules  (including  the
Fast Track Rules).

         (2)  A time period which has started to  run  before  the  date  on
             which these Rules come into force and which  has  not  expired
             shall continue to apply."

         Reference may be made also to rule 1:

         (1)  These Rules may be cited as the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
             Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and come
             into force on 20 October 2014.

         (2)  They apply to proceedings before the  Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal."

    Notably, there is no  specific  provision  repealing  the  2005  Rules.
    However, it seems clear that the principle  of  repeal  by  implication
    applies, subject to rule 46.

29.  Rule 46 operates to preserve the 2005 Rules in a limited way.   In  our
    judgment, it was inserted in recognition of the  reality  that,  for  a
    period of time, the FtT would be seized of appeals which, prior  to  20
    October 2014, had been processed under the old regime.   On  the  other
    hand, the whole of the 2014 Rules came into  operation  on  20  October
    2014.  Rule 46 balances these two factors.  It empowers the FtT to give
    effect to either regime, or both, in the exercise of  a  discretion  to
    give directions.  We consider that the underlying intention  must  have
    been to confine this power to appeals predating 20  October  2014.   An
    appeal comes into existence on the date when it is filed with the  FtT:
    see rule 6(2) and rule 55(1) of the 2005 Rules and rule  19(1)  of  the
    2014 Rules.   Accordingly, to summarise:

    (i)  The 2014 Rules will apply in their  entirety  to  all  Notices  of
         Appeal post dating 19 October 2014.

    (ii) As regards appeals which were filed prior to 20 October 2014,  the
         FtT has a discretion to apply provisions of either the  2005  Rules
         or the 2014 Rules or both, subject to [35] infra .

    (iii)    The mechanism for exercising  this  discretion  is  by  making
         directions. This applies to both  the  pre-hearing  phase  and  the
         hearing itself.

    (iv) The criterion to be applied is that of ensuring that  "proceedings
         are dealt with fairly".

    (v)  In considering whether to give any such direction,  the  FtT  must
         give full effect to the overriding objective enshrined in rule 2.

30.  In the present case, the Tribunal  is  seized  of  an  application  for
    costs against the Respondent under rule 9(2)(b) of the 2014 Rules.   No
    question of making any direction arises in this context.   Furthermore,
    neither party has applied for a direction to be made.  This  impels  us
    to conclude that rule 46 is not directed  to  the  application  we  are
    determining.  The 2014 Rules are silent on the question of whether rule
    9 applies to appeals pre-dating the commencement  date  of  20  October
    2014.  This issue is, therefore, to be determined by  resort  to  first
    principles.

31.  The general  principle  which  is  engaged  is  expressed  in  Bennion,
    Statutory Interpretation (4th Edition), page 265, in these terms:

         "Unless the contrary intention appears, an  enactment  is  presumed
         not to be intended to have a retrospective operation."

    It is evident that, in this  context,  "enactment"  embraces  secondary
    legislation, which is the appropriate categorisation of the 2014 Rules,
    being made pursuant to primary legislation viz the relevant  provisions
    of the 2007 Act.   The origins of the  principle  noted  above  can  be
    traced to the judgment of Willes J in Phillips v Eyre [1870] LR 6  QB1,
    at 23, in the statement that retrospective legislation is -


         "......  contrary to the  general  principle  that  legislation  by
         which the conduct  of  mankind  is  to  be  regulated  ought,  when
         introduced for the first time, to deal with future acts, and  ought
         not to change the character of past transactions  carried  on  upon
         the faith of the then existing law."


    There are clear elements of both fairness and legal certainty  in  this
    formulation.  The principle is expressed in emphatic terms in  Maxwell,
    On the Interpretation of Statutes (12th Edition), page 215:


         "It is a fundamental rule of English law that no statute should  be
         construed  to  have  a  retrospective  operation  unless   such   a
         construction appears very clearly in  the  terms  of  the  Act,  or
         arises by necessary and distinct operation."

    This is a general presumption which, being such, is  capable  of  being
    displaced where the  contrary  intention  appears.   For  Bennion,  the
    rationale of this principle is the following:


         "It  is  important  to  grasp  the  true  nature  of  objectionable
         retrospectivity, which is that the past legal effect of an  act  or
         omission is retroactively altered by a later change in the law."

         (At page 266.)

32.  We consider that the  question  we  are  addressing  also  engages  the
    principle against doubtful penalisation.  The essence of this principle
    is sometimes expressed in the proposition that  no  one  should  suffer
    detriment by the application of  a  doubtful  law.   In  this  context,
    "doubtful is the adjective to be applied to a  construction  which,  in
    the context of a competing  construction  or  constructions,  would  if
    preferred, create an ex post facto legal rule.   This  principle  is  a
    fortiori if the doubtful construction also inflicts a  detriment,  that
    is to say -

         "If it takes away or impairs a vested right acquired under existing
         laws, or creates a new  obligation,  or  imposes  a  new  duty,  or
         attaches a new disability, in regard to events already passed."

              (Yew v Kenderaan [1983] 1 AC 553, per Lord Brightman at 558.)

    The basic concept of fairness also has a role in the  determination  of
    questions of this kind.   Per Staughton LJ in Secretary  of  State  for
    Social Security v Tunnicliffe [1991] 2 All ER 712, at 724:


         "In my judgment the true principle is that Parliament  is  presumed
         not to have intended to alter the law applicable to past events and
         transactions in a manner which is  unfair  to  those  concerned  in
         them, unless a contrary intention appears."

33.  The presumption  against  retrospective  effect,  expounded  above,  is
    prima facie applicable to rule 9 of the 2014  Rules.   Notwithstanding,
    there is a competing principle to be considered. We  are  mindful  that
    there is some authority for the proposition that legislative changes in
    procedural provisions apply to pending as well as  future  proceedings.
    However, this is a qualified, and not an absolute, principle.  In  R  v
    Makanjuola [1995] 3 All ER 730, Lord Taylor CJ referred to "the general
    presumption .....  that a statutory  change  in  procedure  applies  to
    pending as well as future proceedings" (at page 732E). However, this is
    but a general principle, or rebuttable presumption, which must yield in
    appropriate cases, particularly  (per  Bennion,  page  269)  where  its
    application would infringe the principle that a person  should  not  be
    penalised under a doubtful enactment (see [31] above).

34.  Furthermore, the central importance of unfairness in  any  exercise  in
    statutory  construction  of  the  present   kind   must   be   squarely
    acknowledged.  In Secretary of State v Tunnicliffe [1991] 2 All ER 712,
    Staughton LJ stated, at 724:

         "In my judgment, the true principle is that Parliament is  presumed
         not to have intended to alter the law applicable to past events and
         transactions in a manner which is  unfair  to  those  concerned  in
         them, unless a contrary intention  appears.  It  is  not  simply  a
         question of  classifying  an  enactment  as  retrospective  or  not
         retrospective.  Rather, it may well be a matter  of  degree  -  the
         greater the  unfairness,  the  more  it  is  to  be  expected  that
         Parliament will make it clear if that is intended."

    This passage was cited with approval by the House of Lords in  L'Office
    Chrifien v Yamashita [1994] 1 AC 486, at 525.  In the same case,  Lord
    Mustill, delivering  the  judgment  of  the  House,  cautioned  against
    excessive or  mechanistic  reliance  on  generalised  presumptions  and
    maxims:


         "This is misleading, for the basis of the  rule  is  no  more  than
         simple fairness, which ought to be the basis of every  legal  rule.
         True it is that to change the legal character of a person's acts or
         omissions after an event will very often be unfair; and since it is
         rightly taken for granted that Parliament will rarely wish  to  act
         in a manner which seems unfair it is sensible to look very hard  at
         a statute which appears to have this effect, to make sure that this
         is what Parliament really intended.  This is, however, no more than
         common sense, the application of which may be impeded  rather  than
         helped by recourse to formulae which do  not  adapt  themselves  to
         individual circumstances and which tend themselves  to  become  the
         subject of minute analysis, whereas what ought to  be  analysed  is
         the statute itself."

         [At page 524.]

    Their  Lordships  also  recognised  that  in   certain   contexts   the
    distinction between substantive and procedural rights is  unclear  and,
    further, that procedural rights can sometimes be of greater value  than
    substantive rights.  In consequence, their preferred  approach  was  to
    scrutinise intensely the practical  value  and  nature  of  the  rights
    engaged and the statutory language itself.

35.  We formulate the question to be determined in the following  terms:  is
    the power to order costs under rule 9(2) of the 2014 Rules  exercisable
    in appeals which predate the commencement  date  of  20  October  2014?
    "Predate" in this context  denotes  that  an  appeal  to  the  FtT  was
    initiated by the filing of a Notice of  Appeal  with  the  Tribunal  in
    accordance with rule 6(1) and (2) and rule 55(1) of the now  superseded
    2005 Rules.    In giving effect to the principles rehearsed  above,  we
    take into account in particular the following  considerations.   First,
    there is no clear indication in the new 2014 Rules regime that  rule  9
    applies  to  pre-existing  appeals.   This   is   reinforced   by   the
    consideration  that  while  the  authors  specifically  addressed   the
    question of transitional effect, in rule 46(1)(a) and (b),  they did so
    in terms which cannot sensibly be applied to  the  determination  of  a
    costs application under rule 9, other than in respect of  the  handling
    and processing thereof.  The third material consideration is that  this
    is a new power which alters radically the  corresponding  provision  in
    the previous regime, rule 23A of the 2005  Rules.   The  next  material
    factor is that the effect of the exercise of  the  power  contained  in
    rule 9 is to subject the party or representative concerned to  a  clear
    detriment.  Indeed, this may properly be  viewed  also  as  a  penalty.
    Finally, considerations  of  fairness  and  legal  certainty   must  be
    weighed.  We consider that it would be unfair to penalise  in  costs  a
    party or representative for conduct preceding the operative date of the
    new rule, for the elementary  reason  that  such  conduct  occurred  in
    circumstances where the shadow of this  significant  sanction  did  not
    exist.  When  one  grafts  onto  this  analysis  the  factor  of  legal
    certainty, the answer to the question posed above becomes even clearer.
     We are impelled to this conclusion:  the power contained in rule  9(2)
    of the 2014 Rules is not exercisable in appeals  predating  20  October
    2014.  It is, however, exercisable  in  all  appeals  dating  from  and
    including 20 October 2014.

36.  As regards the operation of the other provisions  of  the  2014  Rules,
    excluding rule 9, we offer the following guidance.   Having  regard  to
    the principles expounded above, coupled with rule 46, we consider  that
    in the case of appeals predating the commencement date  of  20  October
    2014, the Tribunal should give effect to  the  provisions  of  the  new
    Rules insofar as it is fair and just to do so.  In cases where to do so
    would give rise to unfairness or injustice, resort should be had to the
    broad discretionary  power  contained  in  rule  46(1).    The  guiding
    principle will be the party's  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   Tribunals
    should be particularly alert to the time limit provision in rule 46(2),
    reproduced in [27] above, which is expressed in unambiguous terms.

37.  In those cases to which rule 9 applies ie  all  appeals  postdating  19
    October 2014, we consider that where the Tribunal is invited to make  a
    wasted costs order, it is empowered to consider  the  totality  of  the
    party's or  representative's  conduct  from  the  commencement  of  the
    process, that is to say the initiation of the appeal in accordance with
    rule 19.  We address this specific issue in light  of  an  argument  on
    behalf  of  the  Respondent  in  the  present  case   that   the   word
    "proceedings" should be construed  as  relating  only  to  the  actual,
    substantive hearing of the appeal.  We have no hesitation in  rejecting
    this contention.

Procedure

38.  We draw attention  to,  without  reproducing  seriatim,  the  elaborate
    procedural provisions enshrined in rule  9.   In  doing  so,  we  would
    highlight in particular the following:

     a) The power enshrined in rule 9(2) may be exercised by  the  Tribunal
        of its own volition.  It is not dependent upon  the  making  of  an
        application.


     b) The mechanisms for applying for an order are an oral application at
        a hearing or a subsequent written application, in  accordance  with
        the specified time limit. While the former  procedure  clearly  has
        the advantages of expedition and minimising further costs, it  will
        plainly be inappropriate in cases where fairness  requires  a  more
        elaborate process.


     c) This latter observation is linked to the requirement that  the  so-
        called "paying  person"  must  be  given  an  opportunity  to  make
        representations.


     d) Furthermore, a pause will facilitate the possibility of  consensual
        resolution of costs issues.


     e) In addition, it will enable the preparation of a  schedule  of  the
        costs  claimed  which,  per  rule  9(4)(b),  is  not  an  automatic
        requirement.


     f) In the generality of cases, bundles  of  authorities  and  skeleton
        arguments will be unnecessary.  It should normally suffice to bring
        to the attention of the FtT this judgment and rule 9 itself.

39.  Where the Tribunal resolves to exercise  its  power  under  rule  9(2),
    there are three possible mechanisms for measurement of the costs to  be
    paid.  These are adumbrated in rule 9(7) and are (a) summary assessment
    by the Tribunal, (b)  agreement  and  (c)  detailed  assessment,  which
    involves applying to the County Court.  We would strongly encourage the
    first and second of these options.  In cases where a Tribunal has  made
    an "in principle" decision to exercise its power under  rule  9(2),  it
    will normally be appropriate to afford the parties  an  opportunity  to
    reach agreement on the amount to be paid.  It follows  from  this  that
    the Tribunal's ruling must identify  clearly  the  nature,  timing  and
    duration of the offending conduct,  since  there  will  undoubtedly  be
    cases in which an order will properly be framed  in  focused,  targeted
    terms.

40.  Clearly, there must be fairness to the  "paying  party".   Furthermore,
    the Tribunal must ensure that it is sufficiently informed and  equipped
    to enable its discretion to be exercised judicially.  Subject to  these
    requirements, we would urge Tribunals to eschew unnecessary elaboration
    and avoidable delay in the processing and determining  of  applications
    under rule 9(2).  The principles enshrined in the overriding  objective
    will apply fully.  Furthermore, we would emphasise rule 2(4):

           "Parties must -


              g) help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective; and


              h) co-operate with the Tribunal generally."


    Caution must be exercised to  prevent  the  development  of  a  cottage
    industry.  The factor of limited resources applies to everyone involved
    in the process: the parties, their  representatives  and  the  Tribunal
    itself.   The   main   touchstones   are   fairness,   expedition   and
    proportionality.

41.  We also draw attention to the question of  how  a  Tribunal's  decision
    under rule 9(2) should be formulated.  By virtue of  rule  29(3)(b)  of
    the 2014 Rules, a written reasoned decision is not obligatory.  In such
    cases, the parties have a right to apply within 28 days for  a  written
    statement of reasons.  Rule 29(1), which empowers the  FtT  to  give  a
    decision orally at a hearing, clearly embraces decisions under rule  9.
    We would encourage Tribunals to  exercise  this  power  in  determining
    applications under rule 9(2).  In cases where the Tribunal does not  do
    so, it would be considered good practice to include a  brief  statement
    of the reasons for its order in the notice  of  decision.   Where  this
    latter mechanism is  invoked,  the  emphasis  should  be  on  succinct,
    focused reasons, to be contrasted with the recitation  of  tranches  of
    evidence or the parties' arguments.  In cases where it is necessary  to
    do so, a Tribunal's decision under rule 9(2) should  also  include  any
    appropriate  findings  of  fact.   Findings  of  this  kind  will,   by
    definition, relate to the unacceptable conduct alleged. In  appropriate
    cases, it may be necessary  to  resolve  disputed  issues  relating  to
    dates, documents, conversations or like matters.

This Application

42.  In the present case, the impugned decision of the Respondent  is  dated
    05 March 2014.  This determined the Appellant's EEA application,  dated
    09 September 2013.  The Notice of Appeal is dated 17 March  2014.   The
    Notice of Hearing is dated 01 April 2014.  The hearing was conducted on
    20 October 2014 (coincidentally, the date of commencement  of  the  new
    2014 Rules). We have concluded in [34] above that the  power  contained
    in rule 9(2) does not apply  to  appeals  pre-dating  the  commencement
    date.  It follows that the Appellant's application must be refused.

43.  Taking into account the cost and effort expended  by  both  parties  in
    preparing and  presenting  the  application  and  the  desirability  of
    promulgating the maximum guidance possible through the medium  of  this
    judgment, we propose  to  express  our  views  on  the  merits  of  the
    application in any event.

44.  The Appellant's application was brought under the second limb  of  rule
    9(2),  the  material  wording  whereof  is  "if  a  person  has   acted
    unreasonably in bringing, defending  or  conducting  the  proceedings".
    The Appellant's case was that the Respondent had acted unreasonably  in
    defending the proceedings.  We summarise the material facts upon  which
    the Appellant relied as follows:

    (i)  Following the initiation of the appeal, the Appellant's solicitors
         made repeated requests of the Respondent for the production of  the
         audio recordings of the separate interviews of  the  Appellant  and
         his spouse, together  with  the  transcripts  thereof.   The  first
         request was made immediately following service  of  the  Notice  of
         Appeal and the requests continued until shortly before the hearing.




    ii) The Appellant's solicitors were driven to  make  a  subject  access
        request under the Data Protection Act 2004.  Some five months after
        serving the Notice of  Appeal,  these  elicited  the  provision  of
        transcripts of the interviews, but not the audio recordings.


   iii) One week in advance of the hearing date one of the recordings, that
        relating to the Appellant's interview, was provided.  As a  result,
        the Appellant's Solicitor  and  Counsel,  having  listened  to  the
        recording, prepared their  own  transcript  of  the  interview  and
        served this on the morning of hearing.

    iv) On the date of hearing, the Respondent's representative was not  in
        possession of all documents, in particular  one  of  the  interview
        transcripts.  This resulted in the hearing being interrupted and  a
        brief adjournment, following exchanges with the Judge.

     v) When the hearing  resumed,  the  Tribunal  was  informed  that  the
        Respondent's representative had taken  instructions  and  that,  in
        consequence, the impugned decision was being withdrawn.

45.  It is difficult to conceive of a more belated withdrawal decision.   It
    was made, figuratively, at the 59th  minute  of  the  11th  hour.   The
    proceedings had been consistently  defended  up  to  this  point.   The
    Tribunal is not privy to what precisely motivated those agents  of  the
    Respondent involved  in  the  withdrawal  decision.   The  Respondent's
    representative was unable to enlighten us on this issue.   Furthermore,
    there is no clear evidence of  what  was  stated  to  the  FtT  by  the
    Respondent's  representative.  The first finding which is  readily  and
    obviously made is that the view was formed that the  impugned  decision
    could not be defended.  Secondly, we readily infer that  this  decision
    was motivated by what we shall describe in shorthand as the "interviews
    issue".  We probed the question of why  the  interview  recordings  and
    transcripts were not provided timeously to the Appellant's  solicitors.
    The response was that no explanation could be provided.  The conduct of
    the Respondent throughout the period under scrutiny must be  viewed  in
    the context of rule 13 of the 2005 Rules, whereby  it  was  obliged  to
    file with the FtT,  inter  alia,  any  record  of  interview  with  the
    Appellant, together with all other material documents.  The next factor
    to be considered is that, from the initiation of the appeal, there  was
    clearly an issue of substance relating to the interviews.  The  several
    repetitions of the request to provide the materials  in  question  also
    have a bearing on the Respondent's conduct.

46.   Given  the  matrix  outlined  above,  the  question  is  whether   the
    Respondent acted unreasonably  in  defending  the  appeal.   We  remind
    ourselves of the pithy statement in Ridehalgh that  the  acid  test  is
    whether the conduct permits of a reasonable explanation.  We take  into
    account that the interview recordings and transcripts thereof  were  at
    all material times  available  to  the  Respondent.   Furthermore,  the
    Respondent was  on  notice  from  an  early  stage  that  there  was  a
    substantial issue relating to the interviews of the Appellant  and  his
    spouse.  The essential elements of this issue would have been clear  to
    the Respondent as they stemmed  from  the  omnibus  assessment  in  the
    impugned decision that "....  there were a  number  of  inconsistencies
    and conflicting answers given during your  marriage  interview  .....",
    followed by particularisation.  The Respondent's ultimate surrender  in
    the precincts of the Tribunal bears all the hallmarks of a long overdue
    concession.  The appeal had a lifetime of  approximately  nine  months.
    The Respondent did not make the case that the timing of the  concession
    was explicable and justifiable by reference to some specific  event  or
    development, for example new information.  In these  circumstances,  we
    consider that a period of some three months should have been  ample  to
    enable the concession entailing the withdrawal of the impugned decision
    to be made. This measurement of time takes into account the factors  of
    normal pressures on resources, the period  typically  elapsing  between
    Notice of Appeal and listing and the reality, of which we take judicial
    notice, that legal costs tend to escalate,  sometimes  rapidly,  during
    the  latter  stages  of  the  pre-hearing  phase.   These  stages   are
    frequently characterised by cost incurring steps such as the assembling
    of written evidence, the preparation of bundles,  instructing  Counsel,
    dealing with Counsel's  advices  and  directions  and,  in  appropriate
    cases,  the  preparation  of  skeleton   arguments   and   bundles   of
    authorities.

Conclusion

47.  We have concluded that this application under rule 9(2)  must  fail  on
    account of our assessment of the retrospectivity  issue.   Had  we  not
    thus concluded, our decision would have been that the Respondent  acted
    unreasonably in defending the Appellant's appeal from the beginning  of
    June 2014.  We  can  conceive  of  no  reason  why,  having  made  such
    conclusion, we would not have proceeded to exercise our  discretion  to
    make a costs order against the Respondent.  Finally,  the  order  would
    have required the Respondent to bear all of the Appellant's costs  from
    01 June 2014, to include the costs incurred by  the  application  under
    rule 9.  We would have assessed  these  costs  summarily  and,  in  the
    absence of any challenge of substance to the costs schedule  presented,
    we would have awarded 75% of the costs claimed (3,352.79).


    Anonymity


48. While we are conscious that  an  anonymity  direction  applied  to  the
    Appellant at an earlier stage of the proceedings,  no  application  for
    the extension thereof has been made and we  are  satisfied,  given  the
    subject matter  of  this  judgment,  that  there  are  no  grounds  for
    continuing to afford the Appellant anonymity.




                                                 [pic]


                                                        MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                      SITTING AS A FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


                                                     Date:   26 January 2015
     APPENDIX 1: Rule 9 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)
                 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

9.- Orders for payment of costs and interest  on  costs  (or,  in  Scotland,
expenses)

   (1) If the Tribunal allows an appeal, it may order a respondent to pay by
   way of costs to the appellant an amount no greater than-


     (a) any fee paid under the Fees Order that has not been refunded; and


     (b) any fee which the appellant is or may be liable to pay  under  that
     Order.


   (2) The Tribunal may otherwise make an order in respect of costs only-


     (a) under section 29(4) of  the  2007  Act  (wasted  costs)  and  costs
     incurred in applying for such costs; or


     (b) if a person  has  acted  unreasonably  in  bringing,  defending  or
     conducting proceedings.


   (3) The Tribunal may make an order under this rule on an  application  or
   on its own initiative.


   (4) A person making an application for an order for costs-


     (a) must, unless the application is made orally at a hearing,  send  or
     deliver an application to the Tribunal and to the person  against  whom
     the order is sought to be made; and


     (b) may send or deliver together with the application a schedule of the
     costs claimed in sufficient detail to allow summary assessment of  such
     costs by the Tribunal.


   (5) An application for an order for costs may be made at any time  during
   the proceedings but must be made within 28 days after the date  on  which
   the Tribunal sends-


     (a) a notice of decision recording the decision which disposes  of  the
     proceedings; or


     (b)  notice  that  a  withdrawal  has  taken  effect  under   rule   17
     (withdrawal).


   (6) The Tribunal may not make an order for costs  against  a  person  (in
   this rule called the "paying person") without first giving that person an
   opportunity to make representations.




   (7) The amount of costs to be paid under an order under this rule may  be
   determined by-


     (a) summary assessment by the Tribunal;


     (b) agreement of a specified sum by the paying person  and  the  person
     entitled to receive the costs  (in  this  rule  called  the  "receiving
     person");


     (c) detailed assessment of the whole or a specified part of  the  costs
     (including the costs of  the  assessment)  incurred  by  the  receiving
     person, if not agreed.


   (8) Except in relation to paragraph (9), in the application of this  rule
   in relation to Scotland, any reference to  costs  is  to  be  read  as  a
   reference to expenses.


   (9) Following an order for detailed assessment made by the Tribunal under
   paragraph (7)(c) the paying person or the receiving person may apply-


     (a) in England and Wales, to the county court for a detailed assessment
     of the costs on the standard basis or, if specified in  the  order,  on
     the indemnity basis; and the Civil Procedure  Rules  1998,  section  74
     (interest on judgment debts, etc) of the County Courts Act 1984 and the
     County Court (Interest on Judgment Debts) Order 1991 shall apply,  with
     necessary modifications, to that application and assessment as  if  the
     proceedings in the Tribunal had been proceedings in a  court  to  which
     the Civil Procedure Rules 1998 apply;


     (b) in Scotland, to the Auditor of the Sheriff Court or  the  Court  of
     Session (as specified in the order) for the taxation  of  the  expenses
     according to the fees payable in that court; or


     (c) in Northern Ireland, to the Taxing Office  of  the  High  Court  of
     Northern Ireland for taxation on the standard basis or, if specified in
     the order, on the indemnity basis.













    APPENDIX 2: Extract from Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2014: The
  Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                 Rules 2014


Wasted and unreasonable costs (or, in Scotland, expenses)

  27. The  new  Rules  implement  a  power  in  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 to  award  wasted  or  unreasonable  costs.   The
      conferring of  this  power,  however,  carries  with  it  considerable
      responsibility to ensure that its use is appropriate and  that  it  is
      used fairly and judiciously.  In nearly all instances the existence of
      the power should act as a restraint on the behaviour  of  parties  and
      their representatives so that the power itself is rarely exercised.


  28. The scope of rule 9(2) covers at  part  (a)  wasted  costs  and  costs
      incurred in applying for such costs and at part (b) costs if a  person
      has  acted  unreasonably  in   bringing,   defending   or   conducting
      proceedings. The Tribunal may make an order on an application or under
      its own initiative. An order may be made against a party, which may be
      the respondent, or against a representative (or both).

  29. A test for unreasonable conduct was set out by the Court of Appeal  in
      Ridehalgh v Horsefield [1994] Ch 205 at 232 (quoted  in  R(LR)  v  FtT
      (HESC) and Hertfordshire  CC  (Costs)  [2013]  UKUT  0294  (AAC)),  as
      follows:


        "'Unreasonable' also means what it has been understood to  mean  in
        this context for at least half a  century.   The  expression  aptly
        describes conduct which is vexatious, designed to harass the  other
        side rather than advance the resolution of the case, and  it  makes
        no difference that the conduct is the product of excessive zeal and
        not  improper  motive.   But  conduct  cannot   be   described   as
        unreasonable  simply  because  it  leads  in  the   event   to   an
        unsuccessful  result  or  because   other   more   cautious   legal
        representatives would have acted differently.   The  acid  test  is
        whether the conduct permits of a reasonable  explanation.   If  so,
        the course adopted may be regarded as optimistic and as  reflecting
        on a practitioner's judgment, but it is not unreasonable."


  30.  The Upper Tribunal went on to point out that both the  appellant  and
      the  respondent  in   tribunals   are   substantially   dependent   on
      representatives who present cases to the best of their ability,  often
      very helpfully, and that is not something which it would be  right  to
      discourage merely because it has not gone  smoothly  on  a  particular
      occasion.  A party being wrong or misguided is not the same  as  being
      unreasonable.


  31. In circumstances where there has been a breach  of  a  direction,  for
      example, a failure to lodge documentary evidence, the offending  party
      should always be given the opportunity to remedy the situation  before
      any order for wasted costs is made.  The issuing of a reminder to  the
      party in breach should be a prerequisite before a wasted  costs  order
      is made.  Even where a hearing has  to  be  adjourned  because  of  an
      avoidable omission by one party, such as  inadequate  preparation,  it
      would not normally be appropriate to make an  order  for  costs.   Not
      only has the paying party the right to offer  an  explanation  but  it
      should be remembered that representatives have many demands  on  their
      time and are subject to a multitude of pressures, which may lead  even
      in well-managed organisations to occasional lapses.  The making of  an
      order for wasted or unreasonable costs should be a very rare event.

  32. Under rule 9(6) the Tribunal may not make an order for costs against a
      person (the "paying person")  without  first  giving  that  person  an
      opportunity to make representations.  Where an application  for  costs
      is made at a hearing it will be considered at  the  hearing,  provided
      the paying party  is  present.   Otherwise  the  application  will  be
      considered without a hearing  unless  the  Tribunal  is  contemplating
      making an order when the application will be  listed  for  hearing  to
      give the paying party the opportunity to make representations.  It  is
      anticipated that the power to award costs will be rarely exercised.

  33. A decision on costs is an "excluded decision" and is not subject to an
      appeal.  (See the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009, SI 2009/275
      and also the Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, s 12(4)(a).)

  34. Where a costs order is  made  the  amount  of  costs  is  assessed  in
      accordance  with  rule  9(7)  either  by  summary  assessment  by  the
      Tribunal, by agreement, or by detailed assessment in  accordance  with
      rule 9(9).

  35. The power to make a fee award is a separate power  contained  in  rule
      9(1).  This remains the subject of existing guidance.

   Michael Clements
   President FtTIAC
   17 October 2014












  APPENDIX 3: Section 29 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007
                                     Act


29 Costs or expenses

(1)The costs of and incidental to-

    (a) all proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal, and

    (b) all proceedings in the Upper Tribunal,

shall be in the discretion of the Tribunal in  which  the  proceedings  take
place.



(2) The relevant Tribunal shall have full power to determine by whom and to
what extent the costs are to be paid.



(3) Subsections (1) and (2) have effect subject to Tribunal Procedure
Rules.



(4) In any proceedings mentioned in subsection (1), the relevant Tribunal
may-

    (a)disallow, or

    (b)(as the case may be) order the legal or other representative
concerned to meet,

    the whole of any wasted costs or such part of them as may be determined
    in accordance with Tribunal Procedure Rules.



(5) In subsection (4) "wasted costs" means any costs incurred by a party-

    (a) as a result of any improper, unreasonable or negligent act or
    omission on the part of any legal or other representative or any
    employee of such a representative, or

    (b) which, in the light of any such act or omission occurring after
    they were incurred, the relevant Tribunal considers it is unreasonable
    to expect that party to pay.



(6) In this section "legal or other representative", in relation to a party
to proceedings, means any person exercising a right of audience or right to
conduct the proceedings on his behalf.

(7) In the application of this section in relation to Scotland, any
reference in this section to costs is to be read as a reference to
expenses.




 APPENDIX 4 : Rule 10  of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008




Orders for costs

10.  (1)  The Upper Tribunal may not make an order in respect of costs (or,
in Scotland, expenses) except-

  (a) in proceedings on appeal from another tribunal, to the extent and in
  the circumstances that the other tribunal had the power to make an order
  in respect of costs (or, in Scotland, expenses); or

  (b) in proceedings other than on appeal from another tribunal or under
  section 4 of the Forfeiture Act 1982(1)-

    (i) under section 29(4) of the 2007 Act (wasted costs); or

    (ii) if the Upper Tribunal considers that a party or its representative
    has acted unreasonably in bringing, defending or conducting the
    proceedings.

(2) The Upper Tribunal may make  an  order  for  costs  (or,  in  Scotland,
expenses) on an application or on its own initiative.

(3) A person making an application for an order under paragraph (1) must-

    (a) send or deliver a written application to the Upper Tribunal and to
    the person against whom it is proposed that the order be made; and

    (b)send or deliver a schedule of the costs or expenses claimed with the
application.



(4) An application for an order under paragraph (1) may be made at any time
during the proceedings but may not be made later  than  14  days  after  the
date on which the Upper Tribunal sends the  decision  notice  recording  the
decision which finally disposes of all issues in the proceedings.

(5) The Upper Tribunal may not make an order under paragraph (1) against  a
person (the "paying person") without first-

    (a) giving that person an opportunity to make representations; and

    (b) if the paying person is an individual, considering that person's
financial means.



(6) The amount of costs to be paid under an order under paragraph  (1)  may
be ascertained by-

    (a) summary assessment by the Upper Tribunal;

    (b) agreement of a specified sum by the paying person and the person
    entitled to receive the costs ("the receiving person"); or

    (c) assessment of the whole or a specified part of the costs (or, in
    Scotland, expenses) incurred by the receiving person, if not agreed.

(7) Following an order for assessment under paragraph  (6)(c),  the  paying
person or the receiving person may apply-

    (a) in England and Wales, to the High Court for a detailed assessment
    of costs in accordance with the Civil Procedure Rules 1998(2) on the
    standard basis or, if specified in the order, on the indemnity basis;

    (b) in Scotland, to the Auditor of the Court of Session for the
    taxation of the expenses according to the fees payable in the Court of
    Session; or

    (c) in Northern Ireland, to the High Court for the costs to be taxed.


 APPENDIX 5: Joint Presidential Guidance - Fee Awards in Immigration Appeals


                                    [pic]


                          THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
       president of the upper tribunal immigration and asylum chamber

                              MICHAEL CLEMENTS
     president of the First-Tier tribunal immigration and asylum chamber



                         JOINT PRESIDENTIAL GUIDANCE

                      FEE AWARDS IN IMMIGRATION APPEALS


Preamble

On the 19 December the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Fees order comes into force requiring those who appeal to the First tier
Tribunal to pay a fee[1].
By rule 23A(2) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2005(as amended by SI 2011 No. 2840) there is a power in the judge to
direct the repayment of a fee in the case of an appellant whose appeal
succeeds.
This guidance is issued to assist judges who have to decide on fee awards

Introduction

1. In the courts, where there is power to award costs, it is usual  for  the
unsuccessful party to pay the costs of  the  successful  party  which  would
include any fees paid to a court to bring an action

2. Provision for a "fee award" is a new element for appeals to  the  FtTIAC.
The making of an award is to be decided by the judge on the evidence  before
him or her and dealt with in the determination  following  the  decision  on
outcome. The decision on fees is not part of the  determination  and  is  an
excluded matter for the purposes of ss.11 and  13  of  Tribunal  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007.

3. Where the Upper Tribunal sets aside a  decision  of  the  FtT  judge  and
remakes it in favour of the appellant, FtT award decision  will  fall  away.
The UT judge will need to consider the question of fees made in  respect  of
the FtT appeal. In so doing the UT judge will  be  exercising  functions  of
the FtT judge under s.12 (4)(a) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

4. Although each case will turn on the exercise of a judicial discretion  in
the light of the issues, the following guidelines should  be  considered  by
judges making these decisions.

Guidance

5. As a first principle, if an appellant  has  been  obliged  to  appeal  to
establish their claim, which could and should  have  been  accepted  by  the
decision-maker, then the appellant should be able to recover the  whole  the
fee they paid to bring the appeal.

6. On the other hand, a different outcome may be appropriate  if  an  appeal
has been allowed principally  because  of  evidence  produced  only  at  the
appeal stage that could or should have been  produced  earlier,  or  if  the
appellant has otherwise contributed to the need for the appeal by their  own
action or inaction.

7. When deciding whether to make a fee award or the amount of such an  award
(up to the maximum of the appeal fee paid), a Judge sitting as  a  judge  of
the FtTIAC will have regard to all the circumstances.   These  will  include
the conduct of the parties, the reasons why the  appeal  succeeded,  whether
the appellant should have  produced  any  fresh  evidence  that  would  have
materially contributed to the success of the appeal at an earlier  stage  in
the application.

 8. The Judge must make a decision in  accordance  with  the  principles  of
proportionality, taking into all available information at the  date  of  the
hearing:

a)  Where there is no good reason to displace the first principle it  should
apply.  Examples of good reason might include failure  to  produce  evidence
that should have been produced before the decision  in  question;  delay  in
complying with judicial directions or responding to the submissions  of  the
other party; other conduct that results  in  adjournments  that  could  have
been avoided.

b)  Judicial time spent  on  the  question  must  be  proportionate  to  the
maximum level of the fee award. The parties should be prepared to  make  any
submissions on fees at the hearing orally or in writing. In the  absence  of
attendance at the hearing the parties cannot expect  the  judge  to  give  a
further opportunity to make submissions on fees.

9.  Brief reasons should be given for a fee award decision.

[pic]                  [pic]

The Hon Mr Justice Blake                Michael Clements
                                             Chamber Presidents
-----------------------
[1] http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2011/2840/pdfs/uksi_20112840_en.pdf


