
HH (Criminal record; deportation: "war zone") Iraq [2008] UKAIT 00051

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Field House                                   Date of Hearing:
28 January -
                       1 February 2008

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     HH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr M. Symes, instructed by IAS
For the Respondent:    Mr P Saini QC, Mr S Wordsworth and Mr A Palmer
                       instructed by the Treasury Solicitor

(1) Given the impact of data protection legislation a  claimant  would  have
difficulty in establishing a risk  on  return  arising  from  communications
between the British government and  the  receiving  state  relating  to  his
criminal record.  (2)  The Secretary of State regarded those  who  would  be
returned to an 'active war zone' as exempt  from  deportation  by  a  policy
revoked on 14 January 2008.  Decisions  to  deport  nationals  of  countries
that were at the relevant time active war zones, made  during  the  currency
of that policy, appear to have been made not in  accordance  with  the  law.
The same applies probably to decisions to remove  overstayers  under  s  10,
but not decisions to remove illegal entrants.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq.   This  determination  follows  a
    reconsideration of his  appeal  to  this  Tribunal.   The  hearing  was
    combined with that of another appellant, the determination of which  is
    now reported as KH (Article 15(c) Qualification Directive) [2008] UKAIT
    00023.  The  reconsideration  hearings  were  combined  because  common
    issues arose in both appeals  in  relation  to  the  interpretation  of
    Article 15(c) of the Refugee Qualification  Directive  2004/83/EC.   As
    the issues relating to the  present  appellant  unfolded,  however,  it
    became apparent that  the  determination  of  this  appellant's  appeal
    depended on the resolution of rather different issues.  The submissions
    of  Mr.  Symes,  who  represented  this  appellant,  however,  were  of
    considerable assistance to the Tribunal in reaching  its  determination
    in KH and that determination  forms  part  of  the  background  to  the
    determination of the  different  issues  which  arise  in  the  present
    appeal.   We  indicated  at  the  hearing  what  the  outcome  of  this
    appellant's appeal would be: we have awaited the publication of  KH  so
    that we could refer to it in this determination.

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 22 August 2001 and  claimed
    asylum upon arrival.  His application was refused but  he  was  granted
    exceptional leave to enter until 7 October 2005.  He  made  an  out  of
    time application for leave to remain, but that application was refused.
     Before the expiry of his leave to enter, in fact on 12 September  2005
    he was convicted after a trial on three counts of sexual activity  with
    a child, contrary to ss 9(1) and 9(2) of the Sexual Offences Act  2003.
    He was sentenced to three and a  half  years  imprisonment.   Following
    correspondence between the respondent and the appellant, on 30  January
    2007 the respondent decided to make a  deportation  order  against  the
    appellant on the ground that  his  deportation  was  conducive  to  the
    public good.  The appellant appealed against that decision. The grounds
    of appeal raise a number of issues, which may be summarised as follows.
     (1) the appellant is Kurdish but cannot be  returned  to  the  Kurdish
    area of northern Iraq because he has no  family  ties  there;  (2)  the
    situation in Iraq is "too dangerous"; "one in forty  Iraqis  have  died
    since March 2003 ... as a result of violence", and  the  situation  has
    been described by the UN Secretary General as "much  worse  than  civil
    war";  (3) if the appellant were returned to  Iraq  there  would  be  a
    serious and individual threat to  his  life  or  person  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in a situation  of  international  or  internal
    armed conflict; he is  thus  entitled  to  subsidiary  or  humanitarian
    protection under the provisions of para 339C(iv) of  the  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395  implementing  the  Qualification
    Directive; (4) there would be a risk to the appellant in  Iraq  arising
    from any knowledge in Iraq  of  the  offences  of  which  he  had  been
    convicted;  (5) paragraph 364 of HC 395 is flawed in  that  it  is  not
    compliant with the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. When the matter came before the Tribunal, an application  was  made  on
    the appellant's behalf for an adjournment in  order  to  obtain  expert
    evidence on what the appellant's position  would  be  in  Iraq  if  his
    history of offending were known.  But on behalf of the  respondent  the
    Presenting Officer stated to the Tribunal that  "the  general  position
    was that the Home Office  did  not  disclose  to  the  receiving  State
    information as to the offence committed: the  criminal  record  is  not
    disclosed".  On that basis the Tribunal took the view that it  did  not
    need to know what the position would be if  the  criminal  record  were
    disclosed and refused the adjournment.  It went on to hear  the  appeal
    and dismissed it on all grounds.

 4. The appellant then sought and obtained an  order  for  reconsideration.
    The grounds of challenge asserted that  information  obtained  from  an
    intelligence officer at Interpol Department NCIS suggested  that  there
    was a real likelihood that details of the  appellant's  offences  would
    indeed be communicated to the government of any country  receiving  the
    appellant.  It was submitted that the Tribunal were aware that that was
    the appellant's position and in the circumstances erred in  relying  on
    the assurance given by the Presenting Officer.  Secondly,  the  grounds
    pointed out that the Tribunal had been  referred  to  the  respondent's
    Operational Enforcement Manual, chapter 12, para 12.3, indicating  that
    enforcement action should not be taken  against  nationals  originating
    from  countries  which  are  "currently  active  war  zones".   It  was
    submitted that the Tribunal erred in failing to take  account  of  this
    policy when dismissing an appeal  against  a  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant to Iraq.  Thirdly, the grounds  asserted  that  the  Tribunal
    erred in failing to take into account  the  fact  that  the  sentencing
    judge had made  no  recommendation  for  the  appellant's  deportation.
    Fourthly, the Tribunal erred in applying to the  appellant's  case  the
    test of "exceptionality" in relation  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, as set out in the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in Huang v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  105.   Fifthly,  the  ground
    relating to the alleged illegality of para 364 of HC 395 was repeated.

 5. An order for reconsideration was made.  The  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    who made the order thought there might be merit in  the  first,  second
    and fourth grounds, but not in the  third  or  fifth.   In  his  order,
    however, he expresses himself as giving leave to argue the fifth ground
    also "although it is difficult to see that ground being made out".

 6. The reconsideration first came before the Tribunal  on  10  July  2007.
    Attention was directed to the question of whether the Iraqi authorities
    would have notice of the appellant's criminal record.  Mr.  Omere,  who
    appeared for the appellant on that occasion, reminded the Tribunal that
    although the Presenting Officer had  said  what  was  recorded  in  the
    determination, he had supported the application for an  adjournment  to
    obtain further evidence on the Iraqis' attitude toward a person with  a
    record such as  the  appellant's.   Mr.  Hutchinson,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, agreed  that  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the
    original Tribunal had appeared to support the application,  but  nobody
    acting on behalf of the Secretary of State  had  then  or  subsequently
    made any further investigations as to what the position  was  until  he
    (Mr. Hutchinson) had spoken  to  somebody  the  previous  day.   As  he
    understood it, the position was that the BIA, the agency  of  the  Home
    Office dealing with immigration matters would not reveal any details to
    the authorities of the country to which a removal was taking place, but
    that the SSOU, the unit of the Home Office dealing with serious  sexual
    offences, might well regard itself as obliged  to  warn  the  receiving
    country of the dangers posed by a person being  returned  to  it.   Mr.
    Hutchinson was unable to give an assurance that details  would  not  be
    given in the appellant's case, nor was  he  able  to  give  a  complete
    account of all applicable policies and practices as they  would  affect
    the appellant.

 7. It appeared to the Tribunal that if the appellant was at risk  in  Iraq
    because of what some agency of the respondent was  going  to  tell  the
    Iraqis about  the appellant, it might be that little else mattered  for
    the purposes for this appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  was  therefore
    directed to indicate with clarity what his position was.

 8. In response to that direction the Treasury Solicitor wrote on behalf of
    the respondent to the Tribunal on 28 September 2007.  The letter is  of
    general interest in cases of this type and it is for that  reason  that
    we set it out, with its enclosures, below.

      "Disclosure of Criminal Convictions to Foreign Governments

      The Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions  Chapter  24,  Section  9
        (attached) give guidance on the disclosure of criminal  convictions
        to foreign governments.  Any disclosure to  the  Iraqi  authorities
        would be made in accordance with those provisions and the IDI makes
        it clear that disclosures are not to be made  unless  permitted  by
        the Data Protection Act and the Human Rights Act.

      The Eighth Data Protection  Principle  provides  that  "Personal  data
        shall not be transferred to a  country  of  territory  outside  the
        European Economic Area unless that country of territory ensures  an
        adequate level of protection for the rights and  freedoms  of  data
        subject in relation to  the  processing  of  personal  data".   The
        European Commission is empowered to make a decision  on  whether  a
        country ensures  an  adequate  level  of  protection  but  no  such
        decision has been made on Iraq and the IDI makes clear that in such
        circumstances the Border and Immigration Agency must  be  satisfied
        that an adequate level of protection can be ensured.

      Exceptions to the Eighth data protection principle  are  contained  in
        Schedule 4 to the Data Protection Act.  These circumstances include
        the situation where  the  transfer  is  necessary  for  reasons  of
        substantial public interest.  Section 1.3 of the IDI makes it clear
        that this exemption is relevant in relation to  transfers  of  data
        that are necessary for the prevention of crime.  Paragraph  3.3  of
        the IDI refers to proactive disclosures and  uses  the  example  of
        someone who has committed a serious crime e.g. a paedophile.

      It is clear  from  the  IDI  that  if  disclosure  of  information  is
        necessary for reasons of substantial public interest  then  such  a
        disclosure can be made, even if the  country  does  not  ensure  an
        adequate level of data protection, provided that such disclosure is
        compatible with the Human Rights  Act.   Section  3.2  of  the  IDI
        states that "If disclosure  of  an  individual's  criminal  history
        will/may lead to that individual being subjected to treatment which
        would breach the HRA then that disclosure will be unlawful."

      Disclosure of the Appellant's Convictions

       Disclosures  of  convictions  of   foreign   nationals   to   foreign
        governments are made by the Police in  conjunction  with  Interpol.
        Interpol's current policy is that it  does  not  pass  on  criminal
        record information to Iraq.   This  does  not  mean  that  Interpol
        considers  such  disclosures  would  place  the  subjects  of   the
        disclosure at risk, but is  due  to  practicalities  based  on  the
        current situation in Iraq, particularly because Interpol  does  not
        at present have a presence in Iraq.  Until this  situation  changes
        disclosure of the Appellant's convictions to the Iraqi  authorities
        by the SSHD will not be practical.

      As  the  current  situation  renders  the  disclosure  of  convictions
        impractical the Secretary of State has not made  an  assessment  of
        whether the disclosure of the Appellant's convictions to the  Iraqi
        authorities might lead to him being subjected  to  treatment  which
        would breach the Human Rights Act.  Such  an  assessment  can  only
        meaningfully be made at the time  of  potential  disclosure  as  it
        depends on the situation prevailing in the  country  at  the  time.
        The Secretary of State has no way  of  knowing  when  Interpol  may
        begin disclosures  of  criminal  record  information  to  Iraq  and
        conditions in Iraq at  that  time  could  be  very  different  from
        current conditions".

      The enclosure is as follows:

            " 1.       THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

                  When  requested  by  a  foreign  government  or  authority
             outside the European Economic Area  to  provide  personal  data
             about  a  living  individual  either  currently  or  previously
             resident within the United Kingdom, in addition  to  the  legal
             considerations (HRA, DPA,  law  of  confidence,  powers)  which
             apply in relation to disclosures to UK public authorities  [see
             sections 1 and 3], the eighth data protection principle of  the
             DPA must be considered. Disclosures of personal data to foreign
             governments are only likely to  be  lawful  under  the  DPA  if
             necessary for the identification or apprehension of immigration
             or criminal offenders, for the purpose of legal proceedings, if
             sanctioned by  international  agreements  such  as  the  Dublin
             Convention, or with the individual's consent.

           1. The Eighth Data Protection Principle


                 The eighth Data Protection principle states:

                 "Personal data shall not be transferred  to  a  country  or
             territory outside the European Economic Area (EEA) unless  that
             country or territory ensures an adequate  level  of  protection
             for the rights and freedoms of data subjects in relation to the
             processing of personal data"

                 The EEA consists of  the  25  European  Union  (EU)  Member
             States together with  Iceland,  Liechtenstein  and  Norway.  It
             excludes  the  Channel  Islands.  The  European  Commission  is
             empowered  to  make  decisions  that  particular  countries  or
             territories ensure an adequate level of  protection  for  these
             purposes. So far such decisions have been made in  relation  to
             Argentina, Canada, Guernsey, Hungary, Isle of Man, Switzerland,
             and a set of non-statutory arrangements in  the  USA  known  as
             "safe harbour".
                 Where no decision has been made in respect of a  particular
             country or territory, and unless an  exemption  to  the  eighth
             principle applies  (see  below),  the  Border  and  Immigration
             Agency must be satisfied that an adequate level  of  protection
             is ensured for these purposes before transferring personal data
             to the foreign government or authority.

                 An adequate level of protection is one  which  is  adequate
             in all the circumstances of the case, having regard to  matters
             such as the  nature  of  the  personal  data,  the  country  or
             territory to which the data are to be transferred, the purposes
             for which and the period during which the data are intended  to
             be processed, the law in force in the country or  territory  in
             question, its international obligations, any relevant codes  of
             conduct or other rules which are  enforceable  there,  and  any
             security measures taken in respect of the data there. If it  is
             considered necessary to assess  whether  a  particular  country
             offers an adequate level of data protection, contact the Border
             and Immigration Agency Information Access  Policy  Team  (IAPT)
             for advice.

           2. Exemptions to the Eighth Principle


                 Schedule 4 of the DPA sets out circumstances in  which  the
             eighth  principle  does  not   apply   to   a   transfer.   The
             circumstances that are  most  likely  to  be  relevant  to  the
             transfer of personal data by the Border and Immigration  Agency
             to a foreign government or authority are:

           . The data subject has given their consent to the transfer.

               . The transfer is necessary for reasons of substantial public
                 interest (e.g. section 13 of the Immigration and Asylum Act
                 1999).

               . The transfer:-
                 (a) is necessary for the purpose of, or in connection with,
                 any  legal   proceedings   (including   prospective   legal
                 proceedings),
                       (b) is necessary for the purpose of  obtaining  legal
advice, or
                 (c)  is   otherwise   necessary   for   the   purposes   of
                 establishing, exercising or defending legal rights.


               . The transfer is necessary in order  to  protect  the  vital
                 interests of the data subject.


               . The transfer is made on terms that are of a  kind  approved
                 by  the  Information  Commissioner  as  ensuring   adequate
                 safeguards for the rights and freedoms  of  data  subjects.
                 This is a reference to standard form  contracts  which  the
                 European Commission has published and which must be used in
                 unamended form.

               .  The  transfer  has  been  authorised  by  the  Information
                 Commissioner as being made in such a manner  as  to  ensure
                 adequate safeguards for the rights  and  freedoms  of  data
                 subjects.



           3. Reasons of Substantial Public Interest.


                 This exemption to the eighth data protection principle  may
             be relevant in relation to transfers which  are  necessary  for
             the prevention or investigation of crime, or the detection  and
             identification of immigration  offenders.  Each  case  must  be
             considered on its merits and staff should consult with the IAPT
             if considering such a disclosure.

            2.   REQUESTS FROM WITHIN THE EEA

                 As mentioned above, the EEA consists  of  the  25  European
             Union (EU) Member States together with  Iceland,  Liechtenstein
             and Norway. It excludes the Channel Islands.

                 If a request is received from a  country  from  within  the
             EEA then the eighth principle would not  apply  and  the  usual
             considerations,  which  apply  to  disclosures  to  UK   public
             authorities,  would  apply  (see  part  3).  All  requests  for
             information should be put in writing and  the  purpose  of  the
             disclosure fully explained.

             3.    REQUESTS  BY  A  FOREIGN  GOVERNMENT   FOR   DETAILS   OF
             CONVICTIONS OF ITS NATIONALS

                 Foreign governments usually make requests  for  details  of
             criminal convictions of their nationals when that individual is
             being removed or deported to their country. In some  cases  the
             Prison Service will alert the authorities of a country  to  the
             fact that one of  their  nationals  has  been  convicted  of  a
             criminal offence and is being returned  to  that  country.  The
             fact that the majority of court cases are open  to  the  public
             and criminal convictions  are  therefore  a  matter  of  public
             record does not mean  that  disclosure  of  the  details  of  a
             conviction to a foreign  government  is  lawful.  Staff  should
             follow the guidance below and contact the IAPT if in doubt.

           1. Requests from governments within the EEA


                  Where  the  Border  and  Immigration  Agency   holds   the
             information which the another government has  requested,  staff
             may disclose information  about  the  conviction  provided  the
             usual provisions of the DPA and Human Rights Act 1998 (HRA) are
             met  i.e.  the  disclosure  is  fair,  lawful,  necessary   and
             proportionate [see section 1 of this IDI  chapter  for  further
             details].

                  If  the  information  which  the  foreign  government  has
             requested is not held by the  Border  and  Immigration  Agency,
             staff should refer the requestor to  the  clerk  of  the  court
             where the individual was convicted.

           2. Requests from governments outside the EEA


                 Where the requesting government is from a  country  outside
             the EEA, the 8th Data Protection principle and the HRA must  be
             borne  in  mind  in  addition  to  the  usual   DPA   and   HRA
             considerations.  If  disclosure  of  an  individual's  criminal
             history will/may lead to that  individual  being  subjected  to
             treatment which would breach the HRA then that disclosure  will
             be unlawful. Similarly, unless we have the consent of the  data
             subject or disclosure  of  their  criminal  conviction  to  the
             foreign  government  is  in  the  substantial  public  interest
             disclosure will probably be unlawful.

                 As mentioned above (in 1.1),  some  countries  outside  the
             EEA have suitable safeguards in place to protect personal  data
             and therefore the 8th Data Protection principle will not apply.
             However, staff must still consider whether the disclosure would
             breach  the  HRA  prior  to  disclosing  the  details   of   an
             individual's criminal conviction to one of these countries.

           3. Proactive disclosures to foreign governments


                  Staff  may  come  across  individuals  being  returned  or
             deported to their country of origin  and  that  individual  has
             committed a serious crime in the UK e.g. a paedophile. Where it
             is clear that the authorities of that individual's  country  of
             origin are not aware of the individual's criminal history staff
             may consider that disclosure of that  information  is  prudent.
             However, staff must be  aware  of  the  need  to  consider  the
             implications of such a disclosure in  terms  of  the  DPA  (8th
             principle) and the HRA (see 3.2 above). A disclosure should not
             be  made  unless  the  disclosure  is  permitted   within   the
             provisions of  the  DPA  and  HRA.  Staff  should  always  seek
             guidance from the IAPT if considering a proactive disclosure to
             a foreign government.

            4.   REQUESTS FOR CERTIFICATES OF CHARACTER

                 Certain foreign  governments  require  individual  overseas
             nationals to produce certificates of character before they will
             issue visas or consider the grant of naturalisation etc.  As  a
             general rule the UK Government neither possesses nor wishes  to
             possess information enabling it to certify  that  a  particular
             individual is of  good  or  bad  character  for  this  purpose.
             Therefore,  all  requests  for  certificates  of  character  or
             criminal records are to be refused.

            4.1.       Standard Reply

                  A  standard  reply,   which   may   be   used   in   these
             circumstances, is as follows:

                 "I am writing in reply to your letter of..... in which  you
             requested a character reference for........

                  The  Immigration  and  Nationality  Directorate's  records
             relating  to  individual  overseas  nationals  do  not  contain
             details which  would  enable  me  to  assess  [INSERT  NAME  OF
             INDIVIDUAL]'s character. I am afraid therefore that I am unable
             to provide you with the information that you request."

 9. Following receipt of this information, it  has  been  accepted  on  the
    appellant's behalf that the danger to him envisaged by grounds relating
    to the Iraqis' knowledge of his record was not a matter that  ought  to
    be pursued on his behalf.  Further, in the light of the decision of the
    Tribunal in EO [2007] UKAIT 00062, Mr. Symes indicated to  us  that  he
    did not propose to pursue the last of the grounds set  out  in  para  2
    from above.

10. The focus of the reconsideration therefore turns to issues relating  to
    questions of conflict in Iraq.  Two  such  questions  are  particularly
    relevant to the appellant's claim.  The  first  is  whether  is  he  is
    entitled  to  the  benefit  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Directive,  as
    implemented by para 339C of the Immigration Rules.  The second flows in
    a sense from that: the appellant claims he was entitled to be  regarded
    as exempt from deportation because his country is an "active war zone".

11. At the hearing, Mr. Saini QC indicated to us that it was the  Secretary
    of State's position that there is (and has at all relevant times  been)
    in Iraq, throughout the whole of its territory, a situation of internal
    armed conflict within the meaning of  international  humanitarian  law.
    In our determination in KH we rejected his submission that the relevant
    phrases in Article 15(c) and para 339C were  to  be  interpreted  other
    than in accordance with the  dialectic  of  international  humanitarian
    law.  We therefore found that at all relevant times  the  situation  in
    Iraq had been one of internal armed  conflict  within  the  meaning  of
    Article 15(c) and para 339C.   So  far  as  the  present  appellant  is
    concerned, that means, as it did for KH, that he is  a  person  who  is
    potentially covered by those provisions.  As the  determination  in  KH
    explains, however, those provisions are not  of  general  or  universal
    scope: it is for a claimant to establish that he as an individual comes
    within the terms there set out.  In view  of  the  conclusion  we  have
    reached on other issues in this case we do not need to  decide  whether
    the appellant could have  succeeded,  in  an  appeal  against  a  valid
    immigration decision, on the basis of Art 15(c) and para 339C.

12. The present appellant, however, has, as we have  indicated,  a  further
    line of argument.  He points to the Secretary  of  State's  Operational
    Enforcement Manual, chapter 12: "persons liable to deportation".  After
    setting out the general principles of deportation, at para  12.2  there
    is a list of those liable for deportation, which is followed  by  these
    words:

      "Enforcement action against those liable to deportation under  section
        35A or section 36 is initiated in the Criminal Casework Team  (CCT)
        but officers may encounter offenders in the field against whom such
        action has already begun, or they may be asked to undertake further
        work or serve papers in such a case.

      Before a decision to deport is reached the  Secretary  of  State  must
        take into account  all  relevant  factors  known  to  him.   It  is
        imperative, therefore, that  all  the  person's  circumstances  are
        reported."

      The next division, 12.3, is headed "those exempt from deportation"

            "The following are exempt from deportation:
            [There is then a list beginning British citizens and those  with
        a Right of Abode and continuing with others who are formally exempt
        from deportation: and then]
            Enforcement action should not be  taken  against  Nationals  who
        originate from countries which  are  currently  active  war  zones.
        Country Information Policy Unit (CIPU) or Enforcement  Policy  Unit
        (EPU) will provide advice on this."

13. The origin of the policy here set out  is  not  clear,  but  Mr.  Symes
    pointed out that it  appears  in  the  sixth  addition  of  Macdonald's
    Immigration Law and Practice, which was published in  June  2005.   The
    policy  was  withdrawn  very  shortly  before  the   hearing   of   the
    reconsideration of these appeals on 14 January 2008.  We do  not  know,
    and we need not speculate, on the reasons for either  the  introduction
    or the withdrawal of the policy.    It  clearly  was  in  force  on  30
    January 2007, the date of the  decision  against  which  the  appellant
    appeals, and it was not in force at the date of the hearing before  us,
    just over a year later.

14. We need to consider first, whether the policy applied to the appellant,
    secondly, whether it was applied to the appellant, and thirdly,  if  it
    was not, the consequences.

15. Two issues arise in relation to the question whether the policy applied
    to the appellant.  First, is Iraq, and was Iraq at all relevant  times,
    a "currently active war zone"?  Mr. Symes, making  his  submissions  in
    his written skeleton before the hearing  of  the  reconsideration,  and
    orally without the benefit  of  the  Tribunal's  determination  in  KH,
    argued that the words of that phrase were ordinary  English  words  and
    should be given their ordinary  English  meaning,  following  Brutus  v
    Cozens [1973] AC 854.  He drew our attention to the description of Iraq
    as a place  where  a  war  is  continuing  and  to  various  dictionary
    definitions of "war" and "zone".  We think there is considerable  force
    in those submissions.  They are, however, to an  extent  superseded  by
    the Secretary of State's indication at the hearing  that  her  view  is
    that for the purposes of international humanitarian law  the  situation
    in Iraq is one of internal armed conflict.  Even if we are wrong in  KH
    to have held that Article 15(c) and para 339C are to be interpreted  in
    accordance with the vocabulary of international  humanitarian  law,  it
    would be extraordinary if the Secretary of State were able to say  that
    she and her predecessors intended  the  phrase  "currently  active  war
    zone" not to apply to a country which  they  regarded  as  being  in  a
    situation of internal armed conflict for the purposes of  international
    humanitarian law.  For this reason, whatever the true  meaning  of  the
    phrase in the Operational Enforcement  Manual,  we  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that the Secretary of State is not entitled to say that Iraq
    is not amongst the countries included.

16. The other question relating to the applicability of the policy  to  the
    appellant is whether, at the time the policy was in  force,  there  was
    any attempt to take "enforcement action" against him.  The Secretary of
    State's position is that enforcement action  has  not  yet  been  taken
    against the appellant: as he appealed against the  decision  to  deport
    him, no deportation order was signed and  he  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  This is a submission, effectively, that "enforcement  action"
    should be given an ordinary  language  interpretation,  and  means  the
    process of ejection from the United  Kingdom.   Unfortunately  for  the
    Secretary of State, however, both statute  and  the  Immigration  Rules
    show  that  the  policy  would  not  be  unique  in  clearly   treating
    "enforcement  action"  as  a  process  beginning  well  before   actual
    ejection.

17. Section 24A of the Immigration Act 1971  makes  it  an  offence  for  a
    person by  deception  to  secure  or  seek  to  secure  the  avoidance,
    postponement  or  revocation  of  enforcement   action   against   him.
    Enforcement  action  is  defined  as  meaning  the  giving  of  removal
    directions, the making of a deportation order or the  person's  removal
    in consequence of directions or a deportation order.    None  of  these
    events are, if we may so put it, as early in the story as the  decision
    to  make  a  deportation  order:  but  for  the  purposes  of  s   24A,
    "enforcement action" nevertheless begins before actual ejection.

18. Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules, to which Mr. Symes  also  made
    reference, lists a number of immigration decisions (including a  notice
    of intention to make a deportation order)  as  events  following  which
    time spent in the United Kingdom does not count  towards  a  period  of
    long residence for the purposes of that Rule.  We do not find para 276B
    helpful in interpreting "enforcement action" for the  purposes  of  the
    Operational Enforcement Manual.  That is not merely because it contains
    no definition of "enforcement action".  It is because  the  purpose  of
    that part of the Rule is to set out the events which,  whether  or  not
    they eventually result in any  further  action,  draw  formally  to  an
    individual's attention the Secretary of State's view  that  he  is  not
    entitled to remain in the United Kingdom.

19.  As  we  have  shown,  however,  the  policy  itself   indicates   that
    "enforcement action" is "initiated" by those involved with following up
    offenders, the Criminal Casework Team, and that those in  the  part  of
    the Home Office concerned with  immigration  to  whom  the  Operational
    Enforcement Manual is directed, take part at a later  stage:  "officers
    may encounter offenders in the  field  against  whom  such  action  has
    already begun, or they may be asked to undertake further work or  serve
    papers in such a case".  That part of the Operation Enforcement  Manual
    makes it clear to us that "enforcement action" within the terms of that
    document is not limited to the process  of  ejection  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is clear that the service of  a  notice  of  intention  to
    deport is to be regarded as "enforcement action".

20. We therefore conclude that  the  policy  set  out  in  the  Operational
    Enforcement Manual applied to the appellant at the date of the decision
    against which he appeals and continued to apply to him until the policy
    was withdrawn on 14 January 2008.

21. The next question is whether the policy applicable to the appellant was
    applied to him.  We have no hesitation in saying that it was not.   The
    appellant originates from a country  which  was  and  is  a  "currently
    active war zone".  It does not appear that any advice  was  ever  taken
    from CIPU or EPU, but in any event under the terms of  the  Operational
    Enforcement Manual  enforcement  action  should  not  have  been  taken
    against him.  The making of the decision against which he  appeals  was
    enforcement action.  It accordingly follows that  the  policy  was  not
    applied to him.

22. It follows further from  that  that  the  decision  against  which  the
    appellant appeals was one which in the Abdi (DS Abdi v SSHD [1996]  Imm
    AR I48) sense was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   What  is  the
    consequence of  that  today?   Mr.  Saini's  submission  was  that  any
    conclusion by us that the decision was not, at the time it was made, in
    accordance with the law does not assist the appellant.  He  points  out
    that there has at no time been any promise or indication not to  change
    or withdraw the policy.  The appellant does not have the benefit of the
    policy at the date of the hearing, because it has been withdrawn.   The
    appellant is accordingly at the date of  the  hearing  liable  to  such
    enforcement action as may be appropriate, subject, of  course,  to  any
    other objections to his removal that may be sustained.  Accordingly, in
    Mr. Saini's submission, the  Tribunal  should  reject  the  appellant's
    arguments against the legality of the decision and proceed on the basis
    that, at the date of the hearing, the decision should be treated as one
    which was made lawfully.

23. Mr. Symes, on behalf of the appellant, takes  a  diametrically  opposed
    view.  He asserts not merely that the decision was made unlawfully, but
    that the consequences of the  decision  are  such  that  the  appellant
    should now be granted leave to remain without further investigation  of
    his circumstances.  Mr. Symes accepts that he cannot point in this case
    to a solemn statement of government obligations, and perhaps not  to  a
    real abuse of power (see R(Rashid) v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  744).   The
    policy, as expressed in the Operational Enforcement Manual, however, is
    not subject to any discretion and is apparently not  capable  of  being
    overridden.  Instead of being given the benefit of  it,  the  appellant
    was subjected to a decision to make a deportation order, which  he  has
    had to fight, in circumstances where that decision should not have been
    made.  To order  the  grant  of  leave  to  him  would,  in  Mr.  Symes
    submission, be the only appropriate outcome in the circumstances.

24. We are unable to accept Mr. Symes submissions.  If the policy had still
    been in force at the date of the hearing, we might, following AG [2007]
    UKAIT 00082, have found that, given the lack of discretion inherent  in
    it, this was a case where in allowing an appeal on "not  in  accordance
    with the law" grounds the Tribunal ought to direct a particular  course
    of action.  Even if the policy had been in force at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, the particular  course  of  action  the  Tribunal  might  have
    directed would not have been the granting of leave.   That  is  because
    the policy itself does not indicate that leave should  be  granted,  it
    merely indicates that enforcement action  should  not  be  taken.   The
    appropriate direction would therefore have been that enforcement action
    be not taken.  We do not  think  that  we  have  the  power  apparently
    exercised by the Court of Appeal in Rashid to grant or direct the grant
    of leave to remain purely as a reward for tribulation.

25. We also reject Mr. Saini's submissions.  For the reasons we have given,
    the decision when made was a decision which was not in accordance  with
    the  law.   A  decision  to  make  a  deportation   order   is   always
    discretionary, and in order to exercise  the  discretion  properly  and
    lawfully the person making the decision  must  take  into  account  all
    relevant circumstances as they are when  the  decision  is  made.   The
    first time the decision to deport the  appellant  could  lawfully  have
    been made was on the day the policy was  withdrawn,  14  January  2008.
    The decision was in fact made a year before that, and cannot have taken
    into account the events  of  the  subsequent  year,  during  which  the
    appellant was in the United Kingdom.  We cannot  imagine  that  nothing
    that happened in that subsequent year was relevant to the  exercise  of
    the discretion.  For that reason the withdrawal of the  policy  cannot,
    in our view, save a decision  which  was  made  unlawfully  during  its
    currency.  If enforcement action is to be taken against the  appellant,
    the discretions involved in that action must be exercised  lawfully  on
    the basis on taking into account all relevant  information.   That  has
    not yet been done.

26. We are aware that this determination may affect a substantial number of
    other cases.  We cannot help that: the position is that in an  official
    statement of instructions the Secretary of State  treated  a  group  of
    people as exempt from deportation and immune from enforcement action in
    connexion with proposed deportation.  That statement  then  appears  to
    have been forgotten by those who had  the  job  of  applying  it.   The
    consequence may be that a number of deportation decisions  made  before
    the withdrawal of this policy on 14 January 2008 will have to  be  held
    to have been made otherwise than in accordance with the law.   As  well
    as chapter 12 of the Operational Enforcement Manual, Mr Symes showed us
    chapter 10, which appears to indicate that the same considerations will
    apply to decisions to remove taken under s 10  of  the  1999  Act.   We
    have, however, seen no material suggesting that the same will apply  to
    illegal entrants like  KH.   The  process  (under  Schedule  2  to  the
    Immigration Act 1971) for the removal of illegal entrants is  different
    from that  for  deportation  and  removals  under  s  10  (normally  of
    overstayers); and there may well be reasons why those who have had some
    leave should be more generously treated than those who have  never  had
    any.  This determination applies to those served  during  the  relevant
    period with notice  of  intention  to  make  a  deportation  order  and
    apparently also to those served with  notice  of  intention  to  remove
    under s 10; but it does not  apply  to  those  served  with  notice  of
    intention to remove as an illegal entrant.

27. At the beginning of  this  determination  we  set  out  the  Tribunal's
    conclusion that the Immigration Judge had materially erred in law.  For
    the reasons we have given the decision against which he appeals  cannot
    stand.  He awaits a lawful decision from the Secretary of  State.   For
    that reason we substitute a determination allowing his appeal.

                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT



