
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

  JJ and SS (Student; regular attendance; which course?) Gambia [2007] UKAIT
                                                                       00050




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Columbus House, Newport            Date of Hearing:  11 May 2007


                                   Before:

                         Mr Justice Hodge, President
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
                       Immigration Judge JFW Phillips


                                   Between


                                  JJ and SS
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:          Mr C Jowett instructed by Lawrence Lupin,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Hammonds, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) A person seeking an extension of leave as  a  student  must  show  under
paragraph 60(iv) of HC 395 satisfactory evidence of regular attendance on  a
course for which he was last  granted  leave  to  enter  or  remain  or,  if
appropriate, for which permission to transfer was subsequently given by  the
Secretary of State and which he has already begun  or,  alternatively  where
that is not possible, that he has already completed.  He is not entitled  to
establish regular attendance by reference to a  different  course  which  he
has undertaken without the Secretary  of  State's  knowledge;  (2)  "regular
attendance" may still be established despite some justifiable absences,  for
example on account of illness or, perhaps, because a student has  to  return
home because of family or personal circumstances such  as  the  death  of  a
close relative.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The first and second appellants are citizens of the  Gambia  who  were
     born on 4 February 1971 and  15  July  1973  respectively.   They  are
     married.  On 24 April 2006, the respondent refused to vary  the  first
     appellant's leave to remain as a  student  under  paragraph  62  (with
     reference to paragraph 60) of  Statement  of  Changes  of  Immigration
     Rules, HC 395.  On that same date, the  respondent  also  refused  the
     second appellant an extension of her leave to remain as the spouse  of
     a student under paragraph 78 (with reference to paragraph  76)  of  HC
     395.  In a determination promulgated  on  13  June  2006,  Immigration
     Judge  Morris  dismissed  both  appellants'   appeals.    Orders   for
     reconsideration were made on 26 June 2006 by Senior Immigration  Judge
     Southern.  As a result, the matter comes before us.

  2. The first appellant's immigration history, so far as relevant,  is  as
     follows.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 January 2003  with  a
     valid entry clearance as a  student.   His  leave  as  a  student  was
     extended on a number of occasions finally being extended on 4 May 2005
     until 31  January  2006.    In  November  2004,  the  first  appellant
     successfully completed a  Chartered  Management  Institute  Management
     Diploma Level 5 NQF at  the  CEED  (Charity)  Ltd  Training  Institute
     ('CEED') in Bristol.  Thereafter, the first appellant enrolled  on  an
     IT Training Level II course on the European Computer  Driving  Licence
     ('ECDL').  The course commenced on 3 February  2005  and  was  due  to
     finish on 4 November 2005.  However, the appellant  decided  that  the
     course was not suitable for him as it was not  structured  as  he  had
     hoped, involving self-learning rather than being taught, and  he  left
     the course in July 2005 having completed four (but passing only three)
     of the seven modules.  He  decided  to  undertake  an  Association  of
     Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) course at  Bristol  College  of
     Accountancy which he enrolled upon in September 2005 but which did not
     commence until the end of January 2006.

  3. On 17 January 2006, he applied  for  an  extension  of  his  leave  to
     undertake the ACCA course which was refused and  it  is  that  refusal
     which is the subject of this appeal.  The Respondent's reasons are set
     out in the Notice of Decision dated 24 April 2006:

           "The Secretary of State is not satisfied that  you  can  produce
           satisfactory evidence of regular attendance  during  a  previous
           course of study.


           Furthermore, the Secretary of State is not  satisfied  that  you
           can show evidence of  satisfactory  progress  in  your  previous
           course of  study,  including  the  taking  and  passing  of  any
           relevant examinations."


  4. The Respondent amplified these reasons  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
     Letter also dated 24 April 2006:

           "In view of the fact that you withdrew from your previous  study
           at the CEED Training Institute in July  2005  the  Secretary  of
           State  is  not  satisfied  that  you  can  produce  satisfactory
           evidence of regular attendance during a  course  for  which  you
           have been enrolled in the past.


           Furthermore, in view of your success in only  three  from  seven
           modules of that course, the Secretary of State is not  satisfied
           that you can show evidence  of  satisfactory  progress  in  your
           course of study."


  5. On appeal, the Immigration Judge accepted that the first appellant was
     a dedicated and capable student as evidenced by his  previous  studies
     and what was said about him on his current ACCA course  which  he  had
     already begun.  She also fully accepted that the first  appellant  had
     not completed the ECDL course for  good  reasons.   Nevertheless,  she
     concluded that, as a consequence, he could not meet  the  requirements
     on  'attendance'  and  'progress'  in  paragraphs   60(iv)   and   (v)
     respectively of the Immigration Rules.  At  paragraph  15(iv)  of  her
     determination, she said this:

           "As regards paragraph 60, the  fact  that  the  First  Appellant
           withdrew from the EDCL (sic)  course, however, well-intentioned,
           means that he  cannot  show  satisfactory  evidence  of  regular
           attendance during any course which he has  already  begun.   The
           requirements of the Rule are that he not only  begins  a  course
           but also that he also completes it.  The same Rules also require
           that he should show satisfactory progress in his course, meaning
           the course for which he obtained leave to remain as  a  student,
           including the taking and passing of any  relevant  examinations.
           Whilst a view  may  be  taken  from  the  consideration  of  the
           documentation supplied by the Educational  Establishments  which
           the First Appellant has attended that he is more than capable of
           making  satisfactory  progress   and   passing   the   necessary
           examinations, the fact remains that he did not do so in the case
           of his EDCL (sic) course..."

  6. As a result, the Immigration Judge  dismissed  the  first  appellant's
     appeal and that of the second appellant which necessarily failed as it
     was entirely dependent  upon  the  first  appellant  establishing  his
     entitlement under the Immigration Rules.

  7. The applicable Immigration Rules are paragraphs 60 and 62  of  HC  395
     which, so far as relevant, are as follows:

           "60.  The requirement for an extension of stay as a student  are
           that the applicant: ....


                 (iv)  can  produce   satisfactory   evidence   of   regular
                 attendance during any course which he has already begun; or
                 any other course for which he  has  been  enrolled  in  the
                 past; and


                 (v) can show  evidence  of  satisfactory  progress  in  his
                 course of study including the taking  and  passing  of  any
                 relevant examinations; ..."
           ....
           62. An extension of stay as a student is to be  refused  if  the
           Secretary  of  State  is  not  satisfied  that   each   of   the
           requirements of paragraph 60 is met."

  8. We do not set out paragraph 76  of  HC  395  which  provides  for  the
     extension of leave of a spouse of a student.  One of the  requirements
     is that the applicant is married to someone who has leave as a student
     (para 76(i)).   It  is  not  a  matter  of  dispute  that  the  second
     appellant's appeal falls to be decided in line with that of the  first
     appellant, her husband.

  9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jowett in  his  skeleton  argument  and
     oral submissions challenged the  Immigration  Judge's  approach  in  a
     number of ways.  Essentially, he submitted that the Immigration  Judge
     had been wrong to look exclusively at the appellant's 'attendance' and
     'progress' on the ECDL course which he did not complete and, at  least
     in relation to the 'attendance'  issue,  there  was  a  discretion  to
     condone non-attendance.

 10. We first deal with the issue of  "satisfactory  progress"  under  para
     60(v).   Mr Jowett  submitted  that  the  first  appellant  had  shown
     satisfactory progress in the ECDL course: it  was  the  course  itself
     rather than his progress on it  which  was  unsatisfactory.    It  was
     accepted by the Immigration Judge  that  the  first  appellant  was  a
     successful and capable student, it could not be, Mr Jowett  submitted,
     that the rule excluded someone who was personally making  satisfactory
     progress but where the course was poorly provided and, as a result, he
     undertook a more suitable course.

 11. We are unable to accept  Mr  Jowett's  submission.   First,  paragraph
     60(v) requires the appellant to show "satisfactory  progress"  in  the
     course of study for which he was last  given  leave  or  permitted  to
     undertake by the Secretary of  State.   That  is  established  by  the
     Tribunal's decision in TY (Student; "satisfactory progress"; course of
     study)  Burma  [2007]  UKAIT  00007.   At  paragraph   [19]   of   its
     determination, the Tribunal said this:

           "19. It seems to us, taking that as an underlying feature of the
           student rules read together, "his course of study" in  paragraph
           60(v) also focuses on the "course of study" for which  leave  to
           enter or remain was last granted.   We  see  nothing  unfair  or
           surprising in requiring  the  applicant  to  show  'satisfactory
           progress' in that "course of study" rather than any other.   Why
           should the individual's progress be assessed by reference to any
           other "course of study" when further leave is requested?  It  is
           the one for  which  leave  was  most  recently  granted  or,  if
           appropriate, for which a transfer was subsequently  approved  by
           the Secretary of State.  Any previous course(s)  of  study  will
           have been taken into account in earlier  decision(s)  to  extend
           the individual's leave.   It is the course of  study  which  the
           individual either wishes to  continue  or,  at  least  in  leave
           terms,  is  the  most  immediate,  against  which  it  is   most
           appropriate to assess progress.   Indeed,  we  do  not  consider
           there to be any justification for an individual to obtain  leave
           for a course of study and then switch to a  less  difficult  one
           because it proves too difficult but claim,  as  is  proposed  in
           this  case,  'satisfactory  progress'  in  the  lesser   course.
           Usually such an individual will have shown, in reality, that the
           leave granted to undertake the  more  difficult  course  was  in
           retrospect mistaken. "


 12. We agree.  The effect in this appeal is that the appellant  must  show
     "satisfactory progress" in the ECDL course since, as was  accepted  by
     Mr Jowett before us, that was the course for which he was last granted
     leave on 4 May 2005.  He had, of course, commenced that  course  on  5
     February 2005 but was still studying it until he stopped in July 2005.
      We are not aware that subsequently he has ever been given  permission
     by the Secretary of State to follow any other course of study.

 13. Can he show  "satisfactory  progress"  in  the  ECDL  course?   It  is
     accepted that he only completed four out of the required seven modules
     (passing only three) before abandoning the ECDL  course.   In  SW  and
     Others (Paragraph 60 (v): meaning of "including") Jamaica [2006] UKAIT
     00054, the Tribunal held that an individual must  take  and  pass  any
     relevant examinations in order to  satisfy  the  requirement  in  para
     60(v).   The relevant course of study  in  this  case  entailed  seven
     modules and examinations in order to complete it.  The course finished
     in November 2005 and the appellant had only  taken  four  (and  passed
     only three) of those modules.  It seems to us that, following SW,  the
     first appellant cannot show that he has taken and passed the  relevant
     examinations for the course.  The fact that he subjectively found  the
     course unsatisfactory is neither here nor there.  In simple  language,
     he failed to progress as required in the  structure  of  that  course.
     The Immigration Judge committed no error of law in  her  approach  to,
     and application of, para 60(v) to the first appellant.

 14. We turn now to consider para 60(iv).  The language of para 60(iv)  is,
     we accept, different from that in para 60(v).  On the face of it, para
     60(iv) does not require proof of "satisfactory attendance"  rather  it
     requires "satisfactory proof of regular attendance".  However, as  the
     Tribunal noted in WR (Student: "Regular Attendance"; "Maximum Period")
     Jamaica [2005] UKAIT 00170:

           "[i]n  substance  these  two  requirements   are   looking   for
           satisfactory attendance and satisfactory progress respectively."
           (at [20])

     Thus, there must be"attendance that is sufficiently often, habitual or
     frequent in order to meet the demands of  undertaking  and  completing
     the particular course." (at [20])

 15. Paragraph 60(iv)  also  contemplates  that  regular  attendance  being
     either "during any course which has already been begun" or "any  other
     course for which he has been enrolled".  Mr Jowett submitted that as a
     consequence the Immigration Judge was entitled to  look  at  the  ACCA
     course on which the first appellant was now enrolled and also  at  the
     management course that he completed in November  2004.   Although  the
     former was post-decision, it was admissible by virtue of s.  85(4)  of
     the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  There was no doubt,
     he submitted, that the first  appellant's  attendance  on  both  those
     courses met the requirement in paragraph 60(iv).

 16. On the face of it,  the  wording  of  para  60(iv)  suggests  that  an
     individual has a choice: he may rely upon his current course (if  any)
     which he has begun or any other completed course  in  the  past.    On
     behalf  of  the  respondent,   Mr   Hammonds   submitted   that   this
     interpretation was to be avoided and the focus  should  be,  as  under
     para 60(v) in relation to 'progress', on  the  course  for  which  the
     appellant was last granted  leave  or  subsequent  permission  by  the
     Secretary of State to undertake.

 17. We agree.   The  reasoning  of  the  Tribunal  in  para  [19]  of  the
     Tribunal's decision in TY, which we set out above, has equal force  in
     respect of the attendance requirement in para 60(iv).  An individual's
     attendance on courses undertaken before his existing period  of  leave
     will have been taken into account in  reaching  earlier  decisions  to
     extend his leave.  What is relevant to the current decision whether to
     extend leave is the nature of the individual's attendance  on  courses
     undertaken during his current period of  leave  for  which  leave  was
     granted  or  subsequent  permission  to  transfer  was  given  by  the
     Secretary of State.   There is no rationality in allowing an appellant
     to trade on his attendance record on earlier courses despite the  fact
     that his attendance record on any course during his current period  of
     leave is poor and unacceptable.  An interpretation which  avoids  this
     nonsensicality is preferable despite the apparently flexible  language
     used in para 60(iv).   Thus, para 60(iv) limits consideration  to  the
     course that the appellant was last granted leave to undertake  or,  if
     appropriate, for which permission to transfer was  subsequently  given
     by the  Secretary  of  State.    That  course  may  be  one  that  the
     individual has already begun  or,  alternatively  where  that  is  not
     possible, that he has already completed.

 18. We are conscious in reaching this view on para 60(iv) that the  course
     relied upon by the appellant in WR to satisfy para 60(iv) was not  one
     for which it would seem that she had leave or permission to undertake.
      In WR, the point raised in this  appeal  was  not  taken  before  the
     Tribunal.  The principal issue in  WR  was  the  meaning  of  "regular
     attendance" in para 60(iv). The Tribunal's decision  cannot  be  taken
     sub silentio as authority for the meaning of para 60(iv) contended for
     by Mr Jowett which was not raised in WR and so not considered  by  the
     Tribunal.

 19. On the facts of this appeal, the course for which  the  appellant  was
     last given leave or permission to transfer to  was  the  ECDL  course.
     Section 85(4) does not assist the appellant.  The "substance"  of  the
     decision relates  to  "regular  attendance"  on  that  course.   Post-
     decision facts relating to other courses, such  as  the  ACCA  course,
     subsequently undertaken by the appellant are simply not  relevant  and
     s. 85(4) cannot make them so  (see   EA  (Section  85  (4)  explained)
     Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00013).   Consequently, the Immigration Judge was
     correct to consider only the ECDL course.

 20. As regards the ECDL course, Mr Jowett submitted that  the  Immigration
     Judge had a discretion,  in  effect,  to  condone  non-attendance  for
     which, as in this case, there was good reason namely that  the  course
     itself was unsatisfactory from the  appellant's  point  of  view.   He
     relied upon the (then) relevant Home Office IDI of 15  March  2006  at
     para 3.15.1:

           "A student must attend every class or session he is required  to
           attend by his educational establishment, except where attendance
           is not practicable e.g. due to illness.  When judging whether  a
           student has been in regular attendance, it is necessary to  look
           at his record over the whole period under consideration.  If  it
           is generally satisfactory with only a short period  of  absence,
           further enquiries may not be necessary.  If a  student  has  not
           been in regular attendance he should be given an opportunity  to
           explain  the  reason  for  his  non-attendance  and  to  provide
           evidence, such as a doctor's certificate in the case of illness.
            If the reason given is not satisfactory or the evidence is  not
           forthcoming, refusal should be the normal course of action."

 21. Mr Jowett submitted that para 3.15.1  of  the  IDIs  showed  that  the
     Immigration  Judge  had  been  wrong  in  paragraph  15(iii)  of   her
     determination to conclude that "the relevant Rules are absolute and do
     not allow the exercise of any discretion".

 22. We can dispose of the final  point  made  by  Mr  Jowett  immediately.
     Paragraph 60(iv) does not create a "discretion"  in  its  application.
     Its terms must be applied and, of course, judgments as  to  the  facts
     and the meaning  of  the  words  must  be  made.   But,  there  is  no
     "discretion" to apply or not apply the Rule.  If the individual  meets
     the requirements leave will follow.   By contrast, if he fails to  met
     the requirements, para 62 makes it plain that the application must  be
     refused.

 23. To the extent that Mr  Jowett  is  suggesting  that  the  IDI  somehow
     'waters down' the requirement of establishing  "satisfactory  evidence
     of regular attendance" in para 60(iv), we do  not  accept  that.   The
     requirements of the Rules cannot be changed by the Secretary of  State
     in the IDIs.   That can only be done by the Parliamentary process  for
     amending the  Rules.   At  best,  the  IDIs  can  provide  an  aid  to
     interpretation or they may set out a policy (or practice) that is more
     generous outside the strict requirements of the Rules.   They  cannot,
     however,  in  making  decisions  under  the  Rules  dispense  with   a
     requirement in those Rules.

 24.  It  may  be  that  IDI  3.15.1  illustrates   that,   on   a   proper
     interpretation, "regular attendance" may still be established  despite
     some justifiable absences, for example on account of illness  (as  set
     out in the IDI) or, perhaps, because a  student  has  to  return  home
     because of family or personal circumstances such as  the  death  of  a
     close relative.  We are content  to  accept  that  is  correct.   That
     cannot, however, help the first appellant in this appeal.   He  failed
     to attend the ECDL course after July  2005  -  in  particular  on  its
     resumption in September 2005 -until its completion in  November  2005.
     The fact that he found the course unsatisfactory  does  not  turn  his
     absence from  the  course  for  some  2  to  3  months  into  "regular
     attendance".  We also note that in a progress report from CEED on  the
     first appellant dated 16 January 2006, it is stated that "[s]ince  the
     inception of the Programme [the first appellant's] attendance has been
     below average."  In the light of the facts, we do not see how the  IDI
     can assist the first appellant.

 25. Alternatively, Mr Jowett may be suggesting  that  the  IDI  creates  a
     legal entitlement or expectation as  to  the  process  which  will  be
     followed if there are  perceived  difficulties  with  an  individual's
     attendance record.  We do not regard it as appropriate to  treat  this
     IDI as creating any entitlement or  legitimate  expectation  that,  in
     certain circumstances, enquiries  will  be  made  before  any  refusal
     decision is taken.  That is, no doubt, sensible practice for officials
     acting on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   Providing  guidance  to
     assist  decision-makers  in  understanding  and  fairly  applying  the
     Immigration Rules is, at least in part, one of  the  purposes  of  the
     IDIs.  However, we would not regard the IDI as going  beyond  guidance
     of that sort and so as  to  create  a  legally  enforceable  practice,
     departure from which could properly give rise to an appeal on the "not
     in accordance with the law" ground before the Tribunal.  In any event,
     even if we were wrong in that view, that could not  assist  the  first
     appellant  here.   The  procedure   was   followed.    Following   his
     application, the first appellant was  asked  by  the  Home  Office  in
     letters dated 30 January 2006 and 9  March  2006  to  provide  further
     information prior to the decision to refuse him leave being taken.  In
     response to the first, he replied in a letter dated 16  February  2006
     (at D3 of the Home Office bundle) in which he explained  that  he  had
     abandoned the ECDL course because he was not satisfied with the course
     and had lost interest in it.   As  we  have  said,  that  was  not  an
     explanation which could lead to any different view being taken of  the
     first appellant's attendance record on the ECDL course.

Decision

 26. For these reasons, the Immigration Judge did not materially err in law
     in dismissing the first appellant's appeal.  The decision  to  dismiss
     the second appellant's appeal follows.  The decisions to  dismiss  the
     appeals of both the first and second appellants stand.








                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                                             Date:
