
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Thapa & Ors (costs: general principles; s 9 review) [2018] UKUT 00054 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                            anita dammarpal thapa
                        surya bahadur dammarpal thapa
                           kamala dammar pal thapa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Ali, Solicitor, Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1) What emerges from the guidance in Cancino (costs -  First-tier  Tribunal
- new powers) [2015] UKFTT 00059 (IAC) is that the power to award  costs  in
rule 9 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and rule 10  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 is to be exercised with significant restraint and  that
detailed examinations of other decided  cases  are  unlikely  to  assist  in
deciding whether to award costs under either of those rules.

(2) Section 9 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007,  read  with
the relevant procedure rules, enables the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  review,
set aside and re-decide a case where, on  the  materials  available  to  the
judge deciding an application for permission to appeal, an error of law  has
occurred and (as in the present case) a party has thereby been  deprived  of
a fair hearing. In the present case, such a course would  have  avoided  the
need for the matter to come before the Upper Tribunal and have  resulted  in
a more expeditious outcome.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Introduction

 1.  On  19  December  2017,  the  Upper  Tribunal  heard  the  appellants'
    application for an order under rule 10(3)(d) of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 that the respondent be required to pay  the
    appellants the sum of �2,332, representing the costs said to have  been
    incurred by the  appellants  as  a  result  of  the  respondent  having
    unreasonably defended the appellate proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellants appealed against the decisions of the respondent  on  30
    September 2015 to refuse them entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as
    adult dependent  relatives  of  their  father,  who  was  an  ex-Gurkha
    soldier.  The appellants' appeals were heard in the First-tier Tribunal
    on 25 January 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid.  Mr M Chowdhury,
    Presenting  Officer,  attended  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.    The
    appellants were not represented.

 3. It is now common ground that Counsel for the appellants had been  taken
    ill the night before the  hearing  and  had  informed  his  instructing
    solicitors that he would be unable to attend that hearing.  The sponsor
    father of the appellants had also been taken ill, with the result  that
    he too could not attend.

 4. It is also now common ground that a fax had been sent to the First-tier
    Tribunal's administration on the morning  of  the  hearing,  confirming
    Counsel's illness and seeking an adjournment.  A further  fax  in  this
    regard had also been sent, in addition to which instructing  solicitors
    telephoned the Tribunal before the scheduled start of the hearing.

 5. It is finally common ground that,  regrettably,  Judge  Majid  was  not
    informed of the adjournment request or of the indisposition of  Counsel
    and the sponsor.  The judge proceeded with the hearing.

 6. In a written decision promulgated on 30 January 2017, the judge held as
    follows:-

         "2.  I have dismissed this appeal due to lack of interest.

           3. Fairness required by the overriding objective does not  demand
             that this case should be left unresolved.   Therefore  in  the
             interest of expeditious and just disposal of cases I deal with
             this appeal without any further delay under Paragraph 28 (sic)
             of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  Immigration
             and Asylum rules 2014, SI2604 (as amended) (sic).

            4.  Adhering  to  the  usual  practice  the  Presenting  Officer
             requested me  to  draw  the  appropriate  inference  from  the
             omission of the Appellant (sic) to arrange any  representative
             to attend the hearing.

           5. Without  cogent  rebutting  evidence  on  various  significant
             issues nobody can expect this appeal to succeed.

           6. Accordingly, bearing in mind that the burden of  proof  is  on
             the Appellant, I find that the  Respondent's  decision  to  be
             sound in law and it stands.

         NOTICE OF DECISION

         Appeal Dismissed."




2. Challenging the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

 7. The appellants applied to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal the decision of Judge Majid.  Paragraph 3 of the grounds  stated
    that the appellants' solicitors had faxed and telephoned the  Tribunal,
    as described above.  The grounds noted that the judge did not appear to
    have been aware of the application to adjourn.

 8. Ground 1 was, accordingly, that the  judge  "arguably  proceeded  on  a
    mistaken view of the facts (that there was no interest in the  case  by
    the appellants, and no application to adjourn)".  The case of E &  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49  was
    relied upon in this regard.  The judge's mistake  of  fact  as  to  the
    reasons why there was  no  representation  of  the  appellants  at  the
    hearing was submitted to amount to an error of law.

 9. Ground 2 contended that the judge failed, in any  event,  to  determine
    the grounds of appeal against the respondent's decision.  That decision
    was said to constitute the refusal  of  the  appellants'  human  rights
    claims, by reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.  A  bundle  of  evidence
    was before the judge, running  to  86  pages,  which  included  witness
    statements "going to emotional ties" between  the  appellants  and  the
    sponsor, as  well  as  "money  transfer  receipts  going  to  financial
    support".

10. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 20 June 2017.  The judge who granted permission stated
    as follows:-

         "2.  Counsel for the Appellants was taken ill the night before  the
             hearing.  The Sponsor was also separately taken ill and  could
             not  attend  the  hearing.   The  grounds  set  out  that  the
             Appellants' solicitor sought an adjournment on the morning  of
             the hearing by fax at  9.27am.   Counsel's  indisposition  was
             also confirmed by his clerk by  way  of  a  fax  sent  to  the
             Tribunal administration  at  9.17am.   The  Appellant's  (sic)
             solicitors further telephoned the Tribunal  administration  at
             9.30am, 11.30am and 16.30pm that day.   From  the  Decision  &
             Reasons it would appear that the Judge was not made aware that
             an application to adjourn the  case  had  been  made  when  he
             decided that "I have dismissed this  appeal  due  to  lack  of
             interest".  It is an  arguable  error  of  law  that  had  the
             Appellants'  Representative  been  available  to  conduct  the
             hearing and the Sponsor been available to give  oral  evidence
             then it may have made a material difference to the outcome  or
             to the fairness of the proceedings."




3. Events in the Upper Tribunal

11. On 3 July 2017, the respondent filed with the Upper Tribunal a response
    to the grounds of appeal, pursuant to rule 24 of the 2008  rules.   The
    substantive provisions of the response read as follows:-

         "2.  The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal.  In summary the
             respondent will submit inter alia that the Judge of the First-
             tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.

           3. If it was the  case  as  asserted  in  the  grounds,  that  an
             application to adjourne (sic) was made but not passed  to  the
             judge to consider, then this could well be a procedural  error
             amounting  to  an  error  of  law.   Unfortunatly  (sic)   the
             permission is unclear as to whether the Tribunal  can  confirm
             that the adjournment request was made  as  asserted.   In  the
             absence of that  confirmation  the  Secretary  of  State  must
             reserve her position on the point.

         4.   The respondent requests an oral hearing."

12. It is now accepted by the appellants that, in composing  the  response,
    the respondent had seen only the appellants' grounds of application for
    permission to appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  The First-tier Tribunal had, however, been sent  not  only  the
    application for permission to appeal, with the attendant  grounds,  but
    also a witness statement of Mr Syed Ali, of the appellants' solicitors,
    dated 1 February 2017, detailing the attempts that  had  been  made  to
    secure an adjournment on the basis of the ill-health of Counsel and the
    sponsor.  There were also a number of attendance notes of Everest  Law,
    made  on  25  January  2017,  concerning  Mr  Ali's  actions;   a   fax
    transmission report showing that a letter from Everest  Solicitors  was
    sent to the First-tier Tribunal  on  25  January  2017,  regarding  the
    illness of Counsel, with the consequent application to adjourn;  and  a
    letter from a doctor in Brecon Group Medical Practice, dated 26 January
    2017, regarding the sponsor's indisposition.

13. The appellants' appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  were  heard  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Southern on 25 October 2017.  Mr  Jesurum,  of  Counsel,
    attended on behalf of the appellants.  Mr Jesurum had been the  Counsel
    due to attend before Judge Majid.

14. At paragraph 2 of his decision, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  noted
    that, unknown to Judge Majid "because it appears that nobody  had  told
    him", the First-tier Tribunal had received a number  of  communications
    regarding the non-attendance of Counsel, and that:-

         "3.  It seems clear that none of this  was  communicated  to  Judge
             Majid.  That is sufficient to establish that  there  has  been
             procedural unfairness such as to amount to an error of law and
             for that reason alone, as was readily, and properly,  conceded
             by  Ms  Ahmad,  [the  respondent's  Presenting  Officer]   the
             decision of the judge cannot stand."

15. Upper Tribunal Judge Southern also found as follows:-

         "4.  Although Judge Majid cannot be held responsible for  the  fact
             that he was not informed of the reasons for counsel's absence,
             I accept Mr Jesurum's submission that it was, in any event, an
             error of law for the judge to fail to engage with the material
             before him and to dismiss the appeal  simply  upon  the  basis
             that the appellants were unrepresented and no one had appeared
             to give support for the appeal."

16. At paragraph 5, Upper Tribunal Judge Southern noted that it was  common
    ground between the parties that "the only proper outcome  is  to  remit
    this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal so that the appellants may  have
    the hearing of their case to which they are entitled."




4. The remitted appeal

17. The remitted hearing in the First-tier Tribunal began before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Spicer on 27 November 2017.   The  judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings discloses that there was extensive cross-examination of the
    sponsor and the  sponsor's  wife.   Mr  Jesurum  then  applied  for  an
    adjournment, which was  not  opposed  by  the  respondent's  Presenting
    Officer.

18. Judge Spicer agreed to the adjournment, with the result that the appeal
    is, currently, part-heard.




5. The application for costs

19. At the hearing on 19 December 2017, Mr Ali, for the  appellants,  spoke
    to the skeleton argument on costs, which Mr Jesurum had prepared on  14
    December.  There, it was submitted on behalf of the appellants that the
    respondent's conduct was unreasonable "in  not  making  the  concession
    made at the hearing earlier".

20. So far as ground 1 was concerned, the  appellants  submitted  that  the
    mere fact the grounds accompanying the application  for  permission  to
    appeal had been settled by Counsel should have led  the  respondent  to
    the conclusion that Judge Majid had, in effect, proceeded on the  basis
    of an error of fact,  involving  procedural  fairness,  and  which  was
    therefore an error of law, on E & R principles.  It was,  according  to
    the appellants, unreasonable of the respondent to "reserve her position
    on the point", as stated in paragraph 3 of the response of 3 July 2017.



21. Regarding ground 2, the appellants submitted that Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Southern had "specifically found an error of law on ground 2" and  that
    there was  "no  lawful  basis  upon  which"  Judge  Majid  "could  have
    dismissed the appeal ... for 'lack of interest'".  It was said that  at
    no point had the respondent suggested other than  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had been under a duty to hear the  appeal  and  consider
    relevant matters,  including  the  grounds,  evidence  and  authorities
    submitted.

22. The appellants  submitted  that  delaying  the  making  of  concessions
    deprives the other party of their benefit  and  causes  that  party  to
    incur unnecessary costs, as well as constituting a  waste  of  judicial
    time and public money.   "The  late  making  of  concessions  tends  to
    promote passive approach  to  litigation,  adding  to  the  burden  the
    Tribunal faces".  According to the appellants, penalising such  conduct
    by way of  a  costs  order  "where  appropriate  gives  effect  to  the
    overriding objective, protects the orderly  administration  of  justice
    and stands as a reminder to the parties of their duties to the Tribunal
    and to each other".

23. Mr Wilding had provided a written response to the costs application, in
    the form of a letter to the Upper Tribunal dated 8 December 2017,  with
    attachments.  Responding to ground 1, Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the
    rule 24 response was correct in stating that it was "unclear  from  the
    grant of permission" whether the First-tier Tribunal had been  provided
    with evidence of the adjournment application.  Mr Wilding said that  it
    was only at the hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Southern  that  the
    respondent, through her Presenting Officer, had been made aware of  the
    supporting evidence.

24. Turning to ground 2, Mr Wilding submitted that,  since  the  respondent
    was under no obligation to file a response pursuant to rule 24, it  was
    difficult to see how she could be categorised as unreasonable for  what
    she had chosen to say in that response.  In  any  event,  even  if  the
    respondent had conceded the appeal, prior to the hearing  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Southern, that would not have necessarily dispensed with
    the need for a hearing.  Under the 2008 Rules, the  Tribunal  needs  to
    give its consent to the withdrawal  of  a  party's  case.   Mr  Wilding
    submitted that, although it had been clearly an error on  the  part  of
    Judge Majid to dismiss the appeal in the way  he  did,  "that  did  not
    necessarily mean the error was material given it would have depended on
    the evidence before the FtT which would need to have been considered by
    the Upper Tribunal as capable of succeeding to assess whether the error
    was material or not".




6. Cases

25. In Cancino (costs - First-tier Tribunal  -  new  powers)  [2015]  UKFTT
    00059 (IAC), the then President of the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal, sitting in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    President of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of that Tribunal,  gave
    guidance on the issue of costs, including rule  10(2)(b)  of  the  2008
    Rules (which corresponds with rule 9(2)(b) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014).  In
    Cancino, the Tribunal drew upon a number of judgments of the  Court  of
    Appeal, including Ridehalgh v Horsefield [1994] Ch 205.   At  [232]  in
    that case, the Court held that the  word  "unreasonable"  was  such  as
    aptly to describe -

         "... conduct which is vexatious, designed to harass the other  side
         rather than advance the resolution of the  case  and  it  makes  no
         difference that the conduct is the product of  excessive  zeal  and
         not  improper  motive.   But  conduct  cannot   be   described   as
         unreasonable  simply  because  it  leads  in  the   event   to   an
         unsuccessful  result  or  because   other   more   cautious   legal
         representatives would have acted  differently.  The  acid  test  is
         whether the conduct permits of a reasonable explanation. If so, the
         course adopted may be regarded as optimistic and as reflecting on a
         practitioner's judgment but it is not unreasonable."

26. At paragraph 25  of  Cancino,  the  Tribunal  had  this  to  say  about
    concessions and withdrawals:-

         "While reiterating our emphasis on the  fact  sensitive  nature  of
         every case, the following illustrations may  be  of  assistance  to
         Tribunals in deciding whether to exercise the  discretionary  power
         conferred by rule 9(2)(b):

         (i)  Concessions are an important part of contemporary  litigation,
             particularly in the  overburdened  realm  of  immigration  and
             asylum  appeals.   In  appeals  which  must   be   heard   and
             determined, concessions  on  factual  issues  bearing  on  the
             appeal  can  be   of   great   assistance   to   judges   and,
             simultaneously, further  several  aspects  of  the  overriding
             objective.   Occasionally,  a   concession   may   extend   to
             abandoning an appeal (by the  Appellant)  or  withdrawing  the
             impugned decision  (by  the  Respondent).   We  consider  that
             applications for  costs  against  a  representative  or  party
             should not be routine in these circumstances. Rule 9 cannot be
             invoked without good reason.  To  do  otherwise  would  be  to
             abuse this  new  provision.  Accordingly,  representatives  or
             parties  must  be  conscientiously  satisfied   that   it   is
             appropriate to have recourse to the rule. This  will  require,
             in  every  case,  a  considered  decision  dictated   by   the
             standards, principles and  constraints  of  good  professional
             practice.  In every case,  the  fundamental  enquiry  for  the
             Tribunal will be why the withdrawal has occurred, coupled with
             the related enquiry of why  it  did  not  materialise  sooner.
             This draws  attention  to  the  intrinsically  fact  sensitive
             nature of every appeal.

         (ii) Subject to the above, the belated withdrawal of an  appeal  is
             unlikely to be adequately explained on the  bare  ground  that
             legal advice was to this effect, particularly if the Appellant
             was legally represented from the outset.  On the other hand, a
             change of representative or the late engagement  of  a  lawyer
             might,  in   appropriate   cases,   provide   a   satisfactory
             explanation for this course.  Judges  will  be  alert  to  the
             balance to be struck so as to ensure that withdrawals are  not
             discouraged.

         (iii)    A belated withdrawal of a Home Office decision is unlikely
             to be satisfactorily explained simply  on  the  basis  of  the
             timing of the  Presenting  Officer's  involvement.   The  Home
             Office is  a  large  government  department  and  the  belated
             commendable conduct of one of its  servants  cannot,  in  this
             context, excuse or justify the acts or omissions of others  at
             earlier stages of  the  appeal  process.   Absent  exceptional
             factors  or  circumstances,  a  protestation   of   inadequate
             resources will be unyielding in this  context.   Striking  the
             appropriate balance as in (ii) above will be necessary.

         (iv) Where  a  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  an  appeal  has  been
             withdrawn as a result of the belated production  of  documents
             or other evidence by the Respondent, this  could,  in  certain
             circumstances, justify the consequential assessment  that  the
             Respondent had acted unreasonably in conducting its defence of
             the appeal, thereby  attracting  a  costs  order  against  the
             Respondent under rule 9(2)(b).

         (v)  The converse applies, in principle.  Thus where a Tribunal  is
             satisfied that  the  Respondent  has  withdrawn  the  impugned
             decision as a result of the belated production of evidence  or
             witness statements on behalf of  the  Appellant,  particularly
             where this involves a breach of case management directions, an
             order  for  costs  under  either  limb  of  rule  9  could  be
             appropriate.   As  ever,  the   specific   context   will   be
             determinative."

27. At paragraph 27 of Cancino, the Tribunal considered it valuable to  set
    out the following observation of the Court of Appeal in the case of  In
    the matter of a Wasted Costs Order made against Joseph Hill and Company
    Solicitors [2013] EWCA Crim 775:-

        "We end with this footnote: there  is  an  ever  pressing  need  to
        ensure efficiency in the Courts: the Judges, the parties  and  most
        particularly  the  practitioners  all  have  a   duty   to   reduce
        unnecessary delays.  We do not doubt  that  the  power  to  make  a
        wasted costs order can  be  valuable  but  this  case,  and  others
        recently before this Court, demonstrate that it should be  reserved
        only for the clearest cases otherwise more time,  effort  and  cost
        goes into making and challenging the order than was alleged to have
        been wasted in the first place."




7. Discussion

28. What emerges from Cancino is that the power to award costs  under  rule
    10 of the 2008 Rules (or rule 9 of the 2014 Rules) is to  be  exercised
    with significant restraint.   In  particular,  the  parties  and  their
    representatives must realise that these powers are of  a  fundamentally
    different character from the procedural provisions and practices  found
    in the courts and some tribunals, whereby costs regularly  "follow  the
    event"; in other words, where  a  successful  party  will  normally  be
    awarded his or her costs.

29.  Cancino  is  also  important  for  making  it  plain  that   "detailed
    examinations of other decided cases  in  the  determination  of  wasted
    costs  applications"  are  "unlikely  to  serve  any  useful   purpose,
    descending into the less than fruitful exercise of simply comparing the
    facts of the instant case with those of other cases" (paragraph 22).

30. In the present case, we are entirely  satisfied  that  the  appellants'
    application for costs must fail.  In the particular circumstances,  the
    respondent did not act unreasonably.

31. In the present case, the respondent was, we find, entitled  to  reserve
    her position regarding ground 1.  Importantly, she had not been sent  a
    copy of Mr Ali's signed witness  statement  or  the  other  significant
    materials, described in paragraph 12 above, which had been  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge who had granted permission to appeal.  It was
    only at the hearing before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  that  the
    respondent was made aware of this evidence.  As  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Southern's decision  makes  plain,  it  was  at  this  point  that  the
    respondent's Presenting Officer conceded that  Judge  Majid's  decision
    did, indeed, contain an error of law.

32. We do not find it was unreasonable of the  respondent  to  reserve  her
    position,  notwithstanding  that  the  grounds   of   application   for
    permission to appeal had been settled by Counsel and set out  times  of
    communications between the appellants' solicitors  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's administration, which we can now see corresponded  with  the
    accompanying evidence.  In saying this, we  are  not  to  be  taken  as
    casting any aspersion upon the professionalism of Mr Jesurum or Everest
    Solicitors.

33. For the respondent, Mr Wilding emphasised the discretionary  nature  of
    rule 24.  The respondent, in an appeal in the Upper Tribunal brought by
    the original appellant, has liberty to file a  response.  There  is  no
    duty on her to do so.  Although we agree that  it  would  be  wrong  to
    construe the power in rule 10 to award costs so widely as,  in  effect,
    to turn the rule 24 power into a general duty, the submission goes  too
    far. There will be cases where (regardless of  whether  the  respondent
    files a response), she will  be  at  risk  of  costs  for  unreasonable
    behaviour; for example, if she does not concede an appeal which is,  on
    the facts of which  she  is  aware,  simply  bound  to  succeed.  That,
    however, is not the position in the present case.

34. So far as ground 1 is concerned, we have found that, in the  particular
    circumstances of this case, the respondent was entitled not to make the
    concession recorded in the Upper Tribunal's decision, until  the  issue
    regarding accompanying  evidence  had  been  clarified,  at  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.

35. We must deal with Mr Wilding's submission that, even if the  respondent
    had conceded the error of law issue before the date of the  hearing  in
    the Upper Tribunal, one could not categorically say  that  the  hearing
    would not still have taken place.  The withdrawal of  the  respondent's
    case, as contained in the rule 24 response,  would  have  required  the
    Upper Tribunal's consent, pursuant to  rule  17.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    would, in particular, have needed to be satisfied that the agreed error
    of law was a material  one  and  that,  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision were set aside, remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal  was,  in
    all the circumstances, the appropriate  course.   Once  the  notice  of
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal had been sent out,  one  could  well  see
    that the Tribunal, faced with such a "concession"  by  the  respondent,
    might reasonably have concluded that the overriding objective would  be
    best served by having these matters dealt with at a hearing.  In such a
    scenario, any claim for costs would have to demonstrate that  the  need
    for a substantive hearing could have been avoided by conceding the case
    before (perhaps significantly before) the case was listed for hearing.

36. What we have just said applies to both grounds 1  and  2.   So  far  as
    ground 2 itself is concerned, however, we agree with Mr Wilding that it
    was not unreasonable for the  respondent  to  decline  to  concede  the
    appeal on that ground.  Unlike ground 1, where the issue was procedural
    fairness, ground 2 depended upon Judge Majid's error being material  to
    the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   We  note  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Southern's decision makes it plain that, at the hearing before him, the
    respondent's Presenting Officer did not make a concession in respect of
    ground 2. It is, we consider,  noteworthy  that  the  Article  8  issue
    remains firmly in contention between the parties, as can be  seen  from
    what happened at the remitted hearing.

37. For these reasons, the appellants' application for costs fails.

8. Power of review

38. The circumstances of this case raise a procedural point of some general
    significance.

39. In common with the rules of other Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    rule 34 of the 2014 Rules requires the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  upon  receiving  an   application   for
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  to  consider  whether  to
    review the appeal decision under section 9 of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007. Rule 35  provides  that  a  review  may  only  be
    undertaken (a) on receiving such an application and (b) if  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is satisfied "that there was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision" (our emphasis); not merely that there was  arguably  such  an
    error.

40.  Section 9 provides as follows:-

         "Review of decision of First-tier Tribunal

         (1)  The First-tier Tribunal may review a decision made by it on  a
             matter in a case, other than a decision that  is  an  excluded
             decision for the purposes of section 11(1) (but see subsection
             (9)).

         (2)  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  power  under  subsection  (1)  in
             relation to a decision is exercisable-

             (a)  of its own initiative, or

             (b)  on application by  a  person  who  for  the  purposes  of
                  section 11(2) has a right of  appeal  in  respect  of  the
                  decision.

         (3)  Tribunal Procedure Rules may-

             (a)  provide  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  not  under
                  subsection (1) review (whether of its own initiative or on
                  application under  subsection  (2)(b))  a  decision  of  a
                  description specified for the purposes of  this  paragraph
                  in Tribunal Procedure Rules;

             (b)   provide  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  power  under
                  subsection (1) to  review  a  decision  of  a  description
                  specified for the purposes of this paragraph  in  Tribunal
                  Procedure Rules is exercisable only of the tribunal's  own
                  initiative;

             (c)  provide that an application under subsection (2)(b)  that
                  is of a description specified for  the  purposes  of  this
                  paragraph in Tribunal Procedure rules may be made only  on
                  grounds specified for the purposes of  this  paragraph  in
                  Tribunal Procedure Rules;

             (d)  provide, in relation  to  a  decision  of  a  description
                  specified for the purposes of this paragraph  in  Tribunal
                  Procedure Rules,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  power
                  under subsection (1) to review the  decision  of  its  own
                  initiative is exercisable only on  grounds  specified  for
                  the purposes  of  this  paragraph  in  Tribunal  Procedure
                  Rules.

         (4)   Where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  under  subsection  (1)
             reviewed a decision, the First-tier Tribunal may in the  light
             of the review do any of the following-

             (a)  correct accidental errors in the decision or in a  record
                  of the decision;

             (b)  amend reasons given for the decision;

             (c)  set the decision aside.

         (5)  Where under subsection (4)(c) the First-tier Tribunal  sets  a
             decision aside, the First-tier Tribunal must either-

             (a)  re-decide the matter concerned, or

             (b)  refer that matter to the Upper Tribunal.

         (6)  Where a  matter  is  referred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  under
             subsection (5)(b),  the  Upper  Tribunal  must  re-decide  the
             matter.

         (7)  Where the Upper Tribunal is under subsection (6) re-deciding a
             matter, it may make any decision which the First-tier Tribunal
             could make if the First-tier  Tribunal  were  re-deciding  the
             matter.

         (8)  Where a tribunal is acting under subsection (5)(a) or (6),  it
             may make such findings of fact as it considers appropriate.

         (9)  This section has effect as  if  a  decision  under  subsection
             (4)(c) to set aside an earlier decision were not  an  excluded
             decision for the purposes of section 11(1), but the First-tier
             Tribunal's  only  power  in  the  light  of  a  review   under
             subsection (1) of a decision under subsection  (4)(c)  is  the
             power under subsection (4)(a).

         (10) A decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  may  not  be  reviewed
             under subsection (1) more than once, and once  the  First-tier
             Tribunal has decided that an earlier decision  should  not  be
             reviewed under subsection (1) it may not then decide to review
             that earlier decision under that subsection.

         (11) Where under this section a  decision  is  set  aside  and  the
             matter concerned is then re-decided, the  decision  set  aside
             and the decision made in re-deciding the matter  are  for  the
             purposes of subsection  (10)  to  be  taken  to  be  different
             decisions."

41. As we have seen, the First-tier Tribunal Judge who  granted  permission
    to  appeal  had  before  her  not  only  the  grounds  of  appeal  but,
    importantly, the signed witness statement  of  Mr  Ali  and  the  other
    evidential materials mentioned in paragraph 12  above.  The  cumulative
    effect of these materials was to make it evident that Judge  Majid  had
    proceeded under a material misapprehension. He had committed  an  error
    of fact going to procedural fairness, which was  in  the  circumstances
    plainly an error of law.

42. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was, accordingly, in a  position  to  see
    that the submissions recorded in the grant of  permission,  taken  from
    the grounds of application, were fully made out.  In the circumstances,
    the First-tier Tribunal, in our  view,  would  have  been  entitled  to
    undertake a section 9 review and conclude (on  the  well-known  E  &  R
    principle) that Judge Majid's decision contained an error of  law,  not
    merely an arguable one: see paragraph 40 above.

43. Applying section 9, the Tribunal could, in  these  circumstances,  have
    issued a review decision, finding such an error and setting aside Judge
    Majid's decision.  The nature of the  error  was  plainly  such  as  to
    require the decision in the appeals to be  re-made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

44. This case is, in short, a good example of the usefulness of  the  power
    of review in section 9.  Instead of granting permission to appeal, with
    its attendant inevitable delay, recourse to review would have meant the
    appeals would have  been  re-heard,  in  all  probability  long  before
    December 2017, without the Upper Tribunal being involved.

                       Signed                     Date: 15 January 2018


                       The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                       President

