

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Fiaz (cancellation of leave to remain-fairness) [2012] UKUT 00057(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 January 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       THE PRESIDENT, MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING

                                   Between

                             MIRZA MUHAMMED FIAZ
                                                                  Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms J Iverson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



     i) An immigration officer has power to cancel a leave to remain  which
        remains in force under article 13(5) of The Immigration  (Leave  to
        Enter) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161).


    ii) The provisions of that article are not  unlawful  for  being  ultra
        vires.

   iii) A change of circumstances justifying cancellation exists where  the
        basis for the grant of the leave has  disappeared:  SSHD  v  Boahen
        [2010] EWCA Civ 595 applied.

    iv) It is possible that a change first occurring before and  continuing
        after the grant  of  the  leave  may  be  "such  a  change  in  the
        circumstances of that person's case since the leave was given  that
        it should be cancelled".

     v) The powers of curtailment of leave to remain may overlap  with  the
        power to cancel leave.

    vi) Where either power may be exercised it may  be  that  the  duty  of
        fairness requires the leave to be curtailed rather than cancelled.

   vii) It is material to whether fairness required curtailment rather than
        cancellation as to whether  the  change  of  circumstance  was  the
        responsibility  of  the  claimant  or  not,  and  whether  he   had
        endeavoured to misrepresent the position during his examination.

  viii) The jurisdiction to determine that a decision is not in  accordance
        with the law because of a lack of fairness, is not to  be  degraded
        to a general judicial power to depart  from  the  Rules  where  the
        judge thinks such a course appropriate,  or  to  turn  a  mandatory
        factor into a  discretionary  one:  fairness  in  this  context  is
        essentially procedural.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1980.  He  was  first
       issued a student visa to come to the United Kingdom in  2006.  After
       his arrival he was granted extensions of stay to  undertake  various
       courses. On 20 October 2010 he was refused an extension of  stay  to
       enrol as a student at St Johns College, Harrow in a hotel management
       course. He successfully appealed that decision in December 2010.


    2. On 9 February 2011 he was granted leave  to  remain  until  December
       2011 to complete the course. The appellant left the  United  Kingdom
       shortly after 26 February 2011 when he received news of the death of
       an uncle to whom he was close. He remained in Pakistan until his re-
       entry to the United Kingdom on or about 10 April 2011  when  he  was
       questioned about his intentions and he  stated  that  he  was  still
       studying at St Johns College. Following further inquiries his  leave
       to remain was cancelled on 11 April 2011 on the basis of a change of
       circumstances since it was granted.


    3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. On  9  June  2011
       Judge McIntosh dismissed his appeal. He found as  follows:-
          a. Following the refusal of 20  October  2010  the  appellant  was
             unable to start or continue his course with St  John's  College
             as he had no authority to do so.
          b. The appellant informed the college that he intended  to  appeal
             but failed to inform them of the outcome  of  the  appeal,  the
             result of which he was aware of by the first week in January.
          c. The appellant did not  study  at  the  college  in  January  or
             February 2011 and his statement to the Immigration Officer that
             he had attended the college in the week before his departure to
             Pakistan was misleading.
          d.  The appellant had not communicated with the college on receipt
             of his identity document endorsed with leave  to  remain  on  9
             February 2011.
          e. His failure to contact the college since January 2011  and  his
             failure to resume his enrolment and continue his studies  there
             was a material change of circumstances within  the  meaning  of
             the Immigration Rules.
          f. The decision to cancel his leave was  in  accordance  with  the
             Rules.
          g. His removal from the United Kingdom would not breach his  right
             to respect for private life.

    4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  9  July
       2011 and following a "for mention" on 7 October 2011 Upper  Tribunal
       Judge  McKee found two material errors of law  had been made by  the
       First-tier judge:-
          a. The judge had stated that the burden was on  the  appellant  to
             demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that there had been
             no change of  circumstances  whereas  the  burden  was  on  the
             respondent to satisfy the judge that  there  had  been  such  a
             change.
          b. Under rule 321 the change of circumstances must  be  since  the
             leave was granted on 9 February 2011, whereas the judge  relied
             in part on events that preceded that date as being the material
             change of circumstances.

    5. The matter came before Judge McKee again on 23  November  2011  when
       the appellant's representatives canvassed new legal  arguments  that
       were the subject of further directions for an exchange  of  skeleton
       arguments. The appellant was due to lodge a skeleton argument by  15
       December 2011. In fact he only lodged it on 11 January 2012, leaving
       insufficient time for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  respond.    An
       adjournment was refused. The Secretary of State provided a  skeleton
       argument on 22 January and the case proceeded to  a  hearing  on  23
       January 2012.


    6. The appellant advances three  grounds  on  which  he  contends  this
       appeal should be allowed. We describe them in  the  following  terms
       and order:-

              i) The respondent had not established  a  material  change  of
                 circumstances since the leave to remain was granted.
             ii) The statutory scheme did not permit cancellation  of  leave
                 to remain.
            iii)  It was unfair to exercise the power of cancellation  where
                 there was
                     an appropriate and less draconian power of
              curtailment.


    7. At the conclusion of the hearing we indicated that we dismissed each
       of these grounds and that we re-made the appeal by dismissing it. We
       curtailed time for permission to appeal to five  working  days  from
       the promulgation of this decision. We now give our written reasons.

The legal background:

    8. Rule  321A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides  for  grounds  for
       cancellation of a person's leave to enter  or  remain  which  is  in
       force on his arrival in, or whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom
       apply. Ground (1) is if  "there  has  been  such  a  change  in  the
       circumstances of that person's case since the leave was  given  that
       it should be cancelled".  The heading to this paragraph states  that
       such leave is to be cancelled if the ground is  made  out.  We  were
       referred to rules 10 to 10  B  dealing  with  the  arrangements  for
       cancelling such leave by an immigration officer under the  authority
       of a Chief Immigration Officer.


    9. By contrast rule 323A  provides  for  discretionary  curtailment  of
       leave to remain granted under the Points Based system. Our attention
       was drawn to rule 323A (d) (i) and (iii) that enable curtailment  of
       leave  where the migrant fails to commence  or ceases studying  with
       the sponsor


   10. The Immigration (Leave to Enter) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161)  is  made
       pursuant to the Secretary of State's powers under  s.3B  Immigration
       Act 1971. Article 13 sets out when leave to remain does not lapse on
       a departure from the United Kingdom. It is in the following terms:-

           13.-(1) In this article "leave" means-

              (a) leave to enter the United Kingdom (including leave to
              enter conferred by means of an entry clearance under article
              2); and

              (b)  leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

           (2) Subject to paragraph (3), where a person has leave which  is
           in force and which was:

             (a) conferred by means of an entry clearance (other than a
             visit visa) under article 2; or

             (b) given by an immigration officer or the Secretary of State
             for a period exceeding six months,

             such leave shall not lapse  on  his  going  to  a  country  or
             territory outside the common travel area.

           (3) Paragraph (2) shall not apply:

             (a) where a limited leave has been varied by the Secretary of
             State; and

             (b) following the variation the period of leave remaining is
             six months or less.

           (4) Leave which does not lapse under paragraph (2) shall  remain
           in force either indefinitely (if it is unlimited)  or  until  the
           date on which it would otherwise have expired (if limited), but-

             (a) where the holder has stayed outside the United Kingdom for
             a continuous period of more than two years, the leave (where
             the leave is unlimited) or any leave then remaining (where the
             leave is limited) shall thereupon lapse; and

             (b) any conditions to which the leave is subject shall be
             suspended for such time as the holder is outside the United
             Kingdom.

           (5) For the purposes of paragraphs 2 and 2A of Schedule 2 to the
           Act   (examination   by   immigration   officers,   and   medical
           examination), leave to remain which remains in force  under  this
           article shall be treated, upon the holder's arrival in the United
           Kingdom, as leave to enter which has been granted to  the  holder
           before his arrival.

           (6) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 4(1)  of  the
           Act, where the holder of leave which remains in force under  this
           article is outside the United Kingdom, the Secretary of State may
           vary that leave (including any conditions to which it is subject)
           in such form and manner as permitted by the Act or this Order for
           the giving of leave to enter.

           (7) Where a person is outside the United Kingdom and  has  leave
           which is in force by virtue of this article, that  leave  may  be
           cancelled:

             (a) in the case of leave to enter, by an immigration officer;
             or

             (b) in the case of leave to remain, by the Secretary of State.



           (8) In order to determine whether or not to vary (and, if so, in
           what manner) or cancel leave which remains in  force  under  this
           article and which is held by a person who is outside  the  United
           Kingdom, an immigration officer or,  as  the  case  may  be,  the
           Secretary of State may seek such information, and the  production
           of such documents or copy documents, as  an  immigration  officer
           would be entitled to obtain in an examination under  paragraph  2
           or 2A of Schedule 2 to the Act and may also require the holder of
           the leave to supply an up to date medical report.

           (9) Failure to supply any information, documents, copy documents
           or medical report requested by an immigration officer or, as  the
           case may be, the Secretary of State under this article shall be a
           ground, in itself, for cancellation of leave.

           (10) Section 3(4) of the Act (lapsing of leave  upon  travelling
           outside the common travel area) shall have effect subject to this
           article."



   11. As the appellant's leave to remain was for more than six months,  it
       did not lapse when he left the United Kingdom. We note that  Article
       13(7) enables such leave to be cancelled when an appellant is out of
       the United Kingdom by either an Immigration Officer  (if  the  leave
       being cancelled was leave to enter) or by  the  Secretary  of  State
       (where the cancelled leave  was  leave  to  remain).   However,  the
       cancellation in this case was whilst the appellant was physically in
       the United Kingdom on his return.

   12. Article 13(5) treats such leave to remain as leave to enter that has
       been granted prior to entry to the United Kingdom for  the  purposes
       of Schedule 2, paragraphs 2 and 2A of the Immigration Act 1971.

   13.  Paragraph 2A(1), (2), (8) and (9)  of  that  Schedule  provides  as
       follows:

                   1) This paragraph applies to a person who has arrived  in
                      the United Kingdom with leave to  enter  which  is  in
                      force but which was given to him before his arrival.
                   2) He may be examined by an immigration officer  for  the
                      purpose of establishing -
                      a) whether there  has  been  such  a  change  in  the
                         circumstances of his case, since  that  leave  was
                         given, that it should be cancelled;
                       ........


                   8) An immigration officer may, on the completion of  any
                      examination of a person under this paragraph,  cancel
                      his leave to enter.
                   9) Cancellation of a person's leave under  sub-paragraph
                      (8) is to be treated for the purposes of this Act  as
                      if he had been refused leave to enter at a time  when
                      he had a current entry clearance.


    Ground 1: Change of circumstances

   14. Mr Malik's submission on this point was succinct.  He says  that  on
       the 9 February 2011 the evidence reveals that the appellant was  not
       studying at St John's College. This remained  the  position  on  his
       return. There was accordingly no change of circumstances  since  the
       leave was granted.


   15.  We  do  not  accept  this  submission.  The  Immigration  Officer's
       investigations into the case lead him to contact St  John's  College
       on 11 April and he received two faxes  from  the  Principal  of  the
       college that day. They revealed first that  the  appellant  had  not
       kept the college updated with the circumstances of his appeal  since
       it was lodged, and second that the college had decided to remove him
       from the course in the light of the time he had spent  off  and  his
       unapproved visit to Pakistan.

   16. In our judgment the appellant's failure between 9  and  26  February
       2011 to inform the college of the grant of leave to remain to  study
       with them was a change of circumstance since the leave was  granted.
       The appellant was aware that his  suspension  from  the  course  was
       pending appeal and the grant of leave to remain  to  enable  him  to
       study. The failure to lift his suspension when he was eligible to do
       so, changed his suspension from an involuntary one at the  direction
       of the college into a  voluntary  one  at  the  instigation  of  the
       appellant. That voluntary failure to  seek  to  resume  studies  was
       material to whether the appellant continued to be eligible to remain
       as a student of St John's College in April 2011.

   17. Further, the second fax  reveals  another  change  of  circumstance,
       namely that in the light of the amount of  time  the  appellant  had
       missed from the course since it began, and absence of  communication
       seeking enrolment and  a  leave  of  absence  before  travelling  to
       Pakistan for 40 days during term time, the College was not  prepared
       to keep his place open or take  him  back.  This  was  a  materially
       different position to that prevailing on 9 February  2011,  when  he
       had been given leave to study at this specific college.

   18. We are satisfied that both or either of these matters constituted  a
       change of circumstance, and cumulatively both  factors  removed  the
       entire basis on which the leave to remain had been  granted  pending
       appeal.  This  case fell into the class where cancellation of  leave
       was appropriate applying the terms  of  the  Rule,  UKBA's  internal
       guidance and the decision of the Court of Appeal in  SSHD  v  Boahen
       [2010] EWCA Civ 595 where Pitchford LJ said the following at [37]

             "The  context  of  the  illustrations  in  the   guidance   is
             important. What is envisaged is that, while the visa  holder's
             intention may remain to enter for the authorised purpose,  the
             factual basis upon which the visa purpose was founded has been
             undermined. Accordingly, leave to enter to take up  employment
             may have  been  undermined  by  withdrawal  of  the  offer  of
             employment; leave to enter for study may have been  undermined
             by withdrawal of sponsorship; or leave to enter as a child for
             settlement may have been undermined by the permanent departure
             of the child's sponsor from the UK. In other  words,  had  the
             entry clearance officer been aware of these eventualities,  he
             would not have issued the visa for the purpose he did, however
             genuine the application was.  There  is,  in  my  opinion,  no
             underlying premise  to  these  examples  that  the  change  of
             circumstances must be permanent, nor is there, in any event, a
             true comparison to be made between the examples given  and  Mr
             Boahen's  case,  in  which  the  visa  holder  had,   on   the
             immigration officer's finding, evinced an intention  to  visit
             for purposes other than that authorised. The  only  legitimate
             analogy lies, in my view, in the  judgement  of  the  probable
             effect of the circumstances as they have turned out to be upon
             the  mind  of  an  entry  clearance  officer  considering  the
             original application. It is legitimate to ask whether, if  the
             entry clearance officer had known that the applicant would use
             the visa for purposes other  than  those  authorised,  whether
             mistakenly or deliberately, he would have issued  it.  In  the
             light of the development  with  which  the  chief  immigration
             officer was faced in Mr Boahen's case, the question she had to
             consider was whether the entry clearance should  continue,  or
             the  visa  holder  should  be  required  to  make  a   further
             application. Consideration of cancellation on  the  ground  of
             change  of  circumstances  required  an  assessment  from  the
             immigration officer of all the  circumstances  including,  for
             example,  whether  there  remained  a  continuing   legitimate
             purpose for the visa  holder's  visits  with  which  the  visa
             holder could and should be entrusted for the remainder of  the
             period of validity. The purpose of the power  of  cancellation
             is to ensure proper immigration control, and the use of a visa
             by a visa national for a visit whose purpose  is  unauthorised
             is, on the face of it, a serious matter."

   19. Finally, we would add that the terms of rule 321A need  to  be  read
       sensibly in the light of its language and context.  Where  leave  to
       remain is granted on  appeal  for  a  particular  purpose  but  that
       purpose disappears between the determination of the appeal  and  the
       grant of the leave to remain, we see no reason why  that  change  of
       circumstance does not continue through to the period when the  leave
       was granted and thus enable cancellation.


   20. For all these reasons we  are  satisfied  that  the  respondent  has
       satisfied us that by 11 April  2011  there  had  been  a  change  of
       circumstances since the leave of 9 February 2011 removing the  basis
       of stay for which the leave had been granted. The  precondition  for
       cancellation has been made out.

 Ground 2: Power to cancel leave to remain

   21. The appellant next disputes that although the Immigration Rules  may
       permit cancellation of leave to remain, the statutory  context  does
       not.


   22.  Although Schedule 2,  paragraph  2A(1)  refers  to  an  immigration
       officer cancelling leave to enter (rather than leave to remain), the
       Immigration (Leave to Enter) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161) Article 13(5)
       provides that for the purposes of Schedule 2, paragraphs 2  and  2A,
       leave to remain which remains in  force  shall  be  treated  on  the
       holder's arrival as leave to  enter.  Thus  the  Order  applies  the
       examination powers to leave to remain in these circumstances.


   23. Mr Malik accepts that to mount the submission that he does  he  must
       persuade us that the terms of  article  13  (5)  of  the  Order  are
       outside the enabling powers of the Secretary  of  State  is  thus  a
       nullity in law because it is ultra  vires.  He  reminds  us  that  a
       strict construction should be taken  to  the  grant  of  law  making
       powers to amend the statutory scheme.

   24.  Mr Malik then directed our attention to s. 3B(1) of the Immigration
       Act 1971 as amended (the enabling power) and points out that  it  is
       confined to "further provision with respect to the giving, refusing,
       or varying of leave to remain in the United Kingdom" and not to  the
       cancelling of such leave, while  s.3B(3)  gives  powers  incidental,
       supplemental and consequential to the principal one.

   25.  Where this submission falls down is the failure  to  place  article
       13(5) in the context of the other changes made by article 13 of  the
       Order. Before the enactment of this provision, any leave  to  remain
       lapsed on a departure from the common travel area  and  the  migrant
       had to apply for a fresh leave  to  enter  on  re-entry.  The  Order
       changed that and enabled leave of more than six months  to  continue
       in force and enable a migrant to re  enter  without  examination  of
       their eligibility. However, just as an entry clearance or a previous
       leave to enter did not give an unqualified right of admission to the
       United Kingdom and could be set aside or cancelled on the  basis  of
       misrepresentation or change of circumstance, those long  established
       powers were now being applied to leave to remain that still  existed
       on return to the UK.[1]

   26. In our judgment, therefore, the Secretary of State was not  creating
       novel powers of cancelling a limited  leave  that  was  outside  the
       purpose of s.3B rather her predecessor was creating a novel class of
       non-lapsing leave to remain that  would  justify  admission  to  the
       United Kingdom after a trip abroad, but needed to  temper  this  new
       provision by applying the same powers of cancellation to it as if it
       had been a form of entry clearance of leave to enter.  The power  to
       cancel such leave was needed as an ancillary provision  to  the  new
       class of non-lapsing leave.

   27. We are therefore satisfied that article 13(5) of the Order is lawful
       and accordingly so is the exercise of a power of cancellation by  an
       immigration officer. Our conclusion is also thus an  answer  to  the
       doubt expressed  about  the  Immigration  Rules  on  this  point  in
       Macdonald's "Immigration Law  and  Practice"  8th  Edition  at  4.35
       footnote 6.

   28. We are equally unimpressed with the submission  that  the  power  to
       promote the Immigration Rules under s.3(4) Immigration Act  1971  is
       limited to promoting rules of practice for the administration of the
       scheme under the statute  rather  than  the  administration  of  the
       scheme  under  Orders  made  pursuant  to  the  statute.   Here  the
       statutory scheme included s.3B that entitled the Secretary of  State
       to create a non-lapsing leave by order.  The administration  of  the
       Act required rules to be promoted for how  functions  created  under
       the scheme of the Act were to be exercised.

   29.  In any event it is the terms of the Order combined with Schedule 2,
       paragraph 2A that gives authority to the immigration officer to make
       the decision in question, rather than the Rules alone.

Ground 3: unfair to cancel rather than curtail

   30.  It was common ground between the parties that:-
          a. Curtailment of leave to remain can be exercised where a migrant
             ceases to study with a sponsor institution.
          b. Curtailment is discretionary under  the  Immigration  Rules  as
             opposed to cancellation that is mandatory.
          c. There may be circumstances where it  would  be  unfair  to  the
             migrant to exercise a power of cancellation where the power  of
             curtailment is more appropriate to  the  circumstances  at  the
             relevant time.
          d. Where the immigration decision is taken in  a  manner  that  is
             conspicuously unfair and thus contrary to the common  law  duty
             of fairness, such a decision is not in accordance with the  law
             and the Tribunal judge has  power  to  so  determine  with  the
             consequence that the decision must be re-made and until it is a
             lawful decision remains outstanding.

   31. We agree with each of these propositions and do not need  to  recite
       the authority that underpins them.


   32. Mr Malik  then submits that it was unfair to cancel the  appellant's
       leave to remain when:
          a. There was a less drastic alternative, namely  curtailment  that
             was tailor- made for the situation that arose in this case  and
             afforded a judge a discretion on appeal to determine whether it
             should have been exercised.
          b. Curtailment of leave keeps the leave in existence  pending  the
             appeal (see s.3D Immigration  Act  1971)  whereas  cancellation
             does not.
          c. A person whose leave is cancelled is therefore forced  into  an
             unlawful position pending any appeal and falls  into  the  same
             situation deprecated by Laws LJ in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ
             1402 at [17] to [18] approved by Sedley  LJ  in   TE  (Eritrea)
             [2009] EWCA Civ 174 at [15].
          d. In any event the appellant was unable  to  pursue  his  studies
             pending the appeal and was thus disadvantaged.

   33. We disagree that the common  law  duty  of  fairness  prevented  the
       immigration officer from exercising the  power  of  cancellation  of
       leave in this case. We  reach  this  conclusion  for  the  following
       reasons:-
          a. On the facts of the  case,  already  examined  under  ground  1
             above, this was a case where the total collapse of the  purpose
             for which the leave had been given made it appropriate for  the
             power to cancel to be exercised.
          b. The appellant was not the victim of a change  of  circumstances
             outside his control arising during his departure.  His  failure
             to enrol with the college following his successful  appeal  was
             voluntary as was his decision to depart for an extended stay in
             Pakistan without securing the college's agreement to  re  admit
             him to a course that was due to have needed in  august  or  any
             later course.
          c. It is relevant to the content of the duty of  fairness,  as  Mr
             Malik accepts, that the appellant was found  by  the  judge  to
             have endeavoured to mislead the immigration officer on 11 April
             2011 about the status of his studies with St Johns College  and
             whether he had actually attended for studies in 2011.
          d. The appellant is deemed not to have entered the United  Kingdom
             on his return in April (see s.11(1) Immigration Act  1971)  and
             thus was not remaining in breach of  the  terms  of  his  leave
             pending an appeal.
          e. It was always open to an appellant, whose original  purpose  in
             being here had failed, to make a fresh application for a  fresh
             course of studies from abroad.
          f. At the time of the decision the appellant had provided no  good
             reason why apart from his studies with St  Johns  College  (now
             terminated) he should be permitted  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom. In particular there was no credible human rights claim
             why removal was disproportionate.


   34. We would add that the jurisdiction of  this  Tribunal  to  determine
       that a decision is not in accordance with the law because of a  lack
       of fairness, is not to be degraded to a general  judicial  power  to
       depart  from  the  Rules  where  the  judge  thinks  such  a  course
       appropriate or to turn a mandatory factor into a discretionary  one.
       Fairness in this context is  essentially  procedural:  a  course  of
       action that prevents the claimant from drawing a  relevant  document
       or other information to the attention  of  the  decision  maker,  or
       preventing the claimant from  switching  colleges  to  one  that  is
       currently  approved  by  the  Secretary   of   State   rather   than
       substantive: an untrammelled exercise of discretion to permit people
       to remain  who have failed to use the  previous permission  for  the
       purpose for which it was granted and who  have  no  other  claim  to
       remain under the rules.


   35. Although it has not been raised in argument before  us  we  entirely
       agree with the First-tier  judge's  decision  on  the  private  life
       claim. There was no established private life deserving of respect or
       making cancellation and removal disproportionate to  the  legitimate
       aim  of  preserving  social  and  economic   order   by   consistent
       application of the Immigration Rules.

   36. It is a matter of some regret that a properly investigated and  well
       reasoned decision to cancel leave  taken  in  April  2011  has  been
       followed by four judicial hearings before the First-tier  and  Upper
       Tribunal and two further occasions when judicial time was  spent  in
       giving directions and nine months have elapsed  since  the  original
       decision.

Decision

   37.  The First-tier judge's decision contained a material error  of  law
       already identified and has been set aside. We re-make  the  decision
       by dismissing the appeal for the reasons we have given above.




                               Signed


                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Date: 25 January 2012






-----------------------
[1] See also sub-paragraph (9)

