
AS and AA (Effect of previous linked determination) Somalia [2006] UKAIT
00052

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Date of Hearing:  22 December 2005

                                   Before:

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Jordan
                      Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For AS:                      Mr Omere, instructed by Wilson & Co
For AA:                      Ms Fielden, instructed by Douglas & Partners
For the Respondent:          Mr Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

The rule that a judicial determination stands as the  determination  of  the
issue  between  the  parties  does  not  govern  later  litigation   between
different  parties.   Accordingly,  when  it  is  said   that   a   previous
determination of the claim or appeal of another claimant is of relevance  in
assessing  a  later  claim  by  a  different  person:   (1)   the   previous
determination has no  evidential  value  as  such,  but  (2)  its  narrative
content is to be taken as evidence of what was said and done leading  up  to
that determination; (3) the Tribunal determining the later case is  required
to make its own decision on the evidence before it; (4) no rule  of  general
law or practice supports the argument that the decision in an earlier  claim
should bind or be regarded as part  of  the  evidence  in  an  appeal  by  a
different person and therefore (5) the  later  Tribunal  should  not  regard
itself as bound  to  follow  a  previous  decision  in  respect  of  another
claimant or to make a decision consistent with  such  a  previous  decision;
(6) on the other  hand,  principles  of  good  administration  require  that
decisions should not be needlessly divergent, so (7)  the  earlier  decision
should be treated as  a  starting-point,  but  (8)  the  Tribunal  will  not
hesitate to depart  from  that  starting  point  in  every  case  where  the
evidence requires it.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The issues

  1. These two appeals were heard together.  In  each  case,  there  was  a
     determination by an Adjudicator dismissing the Appellant's appeal,  an
     application for permission to the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  which
     was refused, and a successful application for Statutory Review of that
     refusal.  The grants of permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal
     Tribunal by the High  Court  in  each  case  operates,  following  the
     commencement of the appeals provisions of the 2004 Act,  as  an  order
     for reconsideration by this Tribunal.

  2. In AS's case, the reasons given by Hughes J for reversing the decision
     of the Tribunal refusing permission were as follows:

           "The question raised by the appeal is  whether  the  Adjudicator
           was or was not bound to accept that the applicant was  Bravanese
           (and thus, as was conceded, entitled to succeed) given that  (1)
           Omar was his brother, and (2) Omar had been  granted  asylum  on
           the basis of his Bravanese origin.  The Adjudicator held at para
           37 that he was not bound by the authorities to conclude  as  the
           applicant wished.  Whether he was or was not is  a  question  of
           law, and the appeal on this point, was by no  means  certain  to
           succeed, is not without real prospects of doing so."

  3. In AA's case, the reasons given by Pitchford J are as follows:

           "This application raises a serious issue to what extent, if any,
           an Adjudicator may be bound by the findings of a colleague in  a
           related appeal.  I consider that it requires determination after
           full argument.  My decision should not be taken as  a  concluded
           view on the merits."

  4. Those two decisions set out with clarity the  issues  now  before  us.
     Each of these appeals concerns a Somali applicant for asylum.  In each
     case, the application was based wholly or partly  on  the  applicant's
     clan membership. AS claims to be Bravanese and  AA  claims  to  be  an
     Ashraf.  In each case, it is accepted, for the purposes of this appeal
     at any rate, that if the clan  membership  is  made  out  the  appeals
     succeed.  In each case, the Appellant had a sibling who had  succeeded
     in securing refugee status as a  member  of  the  clan  of  which  the
     Appellant claimed membership.  Siblings belong to the same  clan:   so
     in each case the  Appellants  claim  to  be  entitled  to  succeed  in
     reliance partly at least on the success of the sibling's claim.

AS

  5. AS claimed asylum at Croydon on 2 March 2004.  He  said  that  he  was
     Somali and was born on 18 December 1972.  He said  that  he  had  left
     Somalia by boat for Yemen in 1995 and had lived in  refugee  camps  in
     Yemen until recently.  He said that he had left Yemen  by  air  on  28
     February 2004 with the assistance of an agent.  He said  that  he  had
     had the telephone number of his brother Omar  and  had  contacted  him
     seven months before he left Yemen.   He  did  not,  however,  know  in
     advance that he was coming to the United Kingdom.  When he arrived  in
     Heathrow Airport the agent saw him through immigration and  then  took
     from him the travel documents that had been  used  for  that  purpose.
     The Appellant said that he "met a Somali man passing" and asked how to
     get in touch with his brother.  He went then to stay with his brother.
      At his first asylum interview, he gave Omar's full name and said that
     he had been granted asylum in the United Kingdom.  He was not able  at
     that stage to give Omar's date of birth.

  6. There were three further asylum interviews,  and  the  Appellant,  now
     assisted by solicitors, produced documentation supporting  his  claim.
     Amongst that documentation is  a  letter  from  the  Somali  Bravanese
     Association in London, in which  the  Secretary  of  that  Association
     writes "to confirm that [AS] is a Somali national of Bravanese  ethnic
     origin".  Appended to that letter is an entry as follows:

           "Below are the persons who are certifying  and  testifying  that
           [AS] is a Somali national of Bravanese ethnic origin."


      There are fifteen names, beginning with Omar described  as  "brother",
      Omar's wife (who is Omar's cousin and is described as the  Appellant's
      cousin) and others who are  described  as  "relative".   There  was  a
      similar document  produced  before  the  Adjudicator  with  twenty-two
      names, some the same as in the earlier document, some different.

  7. After considering  the  Appellant's  claim,  the  Secretary  of  State
     rejected it.  He rejected both the Appellant's assertion  that  he  is
     Bravanese and his  claimed  history.   He  did  so  on  two  principal
     grounds:  he did not regard the Appellant's account of his experiences
     as plausible in that it appeared  to  him  to  run  counter  to  other
     evidence relating to the experience of Bravanese in  Somalia,  and  he
     further did not regard it as credible because of discrepancies between
     accounts given by the Appellant at various stages of his claim.  There
     is no reference in the letter of refusal to Omar or his status.

  8. Having refused the  Appellant  asylum  and  having  decided  that  the
     Appellant  had  no  claim  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
     provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights,  the  Secretary
     of State decided to issue directions for the Appellant's removal as an
     illegal entrant.  That decision was notified on 27  April  2004.   The
     Appellant appealed against it.  The grounds of appeal take issue  with
     the points on which the Secretary of State  regarded  the  Appellant's
     story as lacking plausibility or credibility.  At ground 4 is this:

           "The Appellant maintains that he is a member  of  the  Bravanese
           minority clan.  We are instructed that the  Appellant's  brother
           is in the UK and there are other Bravanese clan members who  can
           vouch for the Appellant's membership of this clan."

  9. The Appellant's appeal came before an Adjudicator, Mr N Easterman,  on
     9 July 2004.  As  the  Adjudicator  records,  at  the  outset  of  the
     proceedings  before  him   it   was   agreed   by   the   Respondent's
     representative that the only real issue to be determined  was  whether
     the Appellant  was  indeed  Bravanese.   The  Adjudicator  heard  oral
     evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  from  Omar.   He  was  shown  the
     documentation relating to Omar's claim, including transcripts  of  his
     asylum interviews.  Omar was granted asylum by the Respondent  on  the
     basis of his claim and the answers he gave at interview:  as is usual,
     the letter granting Omar asylum did not set  out  any  conclusions  of
     fact supporting the decision.

 10. As the Adjudicator noted, there was no formal proof that the Appellant
     and Omar are brothers.  There had, for example, been no  DNA  testing.
     The Respondent presented his case on the footing that if the Appellant
     and  Omar  were  brothers  as  they  said,  the  Appellant's  lack  of
     credibility was  exposed  by  differences  between  his  own  and  his
     brother's account of events.

 11. In the course of legal submissions, the Adjudicator  was  referred  to
     the judgment of Carnwath J in R v  Cardiff  County  Council  ex  parte
     Sears Group Properties Limited [1998] 3 PLR 55, of which he was  given
     a partial transcript, and what  is  described  both  in  the  skeleton
     argument and in subsequent grounds of appeal as "R  v  SSHD  ex  parte
     Danaei  (unreported)  26/3/1997,  QBD  CO/945/97,  Harrison  J   [copy
     attached for ease of  reference",  but  which  appears  to  have  been
     intended as a reference to the decision of Collins J in  the  case  of
     that name on 20 March 1997 with the reference CO/1020/96, of  which  a
     transcript was indeed provided to the  Adjudicator.   The  latter  was
     affirmed by the Court of Appeal:  ([1998] INLR 124).  For some  reason
     the Adjudicator does not appear to have had his attention drawn to the
     judgment in the Court of Appeal, and there was no  specific  reference
     made to them at the hearing before us.  We  shall,  however,  have  to
     mention them in due course.

 12. The Adjudicator set out his task and his conclusions of law  and  fact
     as follows:

           "36.  I approach this appeal on the basis that if the  appellant
                 is likely to be Bravanese to the low standard required then
                 it is conceded he is  likely  to  face  persecution  for  a
                 Convention reason if returned to Somalia.  I approach it on
                 the basis as agreed that any Article 3 human  rights  claim
                 stands or falls with the asylum claim and that there is  no
                 Article 8 claim, which the appellant also agreed.


           37.   Dealing with what I believe to be an important legal point
                 first, I have considered the cases I was referred to of  EX
                 PARTE SEARS GROUP PROPERTIES LIMITED and EX  PARTE  DANAEI.
                 The first of those cases  relates  to  the  intricacies  of
                 planning law and when a decision  made  in  relation  to  a
                 particular decision making authority by  another.   Without
                 going into the detail of the case,  which  is  complex  the
                 decisions that were being  sought  to  be  challenged  were
                 decisions made by a new body taking over from an old,  they
                 were decisions properly taken by  the  original  authority,
                 under the constraints of the law as it was at the  time  by
                 the appropriate body.  Subsequently the new body sought  to
                 alter  those  decisions  or   at   least   postpone   their
                 implementation.  Whilst of course I  accept  as  a  general
                 principle  of  law  that  if  a  decision  is  made  by  an
                 appropriate body on particular facts, it  is  not  open  to
                 that  body  or  its  successor  to  change  that   decision
                 arbitrarily or possibly at all, I do not see that  case  as
                 being directly relevant to  the  circumstances  that  I  am
                 dealing with.  I am not making any decision in relation  to
                 the brother Omar, whose case has been determined and status
                 granted.   I  do  not  feel  bound  to  come  to  the  same
                 conclusion as was reached by anybody looking at the case of
                 Omar, given that I now have additional facts which were not
                 available to the original body.  Further the decision  that
                 I am making is in relation to a different person on further
                 facts, that relate to him specifically and  do  not  accept
                 that I can be bound by a  decision  made  administratively,
                 where the basis for making the decision is  not  disclosed.
                 Of course I accept by implication  it  might  be  that  the
                 decision was reached  for  the  reasons  suggested  by  the
                 appellant's  representative,  but  there  might  be   other
                 reasons why the decision was reached and in the absence  of
                 knowing the reasoning, it does not seem to me that I  could
                 be bound by it.  In any event as  I  have  said  I  am  not
                 making a decision in the same  case.   In  relation  to  EX
                 PARTE DANAEI that was an immigration matter,  in  which  it
                 was sought to argue that  the  Home  Secretary  could  not,
                 without giving additional reasons, ignore the  findings  of
                 an Adjudicator, in effect overruling his original findings.
                  Again I do not find that to be the same as  the  situation
                 in this case;  the decision I make in this case relates  to
                 the  appellant  not  to  the  brother  Omar  and  I  am  in
                 possession of additional information, which will  certainly
                 affect the findings I make in this  case  that  information
                 was not available when the Secretary of  State  was  making
                 assessments on credibility, if that  is  what  he  did,  in
                 relation to the case of  Omar.   Thus,  whilst  I  am  most
                 grateful for the helpful arguments advanced in relation  to
                 these matters, I do not find that either of the  two  cases
                 are applicable to the decisions that I have to make in this
                 case.  For the avoidance of any doubt I find  that  I  need
                 not be bound by any purported decision in relation  to  the
                 brother's clan or sub-clan, if in fact  any  such  decision
                 has been made.


           38.   In the light of the respondent's observations  during  the
                 course of the request for the adjournment, it seems  to  me
                 accepted that the appellant is in fact the brother  of  his
                 witness and I will treat him as such.  The findings I  make
                 in relation to the facts of this matter  will  be  made  in
                 relation to  the  appellant's  case.   I  have  not  had  a
                 representative here on behalf of his brother and I  am  not
                 in a position to adjudicate on that case as an  independent
                 entity;  I can only take into account the evidence  of  the
                 appellant  and  his   witness,   his   brother   and   make
                 assessments, which affect the appellant.


           39.   There is little or no evidence of the clan  membership  of
                 the  appellant  save  for  the  appellant's  evidence,  his
                 brother's  evidence  and  the  letter  from  the  Bravanese
                 Community Association.   The  appellant  when  first  asked
                 about the Bravanese language  did  not  know  what  it  was
                 called, if it is right that he  had  good  reason  for  not
                 knowing that and if it is right hat he was brought up in  a
                 small village where Chimini was not spoken then I am not in
                 a position to say that there is any objective  evidence  to
                 suggest that he should have known what it  was  called.   I
                 have  not  been  referred  to  anything  in  the  objective
                 evidence to  show  that  Mr  Williams  was  wrong  when  he
                 asserted there was nothing in  the  objective  evidence  to
                 show that all Bravanese necessarily spoke or at least  knew
                 of Chimini.  Having said that it is a little strange to  me
                 that the appellant should have troubled  to  have  informed
                 himself subsequently of what the language was called.   The
                 appellant's  account  of  being  persecuted  is   certainly
                 consistent with the  objective  evidence  as  to  what  had
                 happened to those from minority clans.  I say that  because
                 a general account of  being  constantly  under  threat  and
                 attack from the militias is the account of so many from the
                 minority clans.  Having said that  I  note  the  number  of
                 discrepancies between the appellant's account and  that  of
                 his brother' son areas where I would  have  expected  their
                 accounts to  be  the  same.   I  would  have  expected  the
                 appellant and his brother to  give  a  similar  account  of
                 attacks on the home and  the  shop  in  1992,  or  even  if
                 mistaken about the year, not to be in dispute about whether
                 the home and the shop were attacked on  the  same  occasion
                 the 'first major incident', particularly when a relation is
                 said to have died in the shop.


           40.   If the appellant and his family,  including  his  brother,
                 had survived on food buried in the ground and  it  was  one
                 type of food I would have expected them to have  agreed  on
                 what type of food it was.  Whilst it is true there may  not
                 be a great deal of difference between the nature of sorghum
                 and maize they are distinctly different  items,  they  have
                 different names in Somali and they are different  products.
                 I would expect someone to know the distinction between them
                 and the fact that the appellant's brother in evidence  says
                 that they survived on sorghum, but  the  Home  Office  said
                 they survived on maize, suggests to me that the appellant's
                 brother is tailoring such evidence as he is giving  to  fit
                 with the account  the  appellant  has  given  to  the  Home
                 Office.  The same goes for his explanation about  what  was
                 sold in the shop, his shop;  where cosmetics was  mentioned
                 and food omitted to the Home Office  when  he  applied  for
                 asylum but cosmetics were omitted  when  he  gave  evidence
                 before me, in my view to fit with  his  brother's  account.
                 It is true  there  were  other  discrepancies  between  the
                 account  the  brother  gave  before  me  and  that  of  the
                 appellant and those arose largely in areas which came up in
                 questioning had  not  been  rehearsed  in  the  appellant's
                 statement or that of his brother,  suggesting  to  me  that
                 agreement had been reached over the known matters.


           41.   The appellant's account is that there  were  incidents  in
                 1992 when the house and shop were robbed and looted  and  a
                 further incident in 1994 and a final incident  in  1995,  I
                 leave out the minor incidents, which I am aware are said to
                 have taken place throughout and that it was the incident in
                 1995, when the appellant was stabbed in the leg that caused
                 the family to leave.  According to the  objective  evidence
                 those who had funds left  when  they  could.   This  family
                 apparently had funds, they had property  until  1994,  when
                 every stitch was finally looted  and  even  then  they  had
                 food, which presumably could have been sold  and  according
                 to the appellant's brother was  sold  and  they  still  had
                 money  buried  underground  according  to  the   appellant.
                 Whilst superficially it is attractive to hear the appellant
                 say that the family did not flee earlier because  it  would
                 be too dangerous and they would have been robbed, but as  I
                 understand the objective evidence,  staying  was  dangerous
                 and people were being robbed, held to ransom and killed  as
                 indeed the appellant is saying  happened  to  him  and  the
                 family.   There  is  no  obvious  reason  to  me,  why  the
                 appellant and his family did not flee  earlier  given  that
                 they  had  the  funds  on  the  appellant's  account.   The
                 explanation that it was too dangerous  has  to  be  weighed
                 against the fact that remaining where they  were  was  also
                 supposedly too dangerous if the objective evidence is to be
                 believed.  It is said that the appellant's account and that
                 of his brother are consistent on the core issues,  although
                 it is difficult if these are not core issues, to know  what
                 core issues  are.   it  is  said  that  their  accounts  in
                 relation to  buried  money  are  consistent,  although  the
                 appellant's brother  did  not  give  that  account  of  the
                 funding  of  the  leaving,  to  the  Home  Office  in   his
                 interview.


           42.   Looking at matters which are definitely not  core  issues,
                 it is difficult to see why there should be  the  difference
                 there is in the account of the appellant and  his  brother,
                 in relation to his brother's leaving the first camp in  the
                 Yemen.  The appellant saying that the  brother  just  went,
                 without any notice, and he awoke in effect to find him gone
                 and his brother's account, that the appellant knew  of  the
                 departure and his rhetorical 'why would I hide it  from  my
                 own brother'.  There is also the unlikely  and  implausible
                 suggestion from the appellant that having spent  $3,500  on
                 employing an agent, who said he would take him  to  Europe,
                 the appellant did not ask to come to England, knowing  that
                 his brother was here.  Whilst it may not go to the core  of
                 the appellant's account, I find it highly implausible  that
                 the appellant would not at least have asked to come to join
                 his brother and the fact that his evidence  was  clear  and
                 unequivocal that he did not, is an indication to me that he
                 is not prepared to tell the truth  about  his  claim.   The
                 fact that of all the countries in Europe the agent happened
                 to pick the United Kingdom, which was the  one  country  in
                 which the appellant happened  to  have  a  relation,  is  a
                 coincidence that is too good to be true in my view.


           43.   I have not outlined  all  the  discrepancies  between  the
                 appellant's account and that of his  brother,  nor  have  I
                 outlined all the areas where the brother agreed in evidence
                 with the appellant, but was shown to have given a different
                 account  to  the  respondent,  when  applying  for   asylum
                 himself.  Some more will be seen  in  the  outline  of  the
                 evidence that I have given in this determination and others
                 in the record of proceedings.  My  conclusions  from  these
                 discrepancies and differing accounts is that the  appellant
                 and his brother have not been truthful, or wholly truthful,
                 when giving their accounts to the respondent or to me.   In
                 making that assessment I  am  fully  aware  that  a  person
                 escaping persecution may not remember the exact sequence of
                 events which led them having to  flee,  particularly  where
                 they have been through traumatic experiences.   I  am  also
                 mindful  of  the  fact  that  a  person  genuinely  fleeing
                 persecution may exaggerate an account or lie  in  order  to
                 bolster an account out of fear of  return.   However,  even
                 having regard to all of  these  considerations,  I  am  not
                 satisfied that the appellant has given a  credible  account
                 of events.  It is the cumulative effect  of  all  of  these
                 matters that has brought me to that conclusion.


           44.    In  this  case  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  clan
                 affinity, as I have already said, is only that of  himself,
                 his brother and the Somali Community Association.  For  the
                 reasons I have given above, I am not prepared to accept the
                 evidence of the appellant or his  brother  in  relation  to
                 this, the only core matter of the appeal.  Further, if  the
                 appellant and his brother  are  capable  of  putting  their
                 heads together to get a similar  account  for  the  hearing
                 before me, then I am quite certain they could arrange for a
                 number of people to sign a form on their  behalf.   Whether
                 they did or not, I have not seem any of the signatories and
                 their evidence has not been tested.  In  the  circumstances
                 that I have found, I am not prepared to accept the evidence
                 of those signatories at face value.


           45.   When reaching the conclusion I have I have also considered
                 the respondent's submission that the appellant  left  Yemen
                 for economic betterment and I ask myself why, if all of his
                 family are in Kenya, apart from his brother who is  in  the
                 United Kingdom, did the appellant  want  to  spend  $3,500,
                 that was not his money, to come to an  unknown  country  in
                 Europe, when he could presumably have sought to gain  entry
                 to Kenya and be with his family.  I find it hard to believe
                 the level of expenditure would have been the same and I  am
                 bound to conclude that his motive for coming to Europe  was
                 not necessarily to seek safety from persecution.  It  seems
                 from his own account that he had been in a refugee camp run
                 by the  United  Nations  for  refugees.   This  finding  is
                 incidental because it is not directly relevant  to  whether
                 the appellant can be safely returned to Somalia.


           46.   In the above circumstances, I am not  satisfied  that  the
                 appellant has established to the required standard that  he
                 has a well-founded fear of  persecution  for  a  Convention
                 reason, namely  that  he  is  a  member  of  the  Bravanese
                 minority clan and likely to be persecuted by  the  majority
                 clans, if returned to Somalia."

 13. He therefore dismissed the appeal.

 14. In the grounds of appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  the
     Appellant objected in part to a suggestion, made on  the  Respondent's
     behalf in the course of argument  before  the  Adjudicator,  that  the
     grant of refugee status to Omar might have  been  based  on  something
     other than his claimed Bravanese clanship.  As is  apparent  from  the
     extract from the determination set out above, that  submission  played
     no part in the Adjudicator's reasoning.   For  the  purposes  of  this
     determination, we accept that the grant of refugee status to Omar  was
     based on his claimed clanship.  Nevertheless,  we  must  set  out  the
     substance of the grounds of appeal, which are as follows:

           "1.   It is submitted that the adjudicator  erred  in  law  when
                 considering the principle of Legal Certainty emanating from
                 the authorities of Danien [sic] and Sears Gruop  Properties
                 [sic]:


           PARTICULARS


              1. The adjudicator erred in law when declaring that basis  for
                 the decision in respect of Omar was not disclosed.


              2. The appellant relies, in this appeal,  upon  the  interview
                 and statements of Omar made in pursuit of his asylum claim,
                 which were before the adjudicator.  The  totality  of  this
                 documentary evidence made it plain that the only  basis  on
                 which Omar claimed  asylum  was  that  of  being  from  the
                 Bravanese minority.

              3. The suggestion by  the  HOPO  that  Omar  could  have  been
                 granted  asylum  because  of  his  sick   daughter   cannot
                 conceivably be correct since that would  not  be  a  reason
                 falling within Article 1A(2) of the  Convention.   Moreover
                 it is common sense that SSHD does not routinely grant  full
                 refugee recognition for a convention reason other than that
                 advanced  by  a  Claimant.   Such  a  situation  would   be
                 exceptional and there was nothing in the papers relating to
                 Omar which suggested a different Convention reason to  that
                 which he relied upon.

              4. The Home Office who were a party to the appeal  were  in  a
                 position adduce evidence of the actual  reason  for  Omar's
                 grant of asylum other than being Bravanese.  The  HOPO  was
                 also in a position to take instructions from his  employer.
                 He did not do so.

              5. The Home Office did not  produce  evidence  that  they  had
                 subsequently formed the view  they  had  got  it  wrong  in
                 Omar's case and were taking  formal  steps  to  remedy  the
                 situation.

              6. Based on these circumstances, applying the low standard  of
                 proof  in  asylum  cases,   the   adjudicator   erroneously
                 concluded that the basis on which  Omar  had  been  granted
                 asylum had not been disclosed before him.  It is  submitted
                 that from the totality of the  papers  relating  to  Omar's
                 claim there was no other Convention reason disclosed  other
                 than that of race by reason of membership of the  Bravanese
                 minority clan.

              7. It is submitted that the adjudicator's error in failing  to
                 find that the SSHD granted Refugee recognition to  Omar  on
                 the basis of being Bravanese tainted his findings  of  fact
                 relating to the evidence the appellant and his brother gave
                 at the hearing.

              8. It follows that, because of the preceding error of  finding
                 that the basis of grant of refugee recognition in the  case
                 of Omar was not disclosed in the grant of  refugee  status,
                 the adjudicator's whole approach to subsequent findings  on
                 discrepancies between the historical accounts  of  the  two
                 brothers was tainted with irrationality and was accordingly
                 unsustainable."

 15. Following the refusal of  permission  by  the  IAT,  the  grounds  for
     Statutory Review repeated the grounds of appeal, supplementing them as
     follows:

           "16.   The  Claimant  relies  upon  the  original  grounds   for
                 permission to appeal to the IAT  and  makes  the  following
                 challenges to the IAT's findings upon them:


              1.  The  IAT  sequentially  erred  in  law  in  upholding  the
                 Adjudicator's decision.


              1. The IAT stated that it was conceded  that  the  adjudicator
                 properly distinguished the authorities relied upon.


              2. It is submitted that what was being  strictly  conceded  at
                 [12] of the grounds  was  that  the  adjudicator  correctly
                 contrasted a different set of facts in those two cases with
                 those of the instant case.  That would be the position with
                 every case where Danien and  Sears  Group  Properties  were
                 relied upon for  the  purposes  of  the  principle  of  law
                 identified in the judgement.

              3. It is submitted that this concession by the Applicant  does
                 not in anyway undermine the underlying theme of the grounds
                 of appeal  which  was:   that  the  adjudicator  failed  to
                 properly apply  the  principle  of  Legal  Certainty  which
                 emerge from Danien and Sears Group Properties.

              4. The grounds of appeal to the IAT focus on a spurious  theme
                 submitted by  the  Home  Office  and  relied  upon  by  the
                 adjudicator that the appellant's brother  might  have  been
                 granted Refugee Recognition on a basis different from  that
                 which  he  applied  for  asylum.   There  was  no  evidence
                 whatsoever  for  this  extreme   proposition   before   the
                 adjudicator.   And  evidence  disclosed  with  the  grounds
                 setting out the exact basis  of  the  brother's  claim  for
                 asylum.

              5. It must not be forgotten in this appeal that  what  was  in
                 issue was the appellants racial origin as a member  of  the
                 Bravanese clan.  In general The majority of people  in  the
                 world share the same racial origin as  their  siblings  (no
                 doubt imponderable exceptions to this can arise).

              6. If the claim for asylum had been on other grounds  such  as
                 political  opinion  or  religion,  matters  which  are  not
                 biologically determined, but  normally  determined  by  the
                 past actions of the individual then that  prior  acceptance
                 by the SSHD of another family as a refugee would  not  have
                 had the same significance as it did in the instant case.

           16.1.6      It is submitted therefore that the  adjudicator  and
                 IAT  did  not  properly  take  into  account   a   relevant
                 consideration, namely, that  a  brother  had  already  been
                 granted asylum on the basis of his racial origin where  the
                 Applicant was claiming asylum for being of the same  racial
                 origin.


           16.1.7      It is not being submitted here  that  the  fact  the
                 brother  has  so  been  recognised  means  that   it   must
                 automatically  follow  that  the  applicant  must  also  be
                 recognised as being of  the  Brava  clan.   What  is  being
                 submitted is that the brothers position  was  a  matter  of
                 some considerable weight when  evaluating  the  Applicant's
                 claim to be Bravanese.


              8. That is not to say that the IAT are wrong in their  example
                 that in the hypothetical opposite situation  where  if  the
                 brother had been refused asylum that the adjudicator should
                 not consider the appellant's case on  its  own  merits.  Of
                 course the adjudicator should do that.

              9. However in  this  case  it  is  undeniable  that  there  is
                 considerable merit in the argument  that  the  brother  was
                 found to be from the same racial group as that  claimed  by
                 the appellant.  It  is  therefore  a  factor  that  can  be
                 properly weighed into the scales when  making  the  factual
                 finding on the Applicants clan origin.

             10. Because there was a spurious finding that the  Home  Office
                 did not grant asylum on the basis of the  brother's  origin
                 within this balancing  exercise  it  could  not  have  been
                 performed properly by the adjudicator.

             11.  The  rejection  of  the  credibility  was  based  on   the
                 discrepancies between the accounts of the applicant and the
                 brother.  Whilst that was a relevant consideration and  had
                 a negative impact on credibility nonetheless it had  to  be
                 properly weighed on the other side of the scales against  a
                 strong positive factor namely the fact that the brother had
                 already been recognised as a refugee.  For all the  reasons
                 outlined above  this  proper  balancing  exercise  did  not
                 occur.

             12. It follows that for the reasons outlined the  adjudicator's
                 determination  and  that  of  the  IAT  is   tainted   with
                 irrationality.  The applicant therefore  respectfully  asks
                 that the IAT determination be quashed."

 16. Again, we should point out that  the  alleged  "spurious  finding"  to
     which reference is made in paragraph 16.1.10 is not one  that  appears
     in the determination as we read it.

 17. In his submissions before us,  Mr  Omere  referred  us  again  to  the
     Cardiff County Council case.  He asserted that that case decided that,
     even where there had been no judicial  decision  on  the  matter,  the
     facts underlying an administrative  decision  should  be  regarded  as
     binding on all  subsequent  proceedings  to  which  the  authority  in
     question was a party until the decision itself was set aside.  He  was
     asked why a decision in favour of a claimant should have that  effect,
     whereas, as is submitted  in  paragraph  16.1.8  of  the  grounds  for
     Statutory Review, a decision against another person did not.   He  was
     unable to give any clear reason  for  his  view  on  that  point,  but
     reminded us that there was no basis at  all  for  believing  that  the
     grant of status to Omar was based on anything other than his claim  to
     be Bravanese.

 18. In elaborating the precise status of the decision in Omar's  case,  Mr
     Omere submitted that if he was wrong in saying  that  a  principle  of
     legal certainty required an Adjudicator to consider  the  decision  in
     Omar's case as binding on him, it ought nevertheless to be regarded as
     weighty evidence, and, in addition, evidence which there was no reason
     to disbelieve, because the Secretary of State had not sought to revoke
     the decision he had made.  In attacking the Adjudicator's approach  to
     the evidence as a whole, he said that the Adjudicator was  wrong  even
     to suspect (as he did in  paragraph  37  of  his  determination)  that
     "there might be other reasons" why the decision  in  Omar's  case  was
     reached;  and that that suspicion fatally flawed his assessment of the
     evidence as a  whole.   Further,  Mr  Omere  submitted,  none  of  the
     discrepancies to which the Adjudicator referred went to the  issue  of
     the Appellant's clan membership.

 19. On behalf of the Home Office, Mr Deller indicated that there might  be
     several levels of reasoning for  any  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
     State, and submitted that there was no duty on the Secretary of  State
     to establish precise facts before granting asylum, and  no  burden  of
     proof requiring him to provide any such  information  in  a  different
     person's asylum appeal.  If, as was being submitted on behalf  of  the
     Appellant, the decision in favour of Omar could not  co-exist  with  a
     decision against the Appellant, he queried why  it  was  the  decision
     against the Appellant which  had  to  fall.   It  could  not  be  that
     decisions in favour of claimants had a characteristic of infallibility
     which was not shared by decisions against claimants.

 20. So far as the Adjudicator's treatment of the evidence is concerned, Mr
     Deller submitted that  twice  in  paragraph  37  the  Adjudicator  had
     distanced himself from any effect of speculation as to the basis  upon
     which Omar had been granted asylum.  The Appellant was entitled  to  a
     proper hearing of the evidence in support of his claim.   He  had  had
     such a hearing, and the Adjudicator had done his job.

AA

 21. AA came to the United  Kingdom  on  28  August  2004  by  train.   The
     passport he  produced  was  one  he  was  entitled  to  use.   He  was
     interviewed under caution at Ashford Police Station.  He said that  he
     did not know where he had boarded the train and was unable to  explain
     his apparent possession of certain  papers.   He  claimed  asylum  the
     following day.  He was interviewed then and on at least one subsequent
     occasion, by which time he was assisted by solicitors.  He  said  that
     he was an Ashraf, and gave details of events which had caused him  and
     other family members to leave Somalia or Ethiopia in  1992.   He  said
     that those who left with him were his mother, his father, his  sister,
     his brother-in-law and himself:  "five of us" altogether.  There is no
     record of his having been asked any more detailed questions about  his
     family.

 22. The Secretary of State considered his claim to asylum and  decided  to
     refuse it.  He considered that the Appellant knew too little about the
     Ashraf and its sub-clans to be credibly regarded as a  member  of  the
     sub-clan he claimed.  He  further  considered  that  any  difficulties
     which the Appellant had had in Somalia before 1992 were  incidents  of
     the civil war and  not  of  persecution.   Other  factors  caused  the
     Secretary of State  to  disbelieve  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
     history.  Having refused him asylum, the Secretary of State decided to
     remove him as an illegal entrant.  Notification of that  decision  was
     given on 16 November 2004.

 23.  The  Appellant  appealed.   The  grounds  of  appeal  challenged  the
     Secretary of State's conclusions on the  Appellant's  credibility  and
     his knowledge of the Ashraf clan structure.  They add the following:

           "2.   The Secretary of State has failed to take into account the
                 fact that the applicant's sister has already been  accepted
                 as  being  a  refugee.   She  was  granted  asylum  on  the
                 14/3/2003.  In her application SEF form she  gives  details
                 of the  applicant  as  being  her  brother  (copy  relevant
                 documents enclosed)."

 24. The documents in question include the grant of asylum  status  to  the
     person in question (whose name we will abbreviate for the purposes  of
     this determination as Ouma) and her children, and her  own  SEF  form,
     completed by the claimant with the assistance of  her  solicitors  and
     dated 27 September  2002.   (There  are  also  SEF  forms  for  Ouma's
     children, but they add nothing to this appeal.)  In  Ouma's  SEF  form
     she names as one of her brothers, then living at an unknown address in
     Ethiopia, a person with the same year of birth as the Appellant (month
     and day not stated) and  with  a  similar  name.   We  say  "similar",
     because the second element of the name is the same;  the third element
     is the same except for its spelling;   but  the  first  is  different:
     Ouma's form reads "Abdow", and has been amended to read that,  so  the
     spelling is clearly intentional:  the Appellant gives that element  of
     his name as "Abdi".  Despite these difficulties, it  appears  to  have
     been accepted, and we accept for the purposes of  this  determination,
     that Ouma is the Appellant's sister.

 25. The Appellant's appeal came before an Adjudicator, Mr S C D Hulme,  on
     25 January 2005.  He heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  from
     Ouma.  He became aware or was told that the grant of refugee status to
     Ouma followed a successful appeal to another Adjudicator.  He was not,
     however, shown the determination in  Ouma's  case.   We  do  not  know
     specifically what submissions were made to the Adjudicator  about  the
     relevance of Ouma's status.  There was a full skeleton argument signed
     by Mr Barcello, counsel for the Appellant before the Adjudicator.  The
     only reference to this issue is at paragraph 11:

           "In support of [AA], [Ouma] his sister and a recognised  refugee
           has provided a statement in support of  their  relationship  and
           will be in attendance at court to  give  evidence.   Her  letter
           granting indefinite leave  to  remain  is  at  page  96  of  the
           bundle."

 26. Nothing in the skeleton argument suggests  that  the  Adjudicator  was
     bound by the findings made  in  respect  of  Ouma  or  refers  to  any
     authority on that issue.

 27. In cross-examination, the Presenting Officer  appears  to  have  asked
     questions based on what Ouma said at her interview,  a  transcript  of
     which was also before the Adjudicator.  Having considered the evidence
     and the submissions made to him, he wrote as follows:

           "23.  The Appellant's credibility has  been  challenged  by  the
                 Respondent who does not  accept  that  he  Appellant  is  a
                 member of the Ashraf clan.  I have examined  each  area  of
                 concern and had regard to what the Appellant has had to say
                 in response.


           24.   The Appellant's  original  story  told  at  interviews  in
                 August and September 2004 was extremely vague  and  lacking
                 in substantial detail.


           25.   All he said at the police interview in August was that his
                 father and brother were killed, his mother  was  raped  and
                 his teeth were damaged.  No other details and no dates.


           26.   At his screening level 3 interview in August he said  that
                 his foot was ripped open and his teeth were broken in 1991.


           27.   When interviewed in September he said that his father  was
                 beaten severely by Siad Barre's  soldiers  and  the  Hawiye
                 clan in 1991, then  he  (the  Appellant)  was  attacked  by
                 Hawiye in 1992  so  he  left.   No  mention  of  him  being
                 attacked and beaten in 1991.  He said that he  and  members
                 of his family were sheltered in a hut in the rural area  of
                 Afgoye at the time of the attack in 1992.  The  members  of
                 his family were his parents, brother in law,  sisters,  her
                 children, his brother and his (the Appellant's)  wife.   He
                 said that his hands were tied behind his back  and  he  was
                 beaten.  He went on to say that his wife at that  time  was
                 his first wife and that she died.  He  married  again.   He
                 said  that  his  parents,  sister  and   brother   in   law
                 accompanied him to Ethiopia and  that  it  took  about  one
                 month to get there.  He said that the first attack  on  his
                 family by Hawiye was  in  November  1991.   Having  got  to
                 Ethiopia they went to Dire Dawa and in 1993  they  went  to
                 live in a refugee camp in Qabri  Batha  where  they  stayed
                 until he left in 2004.  In 2001 the Ethiopians set fire  to
                 their hut.  He supported his family by working as a  porter
                 in warehouses.


           28.   Included in the Appellant's bundle at pages 7 to 9 is  the
                 Appellant's written statement.  It is  neither  signed  nor
                 dated but it was adopted by him at the hearing.  In  it  he
                 talks about his fiance living with  his  family  in  1991.
                 There is no mention that she ever became his wife  or  that
                 he married for a second time at a later date.  He says that
                 his father was severely beaten by Hawiye militia  in  1991.
                 He was also beaten and some of his teeth were knocked  out.
                 His leg was also cut with a scythe.  He says for the  first
                 time that 2 of his sisters were raped on that occasion.  He
                 then goes on to mention another attack  on  the  family  in
                 1992 which he says occurred in his father's shop, not in  a
                 hut in a rural area.  He says that his mother and 2 of  his
                 sisters were also raped.  No detailed mention of any attack
                 on himself on this occasion.   He  says  that  he  had  not
                 mentioned the rapes in 1991 or 1992 before because  it  was
                 too difficult for him.  I reject that as  plausible  as  he
                 had told the police in August 2004 that his mother had been
                 raped.  No mention then of his sisters suffering  the  same
                 fate.  He left for  Ethiopia  with  other  members  of  his
                 family but he says that he left his fiance behind -  again
                 no mention of her being his wife.  He  says  that  it  took
                 approximately one year to travel across Somalia to Ethiopia
                 and that they arrived there in 1993.  There is  no  mention
                 of a brother of the Appellant being killed at any  time  as
                 he had said at the police interview  in  August.   For  the
                 first time he said that his father died a few months  after
                 the attack in 12992 when en route  to  Ethiopia.   He  also
                 said for the first time that he did not live in a  camp  in
                 Ethiopia despite saying that he did when he was interviewed
                 in September when he was questioned in depth about his stay
                 in the refugee camp.  He said that  while  in  Ethiopia  he
                 made a living by cutting down trees and  selling  wood  and
                 coal and whatever work he was able to find.  No mention  of
                 working as a porter in warehouses.


           29.   Included in the Appellant's bundle at pages 144 to 148  is
                 a medical report from Dr Nelki who examined  the  Appellant
                 on 13 January 2005.  It states that the Appellant's  family
                 was attacked on 2 occasions;  firstly in February 2001  and
                 secondly in April 1992.  When interviewed in September 2004
                 the Appellant had said that the first attack took place  in
                 November 1991.  The description of the attack  in  February
                 1991  is  broadly  similar  to  that   contained   in   the
                 Appellant's written  statement  which  says  only  that  it
                 occurred  in  1991.   Dr  Nelki's  report   describes   the
                 circumstances of the second attack in April 1992.  It  says
                 that 4 of the Appellant's sisters  were  seized  and  taken
                 captive and that their whereabouts are  unknown.   This  is
                 the only time that such an allegation has been  made;   the
                 nearest the Appellant has got to it before is when he  said
                 at interview in September that 2 of his sisters were  taken
                 (question 25).  Dr Nelki's report says that  the  men  were
                 again beaten up, hit with rifle butts and wooden  sticks  -
                 the first time that such detail has been given.  The report
                 goes on to say that the family fled and that the  Appellant
                 fled with his parents, brother, sister, sister in law and 2
                 children.  When interviewed in September he said that 5  of
                 the family fled (question 19).


           30.   I find from the totality of all  of  the  above  mentioned
                 discrepancies in the Appellant's various  recollections  of
                 events that his overall credibility is totally undermined.


           31.   At the answer to question 42 of his interview in September
                 the Appellant said that the Ethiopians set fire to the  hut
                 he was in in 2001.  When giving evidence he said  that  his
                 sister, mother, wife and his children were then living with
                 him.  When his sister gave evidence before me she initially
                 said that she was  living  with  her  husband,  sister  and
                 brother in Ethiopia but  when  challenged  by  Mr  Hammonds
                 about what she  had  said  previously  at  her  own  asylum
                 interview she said that she was  helped  by  her  husband's
                 brother and said that they were living together in 2 houses
                 just behind each other.  She confirmed that she was  living
                 with her  husband.   There  is  a  substantial  discrepancy
                 between the evidence of the Appellant  and  his  sister  in
                 this respect which causes me to find that their credibility
                 is serious undermined as I find  that  they  have  colluded
                 together to present his case.  Unfortunately for  her,  the
                 Appellant's sister appears to have overlooked what she  had
                 said in her own interview.  I am aware that the Appellant's
                 sister has been granted refugee status in the UK.   I  have
                 not, however, seen my colleague Adjduicator's Determination
                 in her case.  Although she is likely  to  have  been  found
                 credible by my colleague that finding is not  binding  upon
                 me and  I  have  arrived  at  my  own  finding  of  adverse
                 credibility in her case on the  particular  facts  of  this
                 appeal.


           32.   Taking Dr Nelki's report in the round  together  with  all
                 the evidence I have seen and heard I find that it does  not
                 corroborate the Appellant's story so far as the reason  for
                 the injuries upon which Dr Nelki  reports.   I  accept  the
                 report at face value and accept that the Appellant displays
                 the scarring on his body as described by the doctor.  I  do
                 not, however, accept that they  are  as  a  result  of  the
                 attacks alleged by the Appellant as I have found that he is
                 not a credible witness.


           33.   So far as  clan  membership  is  concerned  the  Appellant
                 merely said when interviewed that he belonged to the Ashraf
                 clan.  It was not until he made his statement that he  gave
                 details of his claimed sub clan which  he  said  is  Sharif
                 Baclawi descended from  Hussein.   This  was  confirmed  in
                 evidence.  According to the Minorities Report  prepared  by
                 the joint British, Danish and Dutch fact finding mission to
                 Nairobi in September 2000 the correct  spelling  is  Sharif
                 Baalawi.   I  note  from  Dr  Nelki's   report   that   the
                 Appellant's clan is there described as Balyi.  When he  was
                 interviewed in September 2004 he was questioned  about  the
                 Hamar groups but was unable to name them.  He has explained
                 this by saying that he did know them but he was naming  the
                 tribes who lived around Afgoye.  I do not accept that as  a
                 plausible excuse.  I note that one of his answers,  namely,
                 Amudi, is, in fact, one of the Shangani groups according to
                 the 2000 Minorities Report.  He was also unable to name the
                 Hussein or all of the Hassan groups at interview.  When  he
                 gave evidence he was, however, able  to  name  the  Hussein
                 groups.  He said that he was suffering from  severe  asthma
                 at the time of the interview so he was not able  to  finish
                 off saying anything.  I reject that as implausible  as  the
                 record of interview is noted that the Appellant  then  said
                 he was fit and well both at the beginning and  end  of  the
                 interview.  It is noted at question 20  that  there  was  a
                 break for water during the interview and that the Appellant
                 used some sort of inhaler but there is nothing to  indicate
                 that the  Appellant  was  in  any  way  distressed  by  his
                 inability to breathe properly.  I find that the Appellant's
                 knowledge, and that he is  likely  to  have  rehearsed  his
                 answers in readiness for the hearing of his appeal.   I  do
                 not find him credible and I do not  accept  that  he  is  a
                 member of the Ashraf clan as he claims.


           34.   I find from  all  of  the  above  that  the  core  of  the
                 Appellant's account of persecution lacks credibility and is
                 a fabrication designed to gain access to the UK.


           35.   As a returned failed asylum seeker the Appellant may  well
                 have to suffer some hardship but I do not accept that  this
                 will reach the high threshold required by Article 3 of  the
                 1950 Convention.  I do not accept that he is a member of  a
                 minority clan as he claims and I find  that  his  suffering
                 will  be  no  more  than  that  suffered   by   the   whole
                 population."

 28. The grounds of appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  begin  by
     asserting that "the Adjudicator reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's
     claimed credibility are perverse".  We must  set  out  the  other  two
     grounds in full:

           "2.    The  Adjudicator  has  failed  to  properly  assess   the
                 corroborative  evidence  of  the  Appellant's   sister,   a
                 recognised refugee


                 The Appellant's sister  provided  her  SEF,  interview  and
                 grant of status letter.  Her account  in  her  SEF  and  at
                 interview (some two years prior to the Appellant's arrival)
                 accords entirely with the accounts given by the  Appellant.
                 The Adjudicator however has dismissed the entire account of
                 the Appellant's sister and considered there  to  have  been
                 collusion on the basis of one single perceived discrepancy.
                  The Appellant's sister stated in  her  SEF  that  she  was
                 living in Ethiopia  with  her  husband.   In  evidence  she
                 stated that they lived together with her sister and brother
                 in 2 houses behind each other.  The  Adjudicator  considers
                 this to be a 'substantial discrepancy'.   It  is  submitted
                 that this is ambiguous at best and a highly  tenuous  basis
                 upon which to reach a finding of collusion.


                 On this basis the Adjudicator has completely overlooked the
                 rest of the sister's account,  even  though  it  is  highly
                 corroborative and has been accepted as credible previously.
                  The failure to assess any more of her account has  led  to
                 an unfair finding of collusion that does not accord at  all
                 with the evidence.  The suggestion that  they  colluded  in
                 this account 2 years ago is also perverse.

              3.  The  Adjudicator's  assessment  of  clan   membership   is
                 perverse.


                 At paragraph 33, the Adjudicator adopts a similar reasoning
                 for dismissing  the  Appellant's  evidence  regarding  clan
                 membership.  He states that 'the Appellant merely said when
                 interviewed that he belonged to the Ashraf  clan.   It  was
                 not until he made his statement that he gave details of his
                 claimed subclan which he said is Sharif  Baclawi  descended
                 from Hussein'.  Unless a person is asked at interview  what
                 their subclan is, it is unfair to criticise  them  for  not
                 mentioning it.


                 Further, the Adjudicator criticises the Appellant  for  the
                 variety of spellings of the Appellant's claimed clan.   The
                 Appellant does not speak, read  or  write  in  the  English
                 language.  Whilst he is able to state in Somali his  clan's
                 name, he is reliant upon interpreters for spelling.  In any
                 event, the variety of spellings is not limited to documents
                 prepared on behalf of the Appellant.  Spelling  differences
                 extend to the  Joint  Report  on  Minorities.   It  is  not
                 uncommon for there to be a variety of  different  spellings
                 for Somali words."

 29. Permission to appeal having been refused, new grounds  were  submitted
     in support of  the  application  for  Statutory  Review.   So  far  as
     relevant for present purposes, they are as follows:

           "Essence of challenge
           2.    The Adjudicator fundamentally misdirected himself  in  law
                 as regards one important aspect of the  Claimant's  appeal:
                 that  the  Claimant's  sister  was  found  by  a   previous
                 Adjudicator to be from the Ashraf clan.  On that basis  the
                 sister had her  appeal  allowed  and  was  granted  refugee
                 status.  The Claimant's Adjudicator took the  view  that  a
                 previous finding of  that  kind  was  not  binding  on  him
                 contrary to the clear jurisprudence on point.  In turn, the
                 IAT failed to recognize this error.


           ...


           The sister's determination
              4. Within her interview on 19 September  2002  the  Claimant's
                 sister stated clearly that she was from  the  Ashraf  clan,
                 detailing the sub clan and sub sub clan, see questions  62-
                 72 of the interview.  That same interview  was  before  the
                 Claimant's Adjudicator:


                 "when challenged by Mr Hammonds about  what  she  had  said
                 previously at her own asylum interview ..."
                 [see paragraph 31 of the determination]


              5. Further, the copy documents  in  respect  of  the  sister's
                 appeal were attached to the Claimant's notice of appeal.


              6. The Adjudicator in  the  sister's  determination  concluded
                 that whilst parts of the Claimant's sister's  account  were
                 "unreliable" and "exaggerated":


                 "I have no  difficulty  whatsoever  in  finding  that  this
                 particular appellant is Somalian and is of the Ashraf  sub-
                 clan.  I make those findings on the basis of her  knowledge
                 of modern Somalian history and the specifics  of  her  sub-
                 clan."
                 [see paragraph 14 of the determination and also  paragraphs
                 18 and 23]


           ...


           The Claimant's determination
           8.    As set out above, the Adjudicator in the Claimant's appeal
                 did not have  the  sister's  determination  but  knew  that
                 throughout her interview the Claimant's sister claimed  she
                 was Ashraf and knew that findings of fact had been made  by
                 a  previous  Adjudicator  that  were  favourable   to   the
                 Claimant's sister, as  a  result  of  which  she  had  been
                 granted refugee status [see paragraphs 12  and  31  of  his
                 determination].   Given  the  content   of   the   sister's
                 interview and grant of refugee status, it is highly  likely
                 that  even  without  the   determination   the   Claimant's
                 Adjudicator knew that the appeal would have been allowed on
                 the basis, at the very least, of her Ashraf ethnicity.


           9.    Both  Adjudicators  accepted  that  those  of  the  Ashraf
                 minority clan would be at risk on return if found to be  of
                 that  clan.   In  particular  the  Claimant's   Adjudicator
                 accepted at paragraph 19 that


                 ... minorities are particularly vulnerable to abuses


           ...


           The Adjudicator's error of law
           12.   Apart from attacking far  too  much  weight  to  the  only
                 discrepancy in the  sister's  evidence  as  to  her  living
                 arrangements, the far more fundamental error of law  is  as
                 follows:  the Adjudicator completely misdirected himself in
                 law as to  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  previous
                 Adjudicator's findings.


             13. The Claimant's Adjudicator concluded at paragraph 31


                 "Although she is likely to have been found credible  by  my
                 colleague that finding is not binding upon me  and  I  have
                 arrived at my own finding of  adverse  credibility  in  her
                 case on the particular facts of this appeal."


             14. The error is that previous findings  by  another  Appellate
                 Authority which has assessed the evidence and had it tested
                 before it are binding on a subsequent Adjudicator, absent a
                 successful appeal setting aside the determination as flawed
                 or later evidence that  is  fundamentally  undermining  and
                 shows  the  previous  determination  to  be  based   on   a
                 completely erroneous basis.


             15. In the same  way,  once  an  Adjudicator  makes  favourable
                 findings as to an Appellant being a  refugee,  neither  the
                 Secretary of State nor any future court can go behind  that
                 unless it has been set aside on appeal  or  later  evidence
                 emerges fatally undermining those findings.  In such a case
                 however, there would have to be a preliminary  hearing  and
                 further findings  to  explain  why  the  previous  findings
                 cannot be relied on.   Neither  appeal  from  the  sister's
                 determination nor fundamentally undermining evidence of the
                 previous determination exist in this case.  Further,  there
                 is no reasoning by the current Adjudicator as  to  on  what
                 basis he may disregard the previous determination -  simply
                 a bare assertion that it has no binding effect.

             16. It is not for a later Adjudicator to  simply  disregard  or
                 not pay due deference to any previous finding  of  fact  or
                 credibility.  The later Adjudicator cannot simply  disagree
                 with the previous one, which in effect  is  precisely  what
                 has occurred in this case.

 30. There is then reference to Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702,  [2003]  Imm
     AR 1, R v SSHD ex parte Boafo [2002] EWCA Civ 44, [2002]  1  WLR  1919
     and DB [2003] UKIAT 00053.

 31. The grounds continue as follows:

           "21.  It is  plain  from  the  above  that  for  the  Claimant's
                 Adjudicator to have held  in  categorical  terms  that  the
                 previous "finding is not binding upon me" is a misdirection
                 in law and misapplication of the law.  In the premises, the
                 part  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination  rejecting  the
                 Claimant as Ashraf, even though his sister  was  previously
                 found to be Ashraf, is unsustainable.


           22.   Had the Adjudicator directed himself correctly,  he  would
                 have been bound to conclude on the lower standard of  proof
                 that the Claimant was in real likelihood as the brother  of
                 his sister, who had been found to be Ashraf,  also  Ashraf.
                 In turn, he would be at risk on return."

 32. At the hearing  before  us,  the  determination  in  Ouma's  case  was
     produced, apparently for the first time.  It results from a hearing on
     3 February 2003 before an Adjudicator, Mr N J Osborne.  The  appellant
     before him was represented, but there was no appearance  by  the  Home
     Office.  The determination records that Ouma also came to  the  United
     Kingdom by train, but was unable to say where she got  on  the  train.
     So far as concerns Ouma's clan membership, the Adjudicator wrote this:

           "14.  I note from her SEF interview which is in the respondent's
                 bundle at section C that in reply to  questions  62  to  72
                 inclusive the appellant gave specific and accurate answers.
                   I  consider  the  replies  to  those  questions   to   be
                 illuminating in the context of this case and  I  give  them
                 all due significance.


                 I say from this early stage in my findings that I  have  no
                 difficulty  whatsoever  in  finding  that  this  particular
                 appellant is Somalian and is of  the  Ashraf  sub-clan.   I
                 make those findings on the basis of her knowledge of modern
                 Somalian history and the specifics of her sub-clan.


                 A reading of the Reasons for Refusal Letter  (paragraphs  7
                 and  8  in  particular)  leads  me  to  conclude  that  the
                 respondent  either  accepts  or  does  not  deny  that  the
                 appellant is a member of the Ashraf clan.  In  paragraph  8
                 the respondent states that, "The situation was no worse for
                 members of the Ashraf clan than for the general  population
                 and members of any other clan or sub-clan".


                 There is certainly no denial in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
                 Letter that the appellant is a member of the clan.  In  all
                 the circumstances therefore I find that she is a member  of
                 the Ashraf sub-clan of the Reer Hamar clan."


 33. In her submissions to us, Ms Fielden took a  different  approach  from
     that adopted by Mr  Omere.   She  did  not  suggest  that  a  previous
     favourable decision would have weight whereas a previous  unfavourable
     decisions  should  be  ignored.   She  submitted  that  all   previous
     decisions were absolutely binding, because of the rule that  decisions
     of a competent court stood unless successfully appealed.  She referred
     us to Boafo and to the requirement that the losing party  should  make
     use of the appellate process rather than  seeking  to  circumvent  the
     decision.  She submitted that from  all  the  authorities,  one  could
     derive the theme that if there was an existing determination one could
     not go behind it.

 34. In the present case, as we have seen, the Adjudicator did not have the
     previous determination before him.  Ms Fielden reminded us that he was
     aware that it existed, and submitted that in  those  circumstances  he
     had a duty to secure a copy of it before making his own decision.  She
     submitted that failure to do so was itself an error  of  law,  because
     (if  her  submission  on  the  binding   nature   of   that   previous
     determination was accepted) the Adjudicator could  not  make  his  own
     decision without being fully aware of the constraints (imposed by  the
     previous decision) under which he was acting.

 35. In a slightly less demanding version of her  submissions,  Ms  Fielden
     asserted  that  nobody  was  entitled  to  go   behind   an   existing
     determination unless it was either demonstrably flawed  or  there  was
     fresh  material  not  available  to  the  first   Adjudicator.    That
     proposition was derived  from  Devaseelan:   the  first  determination
     should be the starting point.  It might well be in  the  present  case
     that the Adjudicator was entitled, on  the  evidence  before  him,  to
     disbelieve Ouma's account of events in Somalia and  subsequently,  but
     he needed also to reach a view on whether she and the  Appellant  were
     Ashrafs.  He had not done  so  independently  of  his  view  on  their
     credibility;   and  he  had  not  taken  into  account  the   previous
     determination.   That   determination   showed   that   the   previous
     Adjudicator had himself reached a view that Ouma was an Ashraf as well
     as that she was at risk of persecution.

 36.  Mr  Deller  submitted  that  the  non-production  of   the   previous
     determination before the Adjudicator was a tactical decision  and  the
     Appellant must suffer the consequence of  it.   Failure  to  take  the
     contents of that determination into account could not be an  error  of
     law by the Adjudicator.  Mr Deller was not prepared  to  concede  that
     Ouma or the Appellant would be entitled to  succeed  in  their  claims
     solely by establishing their clan membership.  That was not a position
     that the Adjudicator in the present case should  have  taken,  and  he
     could  not  be  expected  to  speculate  about  the  contents   of   a
     determination  he  had  not  been  shown.   In  fact,  now  that   the
     determination is available, it transpires that the Adjudicator made  a
     finding of his own in favour of Ouma's claimed clan membership.  That,
     however, cannot be regarded as concluding the case in this Appellant's
     favour.

 37. Looking at the general question whether there was a principle  that  a
     finding of fact bound findings in another appeal, Mr  Deller  referred
     us in particular to Danaei.  He submitted that a previous  finding  in
     another appeal can only be binding if there is  no  further  evidence.
     When there is another claim by a different person it is almost certain
     that there will be  further  evidence;   and,  he  submitted,  further
     detail on matters on which there has already been evidence amounts  to
     further evidence for these purposes.   His  suggestion  was  that  the
     important question to ask is "Is nothing different?".

The authorities

 38. We may begin with the judgment of Collins J in ex parte  Danaei.   The
     claimant, an Iranian national, claimed asylum.  His claim was  refused
     by the Secretary  of  State.   He  appealed  to  an  Adjudicator,  who
     dismissed his appeal but, in the course of his determination,  made  a
     number of findings of fact including the following:   "I  accept  that
     the appellant left Iran because he feared that his life was in  danger
     as a consequence of him having carried on an  affair  with  a  married
     woman".  He was refused leave to  appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal and, so far as  the  appellate  process  was  concerned,  the
     matter stopped there.  His solicitors, however, sought to persuade the
     Secretary of State to grant asylum nevertheless  or  alternatively  to
     grant exceptional leave to remain.  The Secretary of State refused  to
     do so, and in giving his reasons adopted a form of words which Collins
     J characterised in the following terms:

           "It is apparent, therefore, that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
           approached this case on the basis that he does  not  accept  the
           Adjudicator's findings of fact.  He gives reasons for  rejecting
           them, but the reasons are essentially the same  as  the  reasons
           given in his original letter of March 1994."

 39. In the course of his judgment, Collins J said this:

           "Mr Kovats [for the Secretary of State] submits, and  I  accept,
           that for the purposes of his decision whether  there  should  be
           exceptional leave to remain, the Secretary of State is not bound
           by the findings in this case made by the Adjudicator.   What  he
           has to do is to have regard to them but as it seems  to  me,  he
           must, if he is to disagree with  them,  to  have  some  material
           beyond only that which  he  put  before  the  Adjudicator.   The
           scheme of the 1971 Act is to provide for the Adjudicator  to  be
           able to review the Secretary of State's  decisions  on  fact  in
           order to reach his decision.  If the  Secretary  of  State  were
           without more to be able to disregard those findings of fact  for
           the purpose of any subsequent action then, as it  seems  to  me,
           proper effect would not be given to the role of the Adjudicator.
            ...  Here it is not suggested that the  findings  made  by  the
           Adjudicator were themselves in any way irrational  or  unlawful;
           they were findings which could  properly  be  reached  upon  the
           material that the Adjudicator was considering.  The Secretary of
           State did not agree with them, but that was all.


           In those circumstances, there was no good reason to reject them.
            Of course, the Secretary of State  may  have  further  material
           which he can take into consideration and that may itself provide
           a reason not to accept the Adjudicator's findings, but there was
           no such fresh material in this case.


           ...


           ... In my view, the Secretary of State is not entitled to reject
           those findings unless he has additional  material  or  can  show
           that some matter was not put before the Adjudicator or that  the
           Adjudicator was deceived into reaching the decision that he  did
           reach.  None of that material exists in this case."

 40. On the Secretary of State's appeal, the Court of  Appeal  agreed  with
     Collins J.  By then, the Court of Appeal had itself decided  Elhasoglu
     v SSHD [1999] Imm AR 380, in which it had approved R v SSHD  ex  parte
     Alakesan [1997] Imm AR 315, which had been before  Collins  J.   Those
     were  both  cases  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State  had   refused
     exceptional  leave  to  remain  because  he  had  disagreed  with  the
     Adjudicator's assessment of the situation existing in the  appellant's
     own home country.  (These appeals were all decided before  the  coming
     into force of the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Immigration and Asylum
     Act 1999:  the granting of leave to remain merited by any  Article  of
     the European Convention on Human Rights was therefore a matter for the
     Secretary of State, not the Adjudicator.)  Simon Brown  LJ,  who  gave
     the leading judgment in Danaei, regarded  Elhasoglu  and  Alakesan  as
     properly distinguishable from the present case because, in cases where
     the Secretary of State's decision whether to grant  exceptional  leave
     to remain depended on  the  circumstances  in  another  country  at  a
     particular date it  was  very  likely  that  he  would  have  material
     additional to that which was before the Adjudicator.  Where,  however,
     the question depended on assessment of the appellant's credibility and
     the facts individual to him, however, the Secretary of State could not
     reasonably disagree with the Adjudicator unless (1) the  Adjudicator's
     factual conclusion was itself demonstrably flawed or irrational;   (2)
     fresh material had since become available to the Secretary  of  State,
     such as could realistically have affected the Adjudicator's  findings;
     or (3) (arguably) the Adjudicator had decided  the  appeal  purely  on
     documents or if, despite having heard oral evidence, his  findings  of
     fact owed nothing whatever to any assessment of the witnesses.

 41. In reaching those conclusions, Simon Brown LJ expressed the hope  that
     he was not influenced unduly by the Court of Appeal's decision in R  v
     Warwickshire County Council ex parte Powergen plc (1998)  96  LGR  617
     where it had been decided that a highway authority was not entitled to
     adhere to and act upon its original view that  the  public  would  not
     benefit from a development, when there had been a planning  appeal  in
     which the highway authority's objection had been fully considered  and
     rejected.  Simon Brown LJ indicated that the situation in  a  planning
     appeal was very different:

           "Not least in that a powerful argument arose there that  if  the
           highway authority  were  entitled  to  maintain  their  original
           objection, they could  effectively  defeat  the  whole  planning
           process.  By contrast, even if the Secretary of State has  carte
           blanche here to re-decide the facts as he maintains, there  will
           be no question of that frustrating the  overall  scheme  of  the
           legislation."

 42. Judge LJ, agreeing with Simon Brown LJ's conclusion  and  the  reasons
     for it, said this:

           "The desirable objective of an independent scrutiny of decisions
           in this field would be negated if the Secretary  of  State  were
           entitled to act merely on his own  assertions  and  reassertions
           about relevant facts contrary to express  findings  made  at  an
           oral hearing by a special adjudicator who had seen and heard the
           relevant witnesses.  That would approach uncomfortably close  to
           decision-making  by  executive  or  administrative  dictat.   If
           therefore the Secretary of State is to set  aside  or  ignore  a
           finding on  a  factual  issue  which  has  been  considered  and
           evaluated at an oral  hearing  by  the  special  adjudicator  he
           should explain why he has done so,  and  he  should  not  do  so
           unless the relevant factual conclusion could itself be  impugned
           on Wednesbury principles, or has been reconsidered in the  light
           of further evidence, or is of limited or negligible significance
           to the ultimate decision for which he is responsible."

 43. R v Cardiff County Council ex parte Sears is  a  planning  case.   The
     real issue there was whether the respondent, as successor to both  the
     Cardiff City Council as planning authority  and  the  South  Glamorgan
     County Council as highway authority, was bound by planning  permission
     granted  some  four  years  previously  by  the  predecessor  planning
     authority and subject  only  to  an  agreement  with  the  predecessor
     highway authority under s278 of the Highways Act 1980  (which  enables
     highway authorities to agree with developers that the latter will fund
     improvements to roads made  necessary  by  the  development)  and  was
     therefore not entitled  to  require  further  traffic  surveys  before
     entering  into  the  agreement.   Carnwath  J  held   that,   in   the
     circumstances, the new  authority's  requirement  for  a  new  traffic
     survey was not unreasonable.  But he  accepted  that  there  could  be
     discerned from the cases (including Danaei and Powergen), and  subject
     to variations in detail, that:


           "where a formal decision has been made on a  particular  subject
           matter or issue affecting private rights by a  competent  public
           authority, that decision will be regarded as  binding  on  other
           authorities directly involved, unless  and  until  circumstances
           change in a way which can reasonably be found to  undermine  the
           basis of the original decision".

 44. Boafo is another decision of the Court of Appeal.  The Adjudicator had
     allowed an appeal  by  the  claimant,  but  had  failed  to  give  any
     directions.   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  appeal   from   the
     Adjudicator's   determination   but   reconsidered   the    claimant's
     application in the light of new information available to him and, as a
     result, declined to give effect to  the  Adjudicator's  determination.
     In his judgment, Auld LJ (with whom Ward and Robert Walker LJJ agreed)
     took the view that  "an  unappealed  decision  of  an  adjudicator  is
     binding on the parties".  He  regarded  the  presence  or  absence  of
     directions  in  the  Adjudicator's  determination  as  having   little
     relevance to its effect as a determination of the issues.  He took the
     view that this case was not one in which the Executive was entitled to
     reopen a decision without appealing the determination.

 45. In Devaseelan, the Tribunal gave guidance on the  effect  of  previous
     determinations of an appellant's asylum claim  where  he  subsequently
     sought to raise a human rights claim based largely on the  same  facts
     or evidence.  In these circumstances, it would be right  to  say  that
     the context would be that his previous asylum  claim  must  have  been
     unsuccessful, otherwise he would be unlikely to need to supplement  it
     by a human rights claim.  The Tribunal said at paragraph [37] that:

           "The first Adjudicator's determination stands (unchallenged,  or
           not successfully challenged) as an assessment of the  claim  the
           Appellant was then making, at the time  of  that  determination.
           It is not binding on the second Adjudicator, but, on  the  other
           hand, the second Adjudicator is not hearing  an  appeal  against
           it.  As an assessment of the matters that were before the  first
           Adjudicator, it should simply be regarded as  unquestioned.   It
           may be built upon, and, as a result, the outcome of the  hearing
           before the second Adjudicator may be quite different  from  what
           might  have  been  expected  from  a  reading   of   the   first
           determination only.  But it is not the second Adjudicator's role
           to  consider  arguments  intended   to   undermine   the   first
           Adjudicator's determination."


 46. In its  detailed  guidance,  at  paragraph  [39]  and  following,  the
     Tribunal indicated that the first Adjudicator's  determination  should
     always be  the  starting  point,  because  it  is  "the  authoritative
     assessment of the Appellant's status at the time it was made".

 47. The guidance given on the use  of  previous  determinations  given  in
     Devaseelan was approved by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Djebbar  v  SSHD
     [2004] EWCA Civ 804, the  Court  of  Appeal  particularly  noting  the
     Tribunal's indication that the first determination is not  binding  on
     the second Adjudicator, who has the task of deciding independently the
     appeal that is before him.

 48. DB was a case in which the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  was  concerned
     with an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a  determination
     by an Adjudicator allowing an appeal against a decision refusing entry
     clearance for  settlement.   It  was  not  the  first  time  that  the
     appellants had made such an application or launched  such  an  appeal.
     They had previously appealed against a similar refusal, and  had  been
     unsuccessful.  The reason for their  lack  of  success  on  the  first
     occasion was that the first Adjudicator found that, contrary  to  what
     they had claimed, the  appellants  had  relatives  in  Pakistan.   The
     Adjudicator's determination in the first appeal  was  adduced  by  the
     Presenting Officer before the Adjudicator who heard the second appeal.
      The Adjudicator declined to look at it, saying that this  was  "a  de
     novo application for entry clearance and  a  de  novo  hearing".   The
     Tribunal said this:

           "15.  There is nothing in Devaseelan which limits its principles
                 to asylum and human rights appeals.  There is no reason why
                 they should be so  limited.   We  are  satisfied  that  the
                 principles set out in Devaseelan apply to all categories of
                 appeals coming before Adjudicators and the Tribunal.


           16.   It follows that the Adjudicator was wrong to disregard the
                 findings in the previous determination, and wrong  to  take
                 care, as he described it, not to be affected in any way  by
                 the   previous   determination.    It   would    be    very
                 unsatisfactory and not in the interests of  justice  if  an
                 Adjudicator paid no regard to a previous  determination  in
                 such circumstances ... .   Even  though  the  first  appeal
                 related to a decision made on 20 April 2000,  it  would  be
                 wholly  artificial  to  disregard  that  determination   in
                 assessing the merits of the second decision.


           17.   As the Tribunal emphasised in paragraph 37 in  Devaseelan,
                 the first determination stands  as  an  assessment  of  the
                 claim made as at the date of the determination.  It is  not
                 binding on the second Adjudicator.  The second  Adjudicator
                 is  not  hearing  an  appeal   against   it.    The   first
                 determination may be built on and further evidence may come
                 to light which leads to  a  different  outcome  before  the
                 second Adjudicator."


 49. Each of these cases concerns the dealings of the Secretary  of  State,
     the Tribunal, or some other public authority, with the very person who
     has been subject to the earlier decision.  No party before us cited TK
     [2004]  UKIAT  00149,  which  considers  the  status  of  a   previous
     determination relating to a different appellant but based  on  similar
     facts to those claimed in a later appeal, or AC [2005]  UKAIT  000124,
     which considers the status  of  a  grant  of  status  made  without  a
     judicial determination.

 50. In TK, the instant appeal was by a wife whose husband's appeal,  based
     on  largely  the  same  claimed  facts,  had  been  dismissed  by   an
     Adjudicator about a year previously.   The  Tribunal  regarded  it  as
     "important to note that  his  evidence  [in  his  wife's  appeal]  was
     precisely that offered at his own appeal hearing, where  it  had  been
     rejected  by  the  Adjudicator  as  being  untrue".    Part   of   the
     determination is  concerned  with  some  procedural  difficulties  and
     directions relating to the use of the earlier determination.   On  the
     issue with which we are concerned, however, the Tribunal said this:

           "19.  In these circumstances the  Tribunal  considers  that  not
                 only was  the  Adjudicator  entitled  to  read  [the  first
                 Adjudicator's] determination, ... but was also entitled  to
                 conclude that it would  be  wrong  to  revisit  [the  first
                 Adjudicator's] decision  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
                 husband's evidence.  Were the Adjudicator not  entitled  to
                 take this course, the following extraordinary  circumstance
                 could arise.  The head of a  family,  call  him  X,  claims
                 asylum on the basis of his own account  and  loses  on  the
                 grounds that his account  is  disbelieved.   There  follows
                 thereafter a succession of separate members of  X's  family
                 who each makes his/her  own  asylum  application  and  each
                 expressly accepts that the risks which they fear are  based
                 on the risks to X as head of family.  If [counsel  for  the
                 Appellant's] submissions were correct, then there could  be
                 a  succession   of   hearings   where   a   succession   of
                 Adjudicators, each deprived of all  previous  Adjudicator's
                 determinations, could be asked to reappraise over and  over
                 again the same basic account from X, being  an  account  on
                 which all the successive family  members  were  relying  as
                 showing that they were at  risk  because  X  was  at  risk.
                 Unless some very good reason was advanced to the  contrary,
                 for example, compelling  new  evidence  to  show  that  X's
                 evidence  (which  originally  had  been  disbelieved)   was
                 mistakenly appraised by the original Adjudicator, a  future
                 Adjudicator is, in the Tribunal's view, not merely entitled
                 to read the determination in X's case but also to treat  it
                 as determinative as to X's account.


           20.   In the present case, no such compelling  new  evidence  is
                 alleged to have been available.   It  is  merely  suggested
                 that  so  far  as  the  Appellant's  husband's  account  is
                 concerned (which he was tendering to  the  Adjudicator   in
                 exactly the same terms as he tendered it to  [the  previous
                 Adjudicator]), the  Appellant's  husband  should  have  had
                 another chance to persuade  another  Adjudicator  that  his
                 story was credible.  ...


           21.   We are assisted in reaching this conclusion by the starred
                 Tribunal  determination  in  Devaseelan.    Devaseelan   is
                 distinguishable to the extent that that case was  concerned
                 with a second Adjudicator hearing a second  appeal  by  the
                 same applicant, whereas in the present case the Adjudicator
                 was concerned with the first appeal by the  Appellant  (the
                 wife) who was relying upon the claimed risk to her husband,
                 whose case had been determined in a previous appeal decided
                 by the [first Adjudicator].  However, the general  approach
                 of the Tribunal in paragraphs 37 to 42 of Devaseelan as  to
                 the extent to which matters can properly be relitigated are
                 of importance and are of relevance to the present case."

 51. The Tribunal also noted that in fact the  second  Adjudicator  reached
     his own assessment of the husband's evidence, which factor assisted in
     meeting the appellant's grounds of appeal.

 52. In AC, the Appellant's clan membership was contested.  She called as a
     witness her aunt, who had been granted refugee  status  following  her
     interview.  The Immigration Judge was clearly aware of  the  grant  to
     the aunt, but found the evidence before him on all other matters to be
     entirely lacking in credibility.  He said this:

           "The fact that this aunt managed by  deception  to  mislead  the
           Home Office on an earlier occasion does not mean that I will  be
           similarly misled."

      In refusing to  reverse  the  Immigration  Judge's  dismissal  of  the
      Appellant's appeal on reconsideration, the  Tribunal  noted  that  the
      Immigration Judge  had  found  the  aunt  "singularly  untruthful  and
      evasive".  It noted that the grant to the aunt was not the  result  of
      any rigorous judicial enquiry.


           "We accept that it is  likely  that  in  this  case  the  aunt's
           refugee status was granted because of clan  membership,  but  we
           cannot be certain.  It is, to a large extent surmise.  We do not
           therefore accept that such a decision is to be treated with  the
           same deference as a  reasoned  decision  following  a  contested
           hearing.  Of course such a grant must be taken into  account  as
           part of the overall evidence.  It is not something which can  be
           ignored, and it has not been ignored in this appeal.   Our  view
           is, to an extent, fortified by the  fact  that  the  appellant's
           aunt has a sister in the UK.  That sister  was  refused  refugee
           status and has not appealed.  We have no way of knowing why that
           should be.  It is not unreasonable to assume that she is of  the
           same sub-clan as the appellant's aunt (whatever  that  may  be).
           We have seen no documentation about  the  unsuccessful  sister's
           application.  We see no reason why the Immigration Judge must be
           taken to accept the facts of a situation which  is  advantageous
           to the appellant but not when they are disadvantageous.


           The Immigration Judge was clearly aware of  the  status  of  the
           appellant's aunt, he  heard  evidence  from  both  her  and  the
           appellant  herself.   He  has  carried  out  a   long   detailed
           consideration of all that evidence and made  no  error  of  law.
           The decision was on the facts.  His findings cannot be  said  to
           be perverse and nor can he be said to have omitted  to  consider
           any relevant evidence."

      As will appear from our discussion below, we think that AC may  err  a
      little on the side of deference to the judicial decision; but  it  can
      clearly give no comfort to those who suggest that an Immigration Judge
      is bound by any previous decision or entitled or  required  to  decide
      the case on the basis of anything other than the evidence before  him.



The general law

 53. The issues raised in  the  appeal  are  frequently  argued  before  an
     Immigration Judges.  In  order  to  give  guidance  on  them  we  have
     therefore considered whether there are principles in the general  law,
     outside our own specific jurisdiction, that might be of assistance.

 54. Although the rules of evidence do not apply to our proceedings,  those
     rules are based on years (in some cases hundreds of years) of analysis
     and discussion and, when a matter of principle is involved,  cases  on
     the admission of evidence in other civil proceedings may therefore  be
     of interest.  Much of the discussion of  the  admissibility  in  civil
     proceedings of decisions reached in other proceedings, both before and
     after the decision of the Court of Appeal in Hollington v Hewthorn and
     Co Ltd [1943] KB 587, has centred on the question whether, in law, the
     fact that D had been convicted of a criminal offence was admissible in
     civil proceedings as evidence of the facts upon which  his  conviction
     must have been based.  Hollington v Hewthorn itself was an action  for
     damages arising out of a road traffic accident.  The first  defendants
     were the owners and the second defendants, P, was the driver of one of
     the cars.  The plaintiff was the owner  of  the  other  car.   Unable,
     because of the death of the driver  of  that  car,  to  adduce  direct
     evidence of the accident, he sought to  rely  on  P's  conviction  for
     careless driving as evidence of P's negligence.  The Court  of  Appeal
     held  that  the  conviction  was  inadmissible  as  evidence  of   P's
     negligence.  The decision has subsequently been  reversed  by  statute
     (Civil Evidence Act 1968, s11), but it is an  important  statement  of
     the law although Goddard LJ's statement that over a long period  there
     had been a unanimous body of judicial  opinion  against  admissibility
     rather overstates the case.  There are, nevertheless, decisions  going
     back at least to the time of Holt  CJ  against  the  admissibility  of
     criminal convictions in civil proceedings against the same  individual
     (R v Warden of the Fleet (1699) 12  Mod  337).   Two  rationales  were
     suggested.  One was that a witness in the criminal  proceedings  might
     have been a person who had an interest in the civil  proceedings,  and
     so would not be a competent witness  in  the  civil  proceedings.   To
     allow evidence of the conviction would therefore be to evade the  rule
     against his competence.  That rationale ceased with the passing of the
     Evidence Act 1843, Lord Denman's Act, which removed nearly all bars to
     the competence of witnesses in civil cases.  The other  rationale  was
     that the previous proceedings were res inter alios acta and thus could
     not bind the parties  to  the  present  proceedings.   It  is  perhaps
     rightly said that that reason  goes  more  to  estoppel  than  to  the
     admissibility of evidence, but nevertheless the points continued to be
     made.  Indeed, it appears to be the  explanation  for  what  otherwise
     appears to be the exceptional decision in Re  Crippen  [1911]  P  108,
     where Evans P admitted the evidence of the conviction of  Crippen  for
     murder in determining whether  his  personal  representative  (Crippen
     himself having been hanged) should be passed over in  the  appointment
     of an administrator of the estate of his wife, who died intestate.  As
     the President pointed out,  the  personal  representative  of  Crippen
     stands in his shoes and  cannot  be  regarded  as  "another"  for  the
     purposes of the maxim.

 55. The rule in Hollington v Hewthorn appeared to many to be  contrary  to
     common sense, and was eventually reversed by statute  in  s11  of  the
     Civil Evidence Act 1968.  It is, however, important  to  observe  that
     the debate about the correctness of  the  decision  centred  on  cases
     where the prior proceedings were the conviction of a criminal offence.
      It was rarely, if ever, suggested that the outcome of previous  civil
     proceedings should be regarded in subsequent proceedings  as  evidence
     of the facts upon which the previous decision must  have  been  based;
     and  it  was  also  clear  that  an  acquittal  in  previous  criminal
     proceedings was not evidence of the absence of the facts upon which  a
     conviction would have been based.  The reason, of course, is that  the
     standard of proof in criminal proceedings is such that the  conviction
     may properly be said to remove any real doubt as  to  the  facts  upon
     which it must have been based.

 56. A case sometimes cited as being to the opposite effect is the decision
     of the Court of Appeal in Hill v Clifford [1907] 2 Ch 236.  There, the
     General Medical Council had, after enquiry, made  an  order  directing
     the  defendants  to  be  removed   from   the   register   of   dental
     practitioners.  In subsequent proceedings relating to the partnership,
     the Court of Appeal, reversing the trial judge,  allowed  the  General
     Medical Council's finding to be adduced as evidence of the  misconduct
     upon which it had been based.  The Court did not, however, decide that
     the order of the Council was  itself  direct  evidence  of  the  facts
     found.  The majority based its decision on an analogy with the rule of
     law relating to inquisitions.

 57. It might be thought that for the purposes of  asylum  and  immigration
     appeals an analogy with inquisitions  is  attractive.   The  rule,  as
     traditionally stated by  old  editions  of  Phipson  (eg  8th  Edition
     (1946), Chapter XXXI) and presented by s9 of the  Civil  Evidence  Act
     1968 and s7 of the Civil Evidence Act 1995, is as follows:

           "Inquisitions, surveys, assessments,  reports  and  returns  are
           admissible, but not generally  conclusive,  in  proof  of  their
           contents when made under public authority, and  in  relation  to
           matters of public interest or concern."

 58. There is no  doubt  that  members  of  this  Tribunal  have  a  public
     authority.  Although in one sense they are deciding matters of  public
     interest or concern, the authority of inquisitions and  other  records
     admitted under this rule of evidence  derives  from  their  status  as
     having been generated so that the public might make use of them and be
     able to refer to them:  the fact that the  public  are  interested  in
     documents, and are in a position  to  challenge  or  dispute  them  if
     inaccurate, invests them with  a  certain  amount  of  authority  (see
     Sturla v Freccia (1880) 5 App Cas 623).  There  can  be  little  doubt
     that determinations of Adjudicators and  Immigration  Judges  are  not
     public in that  sense;  and  it  is  clear  that  even  the  published
     determinations of the Tribunal are not published in  order  to  enable
     members of the public to be able to challenge findings relating to the
     individual history of claimants.

 59. There is one other area of the general law to which we ought to refer.
      This is the rule that judgments in rem are binding on the world as to
     the precise point decided.  A categorisation of judgments as either in
     rem or in personam (or, perhaps more correctly  for  the  purposes  of
     English law, inter partes) has never been decisively settled.   It  is
     beyond doubt that some judgments as to the status of  individuals  are
     for these purposes judgments in rem and the old cases on outlawry  are
     said to provide examples.  On the other hand, inquisitions in  lunacy,
     coroners inquests, and orders made in affiliation proceedings were not
     treated as  conclusive  in  subsequent  proceedings.   (See  generally
     Spencer Bower, Turner and Handley, The Doctrine of Res  Judicata,  3rd
     Edition 1996, chapter 9).

Discussion

 60. Generally speaking, parties to an action must  regard  the  matter  as
     finally settled between them by a  subsisting  order  of  a  competent
     court.  This is the rule of res judicata.  The same  rule  applies  to
     certain non-judicial decisions  made  by  authorities  with  statutory
     powers to  determine  issues  of  fact  or  of  mixed  law  and  fact:
     Thrasyroulou v Secretary of State for the Environment [1990] 2 AC 273.
      In that case, however,  Lord  Bridge,  who  delivered  the  principal
     speech, recognised that the principle of res judicata would not  apply
     if "an intention to exclude that principle can properly be inferred as
     a matter of construction" of the relevant statute.   It  is  sometimes
     said that there is no rule  of  res  judicata  or  issue  estoppel  in
     immigration appeals.  Technically speaking, that must be  right.   The
     fact that there has  been  a  previous  unsuccessful  application  and
     appeal does not prevent an individual making  a  new  application  for
     relief, whether by way of entry clearance, leave to  enter,  leave  to
     remain, asylum, or non-removal.  In in-country asylum and human rights
     cases, the possibility of a formal issue estoppel is effectively ruled
     out by the principle that matters have to be decided as  they  are  at
     the date of the decision, whether administrative  or  judicial.   That
     date will, ex hypothesei, be different from  any  consideration  of  a
     previous claim.

 61. On the other hand, a decision-maker considering a second  application,
     or second claim, or second proceedings, to which a person involved  in
     earlier proceedings was a party, should no doubt have  regard  to  the
     previous judgment.   There  are  two  reasons.   First,  it  may  well
     summarise what was said on  the  appellant's  behalf  on  the  earlier
     occasion.  In a jurisdiction such as ours which has no  hearsay  rule,
     that material has evidential value of its own.  Secondly,  it  is  (so
     far) the authoritative decision on the matters  that  were  raised  at
     that time.  If the parties did not take any opportunity  available  to
     them to challenge those findings then, the Tribunal should  require  a
     good reason for departing from them now.  Considerations of that  sort
     are behind the guidance in Devaseelan, which we  set  out  earlier  in
     this determination.  The previous judgment is not binding, but  it  is
     not to be ignored.  If there is no good reason for departing from  it,
     it must, as between the parties to  that  litigation,  be  treated  as
     settling the issues with which it was concerned and the facts on which
     the determination was based.

 62. When the parties to a second appeal are different from the parties  to
     an earlier appeal, the latter consideration does not apply at all.  An
     earlier determination, appearing to decide a  fact  which  may  be  in
     issue in a later case, may, however, demand the attention of the court
     in the later case for a number of reasons.

 63. The first, which we mention only for the purpose of excluding it  from
     further discussion, is where the Tribunal has issued country guidance.
       The  purpose  of  country  guidance  determinations  is  to  promote
     consistency  of  decision-making  in  relation  to  the  circumstances
     obtaining in individual countries.   Country  guidance  determinations
     give no guidance  on  individual  personal  facts:   the  guidance  is
     limited to the general circumstances, or the circumstances for a group
     of  people  with  a  particular  characteristic,  in  the  country  in
     question.  Nothing that we say  in  the  rest  of  this  determination
     should be treated as applicable to country guidance cases.

 64. We note, however, what was said by Laws LJ  in  what  is  perhaps  the
     earliest treatment of country guidance by the Court of Appeal,  S  and
     others v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 539:

           "26.  ... The IAT intended this decision  to  be  determinative:
                 that is,  it  should  thereafter  be  followed  by  Special
                 Adjudicators, and the Tribunal itself, absent evidence of a
                 deterioration in the conditions in Croatia relevant to  the
                 circumstances of Serb asylum seekers.  Now, the notion of a
                 judicial decision which is binding as to fact is foreign to
                 the common law, save for the limited range of circumstances
                 where the principle of res judicata (and its variant, issue
                 estoppel) applies.  ...  This principle has been evolved  -
                 we put  the  matter  summarily  -  to  avoid  the  vice  of
                 successive trials of the same cause or question between the
                 same parties.  By contrast, it is also a principle  of  our
                 law that a party is free to invite the  court  to  reach  a
                 different conclusion on a  particular  factual  issue  from
                 that reached on the same issue  in  earlier  litigation  to
                 which, however, he was a  stranger.   The  first  principle
                 supports the public interest  in  finality  in  litigation.
                 The second principle supports the ordinary call of justice,
                 that a party have the opportunity to put his case:   he  is
                 not to be bound by what others might have made of  a  like,
                 or even identical case.


           27.    The  stance  taken  by  the  IAT  here,  to  lay  out   a
                 determination intended in effect to  be  binding  upon  the
                 appellate authorities as to the factual state of affairs in
                 Croatia absent a demonstrable change for the  worse  vis--
                 vis the plight of Serbs, to an extent sacrifices the second
                 principle  to  the  first.   By  no  means  entirely:    an
                 applicant will of course be heard on any  facts  particular
                 to his case, and (as the IAT made clear) evidence as to any
                 deterioration in the state of affairs in Croatia  would  be
                 listened to.  Otherwise,  however,  the  debate  about  the
                 conditions in Croatia generally affecting Serbian returnees
                 or potential returnees has been had  and  is  not  for  the
                 present to be had again.


           28.   While  in  our  general  law  this  notion  of  a  factual
                 precedent  is  exotic,  in  the  context   of   the   IAT's
                 responsibilities it seems to us in principle to  be  benign
                 and practical."

 65. There is clearly no suggestion there  that  the  exotic  notion  of  a
     precedent of fact should be extended in immigration appeals  to  facts
     relating to the private history of individuals which might have formed
     the foundation for previous immigration decisions, whether  on  appeal
     or not.  Indeed, the decision of the Court of Appeal in S v  SSHD  was
     that the determination of the IAT in that  case  could  not  stand  as
     having binding force on subsequent appeals because it appeared that it
     might have been made without appropriate regard to one small  item  of
     the copious documentation provided to the Tribunal by the  appellants.
     Although the position may have changed slightly in the subsequent four
     years,  the  Court  of  Appeal's  view  clearly  was   that,   for   a
     determination of fact to be binding on those who were not  parties  to
     it, stringent conditions needed to be applied.

 66. Returning to the reasons which might be given for citing a decision or
     determination made in an application or appeal by a related  claimant,
     there is surely no reason, in principle  or  authority,  to  give  the
     previous  determination  evidential  value  to  the  case  now   under
     consideration.  The previous determination is not the  result  of  the
     application of the rigorous requirements of the criminal law; and  the
     fact that a previous court or other decision-maker has reached a  view
     on facts which are in issue in the present appeal is not of itself any
     evidence as to those  facts.   On  the  other  hand,  in  the  general
     interests of good administration, it is  probably  true  to  say  that
     decisions should not be unnecessarily divergent.  It is that principle
     of good administration which, so far as we can see, provides the  sole
     basis in logic or on authority for  saying  that  the  result  of  the
     previous litigation may be relevant in the present appeal.

 67. What then is its relevance?  It can surely only  be  this:   that  the
     previous decision can be taken as establishing the issue  in  question
     unless there is any reason not to take it as establishing  that  issue
     in question.  It has no evidential effect.  It does not even give rise
     to a presumption.  It is simply a starting point.   That  is,  indeed,
     what was decided in TK,  as  we  have  seen.   Treating  the  previous
     decision in this manner is consistent also  with  the  Cardiff  County
     Council case, where the same individual was involved  throughout,  but
     there was no judicial decision:  the old decision remains, but only as
     long as there is no reason for displacing it.

 68. We can see no possible basis for the assertion that a determination in
     one appellant's case has any binding effect on any  other  individual.
     All the authorities, as well as principle, are  against  that.   Still
     less can we find any reason for saying that favourable  decisions  are
     binding but unfavourable decisions have  no  lasting  effect  at  all.
     That latter submission, if we may say so,  is  only  too  obviously  a
     demonstration of the way in which the appellate  process  may  be  the
     subject of cynical manipulation.

 69. In fact, comparison with the considerations relating to the  admission
     of criminal convictions in the proof of civil claims suggests that the
     reverse may be nearer the  correct  position.   In  asylum  and  human
     rights appeals, the standard of proof is very low.  It suffices, it is
     usually  said,  to  establish  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  the
     apprehended harm.   On  the  other  hand,  in  refusing  a  claim,  or
     dismissing an appeal, the Tribunal decides that there is no real  risk
     that the claimant is or will be in the danger  he  claims.   Thus  the
     dismissal of an asylum and human rights appeal indicates  a  level  of
     certainty about the effect of the evidence that  is  not  apparent  in
     allowing an appeal.  We would not press this  issue  further,  but  it
     seems to us to be worthy of mention.

 70. The previous determination stands as a  determination  of  the  issues
     between the claimant in that case and the Secretary of State.  If  the
     claimant in that case brings another claim, there will need  to  be  a
     good explanation for why it is said (if it is said)  that  the  second
     decision, or the basis for it, should be different from the conclusion
     reached in the earlier case.  But, by contrast, the  earlier  decision
     can be nothing more than the background or the starting point for  the
     determination of a claim made by a different person altogether.

 71. It would be dangerous for us to attempt to set out  what  the  factors
     would be that would entitle or require the Tribunal to depart from the
     earlier finding in a later case.  Obviously one  factor,  relevant  in
     some cases although not in  others,  will  be  the  passage  of  time.
     Another factor, which is likely to be of importance in  a  very  great
     many cases, is simply whether the  evidence  is  different.   Evidence
     available  to  the   earlier   decision-maker   may   be   reinforced,
     supplemented, contradicted, effectively withdrawn  or  simply  be  not
     available to the second decision-maker.  It is the very fact  that  he
     is required to make his independent decision on  the  evidence  before
     him that makes it so clear that it would not be right for  him  simply
     to rely slavishly on a decision made by someone else.  We can  see  no
     good reason in general why, if a beneficial earlier decision  is  said
     to be relevant, the beneficiary  of  that  decision  should  not  give
     evidence  before  the  second  Tribunal  and  be  subject  to   cross-
     examination if  the  Secretary  of  State  chooses  to  challenge  the
     evidence before the second Tribunal.  It is for the  claimant  in  the
     second case to prove his case on the evidence, and if it is clear that
     available evidence is not being adduced, the Tribunal is  entitled  to
     draw appropriate conclusions.

 72. There is one final point we would make.  As we have  said  above,  the
     contents of a previous determination or decision may be  of  value  as
     evidence of what was said  before  that  decision  was  reached.   The
     decision itself, however, is only a  starting  point  for  the  second
     Tribunal.  It is the  point  from  which  a  departure  may  be  made.
     Crucially, the conclusion of the previous  decision-maker  is  not  in
     itself any evidence of the facts upon which the conclusions appears to
     have been based.

 73. The result may be, as occurred in the cases before us and  in  TK  and
     AC, that the second decision is on its facts is  consistent  with  the
     first.  That is, in our view, no reason for thinking  that  the  first
     decision rather than the second is correct.  It is for the  Respondent
     to decide, in such circumstances, whether he can  or  should  seek  to
     change the first decision or its effect, in the light of  the  further
     or  different  information  or  evidence  that  supported  the  second
     decision.  We are not called upon to make any further comment in  this
     determination about how that is to be done.  We  note  only  that,  as
     Danaei shows, and as is indicated also by R v SSHD ex parte Momin  Ali
     [1984] I WLR 664, the Secretary of State may  be  entitled  to  depart
     from the decision of the Tribunal, but only for good reason and on the
     clearest evidence.

Decisions

 74. In AS's case, there  had  been  no  previous  judicial  decision.   We
     entirely reject the submission that the Adjudicator was, in making his
     determination, influenced by any hypothesis as to the basis upon which
     the Appellant's brother Omar had been granted asylum.  It is right  to
     say that he did not treat the decision granting  Omar  asylum  as  the
     starting point for his own decision, but it appears to us that he gave
     it all the credit that it deserved.  He heard evidence  pertaining  to
     the claim of the Appellant before him, including evidence  from  Omar.
     He was entirely entitled to reach  the  conclusions  he  did  on  that
     evidence insofar as it related to the claim of  the  Appellant  before
     him.  If, which we doubt, he made an error of law in his treatment  of
     the decision in relation to Omar, it was immaterial, because,  as  his
     determination shows, he would  have  been  bound  to  reach  the  same
     conclusion on consideration of the evidence as a whole.

 75. In AA's case, there had been a previous  judicial  determination.   We
     reject the suggestion that it was for the Home Office to  produce  it,
     or for the Adjudicator  to  enquire  for  it.   The  case  before  the
     Adjudicator was that of the  Appellant  and  the  Adjudicator  was  to
     determine it on the material before him.  The position is simply  that
     a determination in Ouma's  case  was  not  before  him  and  in  those
     circumstances he did not err in law by failing to take account of  its
     contents.  Whether he had the determination or not, we also reject the
     submission that it was binding on him in the sense that it  regulated,
     or ought to have regulated, his determination of  the  appeal  of  the
     Appellant before him.  He was  bound  to  determine  that  Appellant's
     appeal on the whole of the evidence  before  him,  as  an  independent
     judge of fact and law.  He did exactly that.

 76. For the avoidance of doubt, we do not consider that the position would
     have been materially different if he  had  had  the  determination  in
     Ouma's case  before  him.   He  would  have  seen  from  it  that  the
     Adjudicator had decided that  Ouma  was  a  member  of  the  clan  she
     claimed, but that that conclusion had been  reached  from  a  starting
     point that, in her case, the Secretary of State chose not to  question
     it.  Although in those circumstances he  ought  to  have  treated  the
     determination in Ouma's case as the starting point, there was so  much
     extra evidence before him that he would have been bound to  move  away
     from the starting point.  When he had done that, the mere fact that on
     other evidence (or the lack of it) another Adjudicator had found  that
     Ouma was of the clan she claimed could have no conceivable  impact  on
     his own task.

 77. For the foregoing reasons, we find that  neither  Adjudicator  made  a
     material error of law and we accordingly affirm  their  determinations
     dismissing these appeals.











                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
