
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

             AY [Political parties - SCP - risk] Sudan CG [2008] UKAIT 00050


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 18 & 19 February 2008                      |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SOUTHERN
                                MR C THURSBY

                                   Between

                                     AY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar of Counsel instructed by Miles Hutchison
                    & Lithgow, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wright, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.     Opposition parties are allowed to function within relatively
      narrow parameters in Sudan.

      2.   The Sudanese authorities do not attempt  or  even  seek  to  take
      action  which  could  amount  to  persecution  against  all  political
      opponents.   Depending  on  the   particular   circumstances   of   an
      individual, they may resort to stronger measures, particularly against
      those actively engaged in building up grass roots  democracy,  working
      in support of human rights and  involved  in  open  criticism  of  the
      regime's core ideology and philosophy.


      3.   In  general  it  will  be  difficult  for  ordinary  members  and
      supporters of the SCP or any other  political  party  to  establish  a
      claim for asylum. They will need to show that they have been or  would
      be engaged in specific activities likely to bring them to the  adverse
      attention of the  authorities  such  as  active  and  effective  local
      democratic activity or support for particular human rights activities.
       Whether any individual political activist is at risk will necessarily
      depend upon his individual circumstances set within the context of the
      situation as at the date of decision.  This will include an assessment
      of the nature of the activities carried out and how they will be  seen
      by the authorities.


      4.   The legal status  of  an  opposition  party  has  no  significant
      bearing in itself on whether an individual is likely to be at risk  of
      persecution. Political activities also take place under the  guise  of
      cultural associations


1.    The appellant is a citizen of Sudan born in March  1968.   He  arrived
    in  this  country  on  17  November  1995  and  claimed  asylum.    His
    application was refused on third country grounds and his appeal against
    that decision was dismissed by a Special Adjudicator.  In May 1998  the
    appellant through his  solicitors  asked  for  his  application  to  be
    considered substantively.  The appellant was  interviewed  in  November
    1998 but no decision was made on his application until 11  August  2004
    when it was refused. On 17 August 2004 the appellant was refused  leave
    to enter and the respondent decided to remove him to Sudan.

2.   The appellant's appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  an
    Adjudicator, Mr E A S Lucas, following a hearing at Taylor House on  25
    November and 20 December 2004.  The appellant was granted an order  for
    reconsideration  and  on  10  November  2006   the   Tribunal   (Senior
    Immigration Judge Gleeson, Mr H G Jones, MBE JP, Sir Jeffrey James KBE,
    CMG) held that the  Adjudicator  had  materially  erred  in  law.   Its
    reasons were as follows:

          1. The appellant has been granted review of the determination  of
             Immigration Judge Lucas, who dismissed his appeal against  the
             Secretary of State's decision to refuse to  grant  him  asylum
             and to set removal directions to Sudan, his country of origin.



          2.  Reconsideration  was  granted  by  Senior  Immigration  Judge
             Mensah, who considered  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  raised
             arguable issues regarding  the  nature  and  adequacy  of  the
             reasoning in the determination and risk on return as  a  draft
             evader.  Reconsideration was granted on 27 June 2005.

          3. At the error of law hearing, Mr A Jafar of Counsel (instructed
             by Miles Hutchinson and Lithgow) appeared for  the  appellant.
             Ms O Awosanya, Home Office Presenting Officer, represented the
             Secretary of State.

          4. Mr Jafar  produced  a  very  helpful  (albeit  late)  skeleton
             argument setting out the basis upon which it was asserted that
             there  was  a  material  error  of  law.   He  indicated  that
             questions of evasion of military service were no longer to  be
             pursued.

          5. Two significant errors of fact and  law  emerged:  the  first,
             that the Immigration Judge had been misled by the  absence  of
             documents, in the possession  of  the  respondent,  which  now
             showed that  when  first  entering  the  United  Kingdom,  the
             appellant,  in  his  asylum  application  pro  forma  referral
             document clearly set out the basis of the asylum claim as  now
             posited.  Accordingly, the Immigration  Judge's  finding  that
             the appellant made "no mention of his fears on asylum grounds"
             on entry is factually wrong and  sufficiently  significant  on
             its own to be material.

          6. The second issue is that insufficient consideration was  given
             to a robustly worded medical report, which states  (bottom  of
             page  4),  "his  many  lesions,  and  their   site,   strongly
             corroborate his story".  Realistic causation  was  given,  but
             having already formed a view on credibility,  the  Immigration
             Judge had erred in law by considering the  medical  report  in
             the light of those credibility findings, rather than using the
             medical  report  to  help  him  reach  credibility   findings.
             Failing to reach credibility findings  on  the  whole  of  the
             evidence before the Immigration Judge is certainly a  material
             error of law.

          7. For the Secretary of State,  Ms  Awosanya  accepted  that  the
             reasoning  of  the  Immigration  Judge  was   inadequate,   in
             particular, at paragraph 16 - 18 of the determination, and the
             appeal therefore proceeds to second stage reconsideration with
             the concurrence of both Counsel.

          8. In fact, the appeal has  some  interesting  features,  and  in
             particular, there is no  current  authority  on  the  risk  to
             members  of  the  Sudanese  Communist  Party  in  the  changed
             situation in  Sudan,  and  it  may  be  that  this  appeal  is
             appropriate for a country guidance decision.

          9. The appeal was therefore set down  for  reconsideration  by  a
             legal  panel  at  Field  House  (such  panel  not  to  include
             Immigration Judge Lucas).

         10. The following are  the  questions  for  consideration  by  the
             Tribunal at the adjourned hearing -

     a) Whether the appellant's account is credible;

           b) The weight to be given to the failure to claim in France  and
              travelling on a false passport, having regard to section 8 of
              the [Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)
              Act];

           c) Whether on the facts and in particular having regard  to  the
              medical report, the appellant has  proved  past  persecution,
              and if so for what reason;

           d)  Whether  having  regard  to  the  Geneva   Convention,   the
              Qualifications Directive Regulations 2006 and the Immigration
              Rules HC 395 (as amended), the appellant is  entitled  either
              to refugee status or humanitarian protection; and

           e) The risk on return to Sudan  to  those  known  to  be  former
              adherents of the Sudan Communist Party."

3.   The case was identified as suitable for listing as a  country  guidance
    case.  On 26 November 2007 the hearing was adjourned and the  following
    directions were made:

     "The parties should  note  that  (as  advised  at  the  hearing  on  26
         November 2007) the country guidance issues  have  been  widened  to
         include the following:

             'The  legal  status  of  opposition  parties  (including   the
             Sudanese Communist Party) in Sudan; how the legal status of  a
             party is relevant to the ability of the party in  question  to
             operate in Sudan; and how the legal status of a party  affects
             the risk which an  individual  member  or  activist  faces  on
             return to Sudan.'

         If the appellant wishes to rely on the  addendum  report  dated  15
         November 2007 from Mr Verney, then he is on notice  that  a  report
         from Ms Gillian Lusk should be submitted giving full details of the
         matters summarised by Mr Verney at paragraphs 2-5 of  his  addendum
         report.  Ms Lusk's report should explain, inter alia, when she  saw
         the files, the circumstances in which she saw  them  and  what  the
         files  consisted  of.   Consideration  should  also  be  given   to
         requesting Ms Lusk to give oral evidence. [This direction was made
         on the respondent's application as Mr Verney said in  his  addendum
         report that the files had been seen by Ms Lusk].

         If the appellant wishes to rely on article 8, then an  up  to  date
         witness statement should be submitted."

4.   At the hearing before us it was agreed that  this  was  to  be  a  full
    rehearing of the appeal.

Background

5.   The appellant arrived in this country on 18  November  1995  travelling
    by Eurostar from Paris to Waterloo.  He claimed  asylum  after  he  was
    refused leave to enter.  It is now accepted that  he  claimed  under  a
    false name and had travelled with a false travel document. He said that
    he left Port Sudan by cargo ship on 23  September  1995  and  travelled
    directly to France where he had stayed for two days.  The basis of  his
    claim was that he had a political problem in Sudan which started  after
    he became involved with the Communist Party  which  he  had  joined  in
    1988.  He went to  a  lot  of  meetings.   After  the  present  Islamic
    military dictatorship came to power he  took  part  in  anti-government
    activities such as distributing pamphlets and writing slogans.  He  was
    arrested and detained in 1992 for two months. He was burnt on his  arms
    and his legs were badly beaten.  He was forced  to  stand  for  sixteen
    hours a day.  His father was summoned and both he and his  father  were
    forced to sign an undertaking that the appellant would not get involved
    in any more political activities. The appellant was imprisoned again on
    3 May 1995 and held until 20 September 1995.

6.   His application for asylum was refused on third country grounds on  the
    basis that he was returnable to France where his application  would  be
    properly considered by the French authorities in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of the Refugee Convention.  At the hearing of his appeal the
    appellant continued to use a false name.  His appeal was dismissed  but
    the appellant was not removed to France.  He went into hiding.  He then
    instructed solicitors in May 1998 who renewed  his  application  asking
    for it to be determined on a substantive basis.

7.   In his interview the appellant said that he had been  detained  on  two
    occasions, the first being in October 1992 for two months.  He had been
    questioned and subjected to torture and beatings.  He was burned on his
    hand with a heated metal bar and also on his arms and  legs.   He  said
    that political leaflets  had  been  found  at  his  home  when  he  was
    arrested.  He was questioned about where he got  them  from,  who  gave
    them to him, the way they were distributed and who was  with  him.   He
    was released after being forced to sign a declaration with  his  father
    that he  would  never  return  to  political  activities  or  hand  out
    political leaflets.  His father  was  not  detained  but  he  had  been
    threatened.

8.   His next arrest was on 3 May 1995 and he was held  until  20  September
    1995.  He was detained outside Khartoum but he could not  identify  the
    location any further because he had been blindfolded when taken  there.
    During this detention he was again tortured and beaten.   He  had  been
    able to escape; he had been planning this for a long time.  The  guards
    used to make them stand outside for long periods and  when  the  guards
    were changing, they (the appellant and  another  prisoner)  took  their
    chance and climbed over the wall.  They reached a road, were picked  up
    by a lorry and then went to Port Sudan.  Through one of  his  relatives
    he got in touch with his father and obtained some money.  He  was  able
    to plan his escape to France and then on to this country.

9.   The appellant said that he had been qualified to go to  university  but
    had lost his chance in 1992 because the admissions office asked  for  a
    conduct certificate which he  could  not  provide.   He  had  not  been
    charged with any offence.  He had been able to get  into  the  port  at
    Port Sudan as an employee.  He had a forged Eritrean passport  obtained
    through a relative in Port Sudan.  The journey by ship had lasted until
    23 September 1995.   When they arrived off the coast of France, he was
    told to get into a small boat and he was taken  ashore.   He  was  then
    directed to a Sudanese man and was able to get a passport to come on to
    London.  The appellant was asked why he had not  asked  for  asylum  in
    France.  He said that since he planned the escape he  had  intended  to
    come to England because they understood what was going on in Sudan.  He
    had heard that there was security co-operation between France and Sudan
    and that the French authorities were deporting anyone who  applied  for
    asylum.  The appellant was asked why he had gone into hiding  for  more
    than eighteen months. He said that after the decision to remove him was
    issued, he had no one to talk to about his problems and if he had  been
    sent back, it would have been the end of him.

10.  The appellant supported his  application  with  a  statement  dated  16
    February 1999.  He confirmed the details of his arrest in October 1992.
     He said that at about 3am one morning three members  of  the  security
    services raided  his  home  which  was  searched.   Leaflets  from  the
    Communist Party were found and he was arrested by officers  dressed  in
    plain clothes.  He was blindfolded and taken away to a car to  what  he
    now believed to be a ghost house in Khartoum.  He was  beaten,  punched
    and also burnt on his hand, arms and legs with a hot iron  bar  leaving
    him badly injured and scarred.  It was soon after his release  that  he
    was admitted to Omdurman Hospital where he remained for six months.  He
    had a fever which took a long time to subside.  After being  discharged
    he tried to obtain entry  to  university  but  was  unable  to  provide
    certificates to show that he had not been arrested and detained.

11.  On 3 May 1995 he had been arrested again at a friend's home  and  taken
    to another ghost house.  He  was  intensively  interrogated  about  the
    meeting and the leaflets found  in  their  possession.   He  was  badly
    beaten and was given very little food or water.  On  occasions  he  was
    made to stand out of doors during the night.  He was able to escape  on
    20 September 1995.  Once he had arrived  in  Port  Sudan  he  passed  a
    message to his father via a third party with a  request  for  financial
    assistance.  His father duly provided him with money and he  then  made
    arrangements with an Eritrean smuggler who  got  him  access  on  to  a
    freight  ship.   The  appellant  produced  a  medical  report  dated  9
    September 1999 which confirmed that he had scarring  on  his  arms  and
    legs.

12.  In the reasons for refusal letter dated 11 August 2004, the  respondent
    did not accept that the appellant was Sudanese.  He noted that  the  he
    had used three different identities: one on  his  false  French  travel
    document, the second when he first claimed asylum and the third when he
    renewed his application.  He had been unable to describe the principles
    of Communism but said that he was  attracted  to  the  Communist  Party
    because  of  its  slogans  and  goals  which  included  establishing  a
    democratic state.  The appellant said that he had been detained on  one
    occasion, released and then had taken up  his  activities  again.   But
    following his second detention he had chosen to flee rather than remain
    to pursue his activities for the party.  There was no evidence that his
    father had suffered from any problems as a result of having signed  the
    declaration about the appellant's political  activities.   The  medical
    report did not provide conclusive proof that he had been tortured.  The
    respondent did not believe the appellant's evidence  about  his  escape
    from prison and his journey to Port Sudan.   He  had  failed  to  claim
    asylum in France.

Evidence at this Hearing

13.  The appellant gave oral evidence as did the expert witnesses, Mr  Peter
    Verney and Ms Gillian Lusk. The documentary evidence produced on behalf
    of the appellant comprised a subjective bundle of material (1A  indexed
    and paginated 1-45) including a medical report  from  Dr  Braverman,  a
    bundle of background evidence (2A 1-165) and  a  bundle  containing  Ms
    Lusk's  report  and  further  background  evidence  (3A).   During  his
    submissions Mr Jafar produced the Report of the Fact Finding Mission to
    Cairo (Egypt) and Geneva  (Switzerland)  2001  (4A),  the  Home  Office
    asylum instructions on assessing credibility in asylum and human rights
    claims (5A) and further reports including Sudan Human Rights Violations
    Condemned (6A).  Mr Jafar  produced  his  skeleton  argument  for  the
    hearing before the Adjudicator and a further skeleton argument for this
    hearing.  We  note  that  no  further  witness  statement  was  adduced
    following the directions given on 26 November  2007  (see  paragraph  3
    above) and Mr Jafar has not pursued any argument on article 8 grounds.

14.  The respondent produced a bundle of background evidence  (1R  paginated
    1-72) together with the COIS Report, 2006, BA (Military  service  -  no
    risk) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT  0006  and  HGMO  (Relocation  to  Khartoum
    (Sudan)) CG [2006] UKAIT 00062, a supplementary bundle (2R paginated 1-
    74) and an article from Sudan Tribune dated 20 March  2007  (3R).   The
    Tribunal drew to the parties' attention  the  following  documents:  an
    article from the Sudan Tribune of 16 February 2008 (T1) and the  United
    Nations Report of the Secretary General on the Sudan of 31 January 2008
    (T2).

The Evidence of the Appellant

15.  In his oral evidence the appellant gave  an  account  broadly  in  line
    with his written evidence and the account he gave in  interview,  which
    we have summarised above, all of  which  he  adopted.  But  there  were
    significant inconsistencies and contradictions  that  became  apparent,
    which we examine in detail below. The appellant insisted that he  would
    be at risk on return to Sudan both because he would be of  interest  to
    the authorities on account of his past activities and because he  would
    continue to engage in those activities upon return.

The Evidence of Peter Verney

16.  Mr Verney adopted his two reports dated 3 May 2007 (1A  22-46)  and  15
    November 2007 (A5).  Mr Verney's background and experience is  set  out
    at 1A38-39.  He is an acknowledged country expert  on  Sudan  and  gave
    evidence in HGMO.  In his first report Mr Verney indicated he  had  not
    interviewed the appellant but had based his  report  on  the  documents
    provided to him.  It was his view  that  the  appellant's  account  was
    wholly plausible  and  consistent  with  the  known  behaviour  of  the
    Sudanese regime towards members of the Sudanese Communist  Party  (SCP)
    in the early 1990s.  He could see no reason to  doubt  the  appellant's
    nationality.  He said that the appellant's account of his  reasons  for
    supporting the SCP would be accurate in the context of Sudan.  The  SCP
    for all its faults had campaigned  for  democratic  representation  and
    provided the main  democratic  alternative  to  the  Northern  Sudanese
    Islamists and the religious conservative parties.  The Islamists in the
    current regime, the National Islamic Front  (NIF),  came  to  power  by
    crushing Sudan's fledgling parliamentary democracy and have  a  history
    of unprecedented violence and connivance in inflaming civil  war.   The
    SCP and their left wing associates in the trade unions were pivotal  in
    pushing for the restoration of democracy in April 1995 and keeping  the
    north and south peace process going during the 1980s when the Islamists
    were intent on damaging it.

17.  It was Mr Verney's view that all left wing groups in  Sudan  remain  as
    targets  of   the   security   apparatus   notwithstanding   the   2005
    Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).  There  was  less  frequent  overt
    brutality than  in  the  1990s  because  the  regime  had  become  more
    sophisticated but it took little prompting to  elicit  a  reversion  to
    cruder tactics.  Some more senior members of the left  wing  opposition
    including the SCP had reached a degree of accommodation with the regime
    since the CPA and could operate in public,  protected  to  some  extent
    from the  worst  excesses  of  the  regime  by  their  age  and  social
    prominence.  They also tended to hold British  or  other  international
    passports and to come from the same elitist circles  as  senior  regime
    members.  However, the majority of the party's grass roots members  and
    activists had less social influence and remained  vulnerable  to  state
    sanctioned brutality.

18.  The SCP had participated in both of Sudan's  post-independence  periods
    of parliamentary democracy in the mid 1960s and in the mid  1980s.   It
    was part of a left wing grouping including the Democratic Front and the
    Democratic Alliance which counted  among  its  members  many  educated,
    progressively minded people whose political and cultural aspirations in
    European terms would merely be recorded as secular  and  liberal.   The
    current regime did not differentiate between various secular  and  left
    wing groups but attacked them all.  The SCP had been behind one of  the
    most effective opposition campaigns against the current regime and this
    was why communists and leftists were amongst the most persecuted of the
    Northern Sudanese.   In  Mr  Verney's  view  the  current  dictatorship
    interpreted Islam in a more intolerant and narrow way than the majority
    of the country's Muslim population.  The present regime took  power  to
    stop Khartoum becoming a secular capital and to prevent what  was  seen
    as a  conspiracy  against  Sharia  and  the  attempt  to  abrogate  it.
    Although a government of national unity was appointed in September 2005
    following the signing of the CPA on 9  January  2005,  the  regime  was
    nevertheless dominated by the same figures from the NIF which had  held
    power since 1989.

19.  The regime  had  created  an  informer  society  in  which  there  were
    considerable pressures and inducements to encourage people  to  spy  on
    one another.  The security apparatus at the core of the government  had
    a well established record of officially sanctioned  brutality  and  the
    brunt of the violence was often borne by those  less  prominent  active
    party members whose cases did not often  get  reported  either  in  the
    media or by human rights organisations.  The regime was not  consistent
    in its application of oppressive measures but varied between periods of
    apparent relaxation and  periods  of  harsh  repression.   The  precise
    behaviour of the Sudanese authorities towards any  particular  returnee
    was always hard to predict since  it  was  dependent  on  a  number  of
    variables.  Mr Verney described the regime as  being  now  sufficiently
    sophisticated to avoid attracting attention to its  methods  and  would
    often choose not to act in an  obvious  and  public  manner  preferring
    instead to wait until there is less risk of adverse publicity.  It  was
    his view on the  basis  of  the  appellant's  account  that  there  was
    reasonable justification for him to fear  persecution  in  Sudan.   The
    fact  that  he  had  been  abroad  for  a  number  of   years   without
    authorisation would be a factor in alerting the Sudanese authorities to
    him.  It was his view that the appellant would be recognised on  return
    to Khartoum because of his documents and would be  unlikely  to  remain
    untroubled for long even if he was able  to  pass  through  immigration
    security without incident.  In his supplementary statement he  referred
    to the record-keeping activities of the  Sudanese  authorities.   There
    would be every likelihood that the authorities would have a  record  of
    the appellant's detention. An individual of  high  value  or  suspicion
    would remain on record indefinitely.  Evidence was plentiful of the ill
    treatment of detainees.

20.  In his oral evidence Mr Verney confirmed that the SCP would  have  used
    a cell structure.  In its time it had been the largest left wing  party
    in Africa, dating back to the 1960s.  He accepted that there would be a
    number of road blocks on a journey from Khartoum  to  Port  Sudan.   It
    might be possible for certain types of people to get  through  if  they
    were not high profile or wanted by the authorities.   Checkpoints  were
    occasionally manned by inexperienced soldiers. Mr Verney said  that  in
    most cases a person would be asked to show  a  national  identification
    card. He said also that it would not be unusual for a lorry  driver  to
    have casual labour to help him. When asked if it would be  possible  to
    complete such a journey without being asked to produce  identification,
    Mr Verney said that he had heard of cases where that had  been  avoided
    by, for example, the passengers hiding amongst livestock being  carried
    on the lorry.

21.  The security authorities in Sudan had been trained by the East  Germans
    and they kept very extensive records.  In the early 1990s they switched
    from detaining people for long periods to a rapid turnover of  repeated
    detentions.  The aim was to intimidate the  individual  and  the  wider
    population.  It was those with a lower public profile who suffered  the
    most.  Leading opposition figures would  not  be  detained  unless  the
    government were satisfied that there was a specific need to do so.   He
    cited as an example the UMMA leaders  detained  in  the  period  up  to
    December 2007. (See paragraph 39 below).   The  government  had  become
    very aware of the need to give  a  better  impression  to  the  outside
    world.  The regime's view was that it knew the  West  better  than  the
    West knew it.

22.  It was Mr Verney's view that anyone who was  able  to  demonstrate  the
    weaknesses of the regime would be at risk as would those who sought  to
    undermine the way  the  regime  expressed  itself  and  behaved.   Mere
    membership of a political party would not without more put  someone  at
    risk.  If a person was known to be politically  active  and  outspoken,
    there would be a risk.  The fact an activist party may have a  few  MPs
    would be no guarantee  of  safety.   Freedom  to  organise  was  highly
    constrained.  It was his opinion that the  CPA  was  on  the  verge  of
    collapse and members of  the  SPLM,  a  party  to  the  CPA,  were  now
    complaining of the delay in implementing its provisions.

23.  Mr Verney said that it was impossible to predict  whether  a  political
    opponent would be arrested or not.  This  could  depend  on  relatively
    small changes of attitude  in  the  regime.   There  was  an  extensive
    network of informers.  If someone was  seen  as  a  potential  opponent
    there might well be an attempt to co-opt him.  It was the substance  of
    any political activity which would  concern  the  authorities  not  the
    banner under  which  it  was  conducted.   A  number  of  organisations
    described themselves as cultural groups  but  they  would  in  fact  be
    seeking to pursue a political agenda.  The government liked to give the
    impression of free speech and would not necessarily close down  parties
    or activities but would seek to undercut them and deny them grass  root
    support.  Human rights activism was likely to put  a  person  at  risk.
    Even attempts at simple political  consolidation  at  grassroots  level
    could lead to an adverse response from the authorities. In the UMMA and
    DUP parties there was normally little challenge now to their  political
    activities.  In  other  parties   it   depended   on   the   individual
    circumstances but the government tended to allow figureheads  to  carry
    out political activities until they touched on  any  sensitive  issues.
    Mr Verney was invited to comment on the political parties listed in the
    COIR Report. He broadly categorised them into those  which  were  front
    organisations, ideological opponents and opposition  movements  not  so
    ideologically opposed to the government.

24.  His comments can be briefly summarised as follows:

         Alliance of the People's Working Forces:  This party is  neither  a
         front party nor an ideological opponent.  It is not  a  significant
         group.

         Baa'th Party: The CIPU report is accurate.  The party  is  strongly
         and ideologically opposed to the NIF.

         Beja Congress (BC):    This  is  a  weakly  organised  party  which
         recently signed the peace agreement.  It is strongly opposed to the
         current regime.

         Democratic Unionist Party (DUP/DUP-Mirghani):   The analysis in the
         CIPU report is correct.  It covers a broad  spectrum  of  political
         views including both left and right.  As such it cannot be given  a
         specific political  flavour.   The  government  treats  it  with  a
         certain degree of contempt.

         Democratic Unionist Party  (DUP/DUP-Hindi):   This  is  a  splinter
         group from the DUP which has returned to pro-government views.   It
         would not do anything to upset the current regime.

         Free Sudanese National Party (FSNP):   A  Nubian  party  which  has
         supported a more pro-African policy.  It  is  antagonistic  towards
         the government.  Its leader Phillip Ghabbush died recently.

         Independent  Democrats,  Islamic  Christian   Solidarity,   Islamic
         Revival Movement, Islamic Socialist Party:   None of these  parties
         are of any size or significance.  Mr Verney would not  expect  them
         to be ideologically opposed to the present government.

         Islamic Ummah Party:  This is a splinter group from the UMMA  Party
         which has allied itself with the government.

         Justice and Equality Movement (JEM):  A Darfurian-based party which
         is far less obsessive than the current regime about the pursuit  of
         Islamic ideology.  It would be seen as an ideological threat.

         Justice Party:  This party has worked with the regime and would not
         be regarded as political opponents.

         KOrbaj, Moderate Trend Party:   Mr Verney knows nothing about these
             parties.

         National Democratic Party:   Mr Verney has heard of this party  but
         has no information about its current state.

         National Movement for Reconstruction/Reform and Development:   This
         is a splinter group from the JEM and is regarded as a stooge of the
         government.

         Nile Valley Conference, Popular Masses' Alliance:  Mr  Verney  does
         not know about these parties.

         Popular National Congress Party (PNC/PC):  Its founder  Hassan  Al-
         Turabi had been ideologically behind the current regime  but  there
         was a split in a power struggle in the 1990s.  It was now difficult
         to characterise this party's relationship with the regime.  The PNC
         was less Arabising and  generally  less  racist  than  the  current
         regime which found it useful to cast  Al-Turabi  as  an  opposition
         leader.  Depending on the political climate it could be regarded by
         the regime as a serious opponent.

         Al-Shahamah, Social Popular Party, Sudanese Central  Movement:   Mr
         Verney had no information on these parties save that they were very
         small.

         Sudanese Communist Party (SCP):   This is  clearly  regarded  as  a
         significant opponent of the current regime.  It  had  support  from
         both the North and South Sudanese  and  has  been  opposed  to  the
         religious basis of sectarian parties.

         Sudanese Green Party:   The government  has  clamped  down  on  its
         activities.  Members could be at real risk.

         Sudanese Initiative Party:  Nothing known.

         Sudanese  Liberation  Movement  (/Army)  SLM(/A):  This  party   is
         intrinsically opposed to the current government.

         Sudanese National Movement for the Eradication of  Marginalisation:
         Mr Verney had no information about this group and thought  that  it
         might be a splinter group in Darfur.

         Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A or SPLM-Mainstream):
         This party is intrinsically  opposed  to  the  current  regime  but
         signed the CPA in January 2005.

         South Sudan Independence Movement/Army:   The  leadership  of  this
         group had signed up to an agreement with the authorities  but  that
         had now fallen apart.  It had tried to mend  its  fences  with  the
         SPLM.  It would normally be regarded as an ideological opponent but
         the regime was attempting to co-opt individual members.   This  was
         an example of the way the current regime  sought  to  divide  other
         groups.  The leadership of this party had been bought  off  in  the
         past.

         Sudanese National Party (SNP):  A Nubian mountain  party  which  at
         times worked in partnership with the FSNP.   It  was  ideologically
         opposed to the present government.

         UMMA (UP/mainstream UP):  This was a  mainstream  party  which  had
         played a significant role in opposition activities in the 1990s but
         had no clear manifesto.  It was opposed to the government  but  not
         ideologically.

         UMMU Party (Registered):  This could  probably  be  regarded  as  a
             front party.

         South Sudan Defence Force/United  Democratic  Salvation  Front:  Mr
         Verney regarded these as  ploys  to  divide  the  rebels  and  were
         probably fronts.

         National Democratic Alliance (NDA):  Mr Verney regarded its current
         existence as debatable.   It  was  always  a  loose  collection  of
         parties and was a nebulous  organisation  which  was  difficult  to
         describe.

         Legitimate Command: This was formed of  secular  military  officers
         and was opposed to the government.

         Sudan Alliance Forces:  This had merged with the SPLA  and  was  an
         opponent of the government.

         Sudan  Federal  Democratic  Alliance:  This  party  was   primarily
         concerned  with  Darfur  and  was  ideologically  opposed  to   the
         government.

25.  Mr Verney confirmed that in his view the risk to any  individual  would
    depend in part on the political climate at the  time.   The  government
    sometimes took little action but would then clamp down.   It  would  be
    concerned about grass root democratic activities, involvement in  human
    rights issues and criticism of  the  different  internal  conflicts  in
    Sudan.

26.  In cross examination he said that activities for the BC were likely  to
    lead to adverse interest.  The SNP and FSNP were Nuba mountain  parties
    and activists would be at risk.  Members of the JEM had been subject to
    detention and imprisonment.   The ideological approach of the  PNC  was
    similar to the present government but  was  more  internationalist  and
    less racist.   However,  because  of  the  ideological  closeness,  the
    disputes could  be  fratricidal  at  times.  So  far  as  the  SCP  was
    concerned, it was his view that its members had been at risk but  there
    had been different waves and phases of risk since 1979.  The government
    would sometimes follow charm campaigns and then  revert  to  type.   He
    accepted that the SCP newspaper,  Al-Madan,  was  now  being  published
    again.  By permitting it to be published, the government was seeking to
    present itself in a better light abroad.

27.  So far as its relationship with the SPLM was  concerned,  the  Sudanese
    government had missed many of the key stages in implementing the  peace
    agreement.  The treatment of Southern Sudanese  in  Khartoum  had  been
    brutal.  He accepted that mere membership of a  political  party  would
    not put a person at risk and  that  distributing  pamphlets  would  not
    necessarily give rise to a real risk. Someone  who  merely  distributed
    pamphlets may well be of  no  interest  to  the  authorities  but  such
    activity could indicate a depth of active political  involvement  which
    would  concern  the  authorities.   He  would  not  underestimate   the
    consequences of distributing leaflets.  He  repeated  that  the  regime
    worked to give an impression of political freedom but would  then  claw
    back and revert to type.

28.  The problem facing the authorities was that if the peace agreement  was
    fully carried  out  and  there  were  democratic  elections,  it  would
    inevitably lose power.  Some activities would be tolerated.  The regime
    aimed to keep people guessing and to maintain  a  climate  of  fear  of
    potential consequences.  He described the political atmosphere in Sudan
    as veering between Kafka and Alice in Wonderland.  Mr Verney gave as an
    example the requirement to obtain a permit for a musical gathering  but
    then, even if all  the  legal  requirements  had  been  completed,  the
    security police might well still turn up and arrest those involved.  He
    accepted that some degree of political activity was  tolerated  by  the
    authorities "within red lines", a reference to a  phrase  used  by  the
    Sudanese President.  Activities would be permitted within  these  lines
    but they were moved to accord with the political climate at  the  time.
    A degree of political activity was  permitted.   The  authorities  were
    happy to allow the elite leadership of political parties to  carry  on,
    particularly where their power base had been reduced.

The Evidence of Gillian Lusk

29.  Ms Lusk is a freelance journalist and writer on Sudan.  She  lived  and
    worked in  Sudan  from  1975-1987  and  was  deputy  editor  of  Africa
    Confidential from 1987-2006.  In her report dated 11 February 2008 (3A)
    Ms Lusk referred to the fact there was a long history  of  a  vast  and
    effective security service in Sudan.   There  was  a  ready  supply  of
    people to spy on their neighbours.  Information was collected  for  use
    in putting pressure on those deemed to  be  political  opponents.   She
    referred to her own file which was shown  to  her  when  she  initially
    applied for an exit visa in 1987.   Since taking power the NIF had used
    the security apparatus as a major instrument of policy  implementation.
    They did not simply use internal, external and  military  security  but
    there  were  many  other  departments  often  established  as  business
    companies  or  charities  which  were  fronts  for  covert   government
    activity.  She referred to the arrest of three human  rights  activists
    working for the Sudan Organisation against Torture,  SOAT.   All  three
    were linked to the SCP.

30.  In her oral evidence Ms Lusk said  that  the  Sudanese  government  had
    tried to give the impression of  opening  up  and  allowing  things  to
    happen.  The SCP leader had returned to the country but  everyone  knew
    that there were lines beyond which they could not  go.   Often  it  was
    rank and file members and  activists  who  were  at  risk.   The  whole
    situation was unpredictable: the red lines would not be  clear.   There
    were no clear guarantees of what you could do.

31.  In cross examination she confirmed that she had last been in  Sudan  in
    1987 but she worked on Sudan on a daily basis  and  continued  to  have
    diverse  contacts.   Active  opposition  to  the  government  would  be
    considered dangerous.  Opposition in the country to the government  was
    total but  it  was  not  active.   The  current  regime  had  initially
    infiltrated the system and had their people in  place  when  they  took
    over power in 1989.  The security forces would be interested in  anyone
    who might be a threat.  Information was collected on those who  were  a
    direct threat.  The intention  was  also  to  discourage  others.   She
    described the government's activities in permitting  newspapers  to  be
    published  and  opposition  politicians  to   function   as   political
    finessing.

32.  The government was using delaying tactics to put off bringing  the  CPA
    into  effect  but  it  was  under  pressure  to  allow  democratisation
    particularly from the USA.  It had had to make concessions but it  knew
    that if there were democratic elections, it would lose power.   It  was
    her view that an activist opponent  would  be  at  risk.   Whether  any
    particular individual would be at risk would depend upon  the  security
    official involved and the policy being pursued at the time.  Much would
    depend on how someone was perceived.  She was  not  able  to  give  any
    examples of arrests specifically for distributing  leaflets  but  there
    was an atmosphere of continuous harassment and repeated arrests. People
    in Sudan would be arrested for  matters  which  would  be  regarded  as
    normal in the west.

Submissions

33.  Mr Wright submitted that the appellant  was  not  a  credible  witness.
    There were discrepancies in his evidence about when he was detained and
    for how long.  His evidence did not show that in  reality  he  had  any
    political motivation.  He had not taken part  in  political  activities
    since arriving in this country.  His evidence on the way the SCP and in
    particular the cell structure operated was inconsistent and vague.   He
    said that he had carried on his activities in  secrecy  but  failed  to
    explain how in these circumstances he could return to  such  operations
    following his arrest.  The medical report had been provided by a doctor
    who was not said to be  qualified  in  assessing  whether  wounds  were
    evidence of torture.  The appellant had made his claim in  false  names
    after arrival in this country.  On his own account his father had  been
    required to sign an undertaking as to his behaviour but  there  was  no
    evidence that any action had been taken against him.   The  appellant's
    account of his detention and escape was implausible and untrue.  He had
    travelled to France but had failed to make a claim there.

34.  So far as the background evidence was concerned,  Mr  Wright  submitted
    that the starting point should be HGMO.   The  evidence  of  Mr  Verney
    should be approached with caution as he  had  failed  to  deal  with  a
    number of important reports such as the Danish  Report  (4A).   He  had
    clearly not been aware of the contents of that  report.   The  evidence
    showed that the SCP was represented in the current Parliament in Sudan.
     Its leader appeared to operate freely.  The party newspaper was  being
    published.  The reality appeared to be that members of the party  could
    carry on some political activities.  The risk to those opposed  to  the
    Sudanese authorities needed to be assessed in the light of the evidence
    about the number of political detainees: 100 according to the US  State
    Department Report (2A77) or 330 according to the 10th COI Seminar  2005
    (R2/53).  The evidence did not support a finding  that  relatively  low
    level members would be at risk for that reason alone.   Those  who  had
    been working for SOAT had been  activists.   The  evidence  had  to  be
    looked at as a whole to assess whether an appellant in  his  particular
    circumstances would in fact be at real risk.

35.  Mr Jafar submitted that the appellant's evidence  was  consistent  with
    the background evidence.  He  had  been  unable  to  go  to  university
    because of his detention.  There was no reason why the party should not
    allow him to re-engage in his activities following his release from his
    first detention.  His account was consistent with the  regime's  policy
    of repeated detention for some individuals.  There were inconsistencies
    in the evidence but it had to be kept in mind that  the  appellant  was
    now describing events which had  taken  place  13-14  years  ago.   His
    evidence was strongly corroborated by  the  medical  evidence  from  Dr
    Braverman which described his injuries as highly  consistent  with  his
    account.

36.  He argued that an adverse inference should not be drawn from  the  fact
    that the appellant had not given evidence about  his  father  suffering
    any adverse consequences.  His conversations with his family  had  been
    muted and relatively short.  There was no reason  why  the  appellant's
    account of his escape and trip by lorry to Port  Sudan  should  not  be
    true.  Mr Verney had confirmed that it would not  be  unusual  to  have
    workers assisting a lorry driver.  There was evidence  to  support  the
    fact that torture took place in ghost houses.  The appellant had  given
    detailed evidence about the cell structure of the party.   His  account
    was internally consistent and had to  be  assessed  against  a  chaotic
    state of affairs in Sudan which Mr  Verney  had  described  as  veering
    between Kafka and Alice in Wonderland.   The  appellant  had  identical
    burns on both his arms which showed  an  intentional  use  of  violence
    against him.  The appellant had not given his true identity on  arrival
    but his anxiety was to reach a place of safety.   He  had  not  claimed
    asylum in France because he feared that he would be returned to  Sudan.



37.  Mr Jafar submitted that the  assessment  of  risk  for  any  particular
    individual should  take  into  account  a  number  of  factors  and  in
    particular whether he was a member of a political party, his  political
    associations, his student activities and any previous detentions.   The
    reality was that if someone was known or perceived to be opposed to the
    government, there was a real risk of persecution.  There  were  certain
    types of activity, such as taking  part  in  human  rights  activities,
    drawing  attention  to  the  failings  of  the  governing   party   and
    criticising internal conflicts which would inevitably lead to a risk of
    persecution.  No proper distinction could be drawn between  high  level
    and low  level  activists.   The  risk  depended  upon  an  appellant's
    particular circumstances.  The current regime was determined to hold on
    to power  and  although  it  permitted  some  political  activities  by
    opposition groups to appease international opinion, the reality was  it
    continuously worked to deprive opposition parties of any real support.

The Law

38.  We remind ourselves that the appellant would be entitled to  asylum  if
    owing to a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason  he
    is outside Sudan and is unable or owing to such fear  is  unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of that country.  The burden is on  him
    to show there is a reasonable degree of likelihood of persecution for a
    Convention  reason  if  returned  there.  This  standard  can  also  be
    expressed as whether there is a real risk of  persecution.   A  similar
    standard applies to whether the appellant is entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection or is at risk of serious harm contrary  to  article  3.   We
    also take into account the provisions of the Refugee or Person in  Need
    of International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006  which
    together with amended Immigration Rules have  brought  into  effect  in
    domestic law the provisions of Directive 2004/83/EC (the  Qualification
    Directive).

The Current situation in Sudan

39.  We take as our starting point the summary of the  background  situation
    set out in paragraphs 110-117 of HGMO:

        "110. We do not propose to summarise all of the background evidence
        before us, particularly as our  coverage  of  the  expert  evidence
        refers to significant aspects of this. However, we shall  highlight
        parts of it which have a particular bearing on the issues  we  have
        to decide. The April 2006 COIS Report on Sudan affords a convenient
        reference point for much of what we say  here,  by  virtue  of  its
        extensive sourcing.


        111. Sudan's population is variously estimated as being between  32
        and 39 million. Sudan is the biggest country  in  Africa.  With  an
        area of 2.5 million square kilometres, it is as large  as  Austria,
        Italy,  Germany,  France,  Spain,  Portugal,  the  UK  and   Sweden
        together. The distance between Khartoum and the nearest borders  of
        Darfur is  over  600km.   Sudan's  population  encompasses  a  wide
        diversity of tribes (500 African and Arab), cultures, languages and
        religions, one of  the  principal  religions  in  the  South  being
        Christianity. In rough percentages Sudan's population  is  said  to
        consist of 50% black Africans, 40% Arabs, 6% Beja and 3-4%  others.
        It has experienced more than 30 years of internal armed  conflicts,
        but current divisions date back to colonial  times  when  different
        policies were applied to the North and to the South. Darfur was  an
        independent sultanate which became part of Sudan only in 1917. Even
        though a peace agreement was signed in  January  2005  ending  more
        than 30 years of armed conflicts in the South, there remains  armed
        conflict in Darfur, as well as in eastern Sudan. Both sides of  the
        conflict in Darfur are Muslims.


        112. The aim of the so called "Salvation Revolution" which  brought
        the current regime to power in the 1989 coup was  the  islamization
        of Sudanese society. The current government of Sudan has  a  strong
        security and military dimension. The national  security  force  and
        the military intelligence service are considered  to  be  the  most
        efficient organisations in Sudan.  Both  entities,  more  or  less,
        control the country. Since its independence in 1956, Sudan has gone
        through a militarization process. The agricultural  and  industrial
        sectors of the economy are dominated by the military. The  December
        2005 ACCORD report states that according to staff  members  of  the
        Sudanese Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of  Finance,  80%  of
        the budget for 2003  and  2004  was  spent  on  the  military.  The
        Sudanese army, including Popular Defence Force militia and  Borders
        Intelligence, as well as air force and navy, numbers  approximately
        200,000 (COIS April 2006 5.82). The current leadership is trying to
        establish Sudan as the dominant military and political power within
        the Arab region or at least  among  the  North  African  countries,
        second to Egypt.


        113. The human rights situation in  Sudan  has  been  described  as
        extremely poor: there is a  broad  range  of  violations  of  human
        rights including arbitrary arrests, disappearance cases, executions
        and torture  occurring  in  Sudan.  Censorship  of  the  press  has
        increased since the signing of the peace agreement. The  number  of
        arbitrary arrests  and  people  tried  for  political  reasons  has
        doubled from January 2004 to January 2005. Under the 1999  National
        Security Act,  which  is  still  being  implemented,  the  security
        apparatus has impunity and is free to  detain  persons  arbitrarily
        without arrest warrants. This Act allows  detention  without  trial
        and judicial review for 30 days which can be extended three  times.
        In practice, detention can be extended indefinitely. Many detainees
        are held incommunicado and are not given access to lawyers.  Family
        members are not  informed  about  their  status.  Many  people  are
        detained under emergency law, especially when there  are  political
        implications. Moreover, the judicial system is heavily  overloaded.
        The safeguards  of  the  Criminal  Procedures  Act  are  often  not
        implemented simply because courts cannot cope with  the  number  of
        cases.  Lawyers  face  difficulties  and  also  there  is  no  real
        independence of the judiciary.


        114 The conditions in prison are extremely harsh and are marked  by
        overcrowding, lack of exercise and  terrible  sanitary  conditions.
        Many detainees become ill in detention and some die as a result  of
        lack of treatment.


        115. Torture  is  routine  and  widespread.  Many  detainees,  both
        persons detained for political reasons  and  persons  suspected  of
        having committed ordinary crimes, are affected. The real number  of
        people who are being tortured is unknown, but  it  may  reach  into
        thousands every year. There are a  number  of  recorded  deaths  in
        custody as a result of torture, and even  after  release  from  the
        results of torture. In case of ill-treatment by security officials,
        there is no complaint mechanism. Whilst disappearances are not seen
        as taking place on a large scale, many people disappear every year.




        116. Members of opposition parties or  movements  have  experienced
        persecution in the past and whilst in  2005-2006  there  have  been
        some improvements in their position,  the  regime  still  imprisons
        them from time and time.


        117. Members of civil society and human rights defenders are  under
        surveillance  and  might  be  arbitrarily  arrested  and  detained.
        Depending on the charges, their status and the location,  they  may
        then also be subjected to torture."

    It would also be helpful to  set  out  what  the  Tribunal  said  about
    political activists at para 271:



        "271. We have already noted in a number of places evidence  showing
        that persons in  Sudan  who  have  been  involved  with  opposition
        political parties or movements or who have identified themselves as
        anti-government by speaking out against the authorities would be at
        greater risk as a result of surveillance than  ordinary  returnees.
        Although  the  extent  to  which  the   regime   cracks   down   on
        oppositionists appears to fluctuate, we think it safe to infer that
        those who have been activists involved with opposition  parties  or
        movements or who have spoken out against the government continue to
        constitute a current risk category (we deal separately  below  with
        persons who rely on sur place activities)."

     and its conclusions on risk at para 309(8)(ii):


        "309(8)(ii). However, persons  whose  conduct  marks  them  out  as
        oppositionist or anti-government activists remain  a  current  risk
        category. Persons in this category may include some (but  certainly
        not all) students, merchants/traders, lawyers,  journalists,  trade
        unionists, teachers and intellectuals. Such conduct  may  take  the
        form of being a political opponent of the government or of speaking
        out against the government. It may also take the form  of  being  a
        member of a student organisation that is allied  to  an  opposition
        party or that is opposed to the government's  policies  (paragraphs
        271-283)."

40.  There is nothing in the subsequent background evidence to  provide  any
    real support for an  argument  that  the  Sudanese  government's  human
    right's record has improved. The US  Country  Report  on  Human  Rights
    Practices 2006 released in March 2007 (2A111 at 112) says:

         "The government's human rights records  remained  poor,  and  there
         were numerous serious problems, including  evidence  of  continuing
         genocide in Darfur, for which  the  government  and  the  Janjaweed
         continue to bear responsibility.  Abuses continued: abridgement  of
         citizens' rights to change their government: extradition and  other
         unlawful killings by government forces and other government aligned
         groups throughout the country; torture, beatings,  rape  and  other
         cruel, inhuman or  punishment  by  security  forces;  harsh  prison
         conditions; arbitrary arrest and detention, including incommunicado
         detention of suspected government  opponents,  and  prolonged  pre-
         trial detention; executive  interference  with  the  judiciary  and
         denial  of  due  process;  forced  conscription  of  underage  men,
         obstruction   of   the   delivery   of   humanitarian   assistance;
         infringement on citizens' rights  to  privacy,  freedom  of  press,
         assembly, association, religion and  movement;  the  harassment  of
         internally displaced persons (IDPs) and of local and  international
         human   rights    humanitarian    organisations;    violence    and
         discrimination against women,  including  the  practice  of  female
         genital mutilation (FGM); child abuse,  including  sexual  violence
         and  recruitment  of  child  soldiers,  particularly   in   Darfur;
         trafficking persons, discrimination  and  violence  against  ethnic
         minorities; denial of workers rights; and forced labour,  including
         child labour, by security forces and both aligned  and  non-aligned
         militias in Southern Sudan and Darfur".

    This report also confirms that there are  continuing  allegations  that
    the government was responsible for politically motivated  killings  and
    disappearances including  those  of  persons  suspected  of  supporting
    rebels especially  in  Darfur  (113-4).   It  records  that  government
    security  forces  continue  to  torture,  beat  and  harass   suspected
    political opponents and others.  When dealing with political  prisoners
    and detainees, (119)  the  report  says:  "there  were  no  reports  of
    political prisoners; however, the  government  held  an  estimated  100
    political detainees including members of opposition parties.   Security
    forces  reportedly  detained  without   charge,   tortured   and   held
    incommunicado political opponents".  It refers (119) to the  fact  that
    in September 2006  the  government  detained  several  leaders  of  the
    opposition UMMA Party for planned  protests  against  government-backed
    increases for the price of sugar and fuel and security forces  detained
    members of the PNC but adds that there had been fewer  detentions  than
    in previous years.

41.  In the respondent's Operational Guidance Note issued  on  5  June  2007
    (1R 29-51) it is said  that  the  Sudanese  government's  human  rights
    record  remained  poor  in  2006  and  that  there  were  breaches   of
    international humanitarian law and gross and systematic  violations  of
    human rights. The report says that so far as  members  of  the  BC  are
    concerned,  the  peace  agreement  in  October  2006  followed  by  the
    observance of the ceasefire means that it is not likely that any  level
    of BC members are now at real risk of persecution  (3.6.9).   Similarly
    in light of the CPA, affiliates of the SPLM/A are now not likely to  be
    at risk (3.7.1.5) in contrast with members or associates of  the  SLM/A
    or JEM where  there  is  a  strong  likelihood  that  leading  members,
    prominent  figures  and  those  with  significant  involvement  in  the
    organisations and affiliated persons considered by the  authorities  to
    be intellectual would be subject to such treatment (3.7.2.9).

42.  We were  also  referred  to  the  Danish  Report  2001  (1A36)  and  in
    particular to the comments of the Secretary at the Dutch  Embassy  (47)
    that the fact that a person was a member of an opposition party was not
    in itself a problem but if someone  was  an  active  member  and  spoke
    openly about his political association then he  could  be  at  risk  of
    persecution by the authorities.  It was his view that those members  of
    opposition parties who, for example, distributed pamphlets were  hardly
    at risk of being targeted but it was the more prominent members of  the
    opposition who risked harassment and abuse from the  authorities.   The
    report also recorded the view of a member of the  German  Embassy  (48)
    that it  was  only  high  profile  members  of  the  opposition  behind
    activities which the authorities feared who were at risk of arrest  and
    imprisonment and that ordinary members of the opposition  parties  were
    not usually imprisoned although there had been  occasionally  instances
    of SCP and PMC party members being imprisoned.  He added that generally
    care should be exercised in examining asylum applications  where  there
    were substantial political grounds such as membership of the  SCP,  the
    two Ba'ath parties, the DUP and possibly other parties.

43.  The same report (41) records the view of someone identified as  a  well
    informed local source in Cairo that the authorities made particular use
    of a number of pieces of legislation to restrict the activities of  the
    opposition or suspected members of the opposition in the country.  They
    would be detained from morning until night and prevented from  carrying
    out their daily activities.  They would also be detained for periods of
    a few days to a few weeks and  would  often  risk  being  subjected  to
    beatings, isolation, threats, humiliation, frequent interrogations  and
    being forced to carry out hard physical exercise.  A person accused  of
    substantial political activities, particularly for the armed sector  of
    the opposition, was in a  significantly  worse  position  and  violence
    against such detainees was also much more serious.  Many  inmates  were
    subjected to serious torture in the form of electric shocks (mainly  of
    the genitals), branding or being prevented from sleeping.  Generally  a
    person who was suspected of carrying out political activities  for  the
    opposition would automatically be regarded as a security risk  and  his
    case would therefore be a matter for the security  services.   Although
    both the appellant and the respondent placed considerable  reliance  on
    the Danish Report, it is part of the  background  evidence  taken  into
    account by the Tribunal in HGMO and on the basis of this  report  alone
    there is no basis for a revision of the guidance given in that appeal.

44.  It is, however, clear from the evidence before  us  that  the  Sudanese
    authorities do currently allow some political activities by  opposition
    parties.  There is a report of the SCP leader re-emerging in 2005 after
    a decade in hiding (1R 1-3).  He was interviewed in June  2007  by  the
    Sudan Tribune where he refers to the party  working  on  regaining  its
    strength and to regional conferences in many cities around Sudan (1R 8-
    17).  It was reported in the Sudan Tribune that in December 2007 that a
    prominent member of the SCP had met with the ruling NCP to discuss  the
    implementation of the CPA and more generally about building a  national
    consensus among major political  forces  towards  democracy  (2R38-40).
    There is evidence that the party reissued its paper, Al Midan, in  2006
    (2R 33).   It  was  closed  after  the  1989  coup  but  was  published
    underground during the last sixteen years: (1R7).  We  must  also  note
    the report in Reuters dated 28 August 2007 that 15,000 copies  of  this
    newspaper were confiscated by the authorities (1R 25-8).

45.  We also take into account the Tenth COI Seminar 2005  (2R  41-74)  that
    torture is still routine and widespread in Sudan.  Many detainees, both
    persons detained for political reasons and persons suspected of  having
    committed ordinary crimes, are affected.  The real number of people who
    are being tortured is said to be unknown, but might go  into  thousands
    every year.  There are a number of recorded  deaths  in  custody  as  a
    result of torture and even after release from the results  of  torture.
    This report also confirmed that  leading  members  of  the  established
    Khartoum based political movements were not being  imprisoned  at  that
    time, although this might  just  be  a  temporary  phenomenon  as,  for
    example, in the past the leader of  the  PNC  had  been  released  from
    detention but arrested again after rumours of a coup  were  fabricated.
    It also reports  that  middle  and  low  level  opposition  operatives,
    however, were at high risk of being persecuted.

Our Assessment of the Current Situation in Sudan

46.  It is against this background that we turn to  our  assessment  of  the
    evidence of Mr Verney and Ms Lusk. According to  their  evidence,  the
    general position is clear: the current regime has been committed to the
    Islamisation of Sudanese society and  has  been  exceptionally  hostile
    towards opposition activities.   However,  international  pressure  has
    been put on the regime and some  activities  are  now  being  tolerated
    within what are described as "red lines"  of  permitted  activity  with
    participants  knowing  that  they  must  not  step  over   them.    The
    government, as a result of international pressure, has reached a  peace
    agreement with the Southern Sudanese and entered into a  power  sharing
    protocol but the implementation of the peace process is behind schedule
    and according to Mr Verney the current regime is inevitably seeking  to
    delay full implementation as this would lead to democratisation and  to
    the regime losing power.  The CPA which was signed to resolve the North-
    South  conflict  included  the  signing   of   the   Interim   National
    Constitution (INC) in July 2005.  This contains significant  guarantees
    of civil rights against arbitrary arrest and detention and provides for
    political and press freedom.   However, as yet there is no final  draft
    of the INC and its provisions have not been  translated  into  national
    legislation.  The rights guaranteed have  not  been  given  effect  and
    although the Sudanese Government has sought to give the  impression  of
    some political liberalisation, this is only as  a  result  of  external
    pressure on the regime.

47.  We accept Mr Verney's overall analysis  of  the  current  situation  in
    Sudan. It is clear  from  his  evidence  that  both  for  personal  and
    humanitarian reasons he regards the current regime with contempt but we
    find that this does  not  seriously  detract  from  his  assessment  in
    objective terms of the current situation.  The regime is caught between
    the conflicting aims of holding on to power and the need to respond  to
    international pressure to bring to an end the genocidal conflicts which
    have been taking place in Sudan.  We accept that the  tacit  permission
    for opposition parties to function has been forced on the regime and is
    to give an appearance of democracy which only exists within  relatively
    narrow boundaries.  We agree with Mr Verney's analysis that  activities
    which seek to undermine the  rationale  of  the  regime  and  its  core
    policies, activities in support of human rights and  attempts  to  gain
    and consolidate an effective power base for any opposition parties  are
    capable of leading to adverse interest from the authorities.

48.  Mr Verney accepted that membership alone of  a  political  party  would
    not without more give rise to a real risk of  persecution  and  that  a
    distinction  could  properly  be  drawn  between  people   who   merely
    distributed pamphlets, who may not be of interest to  the  authorities,
    and situations where the distribution of  pamphlets  might  indicate  a
    real political commitment to opposition activities,  which  would  give
    the authorities cause for concern.  He made it clear that there were no
    hard and fast lines which  could  be  drawn.  The  situation  in  Sudan
    fluctuates.  At times the  authorities  will  tolerate  activities,  at
    other times they would take action.

49.  The general background is one of intimidation by a  repressive  regime.
    We accept that files  would  be  kept  on  those  of  interest  to  the
    authorities.  Ms Lusk, although not Sudanese, had a file kept  on  her
    while she was working in Sudan.  It is a mark of a repressive regime to
    maintain such  files  assiduously  so  that  they  can  be  used  where
    necessary to provide evidence against those seen as opponents and  more
    generally to create an atmosphere of intimidation.   We  agree,  as  Mr
    Verney said, that the aim is to keep people guessing and to maintain  a
    climate of fear of potential consequences.  In the  light  of  the  way
    that the reaction of the Sudanese authorities to  opposition  political
    activity  fluctuates  in  accordance  with  political  priorities   and
    objectives  at  any  given  time  including  the  need  to  respond  to
    international pressure, it is impossible to  give  any  hard  and  fast
    guidelines in circumstances where the government for political  reasons
    sometimes takes no action and permits a degree of political activity to
    take place.

50.  In summary we endorse the general guidance given in  HGMO  set  out  in
    paras 271 and 309(8)(ii) but  so  far  as  claims  based  on  political
    opinion and activities are concerned we would add to that  guidance  in
    the light of the  further  evidence  we  have  heard  as  follows.  The
    assessment of asylum claims based on  opposition  political  activities
    must be set in the context of a government which has  been  responsible
    for serious abuses of human rights and which has  persecuted  political
    opponents.  However, at present,  opposition  parties  are  allowed  to
    function  even  if  within  relatively  narrow  parameters.   This   is
    evidenced by the fact that the SCP leader has returned to Sudan and  is
    taking part in political activities.   The  party  newspaper  is  being
    published and the party has members in the Sudanese Parliament.  It  is
    not necessarily  high  profile  political  leaders  who  are  at  risk,
    although some may be.  Some are left  alone  to  give  a  semblance  of
    genuine political activity and others have  some  protection  from  the
    fact that they have foreign passports.  The fact that  an  activist  is
    involved in low or mid level political activities does not  necessarily
    mean that he will not be at risk of persecution.  However, the Sudanese
    authorities do not seek or even attempt  to  take  action  which  could
    amount to persecution against all political opponents but in  the  main
    they seek to control by the use of fear and intimidation.  Depending on
    the particular circumstances of an individual, it may  well  resort  to
    stronger measures,  particularly  against  those  actively  engaged  in
    building up grass roots democracy, working in support of  human  rights
    and involved in open  criticism  of  the  regime's  core  ideology  and
    philosophy.

51.  Whether any individual political activist is at risk  will  necessarily
    depend upon his individual circumstances set within the context of  the
    situation as a whole.  This involves an assessment of the nature of the
    activities carried out and how they will be seen  by  the  authorities.
    It appears that the level of risk to  an  individual  engaged  in  such
    activities  may  increase  along  with  the  effectiveness   of   those
    activities. Activities for a secular party or one ideologically opposed
    to the current regime are more  likely  to  lead  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.  There are certain well established parties  such  as  the
    mainstream DUP and the UMMA Party which are less  likely  to  challenge
    the state on ideological grounds but nonetheless  its  members  can  on
    occasions find themselves at real risk as evidenced by  the  fact  that
    leaders of the UMMA party were detained in 2007.

52.  It will be important to take into account whether an appellant  has  in
    the past come to the attention of the authorities, the  nature  of  the
    activities involved, the number of times he has been detained  and  the
    length of any detentions.  The fact  that  someone  has  been  released
    without charge will not necessarily indicate  that  there  will  be  no
    further interest from the authorities.  The level of past interest  and
    treatment is the most reliable indication of how an individual will  be
    treated if he comes to the attention of the authorities in the future.

53.  In the light of the fact that the SCP is currently allowed to  function
    in Sudan we find that it will in  general  be  difficult  for  ordinary
    members and supporters to establish a claim for asylum  but  they  will
    need to show that they have been engaged in specific activities  likely
    to bring them to the attention  of  the  adverse  authorities  such  as
    active  and  effective  local  democratic  activity  or   support   for
    particular human rights activities.

54.  We do not consider that the legal status of an opposition party  has  a
    significant bearing in itself on whether an individual is likely to  be
    at risk of persecution.  The determining feature is likely to be how  a
    particular individual in the light of his previous political activities
    will  be  perceived  by  the  authorities.  Activities  for   a   party
    ideologically opposed to the government are more likely to  lead  to  a
    real risk but someone may also be at risk even if not active on  behalf
    of a political party as such.  Political  activities  also  take  place
    under the guise of cultural associations.

55.  We now  turn  to  an  assessment  of  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    evidence and whether in his particular circumstances  he  would  be  at
    real risk on return.

Analysis of the appellant's evidence:

  56. The appellant gave an inconsistent and contradictory  account  of  the
      commencement and duration of his involvement  with  the  SCP.  In  his
      written evidence and in interview he said he joined the SCP  in  1988.
      In oral evidence when asked "when did you  become  involved  with  the
      SCP?" he said "I started in 1993". He was  asked  if  he  was  certain
      about that. He replied that he could not remember the exact  date  but
      it was at about that time. Admittedly, this was a long time  ago  but,
      if the appellant's account were true, it would be reasonable to expect
      him to be clear that he "started" his involvement with  the  SCP  much
      earlier than 1993.

  57. When this was pointed out to the appellant he  sought  to  explain  it
      away on the basis that, although he started distributing  leaflets  in
      1988, his activity reached its peak in 1993. But it is  hard  to  find
      any real change in the nature and extent of the  activities  in  which
      the appellant claimed to have  participated  throughout  his  time  in
      Sudan.

  58. His account of his activities also  lacked  credibility.  He  said  he
      distributed the leaflets "secretly" but  in  oral  evidence  explained
      that this involved going to "gatherings" or crowded areas in  his  own
      locality and handing out leaflets to strangers. When pressed  on  this
      the  appellant  said  that  he  and  his  colleagues  concentrated  on
      distributing  leaflets  when  there   were   people   "gathering   for
      something". He accepted that he would have no way of  knowing  whether
      such people included those to whom distribution  would  be  dangerous,
      such as security forces personnel. This is, we find, an activity  that
      it is impossible to consider having been carried out in secret.

  59. When describing his first detention the appellant says  that  security
      forces raided his family home at night time and  found  leaflets  from
      the SCP. On the basis of what is known  from  the  background  country
      evidence of the way in which the security forces operate,  we  do  not
      find credible that they would content themselves with taking away  the
      appellant, then aged 22, yet show no  interest  in  the  head  of  the
      household, the appellant's father, or in any of the  appellant's  four
      siblings.

  60. Even if there was some reason (which has not been put  before  us)  to
      explain why only the appellant was taken away for questioning, as  the
      appellant disclosed nothing under torture it is hard to understand why
      the security forces, if intent on  obtaining  information  as  to  the
      source of the leaflets, simply failed to question those family members
      who might  reasonably  be  expected  to  know  about  the  appellant's
      associates and so on.

  61. Our conclusions in this regard are reinforced by  what  the  appellant
      told us of his interrogation. He said that he was  asked  about  those
      with whom he was working but gave false information, such as names and
      addresses he had made up. Bearing in mind that he claims to have  been
      detained for two months it seems extremely unlikely  to  us  that  the
      appellant  would  have  been  released  before  that  information  was
      followed up and found to be false or, if  it  was,  that  he  was  not
      challenged robustly about having supplied false information.

  62. There is further reason to find incredible the appellant's account  of
      him alone being questioned.  He  said  in  his  first  statement  that
      "before being released I was made to sign an undertaking that  both  I
      and my father (who was not a Communist  Party  member)  would  not  be
      involved in any political activities or hand out  political  leaflets.
      We were both threatened with our lives...". In the  interview  and  in
      his oral evidence  the  appellant  made  clear  that  his  father  was
      required to sign such an undertaking as well. This indicates that,  on
      the appellant's account, his father was suspected with involvement  in
      these activities or, at the very least, that the authorities  saw  him
      as being in a position to influence and  to  be  responsible  for  the
      appellant's future conduct. On the basis of what  is  known  from  the
      country evidence, it is impossible to understand why, if that were the
      case, his father was spared interrogation and was allowed to carry  on
      his life and business unhindered in any respect at all,  even  though,
      on the appellant's  account,  the  appellant  was  suspected  of  such
      activity and was found to have continued to engage in it  despite  his
      and his father's undertaking that he would not.

  63. The appellant says that  on  release  from  this  first  detention  he
      required treatment in hospital for a six month period. Yet the  extent
      of the need for treatment described by him is burns to  his  arms  and
      shoulders, weight loss, dehydration  and  fever.  One  does  not  need
      clinical medical knowledge to observe that common sense indicates that
      six months is a very long period to spend in  hospital.  There  is  no
      requirement upon the appellant to provide documentary or corroborative
      evidence before his account is capable of belief.  But  the  appellant
      was put clearly on notice by what the respondent said in  the  refusal
      letter that his account was not accepted to be true. As the  appellant
      has remained in contact with his father in Khartoum throughout, it  is
      surprising that he did  not  ask  him  to  obtain  from  the  hospital
      confirmation of his  admission  and  treatment  or  explain  why  such
      evidence was not available to him relatively easily.

  64. The appellant says that he  subsequently  returned  to  his  political
      activities. There are difficulties with this account as well. Firstly,
      the appellant said that he returned  to  his  activities  "in  a  more
      vigilant way", yet on examination of his evidence he  seems  to  claim
      that he carried on in the same way as before. Indeed,  when  asked  in
      evidence in what way his activities were  different  after  his  first
      detention from before he confirmed that his activities were the same.

  65. Secondly, it is the appellant's account  that  these  activities  were
      dangerous so that they had to  be  carried  out  clandestinely  or  in
      secret. It is not clear why an organisation such as the SCP, for  whom
      secrecy is said to be essential in order to protect its  members  from
      arrest and torture, would welcome back someone who had been identified
      as a person suspected of anti regime political activity, detained  and
      interrogated over a significant period and released only on the  basis
      of an undertaking to avoid such activity in future. As we  have  seen,
      it is said that, once a person has come to the  adverse  attention  of
      the regime there is a risk of repeated  detentions.  Those  he  worked
      with would be putting themselves at greater risk by associating with a
      person known to have come to the adverse attention of the authorities.

  66. In any event, the appellant's account of the steps  taken  to  protect
      the identities of his comrades is not simply lacking  in  credibility.
      It is little short of fanciful. He says that the members of  his  cell
      did not know each other's names but used code names (or, at one  point
      in his oral evidence, code numbers) in order to identify  each  other.
      Thus, should they be  arrested,  they  would  be  unable,  even  under
      torture, to disclose the identities of the others. But  he  said  also
      that their meetings took place in each other's homes. Indeed, he  says
      that his second arrest occurred when he was at  the  home  of  a  cell
      member holding such a meeting. Thus,  it  is  not  apparent  what  was
      achieved by the charade of using  code  names  or  numbers  since  the
      participants would be easily identifiable from their addresses.

  67. The appellant said first that he was detained on the  second  occasion
      on 3rd May 1995 and held at a "ghost house" until 20th September 1995.
      That is a period of nearly five months. Yet in oral evidence  he  said
      that he was detained on this occasion for only two months.  After  the
      time that has passed, the appellant may be excused if  he  has  become
      less than certain about the actual dates of his detention and  escape.
      But if what the appellant has described did in fact occur, these would
      be truly memorable events about which it would be reasonable to expect
      the appellant to give a consistent account. He has  not  done  so.  In
      particular, it would be reasonable to expect the appellant  to  recall
      that his detention was for over four months,  twice  as  long  as  his
      first experience of being detained, and not to say that  it  was  only
      for two.

  68. We do not find credible either the appellant's account of  his  escape
      from the second detention. He said in evidence that,  each  and  every
      night, he and the other detainees were required to stand  outside  the
      house in a walled area. The guards would not be present  and,  on  the
      night of their escape, the appellant and  his  friend  simply  climbed
      over the wall and made their way to a main  road  where  they  flagged
      down a lorry.

  69. There are a number of difficulties with this part of  the  appellant's
      account. Firstly, we do not believe that persons considered to  be  of
      sufficient interest to be detained for  over  four  months  should  be
      allowed to remain each night unguarded in the open  in  an  area  from
      which they could escape by  simply  climbing  over  a  wall.  This  is
      especially so as it is the appellant's  account  that  these  premises
      were designed specifically for  the  detention  and  ill-treatment  of
      suspects.

  70. Secondly, it is said that the objective evidence  supports  the  claim
      that detainees would be required to stand out  of  doors  while  being
      held in detention. But that is not the  case.  Those  reports  are  of
      detainees being made to stand outside during  the  day  so  that  they
      would suffer from the sun as a form of torture. The appellant said  in
      his first statement that he was required to stand outside at night "on
      occasions" but in his oral evidence at the reconsideration hearing  he
      said that he was "always" instructed to stand  outside  at  night  and
      that it was "every day" that he  was  required  to  stand  outside  at
      night.

  71. Further, the appellant said in oral evidence that their escape was not
      planned but happened on the spur of the moment. There was no doubt  or
      ambiguity about his evidence at the hearing in this respect. We do not
      accept that, if circumstances had been as claimed, it would  not  have
      occurred to the appellant or his friend earlier that an  escape  might
      be possible while left unguarded each night. This, in any event, is in
      direct contradiction to what the appellant said in interview:

        "There was another brother - actually it's a colleague and together
        we'd been planning the escape for a long time."

  72. The appellant claimed not  to  know  the  location  of  his  place  of
      detention. But since he escaped from that place on foot and  made  his
      way to a main road where he waited until a lorry driver offered him  a
      lift, it is difficult to understand why he was not  able  to  discover
      from where he had been picked up by that lorry.

  73. In any event, we do not  believe  the  appellant's  account  of  being
      offered a lift by a lorry driver, flagged down in the  middle  of  the
      night by two dishevelled men, who unknown to him had just escaped from
      more than four months detention during which they were  kept  in  poor
      conditions. The lorry driver might be expected to be  aware  that  his
      journey to Port Sudan would take him through several  checkpoints.  It
      is difficult to understand why he would wish to take them  on  to  his
      lorry with no money or identification. Mr Verney told us that it would
      not be unusual for a lorry driver to have casual labour to  help  him.
      But the appellant's account is that he was, of course, unknown to  the
      lorry driver, there was no load on the vehicle and no arrangement  for
      work in exchange for the journey was mentioned.

  74.  Mr  Verney  confirms  that  there  would  have  been  three  or  four
      checkpoints to have been passed through on the journey to Port  Sudan.
      We do not find credible  the  appellant's  account  that  he  and  his
      friend, who remained clearly visible on the back of  the  open  lorry,
      were not asked at any of the check points to  produce  identification.
      Mr Verney said that, in most cases a person would be asked to  produce
      identification. The background  evidence  indicates  that  failure  to
      produce identification upon request could result in arrest.  Mr Verney
      said that vigilance varied  and  it  was  not  impossible  that  those
      operating checkpoints would have accepted that the appellant  and  his
      friend were assistants of the driver  and  not  worthy  of  attention.
      That, we find, might  well  have  been  the  case  at  any  particular
      remotely located checkpoint operated by bored and unmotivated soldiers
      but it is not reasonably likely that this would be the  case  at  each
      checkpoint passed through. We reach  these  conclusions  having  taken
      into account the view expressed by Mr Verney that the appellant "might
      well" have been able to make his way  to  Port  Sudan  in  the  manner
      claimed.

  75. Indeed, it is convenient to record at this  point  that  we  have,  of
      course, made our findings in the light of all the evidence before  us,
      including  the  view  expressed  by  Mr  Verney  that  he  found   the
      appellant's account to be plausible and consistent with what  he  knew
      of the behaviour of the authorities in Sudan.

  76. There are further difficulties about  this  part  of  the  appellant's
      account. This was not a fully laden lorry taking goods to Port  Sudan.
      The appellant said it had a few bags or sacks on the back. In our view
      it is simply not credible that such a  lorry,  with  two  undocumented
      young men riding on  the  back,  would  not  have  excited  sufficient
      interest at any of the checkpoints even to the extent of a  search  to
      discover what was contained within the sacks that were on  the  lorry.
      The appellant's evidence at the hearing is that he did not  know  what
      was in these sacks and the soldiers at the checkpoints  did  not  look
      inside them either.

  77. The appellant has also given a contradictory and inconsistent  account
      of his journey to the United Kingdom. In his first  witness  statement
      the appellant says, clearly and unambiguously, that on arrival in Port
      Sudan he sent a message to his father asking him to  send  money.  His
      father provided him with money and "I then made the arrangements  with
      an Eritrean smuggler" to gain access to the  boat  that  took  him  to
      France. On arrival he met some  Arab  people  in  a  coffee  shop  who
      advised him to go to Paris to meet a Sudanese man  who  then  provided
      the appellant with the passport with which he travelled to the  United
      Kingdom.

  78. But his oral evidence was different. He said that his father  did  not
      send the funds to him but direct to the agent. His  father  sent  some
      further money to him once he arrived in France. He made clear  in  his
      oral evidence that the travel package bought from the  agent  in  Port
      Sudan  brought  him  to  London,  which  was   always   his   intended
      destination.

  79. This inconsistent account reinforces our conclusion that the appellant
      has not given a truthful account of fleeing Sudan after escaping  from
      a second detention. Further, he  has  remained  in  contact  with  his
      father  who,  despite  signing,  on  the   appellant's   account,   an
      undertaking for the appellant's good behaviour when released after the
      first detention, has suffered no adverse attention from  the  security
      forces and continues  to  run  his  car  sales  business  in  Khartoum
      unhindered in any way.

  80. We have found it convenient to discuss the appellant's  account  about
      his experiences in Sudan in a chronological fashion. But we  have,  of
      course, assessed that account in the light of the evidence as a whole.
      In particular, throughout our assessment of the appellant's account of
      his experiences in Sudan we have borne closely  in  mind  the  medical
      evidence provided by Dr Braverman and set out in  a  report  which  is
      undated but was prepared following an interview on 9th July  1999.  In
      that report Dr Braverman sets out a detailed account  taken  from  the
      appellant of the treatment to which he said he  was  subjected  during
      two periods of detention. That account is consistent with  that  given
      by the appellant throughout although given in considerably more detail
      than in other parts of his evidence.

  81. In his report Dr Braverman describes the  marks  and  scars  found  on
      examination of the appellant. A number of these are described  as  old
      abrasions but some are of particular  relevance.  On  the  appellant's
      left shoulder is a burn 6.5 x 4 cms and on his  left  forearm  another
      5.5 x 3 cms. On the appellant's right arm, just below the  elbow,  was
      found three further scars, two of which were described as burns of 2.5
      cms and 4 cms x 1 cm respectively. On the tip  the  appellant's  right
      shoulder are two almost identical burns measuring 6 cm x 3 cm.

  82.   Dr Braverman sets out his conclusions and opinion as follows:

             "[The  appellant]  gives  a  very  clear  description  of  two
             episodes of torture: one in 1992, the other  in  1995  and  in
             particular he describes being burned  with  a  metal  rod  and
             dragged across the floor.  He  is  somewhat  anxious  and  has
             feelings of being followed. He  sleeps  poorly  and  wakes  up
             startled at night and frightened."

      That much, of course, is no more than a recital of what the  appellant
      told him and does not, in itself, take the matter much  further  other
      than to indicate consistency. But the doctor goes on to say, and  this
      is the entirety of the expert opinion expressed:


             "On examination he  has  multiple  lesions,  several  of  them
             obviously burns and especially the lesions on his knees  could
             well be due to being dragged across a rough surface. His  many
             lesions and their site very strongly corroborate his story."

  83. We have given very careful consideration to the opinion  expressed  by
      Dr Braverman. He says that  the  lesions  on  the  appellant's  knees,
      described as "old abrasions" could well be due  to  the  ill-treatment
      described by the appellant. That, of course, leaves  open  many  other
      potential causes but  it  is  his  view,  overall,  that  the  lesions
      identified provide strong support for the appellant's account.

  84. However, we must look at the evidence as a whole and having given  due
      weight to Dr Braverman's opinion that the scars are  corroborative  of
      his account, we do not believe that the  appellant's  account  of  how
      those injuries were sustained is true or reasonably likely to be true.
      For the reasons we have set out, we do not accept that  the  appellant
      has involved himself in any form of political activity  on  behalf  of
      the SCP in Sudan. We are satisfied that he has never been involved  in
      the distribution of leaflets and that his account  of  being  arrested
      and detained on two occasions because of being suspected of  any  such
      activities is untrue.   We  find  that  the  likelihood  is  that  the
      appellant  had  been  unable  to  gain  admission  to  university   or
      permission to study abroad simply because he did not wish  to  perform
      his national service and that his departure from Sudan was planned  so
      that he could pursue other  opportunities  abroad.  He  said  in  oral
      evidence that he did not have a job in Sudan, although he  "sometimes"
      helped his father. He described himself as a student in Sudan although
      he confirmed in oral evidence that he had  completed  school  in  1987
      some years before his departure. We are not satisfied  that  there  is
      any reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant fled from Sudan
      to escape the adverse attention of the authorities.

  85. In summary we do  not  believe  the  appellant's  account  of  how  he
      sustained the injuries described in the medical  report.   Whether  or
      not that explains the absence of any evidence from the hospital  where
      he was treated, we simply do not know but the burden of proof  remains
      upon the appellant throughout to establish the  facts  upon  which  he
      seeks to rely. He has put before us an account which  we  find  to  be
      untrue. It is a regrettable fact that criminal or unlawful harm can be
      inflicted upon individuals for a variety of reasons. Whatever were the
      true circumstances in which the appellant sustained his  injuries,  he
      has not put them forward.

  86. In reaching our conclusions we have had regard, as  required,  to  the
      provisions of section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
      Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004.  In  determining  whether  to  believe  a
      statement made by the appellant we are to take  account,  as  damaging
      the appellant's credibility, of any behaviour to  which  that  section
      applies. The appellant chose not to take  advantage  of  a  reasonable
      opportunity to claim asylum in France and he provided a false passport
      upon entering the United Kingdom. That is behaviour falling within the
      section which we are required to take into  account  as  damaging  the
      appellant's credibility.  But  the  extent  to  which  this  behaviour
      damages his credibility is, of course, a matter for us. The  appellant
      has given an explanation for his behaviour but we have not found it to
      be satisfactory. In any event our findings on  his  credibility  would
      have been the same regardless of these provisions.

  87. Mr Verney said that the fact that the appellant  had  been  away  from
      Sudan for a number of years would in itself attract the  attention  on
      return. But even if that length of absence was noted,  we  cannot  see
      that anything would arise from it absent any other  reason  to  excite
      interest. There is no adequate evidence before us  to  show  that  the
      fact of a lengthy absence from Sudan in itself gives rise  to  a  real
      risk on return.

  88. We find that the appellant faces no real risk of facing on  return  to
      Sudan persecution for a reason recognised by the  Refugee  Convention.
      He has not shown substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  he  faces
      serious harm as defined in paragraph 339C of HC 395 nor is  there  any
      real risk that he will  be  subjected  to  ill-treatment  such  as  to
      infringe his rights under the Human Rights Convention.

Decision

  89. The  original  tribunal  erred  in  law.   We  substitute  a  decision
      dismissing the appeal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
      rights grounds.




Signed                                  Date: 7 May 2008




Senior Immigration Judge Latter



                                  Schedule

                       Country background information

Undated  International Correspondence on Ideas about the Future of
                       Socialism from www.ospaal.org

Undated  Major Sudanese Political Parties from www.sudan.net

28 July 1971  Washington Post Communist Party Leader Sentenced by Military
                       Court

1996 United States State Department Report Sudan January 1996

June 1999     A Peaceful Democratic Solution from www.midan.net

1 July 2000   UNHCR Background Paper on Refugees and Asylum Seekers from
                       the Sudan

9 April 2001  Report on Fact Finding Mission to Cairo and Geneva Danish
                       Immigration Service

1 December 2001   Danish Immigration Service Report on Fact Finding Mission
                       to Cairo

28 March 2003 OHCHR Statement on the Situation of Human Rights in Sudan

8 December 2003   UNHCR Report: More Sudanese Flee into Chad

28 July 2004  Extract from Al Midan SCP Newspaper

15 September 2004 US Department of State International Religious Freedom
                       Report 2004

27 January 2005   UN Press Release: Calls on Sudan to End Impunity

7 April 2005  Sudan Human Rights Violations Condemned, Political Affairs
                       Magazine

8 April 2005  Internet article from Sudan Tribune: Sudan Communist Leader
                       Re-emerges after Decade in Hiding

1 December 2005   Tenth European COI Seminar Paper on Sudan

2006 Excerpt from Annual Report of the Observatory for the Protection of
                       Human Rights

March 2006    Extract from Human Rights Watch Report

7 March 2006  Internet article in Sudan Tribune: Sudan's NDA Condemns
                       Religious Decrees Targeting Communist Party

8 March 2006  US State Department Country Report on Human Rights Practices
                       2005

23 May 2006   Amnesty International Report 2006

6 September 2006  Freedom House Report Worst of the Worst: The World's Most
                       Repressive Societies

28 September 2006 Internet article Sudan Tribune Sudan Communist Party to
                       Re-issue Al Midan Newspaper

26 June 2006  News Archive Detention and Torture of Political Activists
                       SOAT

6 September 2006  Human Rights Alert

15 December 2006  Africa Confidential

18 January 2007   Kerry Williams: Sudan Communists Discuss Prospects for
                       Peace

6 February 2007   Commentary: Sudan The Doomsday Cult

March 2007    US State Department Report Sudan

20 March 2007 Sudan Tribute Fatima Ahmed Retires from SCP in Parliament

11 March 2007 Sudan Report US Administration Extends Protected Status for
                       Sudanese

23 March 2007 Amnesty International Report 2007

2 May 2007    BBC Report: ICC Issue Darfur Arrest Warrants

10 May 2007   SOAT: Arrest of Political Activists

5 June 2007   Operational Guidance Note on Sudan

20 June 2007  Internet article Sudan Tribune Sudanese Communist Leader
                       Urges Government to Admit Darfur Crimes

22 June 2007  Africa Confidential

5 July 2007   Internet article from International Institute for Democracy
                       and Electoral Assistance

12 August 2007    Internet article from Sudan Tribune: Opposition
                       Communists Urged to Convince Rebel Leaders to Join
                       Darfur Process

24 August 2007    Africa Confidential

3 August 2004 Tony Busselen: The Crisis in Darfur, Toward a War Against
                       Sudan?

28 August 2007    Internet article Reuters Sudan Confiscates 15,000 Copies
                       of Opposition Paper

5 November 2007   News article Ben Russell Sudanese Officials Were Allowed
                       to Interview Darfuri Refugees in UK

20 December 2007  Inset article Sudan Tribune Sudan Communist Party, Ruling
                       NCP Discuss Democratic Transition

11 January 2008   Africa Confidential

31 January 2008   UN Report of Security Council on Sudan

5 February 2008   Newspaper reports collated by FCO updating reports of 10
                       January 2008 and 2 August 2007

14 February 2008  Covering letter and Parliament Report from FCO

14 February 2008  Sudan Tribune Sudan Parties Close to Election Deal

17 February 2008  Sudan Tribune: Sudan Vice-President Urges Political
                       Consensus on Major Issues

