
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


OLO and Others (para 398 - "foreign criminal") [2016] UKUT 00056 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 November 2015                       |                                    |
|                                          |....................................|
|                                          |...                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            OLO - FIRST APPELLANT
                           DBO - SECOND APPELLANT
                            BEO - THIRD APPELLANT
                           AOO - FOURTH APPELLANT
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Not represented - the first appellant in person

A person  sentenced  to  a  term  of  12  months  imprisonment  made  up  of
consecutive terms is not a 'foreign criminal'  within  the  meaning  of  the
deportation provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  is  not  therefore
subject to paragraph 398 of those Rules.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for clarity I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The  first  appellant  is  the
    mother of the remaining appellants.  She was born on 14  January  1966.
    The second appellant was born on 16 January 2005, the  third  appellant
    on 1 February 2001 and the fourth appellant on 22 October 1998.

 3.  The  appellants  come  before  the  Tribunal  because  of  the   first
    appellant's convictions for two offences in connection with  possession
    of false documents with intent.  She was convicted on 20 January  2010.
    The Court of Appeal  reduced  her  sentence  from  one  of  20  months'
    imprisonment to a total of 12 months' imprisonment, consisting  of  two
    consecutive sentences of six months' imprisonment.

 4. A decision was made to deport the first appellant,  and  the  remaining
    appellants as her family members, on 17 June 2014.   The  decision  was
    made under Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  on  the  basis
    that the first appellant's deportation is conducive to the public  good
    because of her offending.

 5. Her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A. W. Khan and  Mrs  S
    Singer, a non-legal member, on 2 December 2014.  The Tribunal concluded
    that because the respondent's decision did not consider paragraphs  398
    and 399 of the Immigration Rules, the decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the law.  The matter was 'remitted' to the Secretary of State  for
    fresh decisions to be made.

 6. An associated asylum claim by the first appellant was not pursued.

 7. The short point advanced on appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State is that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in
    concluding that paragraphs 398 and 399 applied.  It  is  asserted  that
    the first appellant falls outside the scope of those paragraphs because
    they are concerned  with  a  single  period  of  imprisonment  and  the
    appellant's sentence  consisted  of  two  consecutive  periods  of  six
    months' imprisonment.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the respondent's decision  makes  no
    reference to paragraphs 398 or 399 of the  Rules.   With  reference  to
    paragraph 398, the Tribunal  observed  that  paragraph  398(b)  applies
    where a person has been convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but  at
    least 12 months. It then referred to paragraph  399(a)  which  concerns
    genuine and subsisting relationships with a child under the age  of  18
    years who is in the UK.  No part of the respondent's decision mentioned
    those paragraphs of the Immigration Rules.

 9. From [7] of the determination it is evident that the Presenting Officer
    at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal raised  the  question  of
    the absence of mention of paragraphs  398  and  399  from  any  of  the
    decisions in respect of any of the appellants.  It was apparently  said
    on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the  decisions  were   therefore
    "unsustainable as a matter of law".  The determination records that the
    Tribunal was invited to find that the decisions were therefore  not  in
    accordance with the law and to remit the matter  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for fresh decisions to be made.  That proposition was assented to
    on behalf of the appellants.

10. In the  circumstances,  this  is  what  the  Tribunal  decided  to  do,
    concluding that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  for
    having failed to consider paragraphs 398 and  399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appeal was allowed to that limited extent only.

11. Before me Mr Avery submitted that there  was  no  requirement  for  the
    respondent to  consider  those  paragraphs  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    because they were  not  applicable,  given  that  the  first  appellant
    received consecutive sentences of six months' imprisonment,  which  did
    not bring  her  within  paragraph  398.   I  was  referred  to  section
    117D(4)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act") to  the  effect  that  a  person  sentenced  to  consecutive
    sentences did not come within the definition of a foreign criminal.

12. Mr Avery informed me  that  as  far  as  he  was  aware  there  was  no
    definition of "foreign criminal" within the  Rules.   It  was  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal may have been misled by what was  said  on
    behalf of the respondent at the hearing but he contended that there was
    nevertheless an error of law in its decision.  It was accepted that  in
    terms of 398(c) it was not suggested that the appellant's offending had
    caused serious harm or that she is a persistent offender  who  shows  a
    particular disregard for the law.  Therefore, that would not have  been
    a basis for her coming within the terms of paragraph 398.

13. Because the appellants were not legally represented before  me,  I  did
    not have the benefit of any legal  submissions  on  their  behalf.  The
    first appellant, who appeared in person, understandably did not advance
    any argument before me.

14. It is apparent that none of the decisions in relation to any  of  these
    appellants contains a consideration of paragraphs  398  and  399.   The
    Immigration Rules do not contain any definition of what is  a  "foreign
    criminal" for the purposes of those Rules.

15. The issue before me in terms of how the first appellant's  sentence  of
    imprisonment of two consecutive terms of six months is to  be  treated,
    had in fact earlier been considered in her case by the  Upper  Tribunal
    at a hearing on 27 September 2011.  A panel consisting  of  Mr  C  M  G
    Ockelton, Vice President and Senior Immigration Judge Jordan considered
    the issue with reference to the automatic deportation provisions of the
    UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act").  At [12]  of  its  decision,  the
    Tribunal stated as follows:

         "Unfortunately s 38(1)(b) uses two different ways of  referring  to
         the period in question.  "At least 12 months" is used  as  well  as
         "more than 12 months".  As we read it a person sentenced to a  term
         of imprisonment of at least 12 months is caught  by  the  automatic
         deportation  provisions,  even  if  the  sentence  is  made  up  of
         consecutive sentences, if it amounts to  exactly  12  months.   The
         reason for that is that the removal of the reference to a  sentence
         of that type by the words "does not include" applies  only  if  the
         sentence is in aggregate more than 12 months.

         ...

         17.  The position is therefore that a person sentenced to a  period
             of imprisonment of exactly 12 months is  liable  to  automatic
             deportation under s 32(2) of the 2007 Act even if the sentence
             of exactly 12 months is made up of  two  or  more  consecutive
             sentences."

16. After referring to the  Immigration  Directorates  Instructions,  which
    they concluded made the position even more difficult, they  found  that
    the appellant did come within the terms of  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions of the 2007 Act and accordingly dismissed the appeal.

17. In doing so they expressed the view that it would be  quite  wrong  for
    the appellant to be deported in accordance with  the  then  deportation
    order until the Secretary  of  State  had  given  formal  consideration
    firstly, to amending the policy so that it properly reflected the terms
    of the statute and secondly, to considering whether the statute  should
    be amended in order to reflect what appears  to  be  the  Secretary  of
    State's intention.

18. Subsequent to that decision the respondent made the decision  which  is
    the subject of the appeal with which I am concerned, notably not  being
    a decision under the automatic deportation provisions of the 2007 Act.

19. Although a panel of the  Upper  Tribunal  therefore  concluded  (in  an
    unreported decision)  that  the  appellant  was  subject  to  automatic
    deportation, and indeed that any new decision made by the Secretary  of
    State would be bound to be the same,  the  assessment  of  whether  the
    first appellant's consecutive terms of imprisonment brought her  within
    the  automatic  deportation  provisions  was  not  concerned  with  the
    Immigration Rules relevant to the appeal before me.

20. The amendments to the 2002  Act  at  s.117A-D  were  brought  about  by
    section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 ("the 2014 Act").   S.117D(4)(b)
    of the 2002 Act provides that references  to  a  person  who  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain length  of  time  do
    not include a person who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
    of that length of time only by virtue of being sentenced to consecutive
    sentences amounting in aggregate to that length of time.  It  is  clear
    therefore, that the appellant is  not  to  be  defined  as  a  "foreign
    criminal" under s.117C of the 2002 Act  because  of  s.117D(4)(b).  The
    appellant's consecutive sentences exclude her from  the  definition  of
    foreign criminal.

21.  That  is  not  to  say  however,  that  she  is  not  subject  to  the
    considerations set out at s.117B. The terms of  s.117A  make  it  clear
    that she is, notwithstanding that she  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a
    "foreign criminal".

22. There is no definition of foreign criminal in  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Paragraph 6 does define what is meant by  "a  period  of  imprisonment"
    within the Immigration Rules, stating that it has the same  meaning  as
    set out in s.38(2) of the 2007 Act.  That however, does not  assist  in
    terms of whether the appellant is a foreign criminal for  the  purposes
    of the Rules, s.38(2) referring to how suspended sentences  are  to  be
    treated and describing the types  of  detention  that  are  within  the
    definition of imprisonment.

23. The Explanatory Notes to the 2014 Act at [21] (materially)  state  with
    reference to the deportation Rules as follows:

        "The Act gives the force of primary legislation to  the  principles
        reflected in those rules by requiring a  court  or  tribunal,  when
        determining whether a decision is in breach of  Article  8  of  the
        ECHR, to have regard to the public interest considerations  as  set
        out in the Act."

24. That extract from the Explanatory Notes fortifies  the  view  that  the
    meaning of "foreign criminal" within the  Rules  should  be  considered
    consistently with the definition in the 2002 Act.

25. A398 of the Rules states as follows:

         "A398.   These Rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked."

26. There then follows the provisions of the  relevant  deportation  Rules,
    including 398 and 399, which  apply  to  foreign  criminals.   However,
    given that the first appellant  is  not  a  foreign  criminal  for  the
    purposes of the 2002 Act, and given that the  meaning  of   the  phrase
    'foreign criminal' is to be construed consistently with the  definition
    in the 2002 Act, paragraphs 398 and 399 have  no  application  to  her.
    Accordingly, the respondent was not required to consider those Rules in
    her decision.

27. It follows from that that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to conclude
    otherwise.  Its decision finding that the respondent's decision was not
    in accordance with the law is therefore in error.

28. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is appropriate
    for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    determination of the appellant's appeal with reference to Article 8  of
    the ECHR, which is the basis upon which her  appeal  is  advanced,  the
    asylum ground having been abandoned. No findings of fact were  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, and there are therefore no preserved findings.



    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  before  a   differently
    constituted panel, or by a single judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted  anonymity  in  order  to  preserve  the  anonymity  of  the   minor
appellants.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them or any member of their family.  This  direction  applies  both
to the appellants and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        14/01/16

