
OG (Student - thesis - term time employment) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00057

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 13 May 2008                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     og

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms F Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

The fact that a student  is  writing  up  a  thesis  rather  than  attending
classes at a university does not exempt him  from  the  limitation  on  paid
work of twenty hours per week during term time.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.     The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Nigeria.   He  appealed  to   an
    Immigration Judge against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  21
    February 2006, refusing to vary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    The appellant was originally granted  leave  to  study  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 2 October 2003 and this was extended on  26  July  2004  and
    again on 5 July 2005.  On 26 January 2006, he sought further  leave  to
    remain as a student in order  to  study  for  a  Master's  in  Business
    Administration with West London College.  That application was  refused
    on 21 February 2006.   The  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
    appellant had not shown that he had not engaged in  business  or  taken
    employment without the consent of the Secretary of State for Employment
    in  the  light  of  wage  slips  produced  which  showed  that  he  had
    consistently worked for over twenty hours  a  week  and  therefore  his
    application for leave to remain was refused under paragraph  62  of  HC
    395 with reference  to  paragraph  60(ii)  and  paragraph  57(v).   The
    Immigration  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.    He   sought
    reconsideration of this decision, arguing that there was an issue as to
    what was meant by "term time" since he had been  writing  up  a  thesis
    during the period in question.

2.    Reconsideration was ordered, and there was a  hearing  on  6  February
    2007 at which a Senior Immigration Judge found there to be  a  material
    error of law in the Immigration Judge's determination.   That  decision
    identified  three  potential  issues  to  be  determined,  firstly  how
    "vacation" should be construed, particularly with  reference  to  cases
    involving a thesis and student cases  generally,  whether  or  not  the
    appellant acted in breach of his  conditions  of  leave  and  what  the
    consequences were in the light of  the  actual  decision  made  by  the
    respondent.

3.    At a previous hearing, on 17 August 2007, a question arose as  to  the
    wording of the letter of 28 July 2004  which  set  out  the  conditions
    under which the appellant was permitted to work.  Neither side had that
    document and therefore  the  hearing  was  adjourned  so  it  could  be
    produced by the Home Office.

4.    The hearing before me took place  on  13  May  2008.   Ms  F  Saunders
    appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.  There was no  appearance
    by or on behalf  of  the  appellant.   Subsequent  to  the  hearing,  I
    received a letter from  the  appellant  attaching  a  letter  from  his
    solicitors who expressed concern as  to  whether  they  still  had  his
    instructions.   The  appellant  said  that   he   had   had   to   stop
    correspondence with them because of the size of their  fees.   He  said
    that he would not be present at the hearing on 13 May  as  it  was  not
    possible for him to make arrangements to do so.  He  did  not  seek  an
    adjournment.  In his absence, and the absence of  his  representatives,
    and noting that notice of hearing had been sent to both by first  class
    post on 3 April 2008, I concluded that it was proper to  go  ahead  and
    hear the appeal.

5.    Ms Saunders had put in a skeleton argument  and  also  attached  IDIs.
    In essence, she argued that the fact that the appellant was writing  up
    a thesis did not preclude him from the obligation to work for  no  more
    than twenty hours during term time.  A copy of the letter  of  28  July
    2004 had been found and faxed through to the Tribunal.   This  made  it
    clear that the appellant could work full-time during  vacation  periods
    but said that he must not work more than twenty hours per  week  during
    term time.  Whether a person was studying by attending classes during a
    course or writing a thesis or dissertation, the obligation remained the
    same.  The refusal in this case was made with  reference  to  paragraph
    57(v) to which the letter of 28 July 2004 referred.

6.     As  regards  the  argument  that  the  appellant's  case  came  under
    paragraph 69G, the appellant had not applied  for  leave  to  enter  to
    write up a thesis, but in any event this involved the need to meet  the
    requirements of, among other provisions, paragraph 57(v), in any event,
    and, therefore, even if it had been applicable, it would have  made  no
    difference.

7.    I think that there is force in Ms Saunders' submissions.  I note  from
    the determination of the Senior Immigration Judge at the hearing  on  6
    February 2007 that it seemed to  be  common  ground  that,  during  the
    period of 5 July 2005 to 31 January 2006, the appellant was working  in
    excess of the permitted twenty hours.  The essence of the argument  and
    his challenge to the Immigration  Judge's  determination  is  that  the
    period in question was not "term  time"  and,  therefore,  he  was  not
    restricted.  Reference was made in the grounds  to  a  letter  from  Ms
    Linda Nicolaides concerning the issue of term time.  It is said in that
    letter that, due to the fact that the appellant  only  had  to  do  his
    thesis, there was no term time schedule but he had to  brief  and  give
    his supervisor reports of his progress on the work and was  given  till
    the 31 January 2006 to resubmit his thesis.  That does not to  my  mind
    quite equate with what it is said to say in the  grounds:  that  it  is
    clearly stated that the period of 8 July 2005 to 30  January  2006  was
    not term time for the purposes of the appellant's  academic  programme.
    Rather, as it states, there was no term time schedule.

8.    It is, in my view,  important  to  consider  the  purpose  behind  the
    Immigration Rules in this regard.  Leave to enter the United Kingdom or
    to remain in the United Kingdom for the purpose of study is not  to  be
    equated with a work permit.  When a person comes to the United  Kingdom
    to study, it is a necessary concomitant of  that  permission  that  the
    essential purpose of their stay is to study.   It  is  clear,  and  the
    wording of the letter of 28 July 2004 appears to be in  standard  form,
    that a student in the United Kingdom,  having  been  granted  leave  to
    enter for the purpose of study, is permitted to work  full-time  during
    vacation periods but is allowed to work no more than twenty  hours  per
    week during term time.  That is for  the  obvious  reason  that  it  is
    expected that he will spend significant amounts of his time in study.

9.    I do not think that it can properly be  said  that  a  person  in  the
    appellant's position who is writing up a  thesis  (assuming  they  have
    leave to do so, which in any event does not appear to be  the  position
    in this case) is relieved of the obligation set out in the letter of 28
    July 2004.  It remains the case that they are a student at an  academic
    institution which has term times and vacation periods.  The expectation
    is that  such  a  person,  whether  they  are  attending  lectures  and
    tutorials, supervisions or writing up a thesis, will be studying for  a
    significant amount of time during the period for which they  have  been
    given permission to stay.   The  University  of  Greenwich,  which  the
    appellant was attending at that time,  clearly  has  term  periods  and
    vacation periods, like any other university.   It  is  clear  that  the
    appellant did work in excess of the permitted period for a  significant
    amount of time during the period in question.  I consider that it makes
    no difference that he was writing up a thesis at that time rather  than
    attending classes at the university.  The obligation  to  work  for  no
    more than twenty hours per week during the term time of that university
    was an obligation that extended to him even given  the  nature  of  the
    academic work he was doing at that time.  Accordingly, I conclude  that
    the Secretary of State was right to  assess  the  appellant  as  having
    breached the requirements  of  paragraph  57(v)  of  HC  395,  and  the
    decision dismissing his appeal is maintained.

Signed

Senior Immigration Judge Allen
