



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application  of  Mahmood)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (effective service - 2000 Order) IJR [2016] UKUT 00057 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |                              |
|On 5 November 2015                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

              THE QUEEN (on the application of Arslan mahmood)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr Z Jafferji and Mr N Ahmed instructed by DV
Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr S Skinner, instructed by the Government
Legal Department

   1) Notice of a decision (not falling  within  the  Immigration  (Notices)
      Regulations 2003) is  "given"  for  the  purposes  of  s.4(1)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 when it is (a) "sent" in accordance with Art  8ZA
      of the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and  Remain)  Order  2000  (SI
      2000/1161) as inserted by the Immigration (Leave to Enter and  Remain)
      Amendment Order 2013 (SI 2013/1749) with effect from 12 July 2013  and
      (b) according to the method used, is  delivered  to  the  individual's
      postal or e-mail address according to that method.
   2) Where Art 8ZB applies, both delivery and  the  date  of  delivery  are
      rebuttably presumed.
   3) There is no requirement that the individual has  actual  knowledge  of
      the notice or its contents.
   4) Consequently, subject to rebuttal, a notice of a curtailment  decision
      attached to an e-mail sent to an individual's e-mail address  will  be
      "given" on the day it is sent and is delivered to that individual's e-
      mail address.

                                  JUDGMENT

JUDGE GRUBB:

Introduction

 1. The applicant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  12  November
    1989.  He challenges the Secretary of State's decision of 4 April  2014
    refusing him further leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  (Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395 as amended).

 2. In refusing the application, the Secretary of State concluded that  the
    applicant was an overstayer for a period of more than 28  days  and  so
    could not meet the requirement in E-LTRP.2.2. of Appendix FM.

 3. The Secretary of State concluded that the applicant's leave to enter as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student  granted  until  25  August  2014  had  been
    curtailed by a decision dated 1 October 2013 so  as  to  expire  on  30
    November 2013.  That decision was sent as an attachment  to  an  e-mail
    sent to the applicant's e-mail address given on  his  visa  application
    form.

 4. The basis of that curtailment was that the licence of  the  applicant's
    sponsor institution  had  been  revoked  on  23  July  2013  such  that
    curtailment was justified under para 323A(b)(i) of the Rules.

The Claim

 5. The applicant argues that his leave was not lawfully curtailed  by  the
    decision dated 1  October  2013.   Consequently,  he  made  an  in-time
    application for further leave as a spouse on 11 February 2014 and so at
    the date of decision he had leave and so met the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, in particular E-LTRP.2.2.(b) of Appendix FM.

 6. The applicant's grounds argue that the respondent has  failed  to  give
    notice of the curtailment decision in accordance with Articles 8ZA  and
    8ZB of the Immigration (Leave to  Enter  and  Remain)  Order  2000  (SI
    2000/1161) of ("the 2000 Order") as inserted by the Immigration  (Leave
    to Enter and Remain) Amendment Order 2013 (SI  2013/1749)  with  effect
    from 12 July 2013.

 7. In the amended grounds the applicant relies on essentially two grounds:



        1) The respondent has failed to prove in  accordance  with  Article
           8ZA(2)(d) of the 2000 Order that  the  curtailment  notice  was:
           "sent  electronically  to  an  e-mail   address   provided   for
           correspondence    by    the    person    or     the     person's
           representative;...";

        2) The applicant has, on the evidence, rebutted the presumption  in
           Article 8ZB(1)(b) of the 2000 Order that notice has  been  given
           to him on the day that the e-mail was sent.

 8. In addition, the applicant argues that the respondent must prove  as  a
    'precedent fact' that his leave was  lawfully  curtailed.   It  is  not
    enough that the decision survives challenge on  public  law  Wednesbury
    principles, i.e. a rationality challenge.  Following the hearing,  both
    counsel submitted additional skeleton arguments on this issue.

The Background Facts

 9. The applicant entered the United Kingdom  on  1  May  2013  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student and leave valid until 25 August
    2014.

10. On 23 July 2013, the respondent revoked the Tier 4 Sponsor  Licence  of
    Camelot College at which the applicant was a student.  The respondent's
    General Cases Information Database ("GCID") Case Record  Sheet  for  14
    August 2013 in relation to the  applicant  records,  having  noted  the
    revocation of the college's licence:

           "please contact Tier 4 Curtailment  Team  if  a  UK  address  is
           obtained."

11. Then on 1 October 2013, the GCID Record (at page  221  of  the  bundle)
    contains the  following  entry  relating  to  the  curtailment  of  the
    applicant's leave:

           "There is no evidence that the migrant has been complicit in any
           non-compliance of the sponsor, so leave is to be  varied  to  60
           days, in accordance with paragraph 527 of  the  Tier  4  Sponsor
           guidance.  Therefore, leave falls to be curtailed with No  Right
           of Appeal under paragraph 323A(b) of HC395 (as amended) so as to
           expire on 31/11/2013.


           No UK address available for the  migrant,  so  unable  to  serve
           decision to a postal address.


           Curtailment notice therefore to be served via e-mail.


           ICD.3971 created on doc gen.  Curtailment  notice  converted  to
           PDF  format  and  e-mailed  to  the  migrant  from  Home  Office
           Curtailments mailbox to  "arslanmehmood321@gmail.com".


    The GCID record sheet (page 219 of the bundle) includes the following:


           "Case Type: Curtailment Consideration - T4 General Student


           Case Outcome: Curtail - No R.O.A.


           Outcome Date: 01-Oct-2013
           ....


           Expiry Date: 30-Nov-2013"




    The decision is stated to have been made by "[AC]".   The  GCID  record
    then continues (page 220 of the bundle) :


           "Despatch Details:


           Despatch Method: By E-mail        Despatched By User[AC]


           Despatch Address: Applicant       Despatched By Unit: MAN Team 3
           - Tier 4
                                        Curtailment


           Outgoing Delivery Number:          Despatch  Date/Time:  01-Oct-
           2013 09:22"




12. The curtailment decision is at pages 221-212  of  the  bundle.   It  is
    headed: "Served Via E-mail" and is signed by  "AC"  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.

13. The applicant claims never to have received the  e-mail  of  1  October
    2013 attaching the  curtailment  decision  to  which  the  GCID  Record
    refers. He says he has no access to the e-mail account which was opened
    and controlled by the agent.

14. On 14 November 2013, the  applicant  wrote  to  the  respondent  making
    enquiries about his status.  The respondent says that  letter  was  not
    received.  It was sent again on 8 January 2014 and was received but  no
    reply was made and the GCID records "letter already sent".

15. On 11 February 2014, the applicant made  the  application  for  further
    leave to remain on the basis of his marriage to a  person  present  and
    settled in the UK.  That application was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 4 April 2014.  The notice of that decision indicated that  the
    decision did not attract  a  right  of  appeal.   It  is  the  decision
    challenged in these proceedings.

16. On 15 May 2014, the applicant's solicitors wrote to  the  Secretary  of
    State in response to the refusal decision of 4 April 2014 pointing  out
    that the applicant had never been served with any curtailment  decision
    and, in the absence of proof of service, the refusal decision  was  not
    lawful.

17. On 3 August 2014, the Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  the  applicant's
    solicitors refusing to reconsider the refusal decision.

18. On 12  August  2014,  the  applicant's  solicitors  sent  a  pre-action
    protocol letter to the respondent.

19. On 26 August 2014, the Secretary of State sent a response to  the  pre-
    action protocol letter.

20.  Thereafter,  on  15  October  2014,  these  proceedings   were   filed
    challenging the respondent's decision of 4 April 2014.

The Legal Framework

21. The central issue in this case is whether the notice of the curtailment
    decision dated 1 October 2013 was  properly  given  to  the  applicant.



22. The relevant legal provisions concerned with the giving of notice of an
    immigration decision are as follows.

23. Section 4(1) of the Immigration Act  1971  ("the  1971  Act")  requires
    notice in writing to be given of a decision,  inter  alia,  to  vary  a
    person's leave under section 3(3)(a)  of  the  1971  Act.   So  far  as
    relevant  s.4(1) provides as follows:

           "The power under this act to give or refuse leave to  enter  the
           United Kingdom shall be exercised by immigration  officers,  and
           the power to give leave to remain in the United Kingdom,  or  to
           vary  any  leave  under  section  3(3)(a)  (whether  as  regards
           duration or conditions), shall be exercised by the Secretary  of
           State; and, unless otherwise allowed by or under this act, those
           powers shall be exercised by notice  in  writing  given  to  the
           persons affected, except that the powers under  section  3(3)(a)
           may be exercised generally in respect of any class of persons by
           order made by statutory instrument."


24. Section 3(3) of the 1971 Act provides power  to  vary  an  individual's
    limited leave to enter or remain  by,  inter  alia,  "restricting...the
    limitation of its duration..."  That  power,  therefore,  includes  the
    power to curtail an individual's leave.

25. Section 4(1) provides that "notice in writing" of such  a  decision  to
    curtail an individual's leave shall be "given" to the person affected.

26. Section 3A of the 1971 Act empowers the Secretary of State by order  to
    make provision with respect  to  varying  leave  to  enter  in  the  UK
    (s.3A(1)) and, in particular, to provide for the "form  or  manner"  in
    which leave may be varied (s.3A(2)(a)).  The latter includes the  "form
    or manner" in which notice of a decision may be given.  Similar  powers
    can be found in s.3B of the 1971 Act in respect  of  varying  leave  to
    remain.

27. In relation to decisions appealable under the Nationality,  Immigration
    & Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act  2002")  the  relevant  provisions  are
    contained within the Immigration (Notice) Regulations 2003 (SI 2003/658
    as amended). Those regulations,  however,  have  no  application  to  a
    decision which is not appealable under the NIA Act 2002.  A decision to
    curtail an individual's leave to a point in time in the future, and  so
    not with immediate effect, is not an appealable decision under  s.82(2)
    the NIA Act 2002 (see s.82(2)(e) - and "immigration decision includes a
    "variation...[of leave]...if when the variation takes effect the person
    has no leave to enter or remain).  Consequently, the 2003 Order has  no
    application to the giving of notice of a curtailment decision  such  as
    in this  case  where  the  individual's  leave  is  shortened  but  not
    immediately ended.

28. Until 2013, there were no specific regulations dealing with  notice  in
    respect of a non-appealable immigration  decision.   Nevertheless,  the
    House of Lords has  recognised in R (Anufrijeva) v SSHD [2003] UKHL  36
    that, based upon the constitutional principle requiring the rule of law
    to be observed, an administrative  decision  "takes  effect  only  upon
    communication" (per Lord Steyn at [30]). In that case, in determining a
    person's entitlement to income support as an asylum-seeker, a  decision
    to refuse a person's asylum claim was not  determined  (and  effective)
    where the decision has been simply noted on the  internal  departmental
    record as refused without communication to the individual.

29. At [28], Lord Steyn identified the "constitutional principle  requiring
    the  rule  of  law  to  be  observed."   Applying  that  principle,  he
    continued:

           "That principle too requires that a  constitutional  state  must
           accord to individuals the right to know  of  a  decision  before
           their rights can be adversely affected. The antithesis of such a
           state was described by  Kafka:  a  state  where  the  rights  of
           individuals are overridden by hole in the  corner  decisions  or
           knocks on doors in the early hours. That is not  our  system.  I
           accept, of  course,  that  there  must  be  exceptions  to  this
           approach, notably in the criminal field, e.g. arrests and search
           warrants,  where  notification  is  not  possible.  But  it   is
           difficult to visualise a  rational  argument  which  could  even
           arguably justify putting the present  case  in  the  exceptional
           category."








30. Lord Steyn concluded  (at [30]) :

           "Until the decision in Salem [R v SSHD ex parte Salem [1999]  QB
           805]  it  had  never  been  suggested  that  an   uncommunicated
           administrative  decision  can  bind  an  individual.  It  is  an
           astonishingly unjust proposition. In our system of law  surprise
           is regarded as the enemy of justice.  Fairness  is  the  guiding
           principle of our public law....Where decisions are published  or
           notified to those concerned accountability of public authorities
           is achieved. Elementary fairness therefore supports a  principle
           that a decision takes effect only upon communication."

31. Although Anufrijeva arose in  the  context  of  entitlement  to  income
    support, it nevertheless provides the applicable legal approach, absent
    any equivalent to the 2003 Regulations, in  respect  of  non-appealable
    decisions: to have legal effect, notice of a  decision  must  be  given
    (see, e.g. R (Mehmood and Ali) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 744 at  [43]  per
    Beatson LJ).

32. In Syed (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT  00144  (IAC),  the
    Upper Tribunal concluded, applying Anufrijeva,  that  a  non-appealable
    curtailment decision did not take affect until it was "communicated  to
    the person concerned" (see [28]).  In Syed, the decision had been  sent
    through the post by recorded delivery but had been returned by the post
    office undelivered.  The respondent thereafter served it "on file". The
    Upper Tribunal concluded that none of the methods of giving notice  set
    out in the 2003 Regulation applied including service,  presumptions  of
    deemed service and, as a last resort, service "on file".   Further,  as
    s.4(1) of the 1971 Act did not, itself, authorise service by post,  the
    deemed service provisions in s.7 of the Interpretation  Act  1978  also
    did not apply.

33. At [28], the Upper Tribunal said this:

           "In the absence of an order made by statutory  instrument  under
           section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 dealing with the giving
           of notice of variation of leave  where  there  is  no  right  of
           appeal, the Secretary of State has to  be  able  to  prove  that
           notice of a decision  varying  leave  to  remain  under  section
           3(3)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 where there is no  right  of
           appeal was communicated to the person concerned  for  it  to  be
           effective.  Where  there  is  no  "immigration   decision"   the
           Immigration   (Notices)   Regulations   2003   do   not   apply.
           Communication would be effective if made to a person  authorised
           to receive it on that person's  behalf,  see  Hosier  v  Goodall
           [1962] 1 All E.R. 30, but the Secretary  of  State  cannot  rely
           upon deemed postal service."

34. In the result, the Upper Tribunal, perhaps not surprisingly,  concluded
    that notice of the curtailment decision had not  been  "given"  as  the
    letter had clearly not been served and "communicated to the  appellant"
    (see [16]).

35. Subsequent to Syed, the 2000 Order was amended with effect from 12 July
    2013 to contain provisions  dealing  with  the  giving  of  notice  and
    presumptions in  respect  of  receipt  including  in  respect  of  non-
    appealable immigration decisions such as the  curtailment  decision  in
    this case.  The provisions are in Articles 8ZA  and  8ZB  of  the  2000
    Order as amended.

36. Article 8ZA sets out the methods and means by which a notice in writing
    may be "given":

           "Grant, refusal or variation of leave by notice in writing


           (1) A notice in writing -


              a) giving leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;


              b) refusing leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom:


              c) refusing to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the
                 United Kingdom: or


              d) varying a person's leave to enter or remain in  the  United
                 Kingdom,


           may be given to the person affected as required by section  4(1)
           of the Act as follows:


           (2) The notice may be -


              a) given by hand;


              b) sent by fax;


              c) sent by postal service to a  postal  address  provided  for
                 correspondence   by   the   person    or    the    person's
                 representative;


              d) sent electronically  to  an  e-mail  address  provided  for
                 correspondence   by   the   person    or    the    person's
                 representative;


              e) sent by document exchange to a document exchange number  or
                 address; or


              f) sent by courier.


           (3) Where no postal or e-mail  address  for  correspondence  has
           been provided, the notice may be sent -


             a) by postal service to -


               i) the last-known or usual place of abode, place of study or
                  place of business of the person; or


                (ii) the last-known or  usual  place  of  business  of  the
                person's representative; or


             b) electronically to -


                (i) the last-known e-mail address for the person (including
                at the person's last-known  place  of  study  or  place  of
                business); or


                (ii)  the  last-known  e-mail  address  of   the   person's
                representative.


           (4) Where attempts to give notice in accordance with  paragraphs
           (2) and (3) are not possible or have failed, when the  decision-
           maker records the reasons for this and places the notice on file
           the notice shall be deemed to have been given.


           (5) Where a notice is deemed to have been  given  in  accordance
           with paragraph (4) and then subsequently the person is  located,
           the person shall as soon as is practicable be given  a  copy  of
           the notice and details of when and how it was given.


           (6) A notice given under this article may,  in  the  case  of  a
           person who in under  18  years  of  age  and  does  not  have  a
           representative, be given to  the  parent,  guardian  or  another
           adult who for  the  time  being  takes  responsibility  for  the
           child."

37. As will be seen, Art 8ZA(2) provides a number of  methods  by  which  a
    notice "may be given to the person affected" as required by  s.4(1)  of
    the 1971 Act.  Notice may be given by hand; sent by fax; sent  by  post
    to the address provided by the individual or  his  representatives  for
    correspondence or electronically by e-mail to the e-mail address  given
    "for correspondence" by the individual  or  his  representatives.   Art
    8ZA(3) provides that where no postal or e-mail  correspondence  address
    is given, the notice may be sent by post or electronically to a  number
    of  other  possible  addresses  relating  to  the  applicant   or   his
    representatives such as the last known place of abode or  study  or  e-
    mail address.  Finally, by virtue of Art 8ZA(4) where attempts to  give
    notice by these methods have failed  or  are  not  possible,  then  the
    decision may be served "on file" and is  deemed  to  have  been  given.
    Although in this latter situation, where  the  person  is  subsequently
    located he must be given a copy of the notice as soon as is practicable
    (Art 8ZA(5)).

38. Article 8ZB provides for certain rebuttal presumptions of  when  notice
    has "been given" when a notice is sent in accordance with Art 8ZA.   So
    far as relevant, it is in the following terms:

           "Presumptions about receipt of notice


           (1) Where a notice is sent in accordance with  article  8ZA,  it
           shall be deemed to have  been  given  to  the  person  affected,
           unless the contrary is proved -


                 (a) where the notice is sent by postal service -


                       (i) on the second day after it  was  sent  by  postal
                       service in which delivery or receipt is  recorded  if
                       sent to a place within the United Kingdom;


                       (ii) on the 28th day after it was posted if sent to a
                       place outside the United Kingdom;


                 (b) where the notice  is  sent  by  fax,  e-mail,  document
                 exchange or courier, on the day it was sent....."

39. Article 8ZB creates a  presumption  that  a  notice  sent  by  recorded
    delivery (but not ordinary post) to a place in the UK is "given" to  an
    individual two days after it is sent.  Likewise, a notice  sent  by  e-
    mail is "given" on the day it is sent.

Discussion

    1. The "Sent" Point: Art 8ZA

40. The applicant's first ground of challenge is that  the  respondent  has
    not established that the curtailment notice was  "sent"  in  accordance
    with Art 8ZA of the 2000 Order.

41. Mr Jafferji, who represented the applicant, submitted that  the  burden
    of proving that the curtailment notice had been sent electronically  to
    the applicant's e-mail address provided for correspondence was upon the
    Secretary of State.  However,  he  submitted  that  GCID  entries  were
    insufficient for the respondent to discharge that burden of proof.   He
    relied upon a passage in the decision of R (Domi) v  SSHD  [2008]  EWHC
    571 (Admin) at [15] where, he submitted, the type of evidence  required
    for the Secretary of State to discharge her burden of proof, albeit  in
    the context of postal service, was set out.   He  submitted  that  that
    included a witness statement from the responsible UKVI Officer that  no
    such statement was included in the evidence before  the  Tribunal.   He
    submitted that the Secretary of State had not established that  the  e-
    mail was sent, that it was sent to the applicant's  e-mail  address  or
    that the curtailment notice was attached  to  it.   He  submitted  that
    without evidence on those issues the Tribunal could  not  be  satisfied
    that the notice was sent as required by Article 8ZA(2)(d) of  the  2000
    Order.

42. I do not accept Mr Jafferji's submissions.  The GCID record is,  in  my
    judgment, persuasive and sound evidence to conclude that notice of  the
    curtailment decision was sent as an attachment to an e-mail sent to the
    applicant's e-mail address on 1 October 2013.  The  GCID  record  shows
    that "AC" e-mailed the notice at 9.22 on 1 October  2013.   That  is  a
    very precise entry.  The curtailment notice itself records it was  sent
    "via e-mail" and is also signed by "AC".  Although I was told that  the
    GCID record is updated contemporaneously and cannot be  retrospectively
    amended,  I  acknowledge  that  is  not  evidence   (see   "Footnote").
    Nevertheless, nothing before me leads me  to  conclude  that  the  GCID
    record is not a reliable record.  Mr Jafferji referred me to  what  was
    said in Domi at [15] where the evidence was somewhat fuller,  including
    a witness statement from the responsible officer.  The  Judge  in  Domi
    was not, in my judgment, seeking  to  lay  down  any  'hard  and  fast'
    evidential rule and to doubt the  self-evident  proposition  that  each
    case must necessarily turn on the specific evidence  available.  It  is
    unlikely, in any event, that AC would have any specific recollection of
    events and so his evidence could only in  reality  be  based  upon  his
    reading of the GCID record itself.  There is,  in  truth,  no  contrary
    evidence to that contained in  the  GCID  record.   The  applicant,  of
    course, claims no knowledge of whether the e-mail is or is not held  in
    the relevant e-mail account.  I see no conceivable basis to  doubt  the
    GCID record.

43. For these reasons, the respondent has, in my judgment,  established  on
    the evidence that the curtailment notice  was  sent.   The  applicant's
    claim fails on this basis whether  the  standard  of  review  is  on  a
    'precedent fact' or Wednesbury basis.

44. Before turning to the applicant's second challenge, there is one  final
    matter I should refer to.  Mr Jafferji did not  maintain  in  his  oral
    submissions a point raised in the grounds that the e-mail (even  if  it
    had been sent to the applicant) was  not  sent  to  an  e-mail  address
    provided "for correspondence" by the applicant or  his  representatives
    as required by Art 8ZA(2)(d).  Mr Jafferji was right, in my  view,  not
    to  pursue  this  point.   The   e-mail   clearly   was   sent   to   a
    "correspondence" address.  The  e-mail  address  was  provided  in  the
    applicant's visa application of 15 April 2013 either by himself or  his
    representatives - the terms of the 2000 Order make plain  either  would
    suffice - under the heading "Visa Applicant Contact Details" (see  page
    213 of the bundle).  What else is this other  than  an  e-mail  address
    provided for correspondence? It was kept as  part  of  the  applicant's
    records and, in the  absence  of  notification  of  change  which  only
    occurred after the curtailment decision was sent,  it  was  the  e-mail
    address provided for correspondence.

    2. The "Given" Point: Art 8ZB

45. Secondly, Mr Jafferji submitted that, even if it was  established  that
    the e-mail had been sent, it nevertheless had not been received by  the
    applicant and, as a matter of law, that was required before it could be
    said notice was "given".  He pointed out that the applicant's  evidence
    was that, although he had included  the  e-mail  address  in  his  visa
    application, this was an address provided by the agent and he had never
    had the password to it and could not access this  e-mail  address.   Mr
    Jafferji submitted that, applying Article  8ZB(1),  the  applicant  had
    rebutted the presumption that notice had been given by e-mail.

46. In relation to the issue of what constituted notice being  "given",  Mr
    Jafferji submitted that it was insufficient that, for example, a letter
    was received at a postal address unless the individual had the  letter,
    effectively in his hands.  Further, it was insufficient that an  e-mail
    had arrived in an individual's inbox.  Notice by e-mail would  only  be
    given if the individual had both received the e-mail in his  inbox  and
    had also read it.  Mr Jafferji relied upon the fundamental principle in
    Anufrijeva  that  a  notice  of  a  decision  was  ineffective   unless
    communicated to the individual.   Communication  meant,  he  submitted,
    that the decision notice must have been received by the individual.  He
    placed reliance for that proposition on a number  of  cases,  including
    Syed, Saleem v SSHD  (1999/1119/C),  especially  at  page  12  and  the
    unreported decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ravindranath &  Jigu  (UTJ
    Deans) (29 May 2015) (Appeal No. IA/29685/2014) at [18].

47. The requirement in s.4(1) of the 1971 Act means that the applicant must
    have been "given" notice of the curtailment decision of 1 October  2013
    for it to take effect.  Art 8ZA of the 2000  Order  sets  out,  as  has
    already been seen, the methods by which notice  "may  be  given".   For
    example, the notice may be  sent  by  post  to  the  individual  postal
    address for correspondence or  electronically  to  his  e-mail  address
    provided for correspondence.  However, simply because a notice has been
    sent does not, in my judgment, mean that  the  notice  has  necessarily
    been "given".  That, in my judgment, follows for at least two reasons.

48. First, if all the respondent had to do was to send a  notice  in  order
    for it to be "given" that would, in my judgment, offend the fundamental
    constitutional principle recognised by the House of Lords in Anufrijeva
    that a decision must be "communicated" to an individual in order for it
    to be effective.

49. Secondly, in any event, the legislative scheme particularly in Arts 8ZA
    and 8ZB of the 2000 Order is, in my judgment, indicative that  more  is
    required in order for a notice to be "given" than it  is  merely  sent.
    Take, for example, the service "to file" provision in Art 8ZA(4) of the
    2000 Order.  That provision contemplates, inter alia, situations  where
    attempts to "give notice" in accordance with Art 8ZA(2)  and  (3)  have
    failed.  That is not concerned with a  failure  to  "send"  the  notice
    whether by post or electronically or otherwise as permitted but  rather
    because, having been sent, it cannot be said that it has  been  "given"
    because, for example, it has been returned undelivered.   That,  in  my
    judgment, points strongly towards a conclusion that notice, in order to
    be "given" has to be  both  sent  and  in  some  sense  "delivered"  or
    "received" by the method lawfully chosen to send it.

50. Article 8ZB itself clearly contemplates that, in order for a notice  to
    be "given", more than it  being  sent  is  required.   The  presumption
    provisions in Art 8ZB would, in truth,  be  irrelevant  unless  it  was
    important in order to determine whether a notice had been "given"  both
    that it had been sent and that it had been "delivered".  There would be
    no point in a deeming provision that a notice sent by recorded delivery
    is deemed to have been "given" on the second  day  after  it  was  sent
    unless proof of receipt is part and parcel  of  establishing  that  the
    notice had been "given".  Likewise, in relation to a notice sent by  e-
    mail the presumption that it was "given" on the day it was  sent  would
    be equally irrelevant.

51. Although Mr Skinner, on behalf of the respondent,  initially  submitted
    that Art 8ZB(1) only permitted an individual to rebut  the  presumption
    of when a notice was received, as I understood his submissions as  they
    developed, he accepted that implicit within that was the potential  for
    an individual not only to rebut the date on which the notice is  deemed
    to be received but whether it was received at all.  That position seems
    to me to  be  entirely  correct.   It  would  be  incongruous  that  an
    individual was entitled  to  show  that  the  postal  service,  perhaps
    through industrial action or otherwise,  did  not  deliver  the  notice
    within two days of it being sent but  could  not,  if  the  appropriate
    evidence were available, demonstrate that  the  notice  had  never,  in
    fact, been delivered to him.  It seems to me that Art 8ZB(1) permits an
    individual, by evidence, to rebut both the time and fact of  "delivery"
    or "receipt" of a notice.

52. That, however, does not resolve the issue - which lies at the heart  of
    the respective submissions of the parties - as to when it is proper  to
    say that a notice has been "given" because - to use my words -  it  has
    been "delivered" or "received".  Mr Jafferji relied upon the  principle
    and statements made in Anufrijeva that  it  was  only  given  when  the
    notice was  "communicated"  to  the  individual.   Mr  Jafferji,  as  I
    understood his submission, accepted that a notice sent by post would be
    "communicated" if the letter was received  and  in  the  hands  of  the
    individual.  More importantly  for  the  purposes  of  this  case,  his
    submission was that notice  by  e-mail  would  only  be  given  if  the
    individual had both received it in the sense of it being in  his  inbox
    and had also read it.

53. Mr Skinner submitted that it was sufficient that the  notice  had  been
    delivered by post to the relevant address or the e-mail had arrived  in
    the individual's inbox.  In those circumstances, Mr  Skinner  submitted
    the individual would have an "opportunity to know that a  decision  has
    been made in respect of him and to deal with it".

54. In my judgment, Mr Skinner's submissions are to be preferred  to  those
    of Mr Jafferji.

55. First, the underlying requirement that notice be "given" must  be  seen
    in the context in which Parliament in  the  2000  Order  has  permitted
    notice to be "given".   The  true  gravamen  of  the  term  "given"  is
    properly seen as being the  consequence  flowing  from  the  method  of
    sending a notice which is permitted by the legislation.

56. The Order contemplates, for example, notice being given when it is sent
    to an individual by post or  electronically  by  e-mail.   The  natural
    consequence of that is, in my judgment, that  notice  will  be  "given"
    when the relevant method results in the notice being delivered.  In the
    case of the ordinary post that would be when  the  postman  leaves  the
    letter containing the notice at the relevant  address  permitted  under
    the Order.  When the notice is sent by recorded delivery,  notice  will
    have been "given" when the relevant letter is signed for in  accordance
    with the recorded delivery procedure and left at the  relevant  address
    permitted by the 2000 Order.

57. In relation to a notice sent  by  e-mail,  the  equivalent  is,  in  my
    judgment, when the relevant e-mail is delivered in the sense of held in
    the individual's e-mail system, in the usual case within his inbox.

58. Whilst Mr Jafferji drew no distinction between  postal  and  electronic
    giving of notices, at least in the sense that an individual should  not
    be required to have read either, his acceptance that a person  who  had
    "in his hands" a letter containing a notice could properly be  said  to
    have been "given" notice despite ignorance of its contents would, in my
    view, strongly suggest (contrary to Mr Jafferji's actual position) that
    an e-mail received in an inbox but unread  would  equally  satisfy  the
    requirement that notice had been "given."  In my judgment, being  given
    notice is not the same as the individual having actual knowledge of the
    notice or of its contents.

59. Secondly, this view is  entirely  consistent  with  the  case  law,  in
    particular Anufrijeva.  In that case, Lord Steyn [at  29]  referred  to
    the European law that it was a:

           "fundamental principle in the Community Legal Order ...  that  a
           matter adopted by the public authorities shall not be applicable
           to those concerned before they  have  the  opportunity  to  make
           themselves acquainted with it."  (my emphasis)

60. To like effect, Lord Millett at [43] stated that:

           "the determination must have been  made  and  appropriate  steps
           must have been taken to communicate it to the Claimant before it
           can lawfully be recorded so as  to  have  the  effect  contended
           for."

61. In other words, actual knowledge by the individual is not required; the
    individual must have an "opportunity" to know that a decision has  been
    made in relation to them.  Thus, in Anufrijeva, the Home Office had not
    provided the individual with an opportunity to know that a decision had
    been made against him in respect of his refugee status by  placing  the
    notice "on file".  In Syed, the notice sent by  recorded  delivery  was
    returned undelivered.  Consistently with what I have concluded  is  now
    the true position under the 2000 Order, there it could not be said that
    notice had been "given."  Nothing in Anufrijeva or Syed  requires  that
    s.4(1) of the 1971 Act and the  2000  Order  should  be  understood  as
    requiring actual knowledge that a decision has been made before it  can
    be said that notice of that decision has been "given" to an individual.



62. Thirdly, Mr Jafferji also relied upon the Court of Appeal's decision in
    Saleem v SSHD (13 June  2000)  (Tab  7  of  the  authorities'  bundle).
    There, the Court of Appeal held to be unlawful the (then) relevant rule
    dealing with service of an adjudicator's determination  which  provided
    for no possibility of proving  that  the  determination  had  not  been
    received (which was irrebuttably presumed on the second  day  after  it
    was sent) and providing for no discretion  to  extend  time  (within  a
    tight time limit) for bringing a further appeal against  the  decision.
    In my judgment, Mr  Jafferji  can  obtain  no  real  traction  for  his
    arguments  from  Saleem.   The  Court  was  not  concerned   with   the
    requirement at issue in this case that notice be "given"  or  with  the
    effect of Arts 8ZA and 8ZB of the 2000 Order.  It was  not,  therefore,
    concerned with the central issue I have to decide.  Further, the  Court
    was not concerned with the nuanced arguments in this case reflected  in
    the differences between the parties' contentions.  The court  was  more
    baldly concerned  with  whether  it  was  unlawful  not  to  permit  an
    individual to show the notice had not reached him at his postal address
    later than presumed because, for example, of a postal strike or had not
    reached his address at all because it had been lost (see, e.g.  p12  of
    the transcript).  It is perhaps worth noting that  the  court  confined
    itself to the context of notice of determinations and further  appeals,
    excluding consideration of the effect in  respect  of  other  "notices"
    (see Roch LJ at p9 with whom Mummery LJ agreed; and Hale LJ at p16).

63. On the other hand, the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  Ravindranath  and
    Jiju (Tab 4 of the  authorities'  bundle)  is,  at  first  blush,  more
    promising for Mr Jafferji's contentions.   There,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    accepted that the presumption that notice had been "given" was rebutted
    under Art 8ZB where it was shown that  the  individual  did  not  "know
    about the notice of curtailment of his leave" which had  been  sent  to
    the address of his employer who had gone out of business (see [18]).

64. I accept that the Upper Tribunal's decision lends some  support  to  Mr
    Jafferji's contentions as to the proper application of Art 8ZA and 8ZB.
     However, there are difficulties with the decision.  It is not entirely
    clear to me how the appellant's employer's address even fell within the
    permissible ones in Art 8ZA(2) or (3).  Although  it  is  not  entirely
    clear from the determination, it would appear that that the appellant's
    home address was provided "for correspondence" -  other  documents  had
    been sent there - and consequently that was a proper address  to  which
    the notice should have been sent by virtue of Art 8ZA(2)  rather  than,
    if no correspondence address had been provided, sent in accordance with
    Art 8ZA(3) to his employer's  address.     That  said,  his  employer's
    address does not seem to have fallen within Art 8ZA as  his  "place  of
    business" anyway: he was an employee  and  it  was  not  his  place  of
    business rather his place of work.  Further,  the  nuanced  differences
    raised by the parties' arguments in this case do  not  appear  to  have
    been raised in that case.  In any event, the decision  is  not  binding
    upon me and to the extent it requires an  individual  to  have  "actual
    knowledge" of a notice or its contents I respectfully decline to follow
    it for the reasons I have given.

65. I acknowledge, as Mr Skinner recognised in his  submissions,  that  the
    interpretation of "given" I have accepted could, in some circumstances,
    potentially produce harsh results  for  an  individual.   For  example,
    where an individual has moved away from the address held on file by the
    Home Office delivery by post or recorded delivery to that address will,
    nevertheless, amount to notice having been "given" to that  individual.
    Whilst I was told that  there  was  currently  no  obligation  upon  an
    individual subject to immigration control  to  notify  the  UKVI  of  a
    change  of  postal  or  e-mail  address,  nevertheless   any   sensible
    individual who wishes to deal with the  Home  Office  bona  fide  would
    inform the Home Office of any change.  In  that  sense,  any  harshness
    would, at least in part, be of an individual's own making.

66. By contrast, if Mr Jafferji's submissions are correct and knowledge  of
    a notice (a fortiori its contents) were required, that would facilitate
    discreditable individuals falsely claiming that  they  had  never  been
    "given" notice simply because it was unopened, unread or they had moved
    address.  Similar situations can easily be envisaged  where  notice  by
    electronic means is used.  It would be only too easy for an  individual
    to say that he had not opened any relevant e-mail so as to be aware  of
    the notice of decision made in respect of him.  I do  not  accept  that
    subterfuge of this  kind  should  be  allowed  to  prevent  the  lawful
    provision of notice of immigration decisions under the legislation.

67. Mr Skinner, albeit  briefly,  drew  my  attention  to  aspects  of  the
    applicant's immigration history and the circumstances in which he  came
    to the UK as a student which, he submitted,  should  remove  any  sense
    that the applicant is beyond reproach.  Mr Jafferji  strongly  disputed
    that any adverse inference should be drawn.  In the result, I have  not
    considered the matters raised which have not assisted me in reaching my
    decision on the law and its application to the applicant.

68. In my judgment, for the reasons I have given, notice of the curtailment
    decision was "given" to the applicant when it was sent by e-mail  on  1
    October 2013 and delivered in his e-mail system presumptively  on  that
    date.  The applicant is entitled to rebut  the  presumption  under  Art
    8ZB(1)(b) that it was delivered on that day or at all.  He is unable to
    do so.  The fact that he claims that he has no access  to  this  e-mail
    account because it was set up by his agent  and  he  does  not  have  a
    password does not  defeat  that  conclusion.   The  e-mail  address  he
    provided was the address at which he should have expected the  UKVI  to
    correspond with him.  Any harshness is, in large measure,  of  his  own
    making, as he had given this e-mail address as a correspondence address
    in his visa application and had made no efforts, at  least  before  the
    curtailment decision was made, to  provide  the  Home  Office  with  an
    address to which he did have access.

69. For these reasons, the respondent has established that  notice  of  the
    curtailment decision of 1 October 2013 was "given" to the applicant  on
    that date and that, therefore, his leave was curtailed with effect from
    30 November 2013.  As a result, the applicant became an overstayer from
    that latter date and at the date of  application,  namely  11  February
    2014 had overstayed for more than 28 days and so  could  not  meet  the
    requirement in E-LTRP.2.2. of Appendix FM.  He also, as a  result,  had
    no right of appeal against that decision.

    3. Precedent Fact or Wednesbury?

70.  One  final  point:  given  my  conclusion  that  the  respondent   has
    established, on the evidence, that the applicant's leave  was  lawfully
    curtailed, it is unnecessary for me to resolve the question of  whether
    that issue should properly be determined by the Tribunal as a matter of
    'precedent fact' or whether the Secretary of State's decision can  only
    be challenged on Wednesbury principles, in  particular,  irrationality.
    I am grateful to  both  counsel  for  their  written  submissions  made
    following the hearing.  Clearly, given my conclusion the  decision  was
    properly open to the respondent and not irrational.  Whichever approach
    is correct, the applicant has failed to make good his claim.

71. I note that in R (Shoaib) v SSHD [2015] EWHC 2010 (Admin), Neil Cameron
    QC (sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge)  concluded  that  public  law
    principles should be applied (see  [41]).   That  approach  is,  in  my
    judgment, consistent, and in accordance, with  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    recent decision in R (Giri) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 784.  The  issue  of
    curtailment in this case arose in the context of the  exercise  of  the
    power whether to grant the applicant leave rather than in respect of  a
    matter upon which the existence  of  that  power  depended  and  so  is
    challengeable only on Wednesbury principles (see  [19]-[20]  and  [29]-
    [30] per Richards LJ).  However, since the applicant cannot succeed  on
    either  basis  in  establishing  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    unlawful, I need not reach a concluded view on this issue.

Decision

72. For these reasons, this judicial review claim is dismissed.





      Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb





FOOTNOTE:


Subsequent to the reporting of the judgment, on 7 June 2016  the  Government
Legal Department wrote to the Tribunal indicating  those  instructions  were
mistaken and seeking to correct and apologise for  that  mistake.   Enclosed
was a letter and  statement  from  Mr  Barry  Durrans,  a  Higher  Executive
Officer within the UKVI setting out the true position which  I  accept.   In
summary, the GCID is capable of amendment  in  certain  circumstances.   The
GCID,  however,  itself  records  the  fact  of  amendment.   The  documents
submitted demonstrate that no amendments had, in  fact,  been  made  to  the
GCID records relevant in this case.


UTJ Grubb
13 June 2016

