
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

YI (Previous claims - Fingerprint match - EURODAC) Eritrea  [2007]  UKAIT
00054

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
On 22 May 2007



                                   Before

                         Mr Justice Hodge, President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste



                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr M Sowerby, instructed by Messrs YVA, Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr S Ouseley, Presenting Officer



An Immigration Judge needs to be satisfied on the specific evidence in  each
case, including EURODAC evidence if available,  whether  the  Appellant  has
made a previous claim. The evidence could  comprise  not  just  fingerprints
but  other  data  from  the  alleged  previous  application,   for   example
photographs, age, name and claim details. General  evidence  might  also  be
properly admitted about the reliability of the EURODAC  system  and  how  it
operates. An Immigration Judge will also, as a matter of fairness,  need  to
be satisfied that the Appellant has had the facility to  access  information
about the assertion against him that would enable him, if he so  wishes,  to
make a meaningful forensic rebuttal beyond mere  denial.  An  Appellant  may
not want to use such  a  facility  if  the  match  is  genuine  and  further
evidence would only  make  matters  worse  for  him.  It  is  therefore  the
availability of the facility rather than the take-up that  is  needed  in  a
fair system.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1.  The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Eritrea.  The   Respondent   seeks
     reconsideration of  the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge  Talbot,
     allowing the Appellant's appeal against his decision on 23 Sept 2006 to
     remove the Appellant as an illegal entrant, asylum/human  rights  claim
     refused.

  2. The key issue in this appeal is the Immigration Judge's approach to and
     assessment of the  Respondent's  evidence  that  there  was  a  EURODAC
     fingerprint match between the Appellant and a person who made an asylum
     claim in Italy on 3 June 2005 at a time when the Appellant  claimed  he
     was undertaking military service in Eritrea from which he deserted. The
     material findings by the Immigration Judge are as follows.

           "14. The primary credibility  issue  raised  by  the  Presenting
           Officer was the Home Office allegation that  the  Appellant  had
           claimed asylum in Italy  in  June  2005,  which  undermines  the
           Appellant's claim to have been undertaking his military  service
           in Eritrea until his departure in July  2006.   This  issue  was
           discussed in some detail at the case management  review  hearing
           on 23 October 2006 before Immigration Judge Flynn.  As a  result
           of concerns raised by Counsel for the Appellant at that hearing,
           directions were issued by the Tribunal requiring the  Respondent
           to provide evidence of all information sent to Italy  to  verify
           the Appellant's identity and show he claimed asylum  there.  The
           Home Office responded by providing an e-mail from Andy  Ritchie,
           the Home Office caseworker who dealt with the Appellant's asylum
           application on behalf of the Secretary of State.


           15.  The sum of the information presented to me on this issue is
           as follows.
              1)   An   e-mail   dated    10    August    2006    sent    to
                 "ASULIVEURODACResults...." Headed  "EURODACSearch  Result".
                 This e-mail refers to the Appellant  by  name  and  various
                 identifying references and codes (including his nationality
                 and date of birth) and the fact that he  was  fingerprinted
                 on 10 August 2006.  Below this there is another  heading  -
                 "Identification List" with a "case ID" No. and  Sex  -  M",
                 "Place  of  Apprehension   -   Pozzallo"   and   "Date   of
                 Apprehension - 2.6.05".
              2)  A Home Office form with the same IFB reference  number  as
                 on the above e-mail with the result "no matching  records".
                 Also on the form are the various identifying references for
                 the Appellant and his photograph.
              3) A memorandum from Andy Ritchie  dated  1.11.06  stating  as
                 follows.
                 "The fingerprint match from Italy in  2005  was  a  EURODAC
                 trace that ASU Liverpool received on 10  August  2006  when
                 the  applicant's  fingerprints  were  scanned  in  after  a
                 previously unsuccessful attempt on 27 July 2006.   When  an
                 applicant's fingerprints are scanned into EURODAC, a result
                 is e-mailed back to the ASU concerned - in this case  there
                 was a hit on  the  applicant's  fingerprints  that  matches
                 details as  being  previously  fingerprinted  in  Pozzallo,
                 Italy on 2 June 2005 (minute on  file  from  ASU  Liverpool
                 dated 10.8.06 refers and copy e-mail..)
           The memorandum then confirms that the photograph attached to the
           printout was taken by the ASU in Liverpool.


           16. When a serious allegation of deception is  made  against  an
           Appellant, this must be adequately supported by evidence.  In  a
           case of this nature, I would expect to see  copies  of  matching
           data in the form of the  fingerprints  taken  in  Liverpool  and
           Italy.  I would also expect to have some further details of  the
           person fingerprinted in Italy such as  their  name,  nationality
           and/or photograph.  Unfortunately none of this  information  has
           been supplied by the Respondent.  The only evidence of the match
           comes in the form of the e-mail with the search results  (quoted
           above).  Even this evidence is undermined by the admission  that
           a previous attempt at a match was unsuccessful (as appears to be
           reflected in the form stating "no matching records").


           17. I have no concerns whatsoever as to the good  faith  of  the
           Home Office in seeking to verify whether this Appellant had made
           a previous asylum claim in Europe, and I accept that information
           was fed into the computer which yielded a match  with  a  person
           fingerprinted in Italy.  Unfortunately, however, the  Respondent
           has failed to back this up with adequate supporting evidence  to
           satisfy me that  the  search  result  is  accurate.   I  do  not
           consider  the  evidence  provided  to  adequately  support   the
           conclusion that this Appellant is the same person as the  person
           fingerprinted in Italy in June 2005.

  3. The Immigration Judge then went on  to  assess  the  other  credibility
     issues taken by the Respondent against the Appellant's claim and  found
     in the Appellant's favour.  On this basis  and  in  the  light  of  the
     extant country guidance, the Immigration Judged proceeded to allow  the
     Appellant's appeal.

  4. The challenge to the  determination  made  by  the  Respondent  in  his
     grounds  of  application  was  limited  to  the   Immigration   Judge's
     conclusions about the EURODAC evidence on the  fingerprint  match.  The
     Respondent did not seek to challenge the Immigration Judge's  reasoning
     for his other  positive  credibility  findings.  However,  those  other
     credibility findings would plainly be unsustainable if  it  were  shown
     that the Appellant was in Italy at the time he claimed he was doing and
     deserting from his military service  in  Eritrea.   The  Respondent  in
     essence argued in the grounds that the Immigration Judge was  wrong  in
     law in not accepting the sufficiency of the evidence provided to him.

  5. Before us, Mr  Ouseley  adopted  the  submissions  in  the  grounds  of
     application and expanded upon them. He argued that the error of law  by
     the Immigration Judge was in his rejecting the  evidence  of  a  proper
     match without providing adequate reasoning.  The Immigration Judge also
     erred in  law  in  giving  weight  to  the  initial  failure  to  match
     fingerprints without further inquiry.  Mr Ouseley said that  there  had
     been problems over some asylum applicants inflicting deliberate  damage
     to their fingertips to prevent matching. There was therefore a need  to
     wait for the damage to heal and for a second attempt to make  a  match.
     He did not however suggest that there was any firm evidence  that  this
     was so in this case.  Mr Ouseley also observed that the  Appellant  had
     not requested any detailed fingerprint data for  independent  analysis.
     Finally Mr Ouseley said that on second  stage  reconsideration  further
     evidence could be produced concerning the  safeguards  in  the  EURODAC
     system.

  6. Mr Sowerby  submitted  that  the  grounds  amounted  to  no  more  than
     disagreement with the Immigration Judge's sustainable  conclusions  and
     that Mr Ouseley was seeking to give new oral evidence which should have
     been  given  to  the  Immigration  Judge.  In  paragraph  14   of   the
     determination there was reference to a Case Management Review where the
     inadequacy of the evidence concerning the fingerprints was  flagged  up
     and specific directions were made in the clearest terms  requiring  the
     Respondent to produce evidence to show why he maintained the  Appellant
     had claimed asylum in Italy.  Only limited documents had been  provided
     in response to these  directions,  as  identified  by  the  Immigration
     Judge.  There had been ample opportunity for the Respondent to  produce
     further  and  better  evidence.   Indeed,  there  was  no  Rule   32(2)
     application before the Tribunal even today to consider any new evidence
     concerning the EURODAC system and Mr Ouseley was unable to say with any
     certainty what further evidence could be provided or when. With  regard
     to the first  and  unsuccessful  attempt  to  match  fingerprints,  the
     Immigration Judge was entitled to rely upon the evidence placed  before
     him by the Respondent as described in paragraph 15 which confirmed that
     an unsuccessful attempt to match fingerprints had been made on 27  July
     2006.  There was no evidence or submission to the Immigration Judge  to
     the  effect  that  this  had  been  as  a  consequence  of   deliberate
     obstruction by the Appellant.

  7. In response Mr Ouseley acknowledged that it would have been better  had
     more supporting evidence been provided to the  Immigration  Judge,  and
     for the future the Respondent could provide evidence of the reliability
     of the system and the opportunity for aggrieved  asylum  applicants  to
     obtain details from it.  However he  maintained  that  the  Immigration
     Judge had erred materially in law in the ways he had described above.

  8. In  considering  these  submissions,  we  should  first  clarify  three
     material matters.

  9. First we note the terms of the specific directions issued in this  case
     as a result of the Case Management  Review.  They  were  issued  on  23
     October 2006, some two weeks before the hearing before the  Immigration
     Judge. They included the usual standard directions and in addition  the
     following specific directions.

           "Respondent to provide evidence of all information sent to Italy
           to verify the Appellant's identity and show  he  claimed  asylum
           there.
           Respondent  to  provide  objective  evidence  referred   to   in
           paragraph 15 of RFR letter.  All documents to be served  on  the
           Appellant and the AIT five days prior to the next hearing."

 10. It  is  the  first  of  these  two  directions  which  relates  to  the
     fingerprints issue.  The information  provided  in  response  was  that
     described by the Immigration Judge in  paragraphs  14  and  15  of  the
     determination as set out above.  He considered this information  to  be
     inadequate for the reasons described in paragraphs 16  and  17  of  the
     determination, again as set out above.

 11. Second, we have noted Mr Ouseley's  submission  that  further  evidence
     relating to the reliability of the EURODAC system can  be  provided  at
     second stage reconsideration.  However,  second  stage  reconsideration
     cannot arise unless he can first demonstrate to us that the Immigration
     Judge made a material error of law. It might  have  been  open  to  the
     Respondent to apply to us to admit fresh  evidence.  There  would  have
     been potential difficulties in the submission of fresh evidence at this
     stage,  which  would  not  normally  be  accepted.  However  given  the
     assertion by the Respondent of fraud by the Appellant and of mistake of
     fact about the EURODAC system by the Immigration Judge, it  might  have
     been possible, having regard to the guidance of the Court of Appeal  in
     cases such as A v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2003]
     EWCA Civ 175; [2003] INLR 249 and by the Tribunal in EB (fresh evidence
     - fraud - directions) Ghana [2005] UKAIT 00131. We  cannot  say:  there
     has been no Rule 32(2) application to us on behalf  of  the  Respondent
     under the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  to
     admit any fresh evidence at all.

 12. Third is the applicable burden and standard of proof. EURODAC  data  is
     produced by the Respondent in cases such as this essentially to  assert
     deception/fraud by an Appellant. The burden  of  proof  rest  with  the
     person making the assertion and the standard of proof  where  fraud  is
     asserted  and  where   the   consequences   for   the   Appellant   are
     correspondingly serious is the higher civil standard  of  "proof  to  a
     high degree of probability" - R v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
     Department ex p. Khawaja [1982] UKHL 5; [1984] AC 74.

 13. From this basis we now assess the submissions made to us. It  is  clear
     that a full assessment of EURODAC data  is  a  matter  of  considerable
     general importance because a number  of  cases  turn  upon  fingerprint
     evidence produced by this system of past  claims  in  order  to  expose
     deception in current asylum applications.

 14. Mr Ouseley's primary submission is in essence that the  EURODAC  system
     is sufficiently reliable, and has sufficient safeguards, that  evidence
     of a match of the kind provided to the Immigration Judge in  this  case
     should have been treated by him as satisfying the  Respondent's  burden
     of proof, when the Appellant, though  denying  any  previous  claim  in
     general terms, has not requested detailed fingerprint data in order  to
     obtain and present  independent  forensic  analysis.  This  may  be  an
     arguable  and  even  sustainable  proposition,  but  unfortunately   no
     evidence to support it was produced either to the Immigration Judge  or
     to us. We are therefore not now in a  position  to  make  a  meaningful
     assessment of the system in general, though plainly it is of importance
     that this should be done by  the  Tribunal  at  the  earliest  possible
     opportunity.

 15. Absent such an assessment of the  system  in  general,  an  Immigration
     Judge, acting fairly, would  need  to  be  satisfied  on  the  specific
     evidence in each case whether that Appellant had indeed made a previous
     claim. The evidence could comprise not just fingerprints but other data
     from the alleged previous application, such as for example photographs,
     age, name and claim details. General evidence might  also  be  properly
     admitted about the  reliability  of  the  EURODAC  system  and  how  it
     operates. We do not seek to be prescriptive about this.  An Immigration
     Judge will also, as a matter of fairness, have to be satisfied that the
     Appellant  has  had  the  facility  to  access  information  about  the
     assertion against him that would enable him, if he so wishes, to make a
     meaningful  forensic  rebuttal  beyond  mere  denial.  Of  course,   an
     Appellant may not want to use such a facility if the match  is  genuine
     and further evidence would only make  matters  worse  for  him.  It  is
     therefore the availability of the facility rather than the take-up that
     is needed in a fair system.

 16. In this appeal, the parties were aware from the time of  the  CMR  that
     there was concern over the adequacy  of  the  evidence  concerning  the
     fingerprint match. The Respondent produced some  further  evidence  but
     this fell short of what  the  Immigration  Judge  said  he  would  have
     expected to see in the light of the directions issued  at  the  CMR  in
     order to make a meaningful evaluation. Moreover the new evidence showed
     that  there  had  been  a  previous  unsuccessful  attempt  to  make  a
     fingerprint match which was never explained to him, though the need  to
     do so would we consider have been obvious. He was entitled to take this
     unexplained  inconsistency  into   account.   Indeed   in   all   these
     circumstances  it  was,  in  our  judgement,  properly  open   to   the
     Immigration Judge to conclude that the Respondent  had  not  discharged
     his burden of proof. The Respondent was still essentially relying  upon
     the bare EURODAC assertion that there was a match without offering  any
     corroborative evidence of it from the Italian  claim.  The  Immigration
     Judge was not seeking to prescribe what was needed by way  of  evidence
     but was rather drawing attention to the sort  of  evidence  that  might
     have been available  but had not been produced him. Indeed a photograph
     of the Italian claimant if he resembled the Appellant, on  top  of  the
     EURODAC fingerprint match, may well have sufficed. However this was not
     produced and the Immigration Judge was entitled to take the view he did
     on the evidence before him. There is no material error of law.


                                  DECISION

 17. The Immigration Judge did not make a material  error  of  law  and  the
     original determination of the appeal shall stand.




      Signed                                                           Dated
                                                                 24 May 2007

                                            Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


