
                                                   [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AM (Evidence - route of return) Somalia [2011] UKUT 54 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 18 November 2010                  |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                               Lord Bannatyne
                       Senior Immigration Judge Latter


                                   Between

                                     AM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr. T Buley, instructed by Fadiga & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr. J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer



  i) In HH (Somalia) v Secretary of State [2010] EWCA Civ 426  at  para  84
     the Court of Appeal when referring to the Claimant  raising  a  cogent
     argument that there might not be  a  safe  route  of  return  was  not
     setting down a threshold requirement for cogent evidence before it was
     open to the Tribunal to consider the issue but making the  point  that
     the issue need only be considered if there  was  a  proper  evidential
     basis for doing so.

 ii) In the  light  of  the  comprehensive  rejection  of  the  appellant's
     credibility, the issue of the safety of returning  from  Mogadishu  to
     Afgoye had to be assessed in  the  light  of  the  general  background
     evidence on this issue: MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State [2010]  UKSC
     49 applied.

iii) The general evidence before the Upper  Tribunal  failed  to  establish
     that generalised or indiscriminate violence was at such a  high  level
     along this route that the appellant would face a real risk to his life
     or person entitling him to a grant of humanitarian protection.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.        The  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Somalia,  appeals   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration  Judge  Kopieczek
    and Mrs G Greenwood) dismissing his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision of 13 January 2010 to make a  deportation  order  against  him
    following his conviction of possessing a false identity  document  with
    intent for which he was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.

Background

2.       The  background  to  this  appeal  can  briefly  be  summarised  as
    follows.  The appellant was born on 1 January 1983. He arrived  in  the
    UK on 26 June 2009 and attempted to gain entry using a false  document.
    He was prosecuted and following his  conviction  and  imprisonment  the
    respondent made a deportation order against him under the provisions of
    s. 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  He appealed on the basis that  he
    would be at real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  on  return  to
    Somalia.  He claimed that he was a member of the minority Benadiri clan
    and had left Somalia for Yemen at the age of 10  with  his  mother  and
    sisters where they lived in  a  refugee  camp.   He  was  a  victim  of
    violence not only from Yemenis but also the police.

3.       In 2007 he left Yemen  for  Saudi  Arabia  where  he  worked  as  a
    security guard but in early 2009 he was  arrested  by  the  authorities
    there and returned to Somalia.  According to the information he gave to
    the respondent, he married in 2003 and has two children, one is  living
    with his mother in Yemen and the other with his wife in  Saudi  Arabia.
    He claimed that at the end of March 2009 after he had been praying in a
    mosque, he was approached by two armed  men  who  were  members  of  Al
    Shabaab (AS).  He was told that he had to join them in  the  jihad  and
    that if he did not do so, he would be killed.  The appellant asked  for
    time to make a decision.  He told his uncle what had happened.  He then
    heard that members of AS were searching for him and  arrangements  were
    made for him to leave Somalia with the help of an agent  who  organised
    his departure to the UK via Dubai.

4.      At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  said
    that he had not had contact with anyone in Somalia or Saudi Arabia.  He
    had been able to contact his mother in Yemen but she did not know where
    his wife and children were.  He accepted that when he was deported from
    Saudi Arabia, he was returned to the  airport  at  Mogadishu  and  then
    travelled to Afgoye in a vehicle with other people.  He had  been  able
    to arrange that without any problems.   A  vehicle  was  for  hire  and
    although he did not have any money, people in the vehicle from his home
    area paid for him when he explained  his  situation;   they  could  not
    leave him at the airport as he had no one there and none of his  family
    knew that he had returned.

5.      In Afgoye he said that he stayed with the son of his aunt.  He  did
    not have many other relatives in Somalia but he did have  his  maternal
    uncle and he referred to another  elderly  person  he  stayed  with  in
    Afgoye.  He also accepted that  his  father  and  his  sister  were  in
    Somalia and that his wife had  relatives  in  Afgoye.   His  uncle  had
    raised $2,500 for his departure from his business.

6.       The Tribunal took into account the country background  material  in
    the COI Report for Somalia November 2009 and  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    Report, 19 April 2010.  There was expert evidence in a report  from  Dr
    Luling dated 16 April 2010 in support of the appellant's claim that  he
    was from a minority clan.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

7.       The Tribunal accepted that the appellant was a Southern Somali  but
    it was not satisfied that he was a member of a minority clan.  It  gave
    reasons for differing from the  opinion  given  by  Dr  Luling  in  her
    report.  The Tribunal commented that despite  claiming  to  be  from  a
    minority clan and with his family in  Somalia  not  knowing  about  his
    return, he nevertheless had managed to travel safely from Mogadishu  to
    Afgoye.  It noted that although  the  appellant  claimed  that  he  had
    travelled in a vehicle with other people who had paid his fare, it  was
    significant that he was able to make his way from the airport to Afgoye
    without apparently encountering any difficulties.  It also regarded  as
    significant his evidence that his uncle was able to run a business  and
    spent $2,500 recruiting an agent to help him to escape.  The  appellant
    had also claimed that his wife's family was from the same minority clan
    and lived in Afgoye but  had  not  suggested  that  they  had  suffered
    because of their minority  clan  status.  So  far  as  the  appellant's
    claimed fear of AS was concerned, the Tribunal found that  his  account
    of the problems he had with that  organisation  was  inconsistent  (see
    paras 69-72 of the determination) and did not accept his evidence.

8.       In summary, the Tribunal were not satisfied that the appellant  had
    established as reasonably likely that he was from the minority Benediri
    clan or that he had ever encountered AS, been  questioned  by  them  or
    subjected to an attempt to recruit him.  The Tribunal went  on  to  say
    that even if they were wrong in their conclusions and if the  appellant
    was from a minority clan, the evidence indicated that  he  was  one  of
    those individuals who would be able to access protection on his  return
    from a majority clan.  He and his wife both had close relatives  living
    in Afgoye who  were  apparently  able  to  live  there  without  having
    encountered security problems and  he  would  be  able  to  secure  the
    protection of members of a majority clan.

9.       The  Tribunal  went  on  to  consider  the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection.  It took into account the determination in AM and AM (Armed
    conflict: Risk Categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091 where  it  was
    found that the armed conflict in Mogadishu amounted  to  indiscriminate
    violence at such a level of severity as to place the  majority  of  the
    population at risk of a consistent pattern of  indiscriminate  violence
    but those whose home area was not Mogadishu would  not  in  general  be
    able to show a real risk of persecution or serious harm simply  on  the
    basis that they were civilians or internally displaced  persons  albeit
    that much would depend on the background  evidence  relating  to  their
    home area.

10.    The Tribunal summarised its findings on  humanitarian  protection  as
    follows:

    "80.  The 2007 Act does not expressly include an exception  under  s.33
         in  terms  of  humanitarian   protection.    Even   assuming   that
         humanitarian protection does need to be considered,  we  would  not
         have  been  satisfied  for  the  reasons  already  given  that  the
         appellant has established  that  he  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of
         humanitarian protection. We  are  not  satisfied  that  substantial
         grounds have been shown for believing that  if  returned  he  would
         face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm  as  defined  in  para
         339C.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  one  of  those
         individuals, no doubt few in number, who would be able to return to
         Somalia, in his case to Afgoye,  without  real  risk  of  suffering
         serious harm.  That conclusion applies, for the avoidance of doubt,
         in relation to any claim to humanitarian protection on the basis of
         Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.


    81.    With reference to the decision of the Court of Appeal in HH,  we
         are satisfied that the appellant would be able safely to reach  his
         home area, having done so before and having regard to  our  general
         conclusions on his claim."


11.     In the  light  of  the  conclusions  the  Tribunal  reached  on  the
    appellant's asylum claim, it also found the appellant  failed  to  show
    that his removal would lead to a breach of either Articles 2  or  3  of
    the ECHR.


12.     Permission to appeal was refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  limited  grounds  that  it  was
    properly arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  deal
    adequately with the issue of whether any risk of harm  arose  from  the
    route of return to the appellant's home area of Afgoye.

Submissions

13.     In his submissions Mr Buley argued that the Tribunal  had  given  no
    indication in its reasons in paras 80-81 what factors  had  been  taken
    into account and that it was axiomatic that a  Tribunal  must  properly
    explain the basis of its main conclusions.  Mr Parkinson submitted that
    the  Tribunal's  conclusions   although   expressed   succinctly   were
    sustainable in the light of the  particular  facts  of  the  case.   By
    implication the appellant was found to be a majority clan  member.   It
    was accepted that he had been returned from Saudi Arabia in early  2009
    and had then been able to travel from Mogadishu to  his  home  area  of
    Afgoye.  He had returned safely from Afgoye back to  Mogadishu  in  the
    company of an agent who, on the appellant's own account, had been  paid
    $2,500 by his uncle.  The Tribunal's finding that the  appellant  could
    return to Somalia without any real risk of serious  harm  was  properly
    open to it and was adequately supported by its findings of fact.

The Error of Law

14.     The issue for us at this stage of the appeal is whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law.  Mr Buley's submission is that the Tribunal
    failed to give adequate reasons for  its  decision.   Succinct  reasons
    when read in the context of the determination as a whole may often make
    it clear that all  relevant  matters  have  been  properly  taken  into
    account.  However, in the present case although the Tribunal summarised
    the country background  material  before  it  in  paras  37-43  of  its
    determination, it is not clear from the brief reasons given in para  81
    what view it  took  of  that  evidence  or  of  its  relevance  to  the
    appellant's claim.  The Tribunal simply said that it was satisfied that
    the appellant would be able safely to reach his home area  having  done
    so before and having regard to its general conclusions  on  his  claim.
    Further, it is unclear from the  reasons  whether  in  considering  the
    critical issue of whether the appellant would be able to reach his home
    area in safety it had regard to the context of the background  evidence
    as a whole.  In these circumstances we are not  satisfied  the  reasons
    are such that it is clear that all relevant matters were properly taken
    into account and accordingly the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

Further Evidence and Submissions

15.    The Tribunal's findings of primary fact are not in issue before  us.
    Permission was not granted to challenge those findings and was  limited
    to the issue of safety on return.  Directions were  subsequently  given
    confirming that the appeal  was  to  be  prepared  on  that  basis  and
    requiring the filing of any documentary evidence to be relied on if the
    Upper Tribunal concluded that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on route of return and safety whilst travelling that  route  should  be
    set aside and re-made.  The  appellant  has  accordingly  produced  and
    relies on an expert report prepared by Markus Hoehne dated 12  November
    2010. The respondent also relies on further evidence: the documents  in
    A-C of Bundle R, a UNHCR  briefing  note  of  16  May  2008,  the  UKBA
    Operational Guidance Note Somalia July 2010 and the report of the Fact-
    Finding Mission on Somalia  Nairobi  8-15  September  2010  of  October
    2010.

16.    In his submissions Mr Buley relied on the report of Mr  Hoehne.   He
    submitted  that  the  background  evidence  showed  that   there   were
    conflicting reports about who was in control of which areas in Southern
    Somalia.  According to the Fact-Finding  Mission  at  1.14  the  Afgoye
    corridor was not under the control of  the  TFG  (Transitional  Federal
    Government); AS controlled access to it and  the  area  surrounding  it
    whereas Hisbul Islam (HI) nominally controlled  the  corridor  although
    there had been skirmishes between AS and HI over control of  HI  areas.
    He submitted that the appellant would be at risk of  travelling  across
    the frontline between opposing groups.

17.    Even within Mogadishu, the appellant risked, so he argued, having to
    cross an HI or TFG checkpoint where there was a risk from undisciplined
    soldiers who would try and extort money.  He  would  then  have  to  go
    through AS checkpoints where he would be at risk if he was seen  to  be
    behaving in an un-Islamic way.  There was a real risk to the  appellant
    in travelling the route to Mogadishu and Afgoye: it could not simply be
    argued that he would not be at risk because he had managed to make  the
    journey on two previous occasions.   It was clear, he  submitted,  from
    the expert evidence that very minor matters could be  regarded  as  un-
    Islamic by AS such as having the wrong photographs or music on a mobile
    phone.  When the various risk  factors  were  looked  at  cumulatively,
    including the risk of getting caught  up  in  fighting,  having  to  go
    through different  checkpoints,  having  come  from  the  UK  with  the
    perceptions that would give rise  to  and  his  own  relative  lack  of
    familiarity with what the position was on the  ground  in  Somalia,  Mr
    Buley argued that the appellant would be at real risk of serious harm.

18.    Mr Parkinson submitted that the appellant could  not  bring  himself
    within the ambit of HH (Somalia) v Secretary of State [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    426 as he had not raised a cogent argument that there might  not  be  a
    safe route of return and therefore in the light of the comments of  the
    Court of Appeal in para 84  of  its  judgment,  the  Tribunal  was  not
    obliged to deal with this issue.  However, if  the  Tribunal  took  the
    view that it should consider the issue of the safety of  the  route  of
    return, he submitted that the appellant would be returned  via  Nairobi
    and this would not lead to any perception that he was a wealthy  person
    because he  was  travelling  from  the  UK.   It  was  clear  from  the
    background evidence that a reasonable number of flights, around fifteen
    to eighteen a day, arrived at Mogadishu Airport carrying members of the
    Somali diaspora and that in the eight months to the end of August  2010
    African Express carried some 12,000 passengers.  Majority  clans  could
    make arrangements for family members to be met on return.  The road  to
    Mogadishu from the airport was controlled by the TFG.  He accepted that
    ordinary Somalis could not afford armed escorts but the evidence showed
    that in general they were not needed and that they were likely  to  use
    minibuses even though drivers may have to buy  their  way  through  the
    checkpoints.

19.    He submitted that the evidence showed that buses and taxis  operated
    between the airport and the city and Somali citizens used  them.  There
    was no clear distinction in Mogadishu between the areas  controlled  by
    the TFG and by AS and people travelled between these areas freely.   So
    far as onward travel from Mogadishu to Afgoye was concerned,  in  areas
    under the control of AS generalised violence was at a low level and  if
    travellers obeyed AS's rules, they would be allowed to  continue  their
    journey.  There was a lot of travel between Afgoye  and  Mogadishu  and
    there were informal bus timetables between the various major  towns  in
    Somalia.  In the light of the background evidence,  he  submitted  that
    the appellant had failed to show that he did not have a safe  route  of
    return from Mogadishu to his home area.

20.    In reply Mr Buley argued that there was no threshold requirement  in
    para 84 of HH which had to be met.  Once the issue of the safety of the
    route was raised, the Tribunal was obliged to deal with the  issue.  He
    referred to the background evidence and in particular to  the  risk  of
    forced recruitment.  He argued that even if the appellant was  returned
    via Nairobi he would still be dressed in a western way and  this  would
    bring him to the attention of those at the AS checkpoints  but  in  any
    event there would be a risk when crossing any checkpoint.

The Expert Report of Mr Hoehne

21.    Mr Hoehne's background and expertise is set out at  pages  13-19  of
    his report.  In paras 1 and 2 he sets out the background to the current
    situation in Somalia and in paras 3-7 confirms that the country is in a
    state of ongoing civil war.  The TFG is fighting with militant  Islamic
    groups such as AS and HI.  There have been  clashes  in  Mogadishu  and
    other areas of Southern and  Central  Somalia;  tens  of  thousands  of
    people have been displaced and  have  had  to  find  refuge  in  poorly
    equipped and overcrowded refugee camps  (para  3).   In  AS  controlled
    areas in the south, very particular interpretations of  Islamic  Sharia
    are enforced (para 4).  Living conditions are harsh and this is thought
    to help recruit destitute youth and men into  militant  Islamic  forces
    (para 7).

22.    In paras 8-11 Mr Hoehne comments on the safety of  the  route  from
    Mogadishu to Afgoye.  He says that there are many checkpoints which are
    places of heightened risk as armed guards are often not responsible  to
    any over-arching authorities and they prey on passengers by looting and
    raping.  Even the checkpoints operated by TFG soldiers do not  function
    in any benign way (para 8).  On the way  from  Mogadishu  to  Afgoye  a
    traveller would have to pass a number of checkpoints both in  Mogadishu
    and along the road between the two places.  He  refers  to  an  account
    from a person identified simply as a man who travelled from  Afgoye  to
    Mogadishu Airport and back in his own car to pick up a friend (para 9).
    Mr Hoehne comments that one can be lucky and make the  journey  without
    major problems only paying a bit of money but that is  not  always  the
    case and there can be skirmishes.

23.    When passing through AS checkpoints,  as  militant  Islamists,  they
    will check cars for people who do  not  comply  with  their  rules  and
    norms.  He comments that if AS rules are fully  complied  with,  it  is
    reasonably safe to travel through their territories (para 10).  He says
    that the issue of full compliance  with  AS  rules  and  policies  when
    passing their checkpoints constitutes in his eyes a real risk  for  the
    appellant.   He  refers  to  the  appellant's  statement   and   asylum
    interview: that AS wanted to  recruit  him  but  he  evaded  them.   In
    circumstances such  as  this,  Mr  Hoehne's  opinion  is  that  if  the
    appellant were to be returned  to  Mogadishu  and  ran  into  AS  at  a
    checkpoint or elsewhere, he would be at serious risk of execution as  a
    traitor (para 11).  However, in a footnote  to  his  report  Mr  Hoehne
    says:

         "The fact that  people  frequently  travel  between  Mogadishu  and
         Afgoye and, if they fully comply to AS rules, can make  the  travel
         without major problems was  confirmed  by  the  UK  Border  Agency:
         Somalia: Report of Fact-Finding Mission to Nairobi."


The Fact-Finding Mission to Nairobi October 2010

24.    This Report is at Annex C of the respondent's documents.   At  1.14,
    the report says that the Afgoye corridor is not under  the  control  of
    TFG; AS is in control  of  the  access,  and  the  whole  of  the  area
    surrounding it.  HI normally controls the Afgoye corridor, although  in
    recent months there have been localised skirmishes between  AS  and  HI
    over control of HI areas.  The situation at Mogadishu  Airport  is  set
    out in paras 2.01 - 09 and this confirms  that  there  is  a  total  of
    around 15-18 flights arriving in Mogadishu per day and it  is  reported
    that returning Somalis can make arrangements with family to ensure they
    have someone to meet them at the  airport  and  somewhere  to  stay  on
    arrival.   Somalis  returning  to  Mogadishu  would  need  a   lot   of
    preparation and would need to ensure they have  contacts  in  Mogadishu
    but the Somali diaspora travel back to Somalia frequently.

25.    The report then goes on to deal with travel  from  Mogadishu  Airport
    to the city where the road is controlled by  the  TFG  with  an  AMISOM
    presence.  One report is to the effect that Somali citizens do not need
    or use armed escorts.  Ordinary Somalis would not  be  able  to  afford
    this and, even if they could, such guards would draw attention to their
    importance and wealth and make them more attractive targets for robbing
    and kidnapping.  There are other reports that it is possible to  travel
    between the city and the airport by taxi and also that buses and  taxis
    operate between the airport and Somali civilians do use them.

26.    So far as travelling outside Mogadishu is concerned  it  is  reported
    that many people travel within the areas under the influence or control
    of AS.  There are checkpoints where travellers will be asked where they
    are travelling to and why but so long as they obey AS's rules, they are
    generally allowed to continue with their journey.  Road travel  between
    Mogadishu and Belet Weyne and Kismayo is  frequently  used.  There  are
    buses and lorries that will carry passengers between towns.  It is said
    that AS have reduced the number of checkpoints in the area they control
    and have made travelling by road more secure against criminals but they
    commit their own abuses including the recruitment  of  young  men  from
    buses stopped at checkpoints.

27.    Another source reports that it is  possible  to  travel  anywhere  in
    Somalia as long as you have money and  contacts.   There  are  numerous
    checkpoints operating that seek to establish who  is  travelling  where
    and why but the Somali population  can  generally  pass  through  these
    checkpoints safely.  Another report says that the old clan system still
    functions as a protection mechanism for Somalis wishing to  travel  and
    that it is generally safe to travel through areas controlled by AS.

28.    In dealing with the Afgoye corridor the report says:

    "5.11 There are estimated to be between 200,000 and 500,000  people  in
        the Afgoye corridor, but it is difficult to  establish  the  number
        due to the scale of the settlement.  The area is under the  control
        of different factions - TFG, Hizbul  Islam  and  Al  Shabaab  which
        makes access for NGOs difficult.  There are reports that water  and
        sanitation have been made priorities for aid delivery.


    5.12   The  Afgoye  corridor  is  increasingly   settled,   with   some
        businessmen choosing to take their businesses there.   Some  choose
        to live in the Afgoye corridor and commute to  Mogadishu,  although
        this practice is not as common  as  it  once  was  due  to  current
        instability in the city."


29.    Further comments are recorded as follows:-

    5.14    "The  Afgoye  corridor  is  an  increasingly  urbanised   area.
         Satellite pictures show evidence of settling, urbanisation  and  of
         normal life with growing infrastructure such as water pipes.  There
         is also some evidence from the satellite imaging the population  is
         decreasing.


         Not all the corridor is under the control of the TFG.  AS seems  to
         create a sense of security even in the corridor."


   15. "Many people are mobile between Afgoye and Mogadishu and there is  a
       fluidity of movement between the areas  depending  on  the  security
       situation.  Hizbul Islam control the area and Amisom are approaching
       the area.  The Afgoye corridor has gatekeepers who control  who  and
       what moves into and out of  the  area.   They  are  not  necessarily
       aligned to any group but seen as opportunists who have found  a  way
       to make money.   They can make assistance from NGOs very difficult."



The Operational Guidance Note Somalia July 2010

30.    In the OGN Somalia July 2010 it is reported that throughout  2009  AS
    has continued to consolidate its control in large parts of central  and
    southern Somalia and that there  are  many  areas  where  there  is  no
    ongoing fighting because territorial control has been  established.  In
    areas fully under AS control the human rights  situation  is  poor  but
    there  are  low  levels  of  generalised  violence  whereas  in   areas
    controlled by the TFG, the human rights position  is  less  problematic
    but there are likely to be high levels of generalised violence  due  to
    continued challenges by insurgents.  It  is  reported  that  given  the
    generally lower levels of fighting and  the  relative  ease  of  travel
    within many areas of Somalia, the risks of travel are likely to be less
    problematic and that it will be feasible for many to  return  to  their
    home areas from Mogadishu Airport as most  areas  are  more  accessible
    than previously and the airport continues to function  normally.  There
    are also scheduled air services to a number of  other  destinations  in
    Somalia (paras 3.7.11, 16).

Assessment of the Issues


31.    This is a case where the  route  of  return,  Mogadishu  Airport  to
    Afgoye, has been identified and we therefore need to  consider  whether
    the use of that route gives  rise  to  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm
    entitling the appellant to humanitarian  or  Article  3  protection  in
    accordance with para 84 of HH (Somalia) v  Secretary  of  State  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 426:

    "84.  In conclusion, our provisional view is that the  Directives  read
        together require that  the  issues  of  safety  during  return  (as
        opposed to technical obstacles to return) should be  considered  as
        part of the decision on entitlement. Only  technical  obstacles  of
        the kind we have sought to identify may legitimately be deferred to
        the point at which removal directions are being made or considered.
        We are aware that the entitlements which appear to  follow  may  be
        considered an unintended consequence of the Directives;  but  this,
        as we have said, is an issue for another day. Our provisional view,
        in the light of the Directive, is that if there is a real issue  on
        safety on return the Secretary of State must engage with it in  his
        decision on entitlement to protection, and his  conclusion  can  be
        the subject of appeal. In any case in which the Home Secretary  did
        not deal with safety during return (because  he  did  not  consider
        that any issue arose) but  where  the  appellant  raises  a  cogent
        argument that there might not be a safe route of return, the appeal
        tribunal would have to deal with that issue, possibly after calling
        for information from the Home Secretary as to  his  intentions.  In
        any  event,  as  it  seems  to  us  at  present,  the  decision  on
        entitlement must be taken within a reasonable time  and  cannot  be
        left until the Home Secretary is in a position to set safe  removal
        directions."


32.   We do not accept Mr Parkinson's submission that the appellant has  to
    raise "a cogent argument" in the sense, as we understood his  argument,
    that there was a threshold evidential requirement for "cogent evidence"
    before it was open to the Tribunal to deal with the issue of safety  of
    the route of return.  We cannot envisage that the Court of  Appeal  had
    any  intention  of  setting  down  any  threshold  requirement   as   a
    preliminary issue to be considered before the assessment of  safety  on
    return.  The point the Court was making was that the issue need only be
    considered if there was a proper evidential basis for doing  so.   This
    view is consistent with the approach of the Tribunal in HM  and  Others
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC) at paragraphs 94-7 of its
    determination.  We are satisfied that a real issue has been  raised  on
    the safety of  the  route  of  return  in  the  light  of  the  general
    background evidence about the situation in Somalia and the  appellant's
    own evidence that his home area is Afgoye.


33.    In the light  of  the  comprehensive  rejection  of  the  appellant's
    evidence by the Tribunal,  we  have  also  reminded  ourselves  of  the
    guidance given by the Supreme Court in  MA  (Somalia)  v  Secretary  of
    State [2010] UKSC 49 in the judgment of Sir John Dyson SCJ:
    "32. Where the appellant has given a totally incredible account of  the
        relevant facts, the tribunal must decide what weight to give to the
        lie, as well as to all the other evidence in  the  case,  including
        the general evidence. Suppose, for example, that at  the  interview
        stage the appellant made an admission which, if true, would destroy
        his claim; and at the hearing  before  the  AIT  he  withdraws  the
        admission, saying that his answer at interview was wrongly recorded
        or that he misunderstood what  he  was  being  asked.  If  the  AIT
        concludes that his  evidence  at  the  hearing  on  this  point  is
        dishonest, it is likely that his lies will assume great importance.
        They will almost certainly lead  the  tribunal  to  find  that  his
        original answers were true and dismiss his appeal. In other  cases,
        the significance of an appellant's dishonest testimony may be  less
        clear-cut. The AIT in the present case was  rightly  alive  to  the
        danger of falling into the trap  of  dismissing  an  appeal  merely
        because the appellant had told lies. The dangers of that  trap  are
        well understood by judges who preside over criminal  trials  before
        juries. People lie for many reasons. In R v Lucas  [1981]  QB  720,
        the Court of Appeal had to consider whether a statement  containing
        a lie was capable of amounting to corroboration. At  p  724F,  Lord
        Lane CJ said:
                   'To be capable of amounting  to  corroboration  the  lie
           told out of court must first of all be deliberate. Secondly,  it
           must relate to a material issue. Thirdly, the motive for the lie
           must be a realisation of guilt and fear of the truth.  The  jury
           should in appropriate cases be reminded  that  people  sometimes
           lie, for example, in an attempt to bolster up a just  cause,  or
           out of shame or out of a wish to conceal  disgraceful  behaviour
           from their family....'
    33.    Although the analogy is not exact, it is close enough  for these
        words  to  be  of  relevance  in  the  present  context.   So   the
        significance of lies will vary from case to case.  In  some  cases,
        the AIT may conclude that a lie is  of  no  great  consequence.  In
        other cases, where the appellant tells lies on a central  issue  in
        the case, the AIT may conclude that they are of great significance.
        MA's appeal was such a case. The central issue was whether  MA  had
        close connections with powerful actors in Mogadishu. The AIT  found
        that he had not told the truth about his links with  Mogadishu.  It
        is in such a case that the general evidence about the  country  may
        become particularly important. It will be a matter for the  AIT  to
        decide whether the  general  evidence  is  sufficiently  strong  to
        counteract what we have called the negative pull of the appellant's
        lies."
34.    The appellant is someone who has been found not  to  have  told  the
    truth about his clan membership and contacts with AS.   When  assessing
    the risks arising from the route of return, we are  proceeding  on  the
    basis that the appellant is a Southern Somali and that his home area is
    Afgoye.  On his account he was returned to Somalia by the Saudi Arabian
    authorities in 2009 and was able to travel to his home area in  Afgoye.
    He was then able to leave Somalia with the help of  an  agent  arranged
    through his uncle, travelling from Afgoye to Mogadishu.  He  says  that
    he has relatives living in Afgoye including an uncle with an ability to
    finance his departure from Somalia.

35.    We accept, in the light of the evidence in the report of  the  Fact-
    Finding Mission to Somalia, that travel is not only possible  but  does
    take place with some degree of frequency from  Mogadishu  Airport  into
    the city of Mogadishu and into other areas in Somalia.  We accept  that
    there are regular,  even  if  limited,  flights  into  Mogadishu,  some
    fifteen to eighteen a day, the report referring  to  their  being  just
    over 12,000 passengers  in  eight  months.   Buses  and  taxis  operate
    between the airport and the city and travel is possible to other cities
    and through the Afgoye corridor.

36.    It is argued that there would be a real risk to the appellant as  he
    has to pass through TFG and AS checkpoints.   The  AS  checkpoints  are
    generally well disciplined and  their  concern  is  whether  travellers
    comply with the rules and norms  of  behaviour  required.  We  are  not
    satisfied that  there  is  any  substance  in  the  argument  that  the
    appellant would be at real risk.  The fact  that  he  has  on  his  own
    account lived in Yemen and Saudi Arabia strongly suggests to us and  we
    find  that  he  is  well  able  to  anticipate  and  comply  with   the
    requirements of AS and he has been able to do so in the past.   So  far
    as the TFG checkpoints  are  concerned,  there  is  nothing  about  the
    appellant which puts  him  at  any  particular  risk  and  we  are  not
    satisfied that the evidence supports  a  finding  that  all  those  who
    travel through the checkpoints can be regarded as being at real risk or
    that he would be so simply because he is being returned  from  the  UK.
     For similar reasons we are not satisfied that there is a real risk to
    him of enforced recruitment  by  AS:  the  general  evidence  does  not
    support a finding that all men or young men are at such risk and in the
    light of the credibility findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant is unable to show that there is anything  in  his  particular
    circumstances or profile which would put him at risk.

37.    The appellant was found not to be a minority tribe member.   He  has
    an uncle who was able to fund his departure from Somalia and  therefore
    will be able to take steps to help him avoid foreseeable risks  at  TFG
    checkpoints as he will  be  able  to  pay  what  is  described  as  the
    relatively modest sums often demanded.  The concerns expressed in  para
    9 of Mr Hoehne's report are based on what one traveller described  who,
    in the event, was able to travel in safety.  His report accepts that in
    general people can travel reasonably safely through AS  areas  provided
    their conditions are met, the footnote on page 7 of Mr Hoehne's  report
    confirming that people frequently travel between Mogadishu  and  Afgoye
    and can make the travel without major problems if they comply  with  AS
    requirements.  The concerns that Mr Hoehne  had  for  the  appellant's
    safety are primarily based on his account of his previous contacts with
    AS but his evidence on these issues  was  rejected  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

38.    We accept that the situation in Somalia is volatile  but  the  issue
    for us is whether the appellant in his particular  circumstances  would
    be at real risk of serious harm when returning from Mogadishu to Afgoye
    so as to entitle him to humanitarian or  Article  3  protection.   This
    must be assessed against the current background evidence.  In the light
    of the Tribunal's findings of fact and  the  appellant's  own  evidence
    that he has been able to make this journey  on  two  occasions  without
    harm, when considered against the background  of  the  travel  actually
    taking place in the Afgoye corridor, we are not satisfied that  it  has
    been shown that the generalised or indiscriminate violence has  reached
    such a high level that  he,  solely  on  account  of  his  presence  in
    Somalia, travelling from Mogadishu to Afgoye, would face  a  real  risk
    threatening his life or  person.   The  background  evidence  does  not
    satisfy us that the appellant would be at real risk of serious harm and
    there is no particular feature in his profile or background which  puts
    him at a risk above that faced by other residents or returnees.

39.     We are therefore not satisfied that the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    asylum, humanitarian protection or that returning him would  give  rise
    to a breach of Article 3.

Decision

40.     The  original  Tribunal  erred  in  law.   We  remake  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.






Signed
       Date



Senior Immigration Judge Latter
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


