


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (AIT Procession House)   |                             |
|On 4 November 2009                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     Aa

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S McEwen, Legal Representative, Refugee and
                    Migrant Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



All non-Arab Darfuris are at  risk  of  persecution  in  Darfur  and  cannot
reasonably be expected to relocate elsewhere in Sudan.  HGMO (Relocation  to
Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062 is no longer to be followed,  save  in
respect of the guidance summarised at (2) and (6) of the  headnote  to  that
case.


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sudan.  He  appealed  to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the Secretary of State's decision on 8 September 2008  to
    remove him as an illegal entrant from the United Kingdom.

2.   Little more need be said about the Immigration  Judge's  determination,
    given that it was successfully challenged and on 16 March 2009 a Senior
    Immigration Judge ordered a full second stage reconsideration  hearing.
    A copy of that determination is annexed hereto.

3.   The second stage reconsideration took place before  us  on  4  November
    2009.  Ms S McEwen of Refugee and Migrant Justice appeared on behalf of
    the appellant.  Mr E Tufan appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

4.   It was common ground that the  appeal  fell  to  be  allowed.   The  UK
    Border Agency produced an Operational Guidance Note (OGN) on Sudan on 2
    November 2009.  At paragraph 3.8.9 we find the following:

    "3.8.9   Ordinary non-Arab Darfuris are not thought to  be  subject  to
             systematic persecution outside  Darfur  and  the  courts  have
             found that it is not unduly harsh to expect them to internally
             relocate to Khartoum.  However, those decisions  predated  the
             developments and reports referred to  at  paragraph  3.9.4  to
             3.9.7 below, and restrictions on the operations of  NGOs  -  a
             key source of country of origin information on  Sudan  -  have
             meant that we have been unable to obtain  sufficient  reliable
             information to be able to assess accurately whether there is a
             continued heightened risk to non-Arab  Darfuris  in  Khartoum.
             In light of the fact  that  we  do  not  yet  have  sufficient
             information to allay the concerns raised in the reports,  case
             owners should not argue that non-Arab  Darfuris  can  relocate
             internally within Sudan.


    3.8.10    Conclusion.   All  non-Arab  Darfuris,  regardless  of  their
             political  or  other  affiliations,  are  at  real   risk   of
             persecution in Darfur and  internal  relocation  elsewhere  in
             Sudan is not  currently  to  be  relied  upon.  Claimants  who
             establish that they are non-Arab Darfuris and who do not  fall
             within  the  exclusion  clauses  will  therefore  qualify  for
             asylum."


5.   Paragraphs 3.9.4 to 3.9.7 of the OGN summarise recent evidence  on  the
    situation in Khartoum.  On 10 May  2008  JEM  launched  an  assault  on
    Omdurman, Khartoum as a consequence of  which  there  were  reports  of
    arbitrary arrests by the Sudanese authorities, extrajudicial executions
    and ill-treatment of detainees following the attack.  The  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office stated that following the fighting large number  of
    non-Arab Darfuris living in Khartoum were detained.  On  4  March  2009
    the ICC announced the issue of  an  arrest  warrant  against  President
    Bashir for war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur.  This  led
    to the expulsion of a number of international NGOs and the  closure  of
    some local human  rights  organisations,  which  severely  reduced  the
    ability of the local human rights community to monitor  and  report  on
    human rights violations.  There  was  continued  press  censorship  and
    intimidation which further increased restrictions  on  the  freedom  of
    expression.  A UNHCR report of November 2008 refers to the use  by  the
    National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) of arbitrary  arrest
    against  political  dissidents  in  Khartoum  which  can  involve  ill-
    treatment, torture and unofficial places of detention, and it  is  said
    that Darfurians may raise the suspicion of the security forces  by  the
    mere fact of travelling from other parts of Sudan to Darfur, by  having
    travelled abroad, or  having  been  in  contact  with  individuals  and
    organisations abroad.

6.   Thus it is clear that the appellant, if he is a non-Arab Darfuri,  must
    succeed in his appeal.  His evidence has consistently been that  he  is
    of the Masseleit tribe, and Mr Tufan accepted that that had  not  been
    contested.  He referred to paragraphs 16 and 22 of the  refusal  letter
    as raising some sort of challenge, but the former  does  no  more  than
    find  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  an  individual  threat   of
    persecution  directed  against  him,  and  the  latter  refers  to  him
    remaining in Sudan for a further three years after the  attack  on  his
    village.  We consider that these matters come nowhere near a  challenge
    to his claimed tribal affiliation, which is noted  without  comment  at
    paragraph 7A of the refusal letter.  Accordingly  we  accept  that  the
    appellant is a non-Arab Darfuri, and it is not suggested that he  falls
    within the exclusion clauses.

7.   As a consequence of  the  further  evidence  referred  to  in  the  OGN
    reassessment, it is clear that persons who are  non-Arabs  from  Darfur
    facing relocation to Khartoum are now a risk category.  It follows from
    this that the guidance summarised in paragraphs (3), (4), (5)  and  (7)
    in the head note to HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT
    00062 is no longer to be followed.

8.   However, as regards other  aspects  of  the  guidance  given  in  HGMO,
    nothing in the recent evidence or  the  OGN  indicates  any  reason  to
    depart from the guidance summarised in paragraphs (2) and  (6)  in  the
    head note to HGMO. These state as follows:

    "(2) Neither  involuntary  returnees  nor  failed  asylum  seekers  nor
         persons of military age (including draft evaders and deserters) are
         as such at real risk on return to Khartoum


    (6)  An appellant will be able to succeed on the basis of medical needs
         only in extreme and exceptional circumstances."

This appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention and under Article  3  of
the Human Rights Convention.





Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Allen

