
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

           RM (Young Chechen Male - Risk - IFA) Russia CG [2006] UKAIT 00050



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at Field House                    Determination Promulgated
On 16 May 2006                          On 12 June 2006


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
                      Senior Immigration Judge Waumsley
                               Mrs L R Schmitt



                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr Alan Briddock instructed by Messrs Alsters
Kelley
For the Respondent:   Ms S Leatherland, Presenting Officer


A young Chechen male will not as such  be at real risk of persecution  or  a
breach of Article 3 either on return to Russia,  or  on  the  rail  link  to
Chechnya, or in Chechnya, and, as an  alternative,  has  a  viable  internal
relocation option in Ingushetia. However  a  Chechen,  who  is  recorded  as
wanted by the Russian authorities in connection with or for  supporting  the
rebels in Chechnya, will  be  at  real  risk  on  return  at  Moscow  or  St
Petersburg Airports, and anywhere else in the Russian  Federation.  He  will
not however be a refugee if his own conduct is  enough  for  Article  1F  to
exclude him.
This decision replaces MR (Chechen - Return) Russia CG  [2002]  UKIAT  07562
as current country guidance on these issues.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1.  The  Appellant,  a  citizen   of   the   Russian   Federation,   seeks
     reconsideration of the determination of Mrs G  McLachlan,  Adjudicator,
     dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 1  June
     2004 to issue removal directions and refuse asylum. By  virtue  of  the
     transitional provisions made on the abolition of the IAT,  this  appeal
     takes effect as a reconsideration by the Tribunal pursuant to an  order
     under section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
     limited to the grounds on which permission to appeal was granted.

                                  The Claim

  2. The Appellant's material claim as presented to us can be summarised  as
     follows. He is an ethnic Chechen who came from a small village  near  a
     town in Chechnya about 40 kilometres from Grozny. In 1980 when he was 2
     months old he moved with his parents to Astrakhan in Russia,  but  they
     returned to their home village in Chechnya in 1992 when  the  Appellant
     was 12 years old. He was 14 years old in  1994  when  the  conflict  in
     Chechnya began. He had by then received  only  intermittent  schooling.
     His village was bombed in December 1994/early January 1995. There  were
     grave problems for the civilian population because of the activities of
     the Russian forces.  The  Appellant  suffered  the  loss  of  relatives
     during the conflict.  His uncle died in a mine explosion and  his  aunt
     and her relatives died in a rocket attack whilst going to his  funeral.
     It was very difficult for the Chechens to move around their local area.
     The Russians attacked Grozny in 1996. The Appellant became  aware  that
     members of his family and the local population provided  assistance  to
     the Chechen freedom fighters in the form of food and accommodation.  As
     the violence died down  the  Appellant  assisted  his  family  at  home
     looking after the cattle. School had not been reopened.   The  violence
     began again at the  end  of  1999.   It  was  commonplace  for  Russian
     soldiers to  undertake  house-to-house  searches.   The  soldiers  were
     looking for freedom fighters and the Appellant, as a young male,  would
     have been suspect. At the beginning  of  2000,  when  his  village  was
     searched, the Appellant hid in a cellar until his mother told  him  the
     soldiers had gone. On another occasion, the Appellant hid in the  local
     forest, knowing that the soldiers would not venture there for  fear  of
     ambush.

  3. In early 2001 his father died after an illness. In the summer  of  2001
     the Appellant was stopped at a checkpoint by Russian soldiers.  He  was
     with another man in a taxi going to  the  market  to  buy  clothes  for
     resale.  The Appellant's shirt was removed as the  soldiers  looked  on
     his body for scars and bruises which would be  taken  to  be  signs  of
     carrying a machine gun. The Appellant was beaten several times  by  the
     soldiers and also kicked.  The soldiers found no scars or  bruising  on
     him, though they did on the other man in the taxi who  was  then  taken
     away. The Appellant was released. There was a further incident about  a
     month later when the Appellant was on a bus when  soldiers  wanted  him
     but women on the bus shouted abuse at the soldiers and  they  left  the
     Appellant alone.

  4. Two or three weeks later, the Appellant was removed from his  house  by
     soldiers early in the morning  and  was  accused  of  being  a  freedom
     fighter.  He was thrown into a hole used to detain  prisoners,  guarded
     by a soldier. Two or three people were already in the hole under guard.
     The other detainees were frequently taken  from  the  hole  and  beaten
     seriously although the Appellant  was  not.   All  the  detainees  were
     deprived of food and drink. The Appellant's  family  paid  a  bribe  of
     $1000  to  obtain  the  Appellant's  release.   Upon  his  release  the
     Appellant went to stay with relatives in the same village, staying only
     for two days before moving to another relative. He moved between 10  or
     15 different houses staying only two days at  each.  He  did  this  for
     several months whilst his relatives looked for a way to assist  him  to
     leave Chechnya.  He was considered to be particularly at risk from  the
     Russian soldiers who suspected him of being  a  freedom  fighter.   The
     Appellant believes that he was suspected of this and  targeted  because
     the soldiers had discovered the support given by members of his  family
     to sheltering freedom fighters.  The  Appellant's  relatives  collected
     $2,200 for his journey into the neighbouring  province  of  Ingushetia.
     From there he travelled through various countries reaching  the  United
     Kingdom on 3 September 2001 when he claimed asylum.

                          The Previous Proceedings

  5. The Appellant's first asylum appeal in  the  UK  was  dismissed  by  an
     Adjudicator in 2002, after he did not appear in the courtroom  for  the
     hearing. The Appellant claimed that he was in the building at the  time
     but was not  aware  he  was  expected  to  go  to  the  courtroom.  The
     Respondent  exercised  his  discretion  and  gave  the  Appellant   the
     opportunity to make a second application. This was refused  on  1  June
     2004 and the dismissal of his subsequent appeal is the subject of  this
     reconsideration hearing.

  6. The Adjudicator, who heard the 2nd appeal on 1  October  2004,  reached
     adverse credibility findings concerning the claim. She noted  that  the
     Appellant had changed the date given  by  him  for  his  problems  with
     Russian soldiers.  The Adjudicator concluded that this  correction  was
     in response to an attack on his credibility by the  Respondent  in  the
     refusal letter rather than a genuine  mistake.   The  Adjudicator  also
     noted other inconsistencies in the evidence.  She noted that  initially
     the Appellant had said that the bribe of $1000 was paid by his  parents
     but, when it became apparent that his father died before it  was  paid,
     he corrected this to say that  it  was  paid  by  his  mother  and  his
     maternal and paternal relatives.  The Adjudicator did not believe this.
      The Adjudicator also noted an inconsistency concerning the Appellant's
     account of his family moving to Astrakhan.

  7. The Appellant claimed before the Adjudicator  that  he  had  difficulty
     with the interpreters when he made his statement on the 8  August  2003
     and at his interviews in September  2001  and  on  19  May  2004.   The
     problem was that  the  interpreters  spoke  Russian  and  although  the
     Appellant said at the time that he  was  happy  to  be  interviewed  in
     Russian and that he understood the interpreter,  he  claimed  later  to
     have had difficulties as  Russian  was  not  his  first  language.  The
     Adjudicator did not believe him and  concluded  that  these  complaints
     were concocted to deal with apparent discrepancies in what he had said.
      The Adjudicator also  concluded  that  it  was  implausible  that  the
     Appellant would not have been found by the Russian  soldiers  searching
     the Appellant's house because according to Dr Galeotti, the Appellant's
     expert, it was normal for houses in the area to  have  storage  cellars
     and it was implausible that the soldiers would not have searched there.

  8. In view of the contradictions and discrepancies between the Appellant's
     various accounts, the Adjudicator did not accept that the Appellant had
     been subjected to oppression, detention and ill-treatment  as  claimed,
     or that his father had died in January 2001.  Moreover  she  held  that
     the Appellant did not provide a plausible explanation as to why he  did
     not remain,  in  common  with  many  thousands  of  other  Chechens  in
     Ingushetia. She held that the Appellant was  an  economic  migrant.  In
     reaching  these  conclusions  she  acknowledged  the  expertise  of  Dr
     Galeotti who had provided a report on the  situation  in  Chechnya  and
     Russia generally. However she concluded that she should not place  "too
     much weight" on this  report  because  Dr  Galeotti  had  not  met  the
     Appellant, had not attended the hearing to give oral evidence and  face
     cross-examination, and because no copy of  his  instructions  had  been
     supplied to her. On the facts as established and in the  light  of  her
     view of the objective evidence she concluded that the  Appellant  would
     not be at any real risk on return to  Chechnya.   She  noted  that  the
     Russian government had offered an amnesty to encourage  the  return  of
     displaced Chechens. She followed the country guidance in MR (Chechen  -
     Return) Russia CG [2002] UKIAT 07562.

  9. On 6 March 2005, a Vice-President of  the  IAT  granted  permission  to
     appeal on the following basis:

           "Other  than  the  Adjudicator's  reference  to  his  report  at
           paragraph  20,  it  is  not  clear  what  weight  (if  any)  the
           Adjudicator attached to  the  report  of  Dr  Galeotti.  If  she
           dismissed what he says, she should say so and explain  why.  The
           fact that he has not met the claimant is irrelevant, as  is  the
           fact that he did not appear to give oral evidence  (it  may  not
           have been an approved expense) and the fact that the Adjudicator
           did not have sight of his instructions.

 10. A different  panel  of  the  AIT  (Senior  Immigration  Judge  Freeman,
     Immigration Judge Grimmettt and Mr T A Jones MBE)  concluded  following
     at the 1st stage reconsideration hearing on 31 January 2006 that:

           "The  Adjudicator  at  paragraph  20  made  comments  about  the
           evidence of the "country expert" which would not have  justified
           completely  discounting  it:  indeed  she   herself   apparently
           accepted the submissions of  the  Presenting  Officer  that  she
           should "not place too much weight on it". Having said  that  she
           needed to look at what  the  "country  expert"  said  about  the
           individual  case,  decide  how  far  it  was  relevant  to   the
           Appellant's credibility, and take such account of it as she  saw
           fit on that basis. It follows that there will need to be a  full
           reconsideration of this appeal."

 11. At a "for mention" hearing on 27 March 2006, the Appellant  sought  and
     obtained permission to call expert  oral  evidence  at  the  2nd  stage
     reconsideration hearing. In the event no expert witness was called  and
     no new expert evidence beyond Dr Galeotti's report of 12 July 2004  was
     produced. Mr Briddock explained that Dr Galeotti  was  in  the  US  and
     unavailable and it was not a viable use of  public  funds  to  instruct
     another expert. We accept that, although unfortunately it means that Dr
     Galeotti has not had the chance to comment on the more recent objective
     evidence from the last two years

                                 The Hearing

 12. We heard oral evidence from the Appellant, and  oral  submissions  from
     both Representatives, all of  which  are  set  out  in  our  record  of
     proceedings. We have also taken into account the following  documentary
     evidence, which was presented to  us  by  the  parties.  The  objective
     evidence comprised within it is itemised in the attached schedule.
           1. The Court bundle.
           2. The Appellant's bundle
           3. a. The Appellant's supplemental statement
              b. The Appellant's further statement
           4. The Respondent's bundle.
           5. The country guidance in MR  (Chechen  -  Return)   Russia  CG
              [2002]  UKIAT  07562  and  other  case  law  referred  to  in
              paragraph 16.
           6. The Appellant's Representative's skeleton argument
           7. US State Department report for 2005
           8. Norwegian Refugee Council report of May 2005
           9. Pravda article of 1 June 2004.
          10. Appellant's statement in the 2002 appeal
          11. Appellant's grounds of appeal in 2002

 13. The issues canvassed before us were as follows:
           1. If the Appellant's claim were credible would he be at an real
              risk due to being wanted by the Russian authorities?
           2. If he were not credible would he be at real risk as  a  young
              Chechen male?
           3. Would he be at risk on return  to  Moscow  or  St  Petersburg
              airports?
           4. Would he be at real  risk  travelling  from  the  airport  to
              Chechnya.
           5. Would he be at real risk in his home area in Chechnya
           6. Would he have a viable internal relocation option in  Russia,
              outside Chechnya, that would not be unduly harsh?

 14. In asylum and associated human rights appeals the burden of proof  lies
     with the Appellant and the standard of proof is  that  of  "real  risk"
     (also described as "a reasonable degree of likelihood"). No  Article  8
     issues were canvassed before us. Nor has any issue relating to military
     service by the Appellant been raised before us.

                            The Objective Context

 15. The IAT provided country  guidance  about  the  risk  in  Chechnya  and
     internal relocation in respect of people with varying  characteristics.
     The Adjudicator specifically followed the case of MR (Chechen - Return)
     which related to an ethnic Chechen male. It concluded that:

           18. The appellant will  face  a  difficult  time  on  return  to
           Chechnya but the evidence suggests that there  is  some  limited
           support in the region and relative stability there  despite  the
           obvious difficulties with the security situation. It  would  not
           in our view arguably breach the appellant's human rights for him
           to be required to return. It would not expose him to inhuman  or
           degrading  treatment,  having  regard  to  the  high   threshold
           required  to  establish  a  claim   under   Article   3.     Any
           interference  with  his  private  or  family   life   would   be
           proportionate and in pursuit of a  legitimate  aim  (immigration
           control).  Despite giving careful and sympathetic  attention  to
           the points made by the appellant, we are unable to assist him.

 16. Other country guidance from 2002/3 subsists in OA (IFA - Unduly Harsh -
     Chechens - Relocation) Russia CG [2002] UKIAT 03796. This  was  a  case
     involving an ethnic Russian  male,  a  pilot,  from  Chechnya  who  had
     refused to fly planes for the Chechen rebels; AV Russia CG [2002] UKIAT
     05260, which relates  to  an  ethnic  Russian  female  with  a  Chechen
     boyfriend; and EM, LM (IFA - Chechen) Russia  CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00210,
     which concerns two ethnic Russian sisters from  Chechnya.  In  each  of
     these cases the risk profile of the individuals involved is  materially
     different from the Appellant in this appeal and neither Mr Briddock nor
     Ms Leatherland has relied upon them.

 17. Mr Briddock invited  us  to  conclude  in  the  light  of  the  current
     objective  evidence  that  not  only  those  wanted  by   the   Russian
     authorities but all young male  Chechens  would  be  at  real  risk  of
     persecution and/or a breach of Article 3 on return  at  Moscow  and  St
     Petersburg Airports,  on  their  way  to  Chechnya,  and  in  Chechnya.
     Moreover there is no viable internal relocation option  for  them  that
     would not be unduly harsh. He referred us specifically to the  material
     identified in his skeleton argument, and to  Dr  Galeotti's  report  of
     July 2004 and a report of May 2005 by the Norwegian Refugee Council.

 18. Ms Leatherland confirmed that returns effected by the Respondent  would
     be to Moscow or St Petersburg Airports.  She  produced  a  report  from
     Pravda of 1 June 2004 of the resumption of a  passenger  train  service
     from Moscow to Grozny, stopping at, amongst other places, a  town  near
     to the Appellant's home village. She produced an objective  bundle  and
     relied in particular on the CIPU Operational Guidance  Note  of  9  May
     2006 on the Russian Federation, which gives a  useful  summary  of  the
     current situation in Chechnya (much of which is sourced from  the  2005
     US State Department report) and of the Respondent's policy  in  respect
     of granting asylum or humanitarian protection. It is in  the  following
     terms:

           3.6.2 The conflict in Chechnya is currently the most serious  on
           the  territory  of  the  former  Soviet  Union.    The   Russian
           government intervened in the Republic  in  1999  after  a  short
           chaotic period of virtual Chechen self-rule after Russian troops
           withdrew in 1996.  Much of the destruction of Grozny  and  other
           Chechen cities and towns was caused  by  indiscriminate  use  of
           heavy artillery and aerial  bombing  by  the  Russian  military.
           However such  attacks  are  now  intermittent  and  the  Russian
           response is becoming more targeted.
           3.6.3 Despite Moscow's claims of "normalisation",  fighting  has
           continued with frequent attacks  by  militants  on  federal  and
           local forces, especially in  the  highland  south.   Reports  of
           human rights abuses remain high.  There have been widespread and
           credible allegations of extra judicial killings, disappearances,
           torture, rape and unlawful detention by all sides.
           3.6.4 Since the start of the Chechen conflict  there  have  been
           widespread reports that  both  sides  have  killed  or  tortured
           prisoners.  The Russian Armed Forces and police units  are  also
           reported to have routinely  abused  and  tortured  personals  in
           holding facilities where federal authorities sorted out fighters
           or those suspected of aiding  rebels  from  civilians.   Federal
           forces  and  police  units  also  reportedly  ransomed   Chechen
           detainees (and, at times, their corpses) to their  families  for
           prices ranging from several hundred to thousands of dollars.
           3.6.5 Although, the statistics from both the authorities and NGO
           Memorial  appear  to  point  to  a  decline  in  abductions  and
           disappearances in 2005 they continue to  occur.  Some  of  these
           disappearances can be attributed to federal forces or pro-Moscow
           Chechen forces.
           3.6.6 During 2005 there was a continued shift in Russian tactics
           away from operations involving Russian military  formations  and
           towards police operations and from the  use  of  federal  forces
           toward reliance on paramilitary and police units of the  Chechen
           Republic. There were  fewer  mopping  up  operations,  known  as
           "zachistky" in  2005  than  in  previous  years,  although  more
           targeted operations, such as night raids  continued.   According
           to the NGO Memorial in some cases zachistky were accompanied  by
           abductions, looting and beatings, most zachistky were  conducted
           with no serious  human  rights  abuses.   According  to  Amnesty
           International many  of  the  human  rights  abuses  in  Chechnya
           occurred during  targeted  raids  by  federal  and  pro  Russian
           Chechen forces.
           3.6.7 Chechen security forces were nominally under  the  control
           of  Chechen  civilian  authorities  but  also  often   conducted
           operations jointly with Russian federal forces.
           3.6.8 Amnesty International reported  that  in  most  cases  the
           Russian  and  Chechen  authorities  failed  to  conduct  prompt,
           independent and  thorough  investigations  into  allegations  of
           human rights violations against the civilian population.
           3.6.9  However  some  action  has  been  taken  by  the  Russian
           authorities.  According to statistics compiled  by  the  general
           prosecutor' office, since 1999, 103 verdicts have been  rendered
           in  cases  involving  federal  servicemen  charged  with  crimes
           against civilians.  Of these, 27 were given prison sentences  of
           from 1 to 18 years in prison,  8  were  acquitted  and  20  were
           amnestied. Sentences in the  remainder  were  suspended  or  the
           guilty were fined. Government statistics also showed that 34 law
           enforcement officers were charged with crimes against civilians,
           with 7 sentenced to prison and  arrested,  convicted  and  given
           suspended sentences......
           3.6.11  Sufficiency  of  protection.   As   this   category   of
           claimants' fear is of  ill-treatment/persecution  by  the  state
           authorities  they  cannot  apply  to   those   authorities   for
           protection.
           3.6.12  Internal  relocation.   All  adults   in   the   Russian
           Federation are issued with internal passports, which  they  must
           carry while travelling, and they are expected to  register  with
           the local authorities within 90  days  of  their  arrival  in  a
           place.  Corruption in the registration process in  local  police
           precincts was a problem and although the fees for permanent  and
           temporary registration remained low, police demanded bribes when
           processing registration applications and during the spot  checks
           for registration documentation.
           3.6.13 The current advice from the FCO is that any returnee  who
           is the holder of a valid Russian  passports  (indicating  former
           residents of Russian territory) should be able  to  resettle  in
           any of a number of regions in the Russian Federation, even after
           a prolonged absence.
           3.6.14 In general, as this category of claimants' fear is of ill-
           treatment/persecution by the state authorities, relocation to  a
           different area of the country  to  escape  this  threat  is  not
           feasible and Chechens who fear the Russian authorities will  not
           be able to relocate internally. However internal  relocation  is
           an option for those Chechens who do not fear or are  not  wanted
           by the federal authorities.  The IAT found in a number of  cases
           that although Chechens  face  societal  discrimination  and  had
           difficulties  finding   accommodation   and   employment   these
           difficulties in a round do not make it unduly harsh for a person
           to relocate internally.
           3.6.16  Conclusion.  The  Russian  authorities  have   committed
           serious human rights abuses including torture, rape, kidnappings
           and extra judicial executions in Chechnya.  The  Chechen  rebels
           have also been  involved  in  serious  human  rights  violations
           including major acts of terrorism outside Chechnya  and  summary
           executions of civilians. Those who are involved or are suspected
           of being involved with Chechen rebels, face a  serious  risk  of
           persecution from the federal authorities.  Where any  individual
           is able to demonstrate that they are at serious risk  of  facing
           such persecution on account  of  their  activities  a  grant  of
           asylum will be appropriate.
           3.6.17. However, Chechens from  Chechnya  who  simply  fear  the
           general situation can internally relocate to another area of the
           Russian Federation and will not therefore qualify for a grant of
           asylum all humanitarian protection.


                         The Risk Arising on Return


 19. In assessing the evidence as a whole and the submissions we begin  with
     the position for Chechen returnees at Moscow and St Petersburg Airports
     and note Ms Leatherland's acceptance that a person with a Chechen  name
     and Chechen appearance will be identifiable as such on return. We  note
     further the Respondent will not return a person without proper  papers,
     which in practice mean either his  own  passport  or  emergency  travel
     documents.

 20. Dr Galeotti is the founder and director  of  the  Organised  Russian  &
     Eurasian Crime Research Unit. He writes for Jane's Intelligence  Review
     and has lectured extensively on his subject to a  variety  of  national
     and  international  intelligence  organisations.  His  report  is  well
     sourced and his views must be taken seriously and considered carefully.
     He reported that there is a computerised document control system  which
     combines data from a variety of organisations including the Ministry of
     Internal  Affairs  (MVD)  and  the  Federal  Security  Service   (FSB).
     Consequently a person who is wanted by the authorities will be  flagged
     on entry and detained. Though we have not been shown any other specific
     objective evidence to confirm this assertion, it is consistent with the
     view expressed in the CIPU OGN that a person who  "is  involved  or  is
     suspected of being involved with Chechen rebels faces a serious risk of
     persecution from the federal authorities".

 21. We are conscious that information about the gathering and dissemination
     of intelligence material in many countries is often hard to come by. We
     accept Dr Galeotti's opinion, as an  expert  on  criminal  and  related
     issues in Russia, that wanted  and  suspected  Chechen  rebels  can  be
     identified either by this computerised system or indeed by enquiries of
     their home area if doubts arise. Consequently we accept,  as  does  the
     Respondent in his OGN, that those Chechens who are recorded  as  wanted
     by the Russian authorities in connection with  or  for  supporting  the
     rebels in Chechnya will be entitled to asylum, subject to the operation
     of any relevant exclusion clause under  the  1951  Convention,  on  the
     basis of their race and real/imputed political opinion, and will face a
     real risk of a material breach of their Article  3  rights.  Indeed  we
     find there is ample objective evidence of serious ill-treatment by  the
     authorities of such people in detention.

 22. However much of Dr Galeotti's opinion was predicated on  assessing  the
     risk to the Appellant on the basis that he  was credible in his account
     and fell  within the category of a wanted person. As we shall  describe
     later, we have considerably more information about the changes  in  the
     Appellant's  evidence  between  his  various  accounts  than  was  made
     available to Dr  Galeotti,  and  we  do  not  share  his  view  on  the
     Appellant's credibility.  We must therefore  go  on,  as  urged  by  Mr
     Briddock, to consider whether in the context of the objective  evidence
     as a whole, a young Chechen male who  is  not  wanted  by  the  Russian
     authorities, and is not suspected by them of rebel connections, and has
     never come to their specific adverse attention, would also be  at  risk
     on return as such or as a consequence of being a failed asylum seeker.

 23. We note the guidance of the Court of Appeal in AA and  LK  [2006]  EWCA
     Civ that a person who can return voluntarily in safety to  his  country
     of nationality is not a refugee even if on forced return he would be at
     risk.

 24. Dr Galeotti makes the point that a person who has left Russia illegally
     will almost inevitably be detained on arrival as he is in breach of the
     1998 Law on Entry and Exit, as amended in 2003. At the  very  least  he
     will  be  detained  by  the  border  troops  who  will  then  handle  a
     preliminary investigation. However he does not suggest that any penalty
     for what is  a  prosecutable  offence  would  be  disproportionate  but
     suggests rather that even if such a person  is  never  charged  he  may
     still have to endure lengthy detention in cruel, inhuman  or  degrading
     conditions. However there is current country guidance  in  ZB  (Russian
     prison conditions) Russian Federation CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00239  to  the
     effect that conditions in Russian prisons are not so severe as to be in
     breach of Article 3, and  in  our  judgment  there  is  nothing  in  Dr
     Galeotii's report or the objective evidence before us that lead  us  to
     reach a different view from the Tribunal in ZB, who assessed this issue
     with great care. Indeed Mr Briddock did not seek to argue before us  to
     the contrary. In this regard our decision confirms ZB.

 25. The next question on return specifically is  whether  a  young  Chechen
     male  would  as  such  be  at  real  risk  at  the  airport.  As   both
     representatives admitted to us there is very little objective  evidence
     on this subject. Ms Leatherland suggested that this  was  because  they
     were not at risk and if they were there  would  be  such  evidence.  Mr
     Briddock argued that it was difficult to prove a negative;  that  there
     were not many returns; and that no NGO actually monitored such returns.

 26. The main evidence on this subject is comprised in some faxes  from  the
     FCO post in Russia and from a report of the Norwegian Refugee  Council,
     which Mr Briddock told  us  is  similar  to  the  Immigration  Advisory
     Service in the UK. The relevant passages are on page 54 of  the  report
     and are as follows:

           "Establishing facts about Chechens that have  been  returned  to
           the Russian Federation from other countries is difficult  as  no
           independent body or organisation monitors this group.  According
           to the Danish Support  Committee  for  Chechnya,  both  the  men
           returned from Denmark in 2005  were  temporarily  detained  upon
           arrival in Moscow.  The release of one of the men is  attributed
           to the fact that  he  had  relatives  in  Moscow  who  protested
           against  the  detention.   This  person  is   currently   living
           "underground" in Moscow.  The committee has not had any  contact
           with the other person after his return.  The person referred  to
           above who was returned to Russia by  Swiss  authorities,  claims
           that he was ill treated by  Russian  law  enforcement  officials
           upon arrival.  The man told the Swiss Refugee  Council  that  he
           was apprehended and questioned by the police at the  airport  in
           Moscow and then brought to a police station  where  he  was  ill
           treated before he was released after 24 hours.  Allegedly he had
           to give the police officers money in order to  be  released  and
           was told by the police officers that he had been lucky and  that
           he should not stay in  Moscow.   A  Chechen  asylum  seeker  who
           arrived in Norway after having been detained in  Ukraine  claims
           that he was told by Ukrainian  law  enforcement  officials  that
           none of the Chechens that were   deported  and  handed  over  to
           Russian law enforcement officials reached Russia in one piece.
           According  to  a  report  in  2002  by  the  Norwegian  Helsinki
           Committee, the problems returnees have faced have  been  similar
           to the difficulties experienced by  the  Chechen  population  in
           general, except that young male returnees will  be  interrogated
           by the police about possible guerilla affiliations and that  any
           temporary registration of residence of  the  returnees  will  be
           cancelled.  This assessment is from late 2002 before a series of
           new grave terrorist attacks in Moscow and  Beslan.  In  February
           2004, Human Rights Watch expressed  concern  that  the  Chechens
           cannot,  or  are  not  able  to  safely  access,  the  necessary
           documentation to ensure a safe return.  In March  2004,  Amnesty
           International wrote that most Chechen asylum seekers rejected in
           European countries are returned to Moscow and  that  information
           available suggested that many of them are immediately subject to
           thorough questioning at Moscow Airport. Some   of  the  returned
           Chechens  are  allegedly  also  deprived  of  money   or   other
           belongings by Russian security officers. In a statement from May
           2004, Svetlana Gannushkina emphasised that even though she could
           not document that Chechens were persecuted  exactly  for  having
           been to a foreign state,  asking  for  asylum  and  deported  to
           Russia, this did not mean that there were no such cases......"

 27. The evidence from the FCO is contained in  correspondence  between  the
     Home Office and the post. A Home  Office  letter  of  27  January  2006
     raised a number of questions on  a  variety  of  topics.  The  material
     replies on risk on return were as follows. On 2 February 2006, there is
     a fax that:


          "[ ] is correct that there  is  no  indication  of  ethnicity  in
          Russian internal or foreign passports.   However,  I  also  agree
          that Chechen names are reasonably distinctive  and  most  of  the
          airline staff I work with  can  identify  a  Russian  passenger's
          ethnicity  with  very  little  difficulty.   The  other   obvious
          giveaway is the place at birth.  I have  seen  no  evidence  that
          Chechens are subjected to any  additional  security  checks  when
          entering or departing from Russia. Certainly  at  Domodedevo  and
          Sheremetevo they are treated in exactly the  same  way  as  other
          passengers."

     However this appears to have been qualified by a subsequent  fax  which
     states that:


           "On question 8, I've checked  with  one  of  our  Russian  staff
           members, who says  that  nationality  (ie  ethnicity)  does  not
           appear in either Russian foreign or Russian internal  passports.
           It does appear in old Soviet passports.  But Chechen  faces  and
           names are quite distinctive, so it  is  entirely  possible  that
           they could be singled out for checks."

 28. Dr Galeotti identified the case of:

           "A Chechen deported from Germany to Russia,  only  to  have  his
           money, jacket and suitcase taken  by  immigration  officials  on
           arrival as a bribe because he did not have a proper passport.  A
           few days later he was forced to go into hiding after police came
           looking for him."

 29. That is essentially the limit of the objective evidence on the risk  at
     the point of return to which we have been  referred.  Taking  it  as  a
     whole, we conclude that a young male Chechen, who is not wanted  by  or
     of material  adverse  interest  to  the  Russian  authorities,  may  be
     detained for questioning on arrival at Moscow or St Petersburg Airport.
     He may face some harassment and demands for bribes (which appear to  be
     endemic in Russia). He may be detained for questioning. But we  do  not
     consider that the evidence supports the view, advanced by  Mr  Briddock
     and Dr Galeotti, that he will be detained for any great length of  time
     or will face a real risk of ill-treatment  of  sufficient  severity  to
     amount either to persecution or a breach of Article 3.

                       Risk on the Journey to Chechnya

 30. The next question is whether such a person will be at any real risk  on
     the journey from Moscow or St Petersburg to Chechnya.  We have not been
     referred to any specific objective evidence  on  road  and  air  links.
     However  the  article  in  Pravda  of  1  June  2004  reports  the  re-
     establishment of a direct rail link from Moscow to Grozny. Mr  Briddock
     invited us to conclude in the absence of any other more recent evidence
     that this material from 2004 did not mean there was now a current  rail
     link. However we can only assess the evidence before us.  There  is  no
     evidence to show that the rail link has closed or does not function.

 31. On that basis we conclude that there is a viable rail link as  a  basis
     for return from Moscow to Chechnya.  The  need  for  registration  with
     local authorities internally  (where  problems  of  discrimination  can
     arise for Chechens in some parts of Russia, especially in Moscow and St
     Petersburg) arises only when a person has been living in an area for  a
     specific period of time. It would not arise  en  route  during  a  rail
     journey. There may well be  security  checks  of  papers  en  route  to
     Chechnya, especially given the instances of serious acts  of  terrorism
     such as at the Beslan school. However we conclude on the evidence as  a
     whole that such checks would not be reasonably  likely  to  entail  any
     more adverse consequences for a young Chechen male with the appropriate
     papers who is not wanted by the authorities, than  the  checks  already
     carried out at Moscow or St Petersburg airport on arrival.

                            The Risk in Chechnya

 32. We come then to the question of whether a young male Chechen  would  as
     such be at real risk of persecution or a breach of  Article  3  in  his
     home area in Chechnya. As we have indicated, the country guidance in MR
     was to the effect that on the objective evidence available in  2002  he
     would not. The CIPU OGN of May 2006 that we have quoted above  suggests
     that the risk has lessened since then due to the continuing  switch  in
     tactics away from the use  of  Russian  to  Chechen  forces,  and  from
     relatively indiscriminate mopping up to targeted operations.

 33. Dr Galeotti has not been  given  the  opportunity  to  comment  on  the
     objective material that post-dates his opinion in  July  2004  and  his
     specific observations about the Appellant are  essentially  predicated,
     as we have said, upon  his  account  being  credible  and  that  he  is
     "wanted" by the Russian authorities. As we have said, we accept that  a
     young Chechen male who is wanted by the authorities in connection  with
     the rebels will be at real risk in Chechnya and we will deal later with
     whether the Appellant comes within that category. We at this point  are
     assessing to risk to one who is not wanted.

 34. Mr Briddock in his skeleton argument has referred us  to  a  number  of
     specific items in the  objective  material.  There  is  a  report  from
     Amnesty International of 30  September  2005  which  asserts  that  the
     Russian Government is using the war on terror as a  pretext  for  human
     rights violations in Chechnya. It refers to continuing  disappearances,
     the extraction of confessions under torture,  and  the  obstruction  of
     investigations into human rights abuses. Another  report  of  18  April
     2006 highlights the disappearance of  2  men  after  being  arbitrarily
     detained. Mr Briddock also relies on a CIPU OGN of October 2005 to show
     that the Russian Government's record on human rights remains poor, with
     continuing killings by both the Government and the rebels. A report  of
     31 March 2005 from Freedom House highlights the human rights abuses  in
     the "mopping up" operations  by  the  Russian  army.  A  report  of  21
     February 2006 from the Society for Threatened  People  was  in  similar
     vein.

 35. UNHCR on 24 February 2006, following a visit  to  the  region,  made  a
     statement which included the following observations:

           "In Chechnya and elsewhere I emphasised to my interlocutors that
           the Chechen people have many friends throughout  the  world  who
           support their desire to live in a peaceful society  governed  by
           the rule of law.  I came in part to convey the distress felt  by
           many who had witnessed the devastation inflicted on the Republic
           and who continue to witness the ongoing violence wrought on  its
           citizens.....  I  noted  that  welcome  physical  reconstruction
           appeared to be under way in Grozny and that political structures
           were being put  in  place  to  normalise  the  situation.....  I
           nonetheless also stressed that I had very serious concerns about
           the integrity of certain institutions, especially in the area of
           law enforcement.  Two phenomena are particularly disturbing: the
           use of torture to extract confessions and information,  and  the
           intimidation  of  those  who  make  complaints  against   public
           officials. There can be little doubt that  these  phenomena  are
           more than allegations but have considerable basis in  fact......
           I left Chechnya  with  the  distinct  impression  that,  despite
           ongoing political and physical reconstruction, the Republic  has
           still not been able to move from a society ruled by force to one
           governed by the rule of law..... There is no  question  of  that
           the Federal Authorities are seized with his issue and are  aware
           of the imperative need to assist Chechnya in addressing its very
           serious shortcomings in this regard."


 36. On 6 April 2006 Radio Free Europe reported that:


           A  Russian  soldier  who  confessed  to  killing  three  Chechen
           civilians was sentenced today to 18 years in prison. A  military
           court  in  Rostov-on-Don  in  southern  Russia   found   Aleksei
           Krivoshonok guilty of murdering the three  civilians at  a  road
           block outside the village  of  Staraya  Sunzha  near  Grozny  in
           November 2005. Reports say the sentence was the heaviest yet  to
           be  handed  down  to  a  Russian  serviceman  found  guilty   of
           involvement in what human rights activists  say  are  widespread
           abuses by the military in Chechnya.

 37. What then do we make of this in  the  context  of  the  risk  to  young
     Chechen males as such in Chechnya, and, if  there  is  such  risk,  the
     prospect of internal relocation elsewhere in Russia?

 38. There has been judicial discussion in the Court of  Appeal  about  what
     "real risk" comprises, and a probing of the different  descriptions  of
     it in different judgments of the Court of Appeal ranging from Hariri  v
     The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ  807  to
     Batayav v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA
     Civ 1489. We have noted the advice of Sedley  LJ  in  the  latter  case
     that:


           "The authority of this court has been lent, through the decision
           in Hariri... to formulations that treatment which is  "frequent"
           or even "routine" does not present a real risk to the individual
           unless  it  is  "general"  or  "systematic"   or   "consistently
           happening"......  Great  care  needs  to  be  taken  with   such
           epithets. They are intended  to  elucidate  the  jurisprudential
           concept of real risk, not to replace it..... There is  a  danger
           if Hariri is  taken  too  literally,  of  assimilating  risk  to
           probability.  A real risk is in language and  in  law  something
           distinctly less than a probability, and it cannot be elevated by
           lexicographic stages into something more than it is."


 39. We have followed the approach described by the Court of Appeal  in  our
     assessment of real risk. As we  have  indicated,  we  accept  the  view
     expressed by Dr Galeotti and in the CIPU OGN that if  a  young  Chechen
     male is wanted in connection with suspected rebel involvement  he  will
     be at real risk in Chechnya and elsewhere in Russia of  at  least  ill-
     treatment in breach of Article 3, and will  also  have  a  well-founded
     fear of  persecution  for  the  1951  Convention  reason  of  race  and
     real/imputed political opinion. We consider however that where a  young
     Chechen male is not wanted by the authorities in connection  with  such
     involvement, and hence there is no specific targeting of him, the  risk
     of being caught up in action by the military or in abusive exercises of
     power  by  individuals,  does  not  amount  to  real  risk.  That   was
     essentially the view reached in MR in 2002 and in  our  assessment  the
     risk is progressively lessening with the reduced involvement of Russian
     troops; with the increased participation in security operations by  the
     forces of the Chechen Government; and with the move away  from  general
     mopping up operations to targeted action. There are still serious human
     rights violations but these appear  to  be  in  the  main  of  targeted
     individuals. The change appears to  be  reflected  in  the  numbers  of
     refugees displaced from Chechnya at the height  of  the  conflict,  who
     have now returned there. Thus we conclude on the evidence  as  a  whole
     that a young ethnic Chechen male as such will not now be at  real  risk
     of persecution or of a breach of Article 3 by reason  of  ill-treatment
     on return to Chechnya.  Nor,  we  would  add,  are  the  conditions  in
     Chechnya in general so  severe  that  they  cross  the  high  threshold
     required to engage Article 3.



                             Internal Relocation

 40. Finally in assessing the objective context, we come to the question  of
     internal relocation. The House of Lords has  recently  considered  this
     issue in Januzi v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2006]
     UKHL 5 and has offered the following guidance:
        13.  In England and Wales, the Court of Appeal in E and  another  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1032,
        [2004] QB 531 declined to adopt what  may,  without  disrespect,  be
        called  the  Hathaway/New  Zealand  rule.  It  was  argued  for  the
        appellants in that case (see para 16 of the judgment  of  the  court
        given by Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers MR) that
           "The 'unduly harsh' test is the means of determining whether  an
           asylum seeker is 'unable to avail himself of the protection  of'
           the country of his nationality. The protection  in  question  is
           not simply protection against persecution.  It  is  a  level  of
           protection  that  secures,  for  the  person  relocating,  those
           benefits which member states have agreed to secure for  refugees
           under articles 2 to 30 of the Refugee Convention."
       In paragraphs 23-24 of its judgment the court said
           "23.  Relocation in a safe haven will not provide an alternative
           to seeking refuge outside the country of nationality if,  albeit
           that there is no risk of persecution in the  safe  haven,  other
           factors exist which make it unreasonable to  expect  the  person
           fearing persecution to take refuge there. Living  conditions  in
           the safe haven may be attendant  with  dangers  or  vicissitudes
           which pose a threat which is as great or greater than  the  risk
           of persecution in the place of habitual  residence.  One  cannot
           reasonably expect a city dweller to go to live in  a  desert  in
           order to escape the risk of persecution. Where the safe haven is
           not a  viable  or  realistic  alternative  to  the  place  where
           persecution is feared, one can properly say that a  refugee  who
           has fled to another country  is  'outside  the  country  of  his
           nationality by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution'.
           24.  If this approach is adopted to the possibility of internal
           relocation, the nature of the test of whether an  asylum  seeker
           could reasonably have been expected to  have  moved  to  a  safe
           haven is clear. It involves a comparison between the  conditions
           prevailing in the place of habitual residence  and  those  which
           prevail in the safe haven, having regard to the impact that they
           will have on a person with the  characteristics  of  the  asylum
           seeker. What the test will not involve is a  comparison  between
           the conditions prevailing in the safe haven and those prevailing
           in the country in which asylum is sought....."
        20. I would accordingly reject the  appellants'  challenge  to  the
        authority of E and dismiss all four appeals so far as they  rest  on
        that  ground.  It  is,  however,  important,   given   the   immense
        significance of the decisions they  have  to  make,  that  decision-
        makers should have some guidance on the approach  to  reasonableness
        and undue harshness in this context. Valuable guidance is  found  in
        the UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection of 23 July 2003. In
        paragraph 7 II(a)  the  reasonableness  analysis  is  approached  by
        asking "Can the claimant, in the context of the  country  concerned,
        lead a relatively normal life without facing  undue  hardship?"  and
        the comment is made: "If not, it would not be reasonable  to  expect
        the person to move there".  In  development  of  this  analysis  the
        Guidelines address respect for human rights in paragraph 28:
           "Respect for human rights
           Where respect for basic human  rights  standards,  including  in
           particular non-derogable rights,  is  clearly  problematic,  the
           proposed area cannot be  considered  a  reasonable  alternative.
           This does not mean that the deprivation of any civil,  political
           or  socio-economic  human  right  in  the  proposed  area   will
           disqualify it  from  being  an  internal  flight  or  relocation
           alternative. Rather, it requires, from a practical  perspective,
           an assessment of whether the rights that will not  be  respected
           or protected are fundamental to the individual,  such  that  the
           deprivation of those rights would  be  sufficiently  harmful  to
           render the area an unreasonable alternative."
       They then address economic survival in paragraphs 29-30:
           "Economic survival
           The socio-economic conditions  in  the  proposed  area  will  be
           relevant in this part of the analysis. If the situation is  such
           that the claimant will be unable to earn a living or  to  access
           accommodation, or where medical care cannot be  provided  or  is
           clearly  inadequate,  the  area  may   not   be   a   reasonable
           alternative. It would be unreasonable, including  from  a  human
           rights perspective, to expect  a  person  to  relocate  to  face
           economic destitution or existence below  at  least  an  adequate
           level of subsistence. At the other end of the spectrum, a simple
           lowering of living standards or worsening of economic status may
           not be sufficient to reject a  proposed  area  as  unreasonable.
           Conditions in the area must be such  that  a  relatively  normal
           life can be led in the context of the country concerned. If, for
           instance, an individual would be without family links and unable
           to benefit from an informal social safety  net,  relocation  may
           not be reasonable, unless the person would otherwise be able  to
           sustain a relatively normal life at more  than  just  a  minimum
           subsistence level.
           If the person would be denied  access  to  land,  resources  and
           protection in the proposed area  because  he  or  she  does  not
           belong to the dominant clan,  tribe,  ethnic,  religious  and/or
           cultural group, relocation there would not  be  reasonable.  For
           example, in many parts of Africa,  Asia  and  elsewhere,  common
           ethnic, tribal, religious and/or cultural factors enable  access
           to land, resources and protection. In such situations, it  would
           not be reasonable to expect someone who does not belong  to  the
           dominant group, to take up residence there. A person should also
           not be required to relocate to areas, such as the  slums  of  an
           urban area, where they would be required to live  in  conditions
           of severe hardship."
      These guidelines are, I think,  helpful,  concentrating  attention  as
      they do on the  standards  prevailing  generally  in  the  country  of
      nationality. Helpful also is a passage on  socio-economic  factors  in
      Storey, op cit, p 516 (footnotes omitted):
           "Bearing  in  mind  the  frequency  with  which  decision-makers
           suspect certain asylum seekers to be simply  economic  migrants,
           it is useful to examine the relevance to IFA  claims  of  socio-
           economic factors. Again, terminology differs widely,  but  there
           seems to be broad agreement that  if  life  for  the  individual
           claimant in an IFA would involve  economic  annihilation,  utter
           destitution  or  existence  below  a  bare   subsistence   level
           (Existenzminimum) or deny 'decent  means  of  subsistence'  that
           would be unreasonable. On the other end of the spectrum a simple
           lowering of living standards or  worsening  of  economic  status
           would not. What  must  be  shown  to  be  lacking  is  the  real
           possibility  to  survive  economically,  given  the   particular
           circumstances of the individual concerned (language,  knowledge,
           education, skills, previous  stay  or  employment  there,  local
           ties,  sex,  civil  status,  age  and  life  experience,  family
           responsibilities, health; available or realisable assets, and so
           forth). Moreover, in the context of return, the  possibility  of
           avoidance of destitution by means of financial  assistance  from
           abroad, whether from relatives, friends or even governmental  or
           non-governmental sources, cannot be excluded."
 41. We have applied these principles to the objective evidence  before  us.
     Mr Briddock referred us to a report of 12 January  2006  from  Medecins
     Sans Frontieres, which talks of a limited  international  aid  presence
     and the insecurity of life for the displaced persons. It says:


          "The living conditions for the  tens  of  thousands  of  Chechens
          remaining in Ingushetia vary from difficult to  unbearable,  with
          many inhabiting overcrowded,  dank,  dilapidated  buildings  that
          enable diseases like tuberculosis and pneumonia to flourish."

 42. The US International Rescue Committee reported on 31 January 2006 that:




           "While the situation now in Chechnya has become quieter and many
           displaced families are making their way home  voluntarily,  some
           36,000 people still remain in exile in the nearby  republics  of
           Ingushetia and Dagestan.  Some 38,000 within Chechnya itself are
           also still unable to return to their  own  homes.   Humanitarian
           and reconstruction needs retain their urgency and  human  rights
           abuses still occur on a  significant  scale.   Some  800,000  of
           Chechnya's estimated 1.1 million people are recognised by the UN
           as being especially vulnerable."

 43. A report by the Memorial Human Rights Centre (Russia)  states  that  by
     the summer of 2004 all the tent camps in Ingushetia had been  abolished
     and some of their residents had  secured  accommodation  in  places  of
     compact living. However there was  continuing  pressure  for  displaced
     persons to return to Chechnya.

 44. The CIPU OGN of May 2006 states that:

           Although Chechens and  other  ethnic  minorities  face  societal
           discrimination  in  the  Russian  Federation  and   often   have
           difficulties  finding  accommodation   and   employment,   these
           difficulties on their own do not make  it  unduly  harsh  for  a
           person to internally relocate. In general it is not unduly harsh
           for members of ethnic minority groups who are not wanted by  the
           Federal authorities to internally relocate to  another  part  of
           the Russian Federation.

 45. The US State Department report for 2005 says:


           International organisations estimated that the  number  of  IDPs
           and refugees who left Chechnya  as  a  result  of  the  conflict
           reached a high of approximately 280,000 in the spring  of  2000.
           At various times during the conflict authorities restricted  the
           movement of persons fleeing Chechnya  and  exerted  pressure  on
           them to return there. At the year's  end  the  Office  of  UNHCR
           estimated that 26,155 IDPs remained  in  Ingushetia  in  private
           accommodations and in temporary settlements.

 46. UNHCR reported in April 2006 that:

           In Ingushetia, High Commissioner Guterres visited the  Berd-Yurt
           settlement in the Sunzha district, which houses  more  than  100
           IDP families who want to remain in Ingushetia. During his visit,
           the  High  Commissioner   also   met   with   local   government
           representatives. As of 31 January 2006, some  26,000  IDPs  from
           Chechnya had been registered by a UNHCR implementing partner for
           assistance in Ingushetia.

 47. We first record, as we have already  said,  that  there  is  no  viable
     internal relocation option for a young Chechen male who  is  wanted  by
     the Russian authorities in connection with the rebels.  For  those  who
     are not wanted and who do not wish to  return  to  Chechnya,  the  most
     obvious place  for  internal  relocation,  absent  specific  individual
     factors, is in the neighbouring republic of Ingushetia where more  than
     a quarter of a million Chechen refugees from the fighting and displaced
     persons originally went, and where up  to  about  30,000  still  reside
     either in private accommodation or in camps. The conditions  there  are
     far from ideal, as indeed is true of many refugee camps resulting  from
     various conflicts around the world. We do not consider however that the
     conditions revealed by the objective evidence as a whole concerning the
     camps and other accommodation available in Ingushetia are so severe  as
     to render internal relocation for a young Chechen male unreasonable  or
     unduly harsh or in breach  of  Article  3,  especially  when  with  the
     continuing  return  of  Chechen  displaced  persons  to  Chechnya,  the
     pressure of  numbers  is  reducing  and  the  worst  of  the  temporary
     accommodation, such as the tent camps, is abolished.

                   Current and Continuing Country Guidance

 48. In paragraphs 15 and 16 above, we identified four potentially  relevant
     existing country guidance cases.  Each dealt  with  risk  and  internal
     relocation but related to people with different personal situations. We
     are concerned in this case with a young ethnic Chechen male and we have
     more and more recent objective evidence concerning this  category  than
     was before the Tribunal in 2002 in MR (Chechen -  Return).  Accordingly
     this decision replaces MR as current country  guidance.  As  the  other
     three country guidance cases (OA, AV and EM & LM) relate to people with
     very different profiles about whom we have  heard  no  submissions  nor
     been directed to any specific objective  evidence,  we  are  not  in  a
     position to comment upon them.

                      Assessment of the Specific Claim

 49. We must now apply these general findings to this  specific  appeal  and
     the first issue that arises is that to the Appellant's credibility.

 50. There have been a number of accounts  of  the  Appellant's  substantive
     claim since his arrival in the UK on  3  September  2001  when  he  was
     detected making a clandestine entry and then when removal  papers  were
     served on him, applied for asylum. The various accounts are as follows:
           1. 05/09/2001     1st interview
           2. 03/04/2002     1st written statement
           3. 2002           1st grounds of appeal
           4. 08/08/2003     2nd written statement
           5. May 2004 2nd interview
           6. Undated        chronology of events
           7. Undated        response to refusal letter
           8. 01/10/2004     oral evidence to Adjudicator
           9. 10/01/2006     3rd written statement
          10. 10/05/2006     4th written statement
          11. 15/05/2006     oral evidence to Tribunal

 51. There are significant differences between these accounts concerning the
     core of the Appellant's claim of the events in 2001  that  led  to  his
     fleeing from Chechnya. We have described above his account as presented
     to us. It is illuminative  to  appreciate  its  evolution  through  the
     different accounts.

 52. In his 1st interview, which was held 2 days after his  arrival  in  the
     UK, he said that when he was  taken  to  Russia  in  1980  "my  parents
     separated so I went with my mother". He said he personally  had  helped
     the "Chechen warriors" occasionally and had been threatened and  beaten
     several times by Russian soldiers in  random  incidents.  He  confirmed
     that his father had died  from  an  illness  on  19  January  2001.  He
     answered a number of questions about Chechnya. He was asked why he  did
     not go to Ingushetia where there were many other Chechen  refugees  and
     he said that that "there is nothing for me in  Chechnya.  I  wanted  to
     learn English, to lead a normal life and not to be oppressed." He  also
     said he had  heard  that  displaced  persons  might  be  sent  back  to
     Chechnya. He confirmed that he had obtained a passport by paying  money
     in 1997 but had lost it in November 1999. He made no mention of  having
     been detained for 3 days in a pit and of being released on payment of a
     bribe by his family.

 53. In his 1st written statement, produced some 7  months  later,  he  said
     that he moved to Astrakhan in Russia with his mother in 1980, when  his
     parents separated. He returned to  his  village  in  Chechnya  in  1992
     (which is near a city) and his  father  died  on  9  January  2001.  In
     November 2000 he was taken with other young Chechen men to  a  military
     post where he was detained for 3 days  in  a  pit  and  was  beaten  by
     Russian soldiers though they treated him carefully  because  they  were
     awaiting a ransom from his family which was  paid  by  family  members.
     Thereafter he travelled between relatives' homes within Chechnya before
     leaving. He did not say that he went to Ingushetia but said that he was
     aware of the standard of living there and was concerned  that  refugees
     would be returned to  Chechnya.  There  is  no  mention  of  any  other
     specific incident concerning  him  and  no  suggestion  either  of  his
     family's support for the Chechen fighters  or  of  his  being  targeted
     because the authorities were aware  of  this.  He  said  that  he  fled
     because there was continuing fighting and he was in fear of  his  life.
     The 1st grounds of appeal are in a  similar  vein  and  repeat  in  two
     places that the 3 day detention was in November 2000.

 54. The second written statement was made in  the  context  of  his  second
     appeal. He said that the whole family moved to Astrakhan in 1980  where
     he had 6 years of schooling.  He  added  detail  of  the  situation  in
     Chechnya after his return there. He said that his uncle died in a  mine
     explosion in 1995 and relatives died in a rocket attack on their way to
     his funeral. He mentioned that in 1996 his parents and others gave food
     and shelter to the Chechcn fighters when they came to the village.  The
     fighting broke out again at the end of 1999. Russian soldiers  searched
     the village every two months or so and the Appellant had to  hide  from
     them, once in the cellar and once in the forest. He then identified the
     three incidents with Russian soldiers. The first, about  being  stopped
     at a checkpoint, when in a taxi with another man, was put as  being  in
     summer 2000. The second, about the bus, was one month later. The third,
     about being held in the pit for 3 days, was two or  three  weeks  after
     that.

 55. The 2nd interview was held some 10 months after the  date  of  the  2nd
     written statement. He said he had heard that close relatives  had  been
     murdered but he was unable to say who they were. His previous claim  of
     having to hide during searches in his village during 2000  was  put  to
     him and confirmed by him. He said that he had never fought against  the
     Russians but his parents provided food to the fighters but he could not
     say how often and said that it stopped after the searches. He could not
     explain why he was not found when he was hiding in the cellar. He  said
     that once in 1996 his parents had sheltered fighters along with  others
     in the village. He was then asked about the claim to have been detained
     for 3 days. As the claim was being probed he changed  his  account  and
     said that it was in 2001 and not 2000, because it was after his  father
     had died. He said he was not beaten as badly as the others because they
     were awaiting the payments of a bribe from his parents. He was asked to
     confirm that the bribe was being paid by his parents and said  yes.  He
     was asked how they got the $1000 for the bribe and said it was all they
     had got in the house and it was in the US currency. He was  then  asked
     specifically whether both parents paid the bribe and he said  that  his
     father was dead. He said that the bribe was paid by his mother  and  by
     maternal and paternal relatives. He again said he was targeted  because
     of the help his parents had given the fighters. He also  said  that  in
     2002 his uncle had been killed by unknown people who came to his  house
     and shot him and that he had a brother in prison  in  Russia  on  false
     criminal charges. He was a businessman.

 56. The chronology, the response to the refusal letter and the 3rd  written
     statement (which was produced in  2006)  all  confirm  that  the  three
     incidents described were in the summer  of  2001,  rather  than  summer
     2000. The Appellant essentially repeated this in his oral  evidence  to
     the Adjudicator.

 57. The 4th written statement was produced in 2006 and related to a  letter
     of 18 April 2005 provided by Akhmed Zakaev in the Appellant's  support.
     Mr Zakaev stated in the letter of that:

           "I confirm that Madaev  Ramzan  (sic)  actively  helped  Chechen
           resistance  forces.   He  is  a  convinced  supporter   of   the
           independent Chechen  state."

 58. The Appellant in his 4th written statement said that the statement from
     Mr Zakaev was obtained for him by an unnamed former Chechen fighter who
     knew that the Appellant's family had helped the fighters. The Appellant
     added however that he had met Mr Zakaev once in London and he was aware
     that the Appellant  had  assisted  Chechen  fighters  when  he  was  in
     Chechnya.

 59. The final part of the Appellant's account of his claim was in his  oral
     evidence to us. He said that  the  first  interview  was  not  accurate
     because there were problems with the translation.   The  interview  had
     been conducted in Russian which although he could speak it was not  his
     first language. He said that there had been  a  misunderstanding  about
     the circumstances in which he had been taken to Russia  in  1980.   His
     parents had separated then only in the sense that his mother  had  gone
     to Astrakhan and his father had joined them there a short while  later.
     Their relationship had never broken down.

 60. He confirmed that his detention of three days  was  in  the  summer  of
     2001. He did not know why November 200o was in his  statement  but  had
     always said that this incident was in  2001.  He  reasserted  that  the
     reason for his detention was because his family supported  the  freedom
     fighters but said that he was never questioned during his detention  or
     told why he was detained. He was asked about having $1000 in the  house
     to pay the bribe as stated in the 2nd interview and confirmed  that  in
     Chechnya people did not use banks and kept their money  at  home.   His
     family were not poor and they were not rich.

 61. He was asked why Mr Zakaev had not attended the hearing  to  give  oral
     evidence on his behalf and said that he did not ask him to come. He was
     unable to describe the circumstances in which he had lost his  passport
     in 1999.

 62. He was asked why he was unable to identify the close relatives he  said
     had been murdered since he came to the UK. He said that he did not have
     direct contact with his mother and sister who still lived in their home
     in Chechnya.  His contact was with a man from the village who lived  in
     Astrakhan and visited the village from time to  time.  The  village  in
     which he lived was very small and everybody knew each  other  and  many
     were related.  He was asked when he had last spoken  to  this  man  and
     said that it was two to three months ago. He was then asked why he  did
     not know who else had been killed besides his uncle but said  that  was
     all he knew. With regard to his brother in prison, he said he had  been
     convicted of being a gangster but this was not true.

 63.  We  have  identified  the  evolution  of  the  Appellant's  claim   to
     demonstrate the material changes and inconsistencies in  it  that  have
     appeared over time and the explanations  given  by  the  Appellant  for
     this. We have considered all the  evidence  and  submissions  and  have
     reached the following findings of fact.

 64. We accept that the Appellant is of Chechen ethnicity and from Chechnya.
     This  has  not  been  challenged  by  Ms  Leatherland  and  is   indeed
     corroborated by his ability in interview to answer  detailed  questions
     about Chechnya. She accepted that the Appellant would  be  identifiable
     as a Chechen by his appearance and name on return to Moscow  or  to  St
     Petersburg. We also accept that the Appellant's  father  died  from  an
     illness on 9 January 2001. The Appellant has been  entirely  consistent
     about this from the time of his 1st interview.

 65. We do not accept  that  any  material  difficulties  arose  during  the
     Appellant's 1st interview or in the making of his statements by  reason
     of the conduct of those  proceedings  in  Russian.  We  note  that  the
     Appellant spent the first 12 years  of  his  life  in  Russia  and  was
     educated for 6 years in a Russian school where teaching would have been
     in Russian.  We note that he agreed  to  the  1st  interview  being  in
     Russian, accepted that he could understand the interpreter, and made no
     complaint about any misunderstanding at the time. We also note that his
     first witness statement prepared by his  then  solicitors  contained  a
     declaration by an interpreter that it had been  translated  in  Russian
     and that she was satisfied that the Appellant understood its  contents.
     It has been suggested on the Appellant's behalf that the interpreter at
     the 1st interview may not have been a native Russian and but we do  not
     consider that if true this is of any material significance  bearing  in
     mind the Appellant's agreement of the time that he could understand the
     interpreter and the lack of any contemporaneous complaint.

 66.  Having  said  that,  it  is  always  possible  for  there  to   be   a
     misunderstanding between people who do speak the same language  and  we
     have carefully scrutinised the various documents and  evidence  to  see
     whether there is any indication that such  misunderstandings  may  have
     arisen.  We do consider that there was a  misunderstanding  during  the
     1st interview over what the Appellant  meant  when  he  said  that  his
     parents had separated  in  1980.  The  misunderstanding  arose  in  our
     assessment not due to any lack of proper translation at the  interview,
     but because the Appellant  in  his  first  written  statement  made  an
     ambiguous comment. It could be read as meaning either that the parents'
     relationship had broken down, or that they had travelled  to  Astrakhan
     separately.  We  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  his  parents
     separated only temporarily on their individual journeys to Russia.

 67. We have also considered  whether  there  was  a  misunderstanding  over
     whether the $1000 bribe was paid by the Appellant's parents  or,  after
     the Appellant's father's death, by his mother and relatives  from  both
     sides of the family. For reasons that we shall describe shortly we have
     formed the view that core elements of the  Appellant's  specific  claim
     are fabrications and that  amongst  them  is  the  claim  that  he  was
     detained in a pit for three days by Russian soldiers  and  released  on
     payment of a bribe. We conclude that his account  that  the  bribe  was
     raised by his mother and other members of his family and that this  was
     what he meant by the use of the word "parents" and  that  there  was  a
     mistranslation, is undermined by his oral evidence to us that the bribe
     was $1000 because that was the amount of money at home at the time.

 68. The third area over which it is alleged that there was misunderstanding
     is in relation to the varying dates attributed to the  three  incidents
     with the Russian soldiers alleged by the Appellant. We do not  consider
     that these can be explained away by mistranslation or misunderstanding.
     The Appellant did not mention these  incidents  at  all  in  his  first
     interview. he claimed he was tired after his journey in a lorry to  the
     UK but the interview was not conducted on arrival but  two  days  later
     when he had had a chance to rest and when his memories would  be  fresh
     in his mind. He then gave on various subsequent occasions the different
     dates of November 2000, the summer of 2000 and the summer of  2001.  We
     do not consider that so many errors could arise from misunderstandings.

 69. On that basis then we turn to our remaining findings of fact. We  begin
     with Dr Galeotti's opinion that there is  nothing  implausible  in  the
     Appellant's account as the things he  describes  commonly  happened  in
     Chechnya. We accept that such things did happen in Chechnya at the time
     the Appellant was there and that  his  account  would  fit  within  the
     objective context. However that does not mean it is  necessarily  true.
     We have reached the following conclusions.

 70.  We consider it to be implausible that the Appellant would have  failed
     to mention at his first interview his being detained in a pit for three
     days and being released only on  payment  of  a  large  bribe,  if  the
     incident were true. As we  have  said  the  interview  took  place  not
     immediately upon arrival but two days later when he would  have  had  a
     chance to rest. This would have been one of, if  not  the,  outstanding
     incident in his mind leading to his departure from  Chechnya.  We  find
     that the reason he did not mention it was because it  did  not  happen.
     Moreover the explanations for the changes in the date  given  for  this
     incident at different times are not credible. The date of November 2000
     for the  three  day  detention  in  the  pit  was  given  both  in  the
     Appellant's 1st written statement and in his  1st  grounds  of  appeal,
     where it is mentioned twice. We do not accept that this could be  based
     upon mis-instruction. Even if the Appellant is not  good  on  dates  he
     worked on the land and would be aware of the passing of the seasons. He
     would not confuse November with the summer. Whilst  it  might  just  be
     within the realms of acceptability for the series of  three  events  to
     begin in late summer 2000 (say late  August)  and  finish  in  November
     2000, given that there was approximately a month between each incident,
      that timeframe could not fit  into  2001  because  the  Appellant  had
     arrived in the UK by September 2001. The truthfulness of  this  account
     is  also  undermined  by  a  variety  of  further  inconsistencies  and
     contradictions. There is the inconsistency over how  and  by  whom  the
     money for the alleged bribe was raised, which we have described  above.
     His account in the 1st written statement that  he  was  beaten  by  the
     soldiers during the  detention  is  contradicted  by  his  2nd  written
     statement where he says he was  not.  There  is  contradiction  between
     whether he was specifically targeted because the soldiers knew  of  his
     family's support for the  fighters  in  which  event  he  would  almost
     inevitably have been questioned, and his oral evidence to  us  that  he
     was not questioned or even told why he was detained. Thus  we  conclude
     that the entire account of targeting for reasons of  family  assistance
     to the fighters, detention in a pit  for  three  days  and  release  on
     payment of a bribe is a fabrication. We should  also  mention  at  this
     point for the sake of completeness that there was mention, in  response
     to questions,  of  the  imprisonment  in  Siberia  of  the  Appellant's
     brother, it is alleged on false charges that he is a gangster.  It  has
     not been suggested to us that this,  if  true,  has  had  any  knock-on
     effect in terms of risk on the Appellant or his family.

 71. Next we do not accept that  the  Appellant  has  ever  personally  been
     involved in assisting the Chechen fighters, either in  fighting  or  in
     any other way. He made no such claim in his 1st and 2nd statements.  He
     made a vague and unspecific assertion of helping  Chechen  warriors  in
     his 1st interview. The claim really arises out of the  letter  from  Mr
     Zakaev and the 4th  written  statement.  In  his  evidence  to  us  the
     Appellant said of Mr Zakaev's statement "It does not necessarily mean I
     was in the fighting". If the Appellant had personally been involved  in
     support for the fighters his contribution would have been mentioned  in
     detail in his written statements or in Mr Zakaev's letter.  We  do  not
     accept the  evidence  on  this  matter  by  either  Mr  Zakaev  or  the
     Appellant. It is a fabrication.

 72. What then remains of the claim are the alleged incidents  in  the  taxi
     when the Appellant  was  searched  and  released,  and  the  relatively
     trivial incident in the bus. The failure of the Appellant to  refer  to
     them in his 1st interview suggests that they were  not  at  that  stage
     seen by him as being of  material  significance  and  for  the  reasons
     described above we do not accept that these incidents occurred in 2001,
     which was the claim presented to us.

 73. We would accept that when the fighting in  Chechnya  was  intense,  the
     Appellant sensibly would have hidden if Russian troops  were  searching
     in his area. We also accept that he may have faced random  road  blocks
     and searches and rough handling by Russian soldiers in  their  security
     operations. We do not accept anything beyond that and we do not  accept
     that there were any specific events in the summer of 2001 that were the
     trigger for his then leaving Chechnya and  Russia.  We  find  that  his
     departure had been in contemplation since he obtained his  passport  in
     1997 and was economically driven, given the poor  state  of  Chechnya's
     economy and the lack of opportunity there. We find also  that  that  is
     why he did not stay in Ingushetia with the many other Chechen refugees.

 74. Finally there is the question of the Appellant's passport. As  we  have
     said, he and his family went to trouble and expense  to  obtain  it  in
     1997 and this suggests the intention even then to leave the country. We
     do not accept his account that he lost it  in  November  1999.  He  was
     asked at the hearing before us how it was lost and  he  was  unable  to
     give any answer beyond the mere re-assertion that it was lost.  Such  a
     document would have been a valuable possession and  looked  after  with
     care.  We  would  have  expected  at  least  some  indication  of   the
     circumstances in which it was lost, if indeed it had been lost.

 75. We find that it was not lost as claimed and that being so there  is  no
     reason why the Appellant could not have used it to exit from Russia and
     we conclude that he did. We note that he was detected entering  the  UK
     clandestinely but many people do, even if  they  left  their  countries
     legally, because of the difficulty in entering the UK  legally  and  in
     order to enhance an asylum claim. We find that the  Appellant  has  not
     established that he left Russia illegally, or, if his  passport  is  no
     longer in his possession, that he will  be  unable  to  replace  it  by
     application at the Russian Embassy in London, if he so chooses.

 76. In summary, we conclude  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  established
     evidence before us  that  would  cause  the  Appellant  to  be  at  any
     additional risk on arrival in Russia, or on his journey to Chechnya, or
     in Chechnya itself, over such risk as would attach to  any  young  male
     Chechen as such. Indeed he would be better off than many others because
     his mother and sister continue to live in their home village.  Thus  he
     would have a home to go to and would not be a displaced  person.  Given
     our previous conclusion that young male Chechens in Chechnya  will  not
     as such be at real risk of persecution or a breach  of  Article  3,  it
     follows that the Appellant's appeal must be dismissed.


 77. Thus the question of internal relocation does not arise in  this  case.
     However for completeness we record our view that if he does not wish to
     remain in Chechnya, he has  a  viable  internal  relocation  option  to
     Ingushetia where many Chechen displaced persons still live in camps.

                            Summary of Decisions

      The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds
      The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds


      Signed
               Dated   5 June 2006

            Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
            Approved for electronic transmission

                  Schedule of Objective Evidence Considered


  1. Report by Dr Mark Galeotti of 17 July 2004.
  2. US State Department report for 2005
  3. Norwegian refugee Council report of May 2005
  4. Pravda article of 1 June 2004.
  5. UNHCR Position Paper of 22.10.04
  6. HRW paper of March 2005
  7. ECRE paper of June 2005
  8. Amnesty International paper of 30 September 2005
  9. CIPU OGN of 1.10.2005
 10. Amnesty International paper of 8.11.2005
 11. Medecins San Frontiers paper of 12.1.2006
 12. Caucasian Knot article of 1.11.2005
 13. Radio Free Europe 31.10.2005
 14. Freedom House paper 31.3.2005.
 15. Helsinki Committee paper of 19 May 2005
 16. Amnesty International paper of 18.4.2006
 17. Helsinki Committee 9.4.2006
 18. UNHCR 11.4.2006
 19. Radio Free Europe 6.4.2006
 20. Voice of America 30 March 2006
 21. Institute for War and Peace Reporting 9.3.2006
 22. Radio Free Europe 7.3.2006
 23. Institute for War and Peace Reporting 3.3.2006
 24. Amnesty International report 27 February 2006
 25. Radio Free Europe 24.2.2006
 26. UNHCR 24 February 2006
 27. HJT Research 23.2.2006
 28. Prague Watchdog 7.2.2006
 29. International Rescue Committee 31.1.2006
 30. Amnesty International 27.1.2006
 31. Radio Free Europe 25.1.2006
 32. Caucasian Knot 24.1.2006
 33. UNHCR Reports of 27.3.2006 and 7.3.2006
 34. Council of Europe report of 15.3.2006.
 35. Human Rights Centre report for July 2005-February 2006.
 36. Faxes between Home Office and FCO in January-February 2006
 37. CIPU report of April 2003
 38. CIPU OGN of October 2005
 39. COIS Bulletin of December 2005
 40. CIPU OGN of May 2006
 41. US State Department report for 2005 released in March 2006




