

                                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

EN (Continuity of residence - family member) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 55 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
On 1 November 2010

                                   Before

                               Mr Justice Owen
                       Senior Immigration Judge Latter

                                   Between

                                     en
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr. Z Jafferji, Counsel instructed by Fitzpatrick & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr. K Kyriacou, Home Office Presenting Officer


To acquire a permanent  right  of  residence  under  reg.  15(1)(b)  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 a family member  of  a
Union citizen must show that both he and the Union citizen have  resided  in
the UK in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous  period  of  five
years.



                      DECISION and DIRECTIONS


1.      This is an appeal against the decision of Immigration Judge  Warner
    who dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision
    made on 11 February 2010 refusing to issue him  a  permanent  residence
    card as the family member of an EEA national under  the  provisions  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations").

Background

2.      The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 9 February 1976.   He
    married his wife, a Swedish  national,  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  3
    October 2003 and he was issued with a residence document on 13 May 2004
    valid until 13 May 2009.  On 21 December 2008  he  sought  a  permanent
    residence document but the application was refused  for  the  following
    reasons:

           "The evidence you have submitted is not enough to prove that you
           have resided in the United Kingdom for  five  continuous  years.
           Also evidence provided suggests that your EEA  national  sponsor
           has resided in Sweden for some periods and also has been paid in
           Swedish kronas.


           You have failed to provide evidence that your EEA family  member
           and yourself are qualified people."


3.         At the hearing before the Immigration  Judge  the  appellant  and
      his wife gave oral evidence and  documentary  evidence  identified  in
      paras 14 and 15 of the judge's determination was produced primarily on
      the issue of where the appellant and his wife have been living.


The Findings of the Immigration Judge

4.         The judge was satisfied that from the date  of  the  marriage  in
      October 2003 to November 2006 the appellant's wife was working in  the
      UK for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations but he  found  that  since
      2006 she had spent a substantial proportion of  her  time  working  in
      Sweden.  He was not satisfied applying the test in reg.  3(2)(a)  that
      since 2006 she had not been absent from the UK for a period which  did
      not exceed six months  in  total  in  any  year  and  found  that  the
      continuity of her residence with the appellant  in  the  UK  had  been
      broken.  This led him to conclude that the appellant had not been able
      to show that he had been residing in the United Kingdom with his  wife
      in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
      five years as required by reg. 15(1)(b).

5.          However,  the  judge  went  on  to  say  in  para  30   of   his
      determination that he was satisfied that the appellant's wife had been
      working since 2006 not only in Sweden but  also  in  the  UK  and  was
      exercising treaty rights in the UK.  She  was  therefore  a  qualified
      person under reg. 6 and it followed that the appellant as  her  family
      member had the right under reg. 14(2) to reside in the UK but  he  was
      not satisfied that he was entitled  to  permanent  residence  and  his
      appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

6.        At  the  hearing  before  us  the  appellant  relied  on   three
      submissions.  Firstly, he argued that the  continuity  of  his  wife's
      residence had not been raised  as  an  issue  by  the  respondent  and
      therefore was not in issue before the judge.  Mr Jafferji referred  to
      the terms of the refusal letter arguing that the respondent  had  been
      well aware of his wife's absences from the UK but had only raised  the
      issue of whether the appellant had resided for a continuous period  of
      five years and whether his wife had been exercising treaty rights  for
      a continuous period of five years.  He submitted that the  appellant's
      evidence and submissions at the hearing did not address  the  question
      of the continuity of residence of the appellant's wife and if that was
      a matter which had concerned the judge, he should have drawn it to the
      parties' attention so that the issue could be properly considered.

7.         His second submission was that  the  judge  had  failed  to  make
      sufficient findings of fact on the issue  of  the  continuity  of  his
      wife's residence and had not dealt with the evidence  with  sufficient
      particularity to make it clear what his findings were.  The judge  had
      referred to the fact that there was  inconsistent  evidence  from  the
      appellant and his wife about the frequency of her periods of  work  in
      Sweden.  He had said that he was satisfied that  she  had  spent  some
      periods of time working there since 2006 and that on her own  evidence
      she had worked there six or seven times a year for an average  of  one
      or two months.  Mr Jafferji argued that the lack  of  clarity  in  the
      judge's findings was compounded by his reference in para 30  to  being
      satisfied that the appellant's wife had been exercising treaty  rights
      in the UK and was a qualified person under reg. 6.

8.          Mr  Jafferji's  final  argument  was  that  in  any  event   the
      continuity of the residence of the appellant's wife was  not  relevant
      to the issue of  whether  he  had  acquired  the  right  of  permanent
      residence.  He referred to Directive 2004/38/EC ("the 2004 Directive")
      and in particular to recital 17 and Article  16.   He  submitted  that
      reg. 15 had  to  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  the  fundamental
      importance of the status of Union citizens, referring in this  context
      to (Case C-162/09) Lassal (2010), and the importance placed  upon  the
      rights of family members so that Union citizens are able  to  exercise
      their rights freely, effectively and with dignity.  The  objective  of
      the 2004 Directive was to give protection  to  the  rights  of  family
      members of  a  Union  citizen  regardless  of  their  nationality  and
      independently of their relationship to the Union  citizen.  He  argued
      that it was clear the appellant had been residing lawfully in  the  UK
      pursuant to rights granted by the  2004  Directive  for  a  continuous
      period of five years and these were derived rights as the spouse of  a
      Union citizen.  His wife had been travelling and residing outside  the
      UK pursuant to her exercise of the right of freedom of  movement  and,
      if her actions had a detrimental affect on his rights, it would  deter
      her from exercising those fundamental freedoms

9.         Mr Kyriacou submitted in relation to the first point that it  was
      clear from the respondent's decision letter that it was  not  accepted
      that the appellant's wife had been residing continuously in  the UK in
      accordance with the 2006 Regulations because she had been  living  and
      working in Sweden at times during the  relevant  period.   There  was,
      therefore, no ambiguity in the decision letter.  The  sole  issue  for
      the judge to determine had been whether his wife's alleged  breaks  in
      continuous residence were relevant to the appellant's application  for
      permanent residence under reg. 15.  So far as  the  second  issue  was
      concerned, he accepted that the judge  had  failed  to  make  adequate
      findings of fact or give sufficient reasons for his decision.

10.       However, so far as the third issue  was  concerned,  he  submitted
      that in order to succeed under reg. 15 the appellant had to show  that
      he was living with his Union national wife, they were both  living  in
      accordance with the Regulations and had been living together for  five
      continuous years.  He submitted that the wording of reg.  15  was  not
      materially different from Article  16  of  the  2004  Directive.   The
      general principle, so he argued, was that a  non-Union  family  member
      derived his right of residence from the Union  national  and  that  it
      would be an absurd situation if a non-Union national was  entitled  to
      permanent residence in circumstances where he entered the UK,  married
      a Union national, remained in the UK working and  living  continuously
      whilst his spouse left the UK and then lived and worked at  all  times
      in another Union country.

11.       He argued that it could not  be  intended  in  such  circumstances
      that the non-Union spouse would be  entitled  to  permanent  residence
      when the Union national spouse would not so qualify.  The  Regulations
      were designed to ensure that a Union national could  exercise  freedom
      of movement and were not intended  to  allow  a  situation  where  the
      status of the Union citizen became of secondary relevance to that of a
      non-Union citizen.  If there had been a break in the continuity of the
      residence of the appellant's wife, it must follow that  he  could  not
      meet the requirements of reg. 15(1)(b).

The Continuity of Residence Issue

12.       We will deal firstly with  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant
      needs to prove that his Union national spouse has been residing in the
      UK exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period of five  years  in
      order to qualify for permanent residence  within  reg.  15(1)(b).  The
      calculation of continuity of residence is set  out  in  reg.  3  which
      provides as follows:

      "3(1)    This  regulation  applies  for  the  purpose  of  calculating
           periods of continuous residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
           regulation 5(1) and regulation 15.


      (2)        Continuity of residence is not affected by -


           (a)        periods of absence from the United Kingdom  which  do
                 not exceed six months in total in any year;
                 ...
           (c)        any one absence from the United Kingdom not exceeding
                 twelve months for an important reason such as pregnancy and
                 childbirth, serious illness, study or  vocational  training
                 or an overseas posting."


13.       Regulation 15(1)(a)  and  (b)  dealing  with  permanent  right  of
      residence provide as follows:


      "15(1). The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
           United Kingdom permanently -


           (a)        an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                 in accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
                 period of five years;


           (b)        a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                 an EEA national but who has resided in the  United  Kingdom
                 with the EEA national in accordance with these  Regulations
                 for a continuous period of five years."


14.      We have been referred to recital 17 and Article  16  of  the  2004
      Directive which read as follows:


       "17.


           Enjoyment of permanent residence  by  Union  citizens  who  have
           chosen to settle long  term  in  the  host  Member  State  would
           strengthen the feeling of Union citizenship and is a key element
           in promoting social cohesion which is  one  of  the  fundamental
           objectives of the Union.  A right of permanent residence  should
           therefore be laid down for all Union citizens and  their  family
           members who have resided in the host Member State in  compliance
           with the  conditions  laid  down  in  this  Directive  during  a
           continuous period of five years without becoming subject  to  an
           expulsion measure."


      Article 16


      "1.       Union citizens who have resided  legally  for  a  continuous
           period of five years in the host Member  State  shall  have  the
           right of permanent residence there.  This  right  shall  not  be
           subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.


        2.         Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family  members  who  are
           not nationals of a Member State and have  legally  resided  with
           the Union citizen in the host  Member  State  for  a  continuous
           period of five years."


15.       We have also been referred to Lassal which set  out  a  number  of
      general principles for the interpretation of EU provisions.   We  note
      in particular the following in paras 31- 32:

      "31.     The Court has  also  observed  that,  having  regard  to  the
           context and objectives of Directive 2004/38, the  provisions  of
           that Directive cannot be interpreted restrictively and must  not
           in any event be deprived of their effectiveness (see Metock  and
           Others, para 84).


      32.       As recital 17 in the preamble to Directive  2004/38  states,
           the right of permanent residence is a key element  in  promoting
           social cohesion and was provided for by that Directive in  order
           to strengthen the feeling of Union citizenship."


16.      The Court went on to emphasise in its  judgment,  particularly  in
      para 49, that when interpreting a provision of EU law it was necessary
      to consider not only its wording but also  the  context  in  which  it
      occurred and the objective pursued by the Rules  of  which  it  was  a
      part.


17.      Applying these principles to the wording of  reg.15(1)(b)  we  are
      satisfied that a family member has to show that not only he  but  also
      his Union national spouse has been residing in the  UK  in  accordance
      with the Regulations for a continuous period of five  years.   If  the
      continuity of the residence of the Union national  is  broken,  having
      taken into account the provisions of reg.3, neither the Union national
      nor the spouse can acquire permanent residence.

18.      The requirement for continuity of residence applies to  the  Union
      national by virtue of reg. 15(1)(a) and we are not satisfied that  the
      Regulations or the Directive could have intended that a family  member
      whose rights derive from residence with the Union national  should  be
      able to acquire permanent residence when the Union national is  unable
      to do so.  The wording of reg. 15(1)(a) and (b) is clear.  To  acquire
      the right to permanent residence the Union national must have  resided
      in the UK "in accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
      period of five years" and a family member must have resided in the  UK
      "with the EEA national" also "in accordance with these Regulations for
      a continuous period of five years".  It follows that  both  the  Union
      national and the family member must meet the requirement of continuity
      of residence.


19.      We are not satisfied that this interpretation in any way  inhibits
      the exercise by a Union citizen of rights of free movement or  freedom
      to work in another Member State.  We do not accept the  argument  that
      there is any loss of social cohesion or a detriment to the feeling  of
      Union citizenship  by  a  non-Union  spouse  not  acquiring  permanent
      residence in circumstances where the Union spouse does  not  meet  the
      requirements for such residence.

20.       We are therefore satisfied that if the appellant's wife is  unable
      to meet the requirements of continuity of residence in accordance with
      the Regulations, the appellant cannot succeed in his  own  application
      for permanent residence simply on the basis that he has the  necessary
      continuity.  For these reasons the appellant was not able  to  succeed
      simply on the basis of his continuity of residence and the  judge  did
      not err in law in that respect.

The Error of Law

21.       We now go on to deal briefly with the other two  submissions  made
      by Mr Jafferji.  We are not satisfied there is any  substance  in  his
      first point that the issue  of  continuity  was  not  clear  from  the
      respondent's decision.  We have already referred to  the  respondent's
      reasons in para 2 above.  If there was any ambiguity as to whether the
      continuity of  the  exercise  of  treaty  rights  in  the  UK  by  the
      appellant's wife was put in issue, the point  is  made  clear  in  the
      previous paragraph in the decision which records that  the  respondent
      had written requesting further evidence  to  support  the  application
      including:

            "evidence that your EEA family member ... has exercised Treaty
           rights in the United  Kingdom  for  a  period  of  a  five  year
           continuous  period,  i.e.  pay  slips,  P60,  end  of  tax  year
           certificates and employer's  letters  if  employed  or  if  self
           employed national insurance, contribution and tax  and  earnings
           records in a letter from HM Revenue and Customs,  business  bank
           statements, audited accounts from a certified account and recent
           business invoices ...".

22.      We are satisfied, however, that the judge erred in law by  failing
      to make adequate findings of fact on when  the  appellant's  wife  was
      living and working in Sweden as opposed to the UK and  in  consequence
      failed to deal adequately with the issue  of  the  continuity  of  her
      residence.

23.      This hearing will be adjourned for findings of fact on  the  issue
      of continuity of residence.  Permission is given to the  appellant  to
      adduce further oral or documentary evidence on that issue to be  filed
      in accordance with directions.  The resumed  hearing  will  be  listed
      before SIJ Latter, if available.


Signed

Senior                           Immigration                           Judge
      Latter
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



