
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ahmed & Ors (valid application - burden of proof) [2018] UKUT 00053 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                  Decision & Reasons    |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|on 7 November 2017                 |                                        |
|                                   |                                        |
|                                   |....................................... |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 ZAHOOR AHMED, GHAFOORA KHANUM, IRFAD AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Osmans
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1)  Central  to  the  analysis  in  Basnet  (validity  of  application  -
      respondent) [2012] UKUT 113  (IAC)  is  the  existence  of  a  further
      procedure undertaken by the Secretary of State  in  order  to  process
      payment in relation to which applicants are not privy and  over  which
      they have no control. As such, it remains appropriate for her to  bear
      the burden of proof.

   2) The fact that an invalidity decision was  not  immediately  challenged
      may be relevant in determining whether the legal burden, including  an
      initial evidential burden requiring the Secretary of  State  to  raise
      sufficient evidence to support her  invalidity  allegation,  has  been
      discharged.

   3) Whether the Secretary of State ultimately discharges the legal  burden
      of proof will depend on the nature and quality of evidence she is able
      to provide, having regard to the timing of  any  request  for  payment
      details and the reasons for any delay, balanced against  any  rebuttal
      evidence produced by an appellant.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. These appeals fall to be determined  under  the  appeal  regime  in
        force prior to the amendments wrought by the Immigration Act  2014.
        The appellants can appeal on the  grounds,  inter  alia,  that  the
        respondent's decisions were not in accordance with the  immigration
        rules, and that they were otherwise not in accordance with the  law
        (section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).


     2. The appeals raise issues concerning the burden of proof in  respect
        of applications deemed invalid by the respondent. These issues were
        first considered in Basnet (validity of application  -  respondent)
        [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC), and revisited 3 years  later  in  Mitchell
        (Basnet revisited) [2015] UKUT 00562 (IAC).

Summary of Basnet

     3. Before his extant leave was due to expire on 28 May 2011 Mr  Basnet
        applied for further leave  to  remain.  On  16  June  2011  he  was
        informed  by  letter  that  his   applicated   was   invalid.   The
        Respondent's letter is in identical terms to that  in  the  instant
        appeal and is reproduced below.
             The specified fee has not been paid ...
             The passage next to the box ticked below provides more  detail
             about the failure to pay the specified fee and the  steps  you
             should take to ensure that you make the correct  payment  when
             returning your application.
             [Box checked]: Although credit/debit card  details  have  been
             provided, the issuing bank rejected  the  payment.  There  may
             have been insufficient funds in the  account  or  the  details
             provided did not match the information held by the  bank.  For
             security reasons the cardholder's name, address,  expiry  date
             and issue number supplied on the payment form must  correspond
             to the information held by the issuing bank.  If  the  details
             fail to match the bank will reject  the  payment.  Your  fresh
             application should be returned to the  address  given  on  the
             application form.
     4. Although Mr Basnet resubmitted his application the following day it
        was refused as he no longer had  valid  leave  to  remain  and  was
        unable to demonstrate that he had "an established presence studying
        the UK." He quickly lodged a notice of appeal. Although the  First-
        tier Tribunal maintained that his initial application  was  invalid
        and that it had no jurisdiction, permission was granted  to  appeal
        to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  matter  came  before  the  then
        President, Mr Justice Blake, and Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman. The
        Upper Tribunal concluded that it had jurisdiction to  consider  the
        invalidity issue and that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  holding
        that non-payment was fatal to the validity of the application.

     5.  The  Tribunal  then  examined  the  respondent's   procedure   for
        processing postal applications, which was based on the  explanation
        given by the Presenting  Officer.  It  noted  that  fees  were  not
        processed when an application  was  initially  received,  and  that
        there were no instructions that applications  should  be  processed
        before the expiry of an applicant's leave. If the fee could not  be
        collected, for whatever reason, a standard letter was sent out  and
        the application form and documents returned with the  exception  of
        the page providing for payment  of  the  fee  which,  for  security
        reasons,  was  shredded.  This  procedure  gave  an  applicant   no
        opportunity to check the accuracy of the billing data and  resubmit
        the application before his leave expired, or to check  whether  the
        billing data was accurate after the processing failed. Nor was  any
        evidence-based reason provided as to why the processing failed.  No
        record was kept of what went wrong with the payment that  could  be
        provided to the tribunal determining invalidity issues.


     6. The Upper Tribunal observed that the best evidence  of  whether  an
        application was accompanied by the fee was the original information
        page supplied by an appellant, and that the best evidence of why an
        attempt to process a payment failed would be the record  maintained
        by the processor. It concluded that  the  respondent's  system  put
        both these items of evidence beyond future reach  of  either  party
        and of the tribunal.

     7. At paragraph 27 the Upper Tribunal considered the burden of proof.


         We now turn to the question of who bears  the  burden  of  proving
         that an application has been validly  made.  This  would  normally
         fall on  the  applicant,  who  would  discharge  it  by  producing
         evidence of  acknowledgement  of  receipt  of  postage.  Here  the
         application was received in time, but the question of  whether  it
         was accompanied by accurate billing data can be answered  only  by
         the respondent. In  those  circumstances,  we  conclude  that  the
         evidential burden of demonstrating that the  application  was  not
         "accompanied by such authorisation  (of  the  applicant  or  other
         person purporting to pay) as will enable the respondent to receive
         the entire fee in question" must fall on the respondent. We  reach
         this conclusion both by application  of  first  principles  -  the
         party  that  asserts  a  fact  should  normally  be  the  one  who
         demonstrates it; and because the respondent is responsible for the
         procedure to be used in postal cases, and the features noted above
         prevent both the issue of a prompt receipt and an  opportunity  to
         understand why payment was not  processed.  An  applicant  is  not
         present when an attempt to process payment is made, and has no way
         of later obtaining the relevant information.

     8. At paragraph 28 the Tribunal stated,


         We now consider whether the evidential burden has  been  discharged
         in the present case on the basis of what  is  known  to  us  today.
         Payment may fail for many reasons. An applicant may fail to provide
         any payment details;  may  make  an  inadvertent  error;  may  give
         deliberately incorrect details; or may give  the  correct  details,
         but lack funds. The respondent may enter  the  details  incorrectly
         into the automated payment system. The payment system ... may fail.
         The Presenting Officer advised us that sometimes payments cannot be
         processed for a period of  hours,  or  even  days,  due  to  system
         failure. There is the possibility of error or systems failure by an
         applicant's  bank.  Perhaps  the  most  common  error  may  be  the
         inadvertent supplying of incorrect details, but there could  be  no
         presumption to that effect, and no presumption that payment systems
         are infallible, or even close to infallible.

     9. It was accepted in Basnet that the appellant had  at  the  material
        time sufficient funds in his bank account to cover the  entire  fee
        for the duration of the relevant period.

Summary of Mitchell

    10. Ms Mitchell had lawfully resided in the UK since November 2002  and
        had leave valid until 31 January 2010  when  she  made  an  in-time
        application for further leave to remain. On 18  February  2010  she
        was informed that  her  application  was  invalid  as  the  payment
        mandate section on her application  form  was  not  signed.  A  new
        application was made on 1 March 2010 and Ms Mitchell was eventually
        issued with further leave to remain on 24 September 2010.


    11. She made a further in-time application for leave  to  remain  which
        was refused in October 2013. In an appeal against this decision she
        contended, for the first time, that  she  met  the  10  years  long
        residence requirements as she had signed the mandate section in her
        2010 application. The respondent's position was  that  Ms  Mitchell
        had no leave between 31 January 2010 and  24  September  2010.  The
        long residence claim depended on whether her  application  made  in
        January 2010 was lawfully rejected as being invalid.

    12. The Upper Tribunal, consisting of  the  Vice  President  and  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Macleman, found there were  "a  number  of  striking
        differences"  between  the  circumstances  of  Mr  Basnet  and   Ms
        Mitchell. There was a  delay  of  some  years  by  Ms  Mitchell  in
        asserting that she had in fact  signed  the  authorisation.  Nearly
        contemporaneous evidence referred to the absence of  any  signature
        and there was no challenge to the invalidity decision at the  time.
        Unlike the application in Basnet,  where  the  form  submitted  was
        'good on its face' and where the difficulties arose  in  attempting
        to collect the fee on the strength of the information  provided  in
        the form, Ms Mitchell's application form was not 'good on its face'
        as the mandate  was  not  signed.  The  crucial  events  in  Basnet
        happened after the submission of the form and  were  solely  within
        the knowledge of the Respondent. Accordingly,  the  Upper  Tribunal
        did not consider that similar reasoning applied  when  the  alleged
        defect was apparent on the face of the form  itself,  "and  so  was
        within the knowledge of the applicant." Where the application  was,
        on its face, insufficiently completed, the burden of proof was  not
        on the Secretary of State.


    13. At paragraph 14, in what is  strictly  obiter  comment,  the  Upper
        Tribunal referred positively to an affidavit, intended for  use  in
        judicial  review  proceedings  in  another  case,  describing   the
        Secretary of State's accounting processes. Postal applications that
        are accompanied by a completed payment form  are  directed  to  the
        payment processing centre which inputs  details  from  the  payment
        page onto their system.

         If full and valid card details are received these are input onto a
         system called TNS and sent via  Streamline  to  be  processed.  The
         result is  usually  received  within  50  minutes,  and  is  either
         "successful" or "declined". The banks provide no further details of
         the reason for declining a payment. If the  payment  is  successful
         the application is treated as a valid application. There may  be  a
         number of reasons  why  a  payment  might  be  declined,  including
         insufficient funds, exceeding the maximum transaction limit or  the
         number of transactions permitted, incorrect card number, or failure
         to indicate the amount to be taken. All cases where the payment  is
         declined are classified as "payment exceptions", and an  indication
         of that result is sent to the applicant as soon  as  possible.  The
         payment pages are stored  at  the  payment  processing  centre  for
         eighteen months from  the  date  of  receipt.  Thus,  within  those
         eighteen months, it is, or should be, possible for an enquiry to be
         made as to the success or otherwise of the payment process; and, if
         the applicant obtains those details, he  or  she  may  be  able  to
         ascertain from the bank the reason for declining the payment. After
         eighteen months, however, the payment pages are destroyed.


    14. This was described "... in order to make clear and public what  the
        position is in relation to evidence of the processing of payments."
        Generally speaking, the respondent will be in a position, within 18
        months, to demonstrate that payment was not taken, and an applicant
        will be able to obtain the payment  page  within  that  period.  An
        applicant could, in any event, take up the matter with his  or  her
        bank  without  involving  the  respondent  at  all.  The   Tribunal
        considered this further information "... may be regarded as casting
        some factual doubt on the conclusions in Basnet" as it was  assumed
        in the earlier case that the respondent was not in  a  position  to
        show that the non-availability of the payment was the result  of  a
        decision by the bank rather than  an  error  by  the  Secretary  of
        State. Based on the affidavit this was no longer the case, and  may
        not have been true at the time of Basnet. "Given that the Secretary
        of State does not have  access  to  the  reasons  for  declining  a
        payment that  has  been  sought  in  accordance  with  a  completed
        mandate, a more nuanced approach to the  burden  of  proof  may  be
        needed."

   Factual background of the present appeals


    15. The appellants are all nationals of  Pakistan.  The  1st  appellant
        (DOB 2 August 1978) is the husband of the 2nd appellant (DOB 5 July
        1981), and they are both the parents of the 3rd appellant (born  in
        2009). The 1st and 2nd appellants have another child born  in  2012
        who is not involved in these proceedings.


    16. The 1st appellant entered the United Kingdom on the 14 May 2004  as
        a student. He was granted further periods of leave to continue  his
        studies. The last period, issued on 30 April 2012, was valid  until
        22 May 2014. The 2nd appellant entered the UK on 18 March 2006 as a
        dependent of  the  1st  appellant.  She  was  subsequently  granted
        further leave to remain in line with that of her husband.  The  3rd
        appellant was born in the UK and was granted leave to remain  as  a
        dependant on 6 August 2010.

    17. On 31 August 2012 the 1st appellant's leave as a Tier  4  (General)
        Student was curtailed so that it expired on 30 October 2012.  On  9
        October 2012 the 1st appellant applied for leave  to  remain  as  a
        Tier 4 (General) Student, with the 2nd and 3rd  appellants  as  his
        dependants. In January 2013 the respondent treated the applications
        as invalid and issued a letter in the terms described in  paragraph
        3 of this judgment.

    18. Documentation obtained pursuant to a  Freedom  of  Information  Act
        (FOI) request contained two entries relevant to the applications of
        9 October 2012. There is a screen print stating "PUK Payment  Error
        - 17 October 2012". There is also an entry, dated 19 October  2012,
        on the General Case Information Database (GCID)  database  stating,
        "The application is potentially invalid due to - fee declined."


    19. The 1st appellant lodged a further application for leave to  remain
        as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 19 February 2013  with  the  other
        appellants  as  dependants.  These  applications  were  refused  in
        decisions  dated  23  January  2014  because  the  bank  statements
        accompanying the resubmitted applications dated from more than  one
        month before the applications were submitted  (had  the  9  October
        2012 applications been accepted as valid,  this  requirement  would
        have been met).

The First-tier Tribunal decision dated 20 October 2015

    20. Appeals were lodged against the decisions of 23 January 2014. On 20
        May 2014 the appellants issued a Statement of  Additional  Grounds,
        pursuant to section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
        Act 2002, asserting that, as the  1st  appellant  had  achieved  10
        years continuous lawful residence,  he  met  the  requirements  for
        leave to remain under  paragraph  276B  of  the  immigration  rules
        (relating to long residence).

    21. The appeals were allowed by the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Kennedy in a decision promulgated on 20 October 2015. The key issue
        at the appeal hearing was  the  validity  of  the  9  October  2012
        applications. If valid, the appellants'  leave  would  continue  by
        virtue of section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  and  the  1st
        appellant would have accumulated over 10  years  continuous  lawful
        residence.

    22. In the absence of a Presenting Officer  the  judge  heard  evidence
        from the 1st and 2nd appellants concerning the manner in which  the
        9 October 2012 application form was submitted, and from  a  friend,
        Mr  Muhammad  Asif,  who  said  he  checked  the  contents  of  the
        application form. The appellants asserted that they had  sufficient
        funds available via credit cards to cover the fees.

    23. Relying on  the  decision  of  Basnet  the  judge  found  that  the
        respondent failed to discharge  the  burden  of  proving  that  the
        applications were unaccompanied by the appropriate fees. The  judge
        stated,

         There was no meaningful evidence before the tribunal to show  that
         the appellants failed to provide the authorisation  necessary  for
         the respondent to receive payment from their credit card  provider
         or that payment was declined by the credit  card  company  because
         there was [sic] insufficient funds in the account.
          ...
         The  appellant's  immigration  history   shows   that   they   are
         experienced at making application [sic] for leave to  remain.  The
         1st appellant, in particular, appeared to be intelligent and  well
         educated. I find it entirely credible that they would  have  taken
         care when  completing  their  application  forms  and  would  have
         understood the importance of ensuring  that  the  proper  fee  was
         paid.

    24. The judge then considered credit card documentation produced by the
        appellants relating to their total spending over a 12-month period.
        The judge found that the entries  did  not  suggest  that  the  1st
        appellant was unable to control his spending, was  disorganised  or
        fell significantly behind in making repayments.


    25. At paragraphs 32 and 33 the judge stated,

         In any event, the onus is on the respondent and I  find  that  she
         has failed to demonstrate the basis upon which it is said that  the
         appellants failed to make payment of the  fee.  The  file  produced
         does not provide an answer to this question. While it  is  possible
         that a  Presenting  Officer  would  have  been  able  to  highlight
         something in the computerised records system that might  cast  more
         light on what happened, my own careful reading of the file does not
         allow me to draw any meaningful conclusions beyond noting that,  on
         page 426, there is an entry (which appears to be dated  19  October
         2012) stating, "the application is potentially invalid due to - fee
         declined" and on page 430 there is  a  screen  print  stating  "PUK
         Payment Error - 17 October 2012".

         The entries referred to suggest that the  respondent  attempted  to
         take payment but was unable to do so.  The  reference  to  "payment
         error" says nothing about the reason for the error.  The  reference
         to "fee declined" says nothing about the  reason  for  the  payment
         being declined. It is not hard to imagine a number of  reasons  why
         an attempt to take a  payment  might  have  failed  such  as  human
         inputting error, technical  issues  in  the  electronic  system  or
         failure by the bank to honour the payment for  reasons  unconnected
         with the availability of funds in the account. In  the  absence  of
         more meaningful evidence from the respondent about  the  manner  in
         which they attempted  to  process  the  payment,  the  credit  card
         details they used when doing so and the reason for their failure, I
         find it impossible to conclude that  the  failure  in  payment  was
         attributable to a deficiency in the authorisation provided  by  the
         appellant or a shortage of funds in  their  accounts.  I  note  the
         error made by the respondent when attempting to  take  payment  for
         the  appellants  second  applications,  which  does   not   inspire
         confidence in the system that the respondent operates.

    26. The judge concluded that the applications  were  validly  made  and
        that leave to remain continued under section 3C of  the  1971  Act.
        The judge treated the applications made on 19 February  2013  as  a
        variation  of  the  9  October  2012  applications   (applying   JH
        (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 78) and concluded  that  the  1st
        appellant ought to have been granted the Tier 4  (General)  Student
        leave that he had sought given that the  bank  statements  provided
        with  the  earlier  application  met  the   requirements   of   the
        immigration rules, and that the 2nd and  3rd  appellants  ought  to
        have been granted similar leave as dependants. The  judge  felt  he
        could not entertain the 1st appellant's submission that he met  the
        requirements of paragraph 276B because the issue was only raised in
        response to a section 120 notice and he had no basis  for  claiming
        ILR at the time of the decision appealed against.

The Upper Tribunal's decision dated 25 May 2016

    27. Although  heard  on  11  August  2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        decision was not promulgated until 20 October  2015.  Mitchell  was
        promulgated on 8 October 2015. The Respondent  obtained  permission
        to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  the  revised
        assessment of Basnet.

    28. In a decision issued on 25 May 2016  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
        Shaerf found, through no fault of the judge, that his decision  was
        vitiated by a material error of law as he failed  to  consider  the
        more nuanced approach identified in Mitchell,  which  rendered  his
        decision unsafe.

    29. The Deputy Judge noted the absence of any explanation for  the  two
        GCID extracts, and that  the  1st  and  2nd  appellants  failed  to
        clearly identify the means of payment tended for the application of
        9 October 2012, and to supply sufficient evidence to show that  the
        relevant accounts were in funds for the period 9 - 18 October 2012.
        The credit card payment records were said to be incomplete for  the
        relevant period and there was  said  to  be  an  issue  as  to  the
        appropriate credit card number by reference to a new card that  had
        been issued. At paragraph 22 the Deputy Judge stated,

         The facts as found by the judge at paragraphs 32  and  33  of  his
         decision shall stand but will need to be considered in conjunction
         with other evidence, some of  which  I  have  already  identified,
         through the prism of Mitchell.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 10 January 2017

    30. The remitted appeals were heard  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal O'Garro (the FtJ) on 18 November 2016.  Having  summarised
        Basnet and Mitchell the judge stated, (at [21])

          I find, having considered Mitchell that the appellant would  need
          to show he  had  given  the  correct  information  regarding  his
          bank/credit card details, that he had  sufficient  funds  in  his
          account and that the credit card  he  intended  to  use  had  not
          exceeded its limit.

    31. The FtJ held that none of this evidence was  before  the  Tribunal.
        Although the appellants provided letters from  Capital  One  (their
        Credit Card company) issued in May 2016 indicating that no payments
        were declined in  respect  of  the  credit  card  accounts  from  1
        September 2012 to 28 February 2013,  the  FtJ  did  not  find  this
        assisted  the  appellants'  case  as  she  did  not  believe  their
        bank/credit card company would have received any  notice  that  the
        payments did not go through if  the  reason  for  the  unsuccessful
        payments was because an  incorrect  card  number  was  put  on  the
        payment page of the application forms.


    32. At paragraph 24 the FtJ accepted that there can be human  inputting
        errors, and that the respondent had in  fact  made  an  error  when
        attempting  to  take  payment  in  respect   of   the   resubmitted
        applications in February 2013, but stated,


         ...  it  seems  to  me  that   in   light   of   the   respondent's
         responsibility, all efforts would have been made to check the  card
         numbers given by the appellant to ensure that there was no  mistake
         with the numbers given before submitting for payment.

    33. At paragraph 25 the FtJ found it unfortunate  that  the  appellants
        did not retain copies of their application forms which  would  have
        contained the payment page, and that it was now too late to  obtain
        a copy but,  given  that  the  burden  of  proof  was  on  them  to
        demonstrate that they had submitted correct card details, that they
        had sufficient funds on their card account, and that they  had  not
        gone over their card limit, they failed to discharge the burden  as
        any one of these could have led to payment being declined.


    34. Having concluded that the respondent was entitled  to  hold  the  9
        October applications as invalid, the 1st appellant  was  unable  to
        demonstrate 10 years of continuing lawful residents under paragraph
        276B.

    35. The judge went on to consider article 8,  both  with  reference  to
        Appendix-FM and paragraph 276ADE and outside the immigration rules.
        The judge concluded that  the  decision  under  challenge  did  not
        breach article 8. The appeals were dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    36. The appellants contend that the FtJ misdirected herself as  to  the
        scope of Mitchell and that it was only where the  application  was,
        on its face, insufficiently completed, that  the  burden  of  proof
        fell on them. Only the provision of  evidence  indicative  of  this
        could, it was submitted, shift the burden to  the  appellants,  but
        the respondent failed to provide any evidence of that kind  in  the
        First-tier Tribunal appeals.


    37. The grounds additionally contend that the FtJ should  have  applied
        the principles enunciated in Devaseelan v Secretary  of  State  for
        the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 00702 to the remitted  appeal  and
        that she was only entitled to depart from the findings made by  the
        original First-tier Tribunal judge if there was a "good reason" for
        doing so (as explained by the Court of Appeal  in  AA  (Somalia)  v
        SSHD & AH (Iran)  v  SSHD  [2008]  Imm  AR  241).  It  was  further
        submitted that the FtJ's approach to the Capital  One  letters  was
        perverse as the letters rebutted any suggestion by  the  respondent
        that the appellants' applications had been refused due to a lack of
        availability of funds. It was not open to the FtJ  to  assume  that
        the respondent did not make  mistakes  as  Basnet  emphasised  that
        there can be no presumption that payment systems are infallible, or
        even close to infallible. The appellants finally submitted that the
        judge misdirected  herself  as  to  the  significance  of  the  3rd
        appellant's residence in the UK in accordance with section  117B(6)
        and the Court of Appeal decision in MA  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD  [2016]
        EWCA Civ 705.

    38. On 2 October 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted  permission  on
        the grounds relating to the FtJ's approach to the invalidity issue.
        She noted that the task before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  made
        more complicated by the changing case law on the  correct  approach
        where there is an allegation that an application is invalid and  by
        the upholding of certain findings of fact from the  earlier  First-
        tier Tribunal decision. It was arguable that an incorrect  approach
        was taken to these matters.

    39. Judge Pitt  did  not  find  it  arguable  that  the  FtJ  erred  in
        concluding that article 8 ECHR was not breached. The FtJ took  into
        account the 3rd appellant's  7-year  residence  but  this  did  not
        oblige her  to  allow  the  article  8  claim  on  "reasonableness"
        grounds. The FtJ gave cogent reasons for  her  conclusion  and  the
        human rights ground was not arguable.

    40. At the Upper Tribunal hearing on 7 November  2017  we  received  no
        further evidence relating to the respondent's  payment  procedures.
        Both parties relied exclusively on  the  decisions  in  Basnet  and
        Mitchell.

    41. At the outset of the hearing, and without any prior indication,  Mr
        Nicholson invited us  to  grant  permission  on  the  human  rights
        grounds  that  had  been  expressly  excluded  by  Judge  Pitt.  Mr
        Nicholson submitted that  we  had  power  to  amend  the  grant  of
        permission under the case management powers contained in rule 5  of
        the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (the  Procedure
        Rules) and applied to amend the grant of leave  to  enable  him  to
        challenge the  FtJ's  decision  on  human  rights  grounds.  Having
        retired to consider this application we  accepted  that  the  Upper
        Tribunal does have power, by reference to rules  2  and  5  of  the
        Procedure Rules, to grant permission to  argue  grounds  that  were
        previously refused. We were however entirely satisfied that it  was
        not appropriate to grant the application. Mr Nicholson  was  unable
        to offer any explanation why no application had been made prior  to
        the day of the hearing. The overriding objective in rule 2  of  the
        Procedure Rules encompasses procedural fairness  and  the  need  to
        deal with appeals in a timely fashion, and, on the particular facts
        of this case, the respondent would need more time to  consider  her
        position, had permission been granted.


    42. Mr Nicholson submitted that the decision in Mitchell was limited to
        its  facts  and  that,  generally,  the  burden  remained  on   the
        respondent to demonstrate that an application was invalid. He  drew
        our attention to several decisions  making  positive  reference  to
        Basnet including Muhandiramge (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675
        (IAC) and Iqbal & Ors, R (On the Application  Of)  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 838,  where,  it  was
        submitted, the Court of  Appeal  appeared  to  endorse  the  Basnet
        principles. Mr Nicholson contended that, in addition  to  expressly
        reserving the factual findings at paragraphs 32  and  33  of  Judge
        Kennedy's decision,  his  other  findings,  particularly  those  at
        paragraphs 27 to 31,  were  also  retained  on  the  basis  of  the
        principles established in Devaseelan and that, in any event,  these
        findings of fact were not the subject of the respondent's appeal to
        the Upper Tribunal in 2016. Mr Nicholson finally submitted that the
        FtJ was not entitled to reject the  letters  from  the  appellants'
        credit  card  company  as  the  letters  rendered   untenable   any
        suggestion by the respondent that the applications had been refused
        due  to  a  lack  of  availability  of  funds,  and  that  the  FtJ
        impermissibly  established  a  presumption  that  the  respondent's
        payment systems were infallible, contrary to conclusions in Basnet.


    43. Mr Jarvis submitted that  the  Devaseelan  principles  were  of  no
        application in cases that  had  been  remitted  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal after a material error of law had been uncovered, and drew
        our attention to paragraph 29 of Devaseelan. The  decision  of  the
        Designated Judge, properly understood, disclosed various unresolved
        factual issues relevant to  both  parties  and  that  the  FtJ  was
        consequently entitled to her findings. Mr Jarvis pointed  out  that
        there had been no judicial review  challenge  to  the  respondent's
        invalidity decision dated 18 January 2013 and that  the  appellants
        had, by implication, accepted that their October 2012  applications
        were invalid. He relied on the delay in challenging the  notice  of
        invalidity in submitting that the burden rested on the  appellants.
        They could have made enquiries of the processing centre  and  could
        have made enquiries of their own bank or credit  card  company.  It
        was submitted that the Mitchell principles applied because evidence
        could have been obtained by the  appellants  in  support  of  their
        claim as to why payment was declined.

Discussion

    44. It is apparent from our  summaries  of  Basnet  and  Mitchell  that
        distinct and contrasting reasons were given by  the  respondent  in
        each case for finding the relevant application invalid. Basnet  was
        concerned with whether there was valid authorisation in the context
        of a rejection of payment  by  an  issuing  bank.  As  held  in  BE
        (Application Fee: Effect of Non-payment)  [2008]  UKAIT  00089,  an
        application is "accompanied by" a fee if it is accompanied by  such
        authorisation as will enable the respondent to receive  the  entire
        fee in question, without further recourse having to be made to  the
        payer. This was affirmed in Basnet at [20],


         Validity of the application is determined not by whether  the  fee
         is actually received but by whether the application is accompanied
         by a  valid  authorisation  to  obtain  the  entire  fee  that  is
         available in the relevant bank account.

        In Basnet the respondent actually attempted to obtain payment using
        her payment procedures having received what was,  on  its  face,  a
        completed payment page.

    45. Mitchell does not concern the procedure for obtaining payment  from
        a bank, but whether the payment mandate section of the payment page
        was signed. In contrast with the procedure  for  obtaining  payment
        from a bank or  credit  card  company,  which  involves  a  further
        process in respect of which an applicant  has  no  involvement  and
        which will only be embarked on if  an  application  appears  to  be
        sufficiently  completed,  there  is   no   further   process   when
        determining whether an application is,  prima  facie,  sufficiently
        completed.

    46. We have no  hesitation  in  endorsing  the  conclusion  reached  in
        Mitchell that, if an application is, on  its  face,  insufficiently
        completed,  the  burden  of  proving  its  validly  remains  on  an
        appellant. This stands in marked contrast to a situation  where  an
        attempt has been made to obtain payment following the provision  of
        complete payment details. Central to the analysis in Basnet is  the
        existence of a further procedure undertaken by  the  respondent  in
        order to process payment in relation to which  applicants  are  not
        privy and over which they have  no  control.  As  was  observed  in
        Mitchell (at paragraph 10), once a postal application  is  received
        that is,  on  its  face,  sufficiently  completed,  an  applicant's
        involvement in the payment procedure ends and the matter is  solely
        within the knowledge of  the  respondent  (a  point  emphasised  by
        McCloskey J in Muhandiramge (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015]  UKUT  00675
        (IAC)). Applicants have no involvement in attempts to draw  payment
        from a bank or credit card company using the card details provided.
        Nor  are  they  provided  with  the  payment  page  of  a  returned
        application deemed invalid. As the crucial events happen after  the
        submission of the application form, and as the  respondent  is  the
        party asserting that the application is invalid because the issuing
        bank or credit card company rejected payment, and given  that  only
        she is privy to and responsible for  the  actual  attempt  to  draw
        payment, it remains appropriate for  her  to  bear  the  burden  of
        proof.


    47. Nothing in the summary of  the  affidavit  considered  in  Mitchell
        diminishes our conclusion. While we accept that the  payment  pages
        of an application are now retained by the payment processing centre
        for 18 months from the date of receipt,  this  does  undermine  the
        observation in Basnet that an applicant has no way of obtaining the
        payment information received by the respondent. We  note  that  the
        payment  information  remains,  throughout  that  period,  in   the
        possession of the respondent. It therefore  remains  the  case,  as
        indicated at paragraph 27 of Basnet, that the question  whether  an
        application  was  accompanied  by  accurate  billing  data  can  be
        answered only by the  respondent.  The  summary  of  the  affidavit
        indicates that, within those  18  months,  it  is  "or  should  be"
        possible for an applicant  to  make  an  enquiry  about  a  payment
        process,  and,  presumably,  obtain  the  payment  pages  from  the
        respondent. This information would  equally  be  available  to  the
        respondent throughout that period.

    48. What is required to enable the respondent to discharge  the  burden
        of proof (to the balance of probabilities standard) will depend  on
        the nature of the evidence she is able to adduce, and this in  turn
        may depend on whether any request  was  made  by  an  appellant  to
        obtain the  payment  details.  If,  in  an  appeal,  the  issue  of
        invalidity arises within  18  months  of  receipt  by  the  payment
        processing centre of the payment details, then the respondent  will
        have access to those details. The fact that the invalidity decision
        may  not  have  been  immediately  challenged  has  no  bearing  on
        determining which party must discharge the burden of proof, but  it
        may be relevant in determining whether the legal burden,  including
        an initial evidential burden  requiring  the  respondent  to  raise
        sufficient evidence to support her invalidity allegation, has  been
        discharged. If an appellant has the opportunity of  requesting  the
        payment details from the respondent but does not avail  himself  of
        that opportunity in a timely manner, he cannot  then  rely  on  the
        respondent's inability to obtain those payment details. The reasons
        for a delay in challenging an invalidity decision or requesting the
        payment details may therefore be relevant  in  determining  whether
        the respondent has discharged the burden of proof  when  considered
        in conjunction with other relevant evidence.

    49.  It will be  rare  in  a  statutory  appeal  for  the  respondent's
        assertion that an application is invalid to be entirely unsupported
        by other evidence. The respondent will almost  always  be  able  to
        provide information maintained on  the  GCID,  which  will  usually
        include some basic information relating to  payment  (but  not  the
        debit or credit card details). If  the  GCID  notes  indicate  that
        payment was declined (which suggests  that  an  attempt  to  obtain
        payment was made), and the opportunity  of  obtaining  the  payment
        pages has passed, this may suffice  in  discharging  a  preliminary
        evidential burden, requiring an appellant to then produce  evidence
        that their  bank  or  credit  card  account  had  sufficient  funds
        throughout the relevant period or that the  credit  card  limit  or
        transaction limit had not been breached, or that the bank or credit
        card company did not decline  payment.  The  absence  of  any  such
        rebuttal evidence may ultimately result in  the  respondent  having
        discharged the legal burden. The question  whether  the  respondent
        has ultimately discharged the legal burden of proof will  therefore
        depend on the nature  and  quality  of  evidence  she  is  able  to
        provide, having regard to the timing of  any  request  for  payment
        details and  the  reasons  for  any  delay,  balanced  against  any
        rebuttal evidence produced by an appellant.


    50. As noted in Mitchell, an appellant can and should  be  expected  to
        make inquiries of his  or  her  bank  or  credit  card  company  to
        determine whether it received a request for payment and whether and
        for what reasons payment was declined.  If  the  payment  is  being
        taken from a bank account,  details  of  the  funds  held  in  that
        account over the relevant period are clearly relevant, as would  be
        any reasons for a decline of payment. Also of  relevance  would  be
        evidence that credit or transaction limits of a  credit  card  have
        not  been  reached  in  respect  of  the  relevant  period.  If   a
        bank/credit card company maintains that no payments were  declined,
        this may be prima facie evidence that the payment details used  did
        not relate to that particular account,  either  because  the  wrong
        details were provided by an appellant, or because they  were  input
        incorrectly when the processing centre attempted to obtain payment.
        We  endorse  the  observation  in  Basnet  that  there  can  be  no
        presumption that  an  appellant  may  have  inadvertently  supplied
        incorrect details, just as there can be no presumption that payment
        systems are infallible.


    51. In light of our assessment of  both  Basnet  and  Mitchell  we  are
        satisfied that the FtJ erred in law in  approaching  the  issue  of
        invalidity on the basis that the burden  of  proof  rested  on  the
        appellants. The  respondent's  rejection  of  the  9  October  2012
        applications was only based on an allegation that the issuing  bank
        rejected the payment. It was never suggested that the  applications
        were, on their  face,  insufficiently  completed.  Given  that  the
        attempt to obtain payment occurred  after  the  submission  of  the
        application forms and was a matter solely within the  knowledge  of
        the respondent, the burden of proof remained on her. The fact  that
        the challenge to the invalidity decisions was only raised during an
        appeal against a later decision,  while  ultimately  relevant  when
        assessing whether the  respondent  has  discharged  the  burden  of
        proof, has no bearing in determining  where  the  burden  of  proof
        laid.

    52. We are additionally satisfied that the FtJ erred in her approach to
        the Capital One letters. These letters,  which  indicated  that  no
        payments were declined in relation to the appellants'  credit  card
        accounts during the period 1 September 2012 to  28  February  2013,
        were clearly relevant because the credit card  company  would  have
        had notice of any declined payment due to  lack  of  funds  in  the
        appellants'  accounts,  which  was  one  of  the  possible  reasons
        identified by the respondent in her invalidity letter. Likewise, if
        the appellants had exceeded the maximum transaction limits  or  the
        number of transactions permitted, it is highly likely that  Capital
        One would have been aware of this. While  the  FtJ  properly  noted
        that Capital One was unlikely to have any knowledge of an attempted
        payment if  the  wrong  card  numbers  had  been  provided  by  the
        appellants, this would be equally true if the respondent had  input
        the wrong card details in her attempt to obtain payment.

    53. We are additionally satisfied that the judge  materially  erred  in
        law by assuming that  the  respondent  did  not  make  mistakes  in
        checking card numbers, and that she  impermissibly  approached  the
        evidence  with  this  assumption  in  mind,   a   point   expressly
        disapproved in Basnet. Allied to this finding is a failure  by  the
        judge to  engage  with  the  evidence  provided  not  just  by  the
        appellants but also  by  their  friend,  Mr  Asif,  which  was  not
        challenged in the respondent's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
        which the FtJ should have taken into  account  in  determining  the
        likelihood of the appellants making a mistake in their  application
        forms or the respondent making a mistake in  inputting  the  credit
        card details.

    54.  We  see  little  merit  in  Mr  Nicholson's  submission  that  the
        Devaseelan principles have any application  in  the  context  of  a
        remitted appeal. He was unable to identify any authority to support
        his proposition that, in the context of an appeal remitted  by  the
        Upper Tribunal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  where  some  specific
        findings of fact were retained, that all other unchallenged factual
        findings should  also  be  retained.  Such  an  approach  would  be
        contrary to the general underlying purpose of  remitting  decisions
        to be considered anew.

Re-making decision

    55. With the acquiescence of both parties we indicated at the close  of
        the error of law hearing that, if  a  material  error  of  law  was
        identified, we would be able to re-make the  decision  without  the
        need for further evidence.


    56. In determining whether the respondent has discharged the burden  of
        proving that the October 2012 applications were  invalid  we  first
        note that the appellants did not challenge the invalidity decisions
        by way of judicial review, and that the issue was not raised  until
        May 2014, by which time the payment details,  if  retained  by  the
        processing centre, would  have  been  destroyed.  It  is  therefore
        impossible to categorically determine whether payment was  declined
        because the appellants provided incorrect credit  card  details  or
        whether they were input incorrectly by the respondent.

    57. We do not however consider  that  it  was  unreasonable  for  these
        appellants to resubmit their applications rather than challenge the
        invalidity decisions by way of judicial review.  In  a  great  many
        cases the resubmission of an application may carry a  much  greater
        chance  of  achieving  a  successful  outcome,  especially  if  the
        resubmission is made within a short space of time.  A  re-submitted
        application will often be the most direct and cost-effective  means
        for an applicant to obtain their desired status,  especially  given
        the expense and limited  scope  of  a  judicial  review  challenge.
        Furthermore, although it may  have  been  notionally  open  to  the
        appellants to have requested  the  payment  details  following  the
        invalidity decisions, the knowledge that the details  are  retained
        for 18 months had not been publicly disseminated and was not in the
        public domain until the promulgation of Mitchell in  October  2015.
        We additionally note that there was a delay of approximately a year
        by the respondent in considering the application resubmitted on  13
        January 2013.

    58. Other than the invalidity letters issued in January 2013, the  only
        other evidence relating to the reasons for the  applications  being
        held invalid are the screen-print "PUK Payment Error -  17  October
        2012", and the GCID entry, dated 19 October 2012, "The  application
        is potentially invalid due to - fee declined." It is not clear what
        "PUK Payment Error" means. The entry dated 19 October 2012 suggests
        that the appellants' credit card company (Capital One) declined the
        application fees. Given that the payment details  would  have  been
        destroyed, and the limited evidence available to the respondent, we
        find that the GCID entry is sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial
        evidential burden and to require the  appellants  to  provide  some
        rebuttable evidence that their applications were validly made.

    59. We consider  first  the  documentary  evidence  relied  on  by  the
        appellants. They have consistently maintained  that  their  October
        2012 applications were  accompanied  by  Capital  One  credit  card
        details, and this assertion was not challenged  in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal hearing on 18 November  2016.   The  Capital  One  letters
        dated 2 May 2016 in respect of the credit cards held by the 1st and
        2nd appellants, indicated that no payments were declined between  1
        September 2012 and 28 February 2013. This is significant as payment
        would almost certainly have been declined if the credit limits  had
        been breached, or  a  request  for  payment  exceeded  the  maximum
        transaction limits or the number  of  transactions  permitted.  The
        fact that no payment was declined suggests that  either  the  wrong
        card details were provided to the respondent or the respondent miss-
        typed the card details when processing the payment.

    60. While we are not in any way bound  by  the  factual  assessment  of
        Judge Kennedy, we are entitled to  take  account  of  the  evidence
        given by 1st and 2nd appellants at the hearing on 11  August  2015,
        and the unchallenged evidence given by Mr Asif.  The  1st  and  2nd
        appellants maintained that they carefully  added  the  credit  card
        details, and verified that  the  card  details  were  correct.  The
        application forms were then checked by Mr Asif. In his evidence  Mr
        Asif explained that he and the 1st appellant  always  checked  each
        other's immigration forms because of their importance.  The  credit
        card details were part of this exercise. We additionally note  that
        the 1st appellant is educated and was already experienced at making
        application  for  further  leave  by  the  time  the  October  2012
        applications were made.

    61.  We  are  satisfied,  based  on  the  above  assessment,  that  the
        appellants have provided  sufficient  rebuttal  evidence  that  the
        correct credit card details were provided  to  the  respondent.  We
        consequently find that the respondent has failed to  discharge  the
        burden of proving that the October 2012 applications were invalid.

    62. As the applications dated 9 October 2012  were  validly  made,  the
        respondent's decisions dated 23  January  2014  were  not  made  in
        accordance with the law or the immigration rules as she erroneously
        believed that the applications were only made on 19 February  2013.
        The applications remain outstanding and await lawful consideration.



    63. We note that in July 2014, the 1st appellant attempted to  make  an
        application for Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) based  on  his  10
        years residence. A letter from the  respondent,  dated  1  November
        2016, states that an earlier rejection of this application was made
        in error, and that the respondent would reopen the 1st  appellant's
        long residence  application.  The  ILR  application  is  likely  to
        constitute a variation of the 1st appellant's  initial  application
        for further LTR as a Tier 4 (General) Student. It remains  for  the
        respondent to consider whether the public interest requirements  of
        paragraph 276B(ii) have been met.

    64. We additionally note that the 2nd appellant has now resided in  the
        UK for over 10 years. Consideration of her original application  as
        a dependent of the 1st appellant will need to be made in  light  of
        any variation application that she may make, and in  light  of  her
        length of residence and the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the
        immigration rules. The 3rd appellant has not remained in the UK for
        10 years. She was born on 7 April 2009 and has therefore resided in
        the UK for over 7 years. Her application  as  a  dependent  of  her
        parents remains outstanding and must be considered in  the  context
        of the applications or her parents and the respondent's duty  under
        s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge O'Garro is vitiated  by  material  legal  errors.  Her
decision is set aside.
We re-make the decisions in the appeals by allowing them on the  basis  that
the respondent's decisions were not in accordance with the law.
The  appellants'  applications  remain   outstanding,   and   await   lawful
consideration.



[pic]                               9 January 2018
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
