
OE and NK (No hearing; compliance with Rules) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 0055

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

No Hearing                   Date:  23 June 2006

                                   Before:

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
 Miss E Arfon-Jones, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb


                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA

                                                                  Respondent

                                     and


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA

                                                                  Respondent

(1) The power to determine an appeal without  a  hearing  under   r15(2)  is
discretionary.  (2)  The  appellant's  failure  to  enclose  the  notice  of
decision with the notice of appeal is a failure to  comply  with  the  Rules
but it does not make the appeal invalid.  (3) The  respondent's  failure  to
send the appeal bundle (with or without a direction to do so) is  a  failure
to comply with the Rules or a direction but it does not amount to  conceding
the appeal or reversing the burden of proof.  (4)  It  may  be  possible  to
deal with the  fact  that  a  document  is  missing  by  issuing  a  further
direction to send it, stating precisely what  the  consequence  will  be  if
this direction is not complied with.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. We have considered and determined these  reconsiderations  together  as
    they raise some similar issues.

OE

 2.  The  first  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.    This   is   the
    reconsideration,  at  his  instance,  of   his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision on 7 June 2005 refusing him entry clearance as  a
    student.  The second appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.   This  is  the
    reconsideration, at the instance  of  the  respondent,  of  her  appeal
    against the respondent's decision on  6  September  2005  refusing  her
    entry clearance as a student.

 3. In each case we have exercised our  discretion  to  proceed  without  a
    hearing under Rule 14(2)(b) as applied by Rule 29  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

 4. The first appellant submitted a notice of appeal to the  respondent  on
    24 June 2005.  It was accompanied by grounds of appeal in  three  pages
    of manuscript and a letter headed "Study Leave"  from  the  appellant's
    employer.  Despite what is asserted in the  appeal  form,  it  was  not
    accompanied by the notice of decision.  Other annotations on  the  form
    indicate that further documents will follow, and invite the  respondent
    to submit other documents to the Tribunal.  On receipt of to the notice
    of appeal the  Tribunal  required  the  respondent  to  file  with  the
    Tribunal the documents mentioned in Rule  13(1)  by  9  December  2005.
    Those documents have never been filed.  As a result, the  Tribunal  has
    no access to the original application form or any documents  supporting
    the application when it was made.

 5. This being a case to which Rule 15(2)(b) applied, the appeal was passed
    to an Immigration Judge for  consideration  of  whether  it  should  be
    determined without a hearing.  The Immigration Judge  appears  to  have
    decided that it was an appropriate case to be so determined.  He issued
    a determination, of which the relevant parts are as follows:

      "The appellant lodged his notice of appeal in terms of Rule 6 of  the
        Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 but in terms
        of Rule 8(2) the notice of appeal must 'if reasonably  practicable'
        be  accompanied  by  the  notice  of  decision  against  which  the
        appellant is appealing or a copy  of  it.   The  appellant  has  no
        representative and presumably therefore the notice of decision  was
        served upon him which instigated his lodging of a notice of appeal.
         The appellant has failed, in terms  of  Rule  8,  to  include  the
        notice of decision or a copy of it therewith.  There is no evidence
        to show that it was not reasonably practicable for him  to  include
        this.  Accordingly therefore, the appellant has failed to meet  the
        requirements of Rule 8(2) of the Procedure Rules referred to above.

      Accordingly therefore, I have to dismiss this appeal through  want  of
        jurisdiction a proper appeal not having been lodged."

 6. The grounds for  reconsideration  are  accompanied  by  the  notice  of
    decision.  It shows that the appellant's application was refused  under
    sub-paragraphs (ii), (iv) and (vi) of  paragraph  57  of  HC  395,  the
    reasons being as follows:

      "The course you propose to study is widely available in  Nigeria  and
        leads to the same qualification at a significantly cheaper cost and
        you cannot satisfactorily explain why  you  do  not  undertake  the
        course here.


      The cost of your tuition, maintenance  and  accommodation  is  to  be
        borne by your sponsor.   Funding  your  education  will  impose  an
        additional financial burden upon him and I am  not  satisfied  that
        this increased financial outlay is commensurate  with  his  current
        economic circumstances and that such  funds  will  be  actually  be
        available to you  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Therefore  I  am  not
        satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you  are  able  to
        meet the cost of the course and maintain and  accommodate  yourself
        without recourse to employment or public funds.


      The cost of your tuition, maintenance  and  accommodation  is  to  be
        borne by you sponsor, you have not provided any evidence that he is
        willing to fund you.  Furthermore you have  provided  company  bank
        statements, you have provided no evidence  that  your  sponsor  has
        access to these funds.  The balance of this account  is  modest  to
        say the least.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  sufficient  funds  are
        available to fund your trip.  In light of the aforementioned  I  am
        not satisfied, that you are able to meet the cost of the course and
        maintain and accommodate yourself without recourse to employment or
        public funds.


       Your  proposed  course  of  study  is  unrealistic  because  it   is
        inconsistent with  your  previous  pattern  of  study/previous  job
        experience  and  does  not  represent   a   progression   in   your
        education/previous employment pattern and you have not been able to
        give me credible explanation for this change of direction.


      You have been unable to satisfactorily explain how your  course  will
        be of benefit to you or enhance your future prospects and as such I
        am not satisfied that the cost of these studies is proportionate to
        your current economic circumstances and advantages you might derive
        from this course of study.


      Your account of your personal, economic and social circumstances  and
        how you will use these studies does not satisfy me, on the  balance
        of probabilities, that you intend to leave the  United  Kingdom  on
        completion of your course."

 7. Because of the conclusion reached by the Immigration  Judge  about  his
    jurisdiction, the substantive elements of the appellant's case have not
    been considered on appeal.

NK

 8. In the case of the second appellant the notice of  refusal  is  in  the
    following terms:

        "I am not satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that  you  meet
        all the requirements of paragraph 57 of the Immigration Rules,  and
        in particular


         . that you are able and intend to follow your proposed course
         . that you intend to leave the United Kingdom on the completion of
           any studies, BECAUSE you plan to undertake a BTEC in hospitality
           supervision at Birmingham College of Food.  Currently  you  work
           for Hideva restaurant as a waitress earning 4000 Naira  (�16)  a
           month.  You claim that after your studies you  will  return  and
           hopefully own the place.  I do not  find  it  credible  that  an
           employee on such a low income would be  prepared  to  return  to
           there [sic] present place of employment  rather  than  look  for
           better job prospects elsewhere."

 9. The appellant's notice of appeal, accompanied by extensive grounds  but
    no further documentation, was received on 5 October 2005.  The Tribunal
    thereupon required the respondent to file the  documents  mentioned  in
    Rule 13(1) by 23 December 2005.  In this case too those documents  have
    never been filed.

10. The appeal was passed to an  Immigration  Judge  for  consideration  of
    whether it should be determined without  a  hearing.   The  Immigration
    Judge evidently decided  that  it  should  be.   The  sole  substantive
    paragraph of her determination is as follows:

        "On 2 October 2005 the respondent was directed by the AIT  to  file
        by 23 December 2005 a copy of the decision to which the  notice  of
        appeal relates, any other document giving reasons for that decision
        and any  application  form,  record  of  interview,  or  any  other
        unpublished document which is relied upon by  the  respondent.   He
        did not do so and there is no explanation for his failure.  I  have
        in the bundle the  refusal  decision,  the  notice  of  appeal  and
        nothing else - nothing at all.  I do not have the documents  relied
        on by the respondent including the appellant's own statement of her
        employment  and  income.   The  notice  of  appeal  refers  to  the
        respondent having bank statements of her sponsor.  They are not  in
        my bundle.  If what the respondent said were true, I would be  very
        tempted to dismiss this appeal.  However, in the absence  of  these
        documents I am unable to assess the respondent's challenge  to  the
        appellant's application  and  I  cannot  assess  whether  what  the
        respondent said about her application is true or what  she  herself
        said in her Visa Application Form.  I have no choice therefore  but
        to accept the appellant's claim, effectively unchallenged."

      She therefore allowed the appeal.

11. The respondent's grounds supporting the application for reconsideration
    assert that the determination does not show why the  Immigration  Judge
    considered that the respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules.

Determination with a hearing

12. For reasons that we shall give below, we consider that  in  both  these
    cases the Immigration Judges erred in law.  Their first error, however,
    was  one  to  which  no  reference  was  made  in   the   grounds   for
    reconsideration.  It was the assumption,  which  they  both  apparently
    made, that these appeals had to be determined without a hearing.   That
    was not correct.  Rule 15 gives a discretion.  It is no doubt  fair  to
    say that where  the  appellant  has  elected  determination  without  a
    hearing, or where there is no United Kingdom representative in an  out-
    of-country appeal, the discretion will normally be exercised in such  a
    manner as to allow determination without a hearing.  But it is  clearly
    a matter for the Immigration Judge to decide.   If  the  appeal  cannot
    properly or justly be determined on the basis of the documents on file,
    no Immigration Judge should regard himself  or  herself  as  forced  to
    proceed without a hearing.  That is not what the Rules require.

13. In deciding whether to proceed without a hearing, an Immigration  Judge
    will no doubt bear in mind the source of any  difficulties.   If  there
    has been a failure by the appellant, it may be that he has only himself
    to blame.  A failure by the respondent should not of itself  cause  the
    appellant to lose his appeal, but (as we also explain below) cannot  of
    itself entitle the appellant to succeed.

14. We should make it clear that we do not say  that  in  either  of  these
    cases there should have been a hearing.  The position  is  simply  that
    the question should have been considered.  The problem with each of the
    determinations is that they both fail to consider the question and then
    imply that the Immigration Judge was not entirely content to deal  with
    the appeal on the basis of the material on file.

15. Secondly, the consequence of failing to comply with  a  requirement  of
    the Rules is prescribed by the Rules.  It is not  (as  the  Immigration
    Judge in the first appeal before us appears to have thought) that there
    is no valid appeal; nor is it (as the Immigration Judge in  the  second
    appeal before us appears to have thought) that the party whose  failure
    it is is regarded as no longer contesting the  appeal.   Rule  15(2)(c)
    provides that the Tribunal may determine an appeal  without  a  hearing
    if:

        "a party has failed to comply with the provision of these Rules  or
        a direction of the Tribunal, and the Tribunal is satisfied that  in
        all the circumstances, including the extent of the failure and  any
        reasons for it, it is appropriate to determine the appeal without a
        hearing."

16. This provision is, of course, of little effect if it has  already  been
    decided that the appeal is to be determined without a hearing.  But  if
    the power under this sub-paragraph of the Rules is to be exercised, the
    determination ought clearly  to  indicate  the  process  by  which  the
    decision to proceed without a hearing was reached.

17. Rule 51(4) is as follows:


        "Where the Tribunal has given directions setting  time  limits  for
        the filing and serving of written evidence, it  must  not  consider
        any written evidence which is not filed  or  served  in  accordance
        with those directions unless satisfied that there are good  reasons
        to do so."


    This rule cannot apply in the present case, because there has  been  no
    evidence submitted later than a direction by the Tribunal required.  In
    a case in which it does apply - for example if the respondent's  bundle
    is late - we think  that  there  will  usually  be  'good  reasons'  to
    consider whatever evidence  is  available  if  the  alternative  is  to
    attempt to decide an issue without evidence or on the basis of woefully
    inadequate evidence.  But, again, the impact on the innocent as well as
    the defaulting party must be taken into account.

18. In both the present  appeals  we  have  decided  to  proceed  with  the
    reconsideration without a hearing not because  of  any  breach  of  the
    Rules or directions,  but  because  in  each  case  the  appellant  has
    indicated that he is content for the matter to be dealt with without  a
    hearing, the respondent has not sought  a  hearing,  the  appellant  is
    outside  the  United  Kingdom  and  unrepresented,   and,   given   the
    opportunities that each party has had that,  we  consider  it  unlikely
    that any further  material  relevant  to  the  determination  of  these
    appeals will be forthcoming.

Decision: OE

19. The first appellant's appeal is not invalid for failure to comply  with
    Rule 8.  His failure has merely the consequences we have set out above.

20. The first appellant knows the points that the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    took against him.  They are set out in the notice of  refusal.   It  is
    somewhat difficult to evaluate the points relating to the  contents  of
    the letter of sponsorship, because  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  has
    still not forwarded that letter to  us,  and  the  appellant's  grounds
    relating to it are based on his recollection of what it said.  If  this
    appeal had depended on it,  we  might  have  had  to  cause  a  further
    direction to be sent to the Entry Clearance Officer:  we  suspect  that
    the appropriate terms would be that unless the  documents  required  by
    Rule 13 were sent within a specified time, the  Tribunal  would  assume
    that the respondent was content for the Tribunal to take the content of
    those documents as what the appellant says it is.  (That is, of course,
    quite different from suggesting that the respondent is to be  taken  as
    no longer contesting the appeal or that the assessment of  the  content
    of the documents should be in favour of the appellant.)

21. In this case, however, the outcome of the appeal does not depend on any
    missing documents.  The first reason for refusal is that the  appellant
    has given no satisfactory explanation  why  he  does  not  undertake  a
    similar course in Nigeria, much more  cheaply.   His  response  in  the
    grounds is to indicate  that  there  are  forty  five  universities  in
    Nigeria and to ask whether it is a crime to study abroad.  It does  not
    appear to us at all unreasonable to expect that a person who embarks on
    a project which will cost his sponsor many thousands of  pounds  should
    have formulated some reason for the expenditure of such a sum of money.
     It would perhaps not have to be a reason with  which  everybody  would
    agree: but, if there is no reason at  all  for  taking  the  course  in
    England, a decision-maker is entitled to think that the  course  itself
    is not the real reason for wanting to travel.

22. The last of the reasons given by the respondent is that the appellant's
    account of his personal, economic and social circumstances and  how  he
    will use the studies does not satisfy him that the appellant intends to
    leave the  United  Kingdom  on  the  completion  of  his  course.   The
    appellant's response is to point out that he proposes to return to  the
    same employment after completing his course, that (perhaps in order  to
    help his uncle expand  the  scope  of  his  business)  he  needs  "more
    exposure to the outside world", and that  "back  home  there  are  vast
    opportunities".  All that may be true, but it gives no  reason  at  all
    for undertaking the proposed course and committing his sponsor  to  the
    very considerable expenditure on it.

23. For those reasons the first  appellant  fails  to  satisfy  us  on  the
    balance of probabilities on the evidence before us that at the date  of
    the decision he intended to undertake the course proposed, or to  leave
    the United Kingdom on completion of his studies.  That is sufficient to
    dispose of this appeal, but we should add that (whilst recognising that
    we are handicapped by not having the original sponsorship letter before
    us) we do have some doubts about the financial aspects  of  this  case.
    In particular, we find it very surprising that the appellant's proposed
    sponsor was apparently unable or unwilling to provide a further  letter
    of support to accompany the  grounds  of  appeal  or  the  grounds  for
    reconsideration.

Decision: NK

24. Turning now to the second appellant's appeal, it appears  to  us  that,
    having noted  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  comply  with  his
    obligations to supply documents to the Tribunal, the Immigration  Judge
    went far beyond her powers or duties in her reaction to  that  failure.
    As we have indicated, the consequences of  a  failure  to  comply  with
    directions or a provision of the Rules  are  very  limited.   What  the
    Immigration Judge appears to have done in this case is to have reversed
    the burden of proof and to have failed to carry out  her  duties  under
    Section 86.

25. Although she said in her determination that the appellant's  story  was
    "effectively unchallenged" she knew that it was challenged in the terms
    of the notice of refusal.  She was required to allow the appeal only in
    so far as the evidence taken as a whole showed that the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof of showing that  she  should  have  been
    granted, rather than refused, the visa she sought.  If the  Immigration
    Judge was, as she said, "unable to assess" the  respondent's  challenge
    it is extremely difficult to see how she could have  thought  that  the
    burden of proof had been discharged.

26. For these reasons we consider that  the  Immigration  Judge  materially
    erred in law in her determination.

27. We have considered the material before us.  As  the  Immigration  Judge
    noted, "if what the respondent said were true, I would be very  tempted
    to dismiss the appeal".  The truth of what the  respondent  said  about
    the appellant's income is confirmed in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    foundation  of  the  respondent's  suspicions  about  the   appellant's
    intention to leave the United Kingdom is confirmed in  the  grounds  of
    appeal where the appellant says "if after completing my  studies  I  am
    given a better job in the UK I could apply for extension  of  stay  and
    work there".

28. Nothing in the grounds of appeal does anything  substantially  to  meet
    the points made against the appellant in the notice  of  refusal.   The
    cost of the proposed course and  the  appellant's  maintenance  in  the
    United  Kingdom  remains  grossly  disproportionate  to  the  perceived
    benefits of receiving an "increase of salary" or perhaps  being  "taken
    to the post of the manager" of the restaurant where she now works.  The
    sentence cited at the end of the previous paragraph shows that she  has
    no firm intention to leave  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  her
    studies.   She  has  not  persuaded  us  that  she  met  or  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 57 of HC 395.

Conclusion

29. For the foregoing reasons we find that in  each  case  the  Immigration
    Judge made a material error of law  and  we  substitute  in  each  case
    decisions dismissing the appeal.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
