
GC (Citizens Directive: UK national's spouse) China [2007] UKAIT 00056

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Hatton Cross                                   Dates of Hearing:
8 June 2006 & 13 April 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                     Designated Immigration Judge Barton
                         Immigration Judge Easterman

                                   Between

                                     GC
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr R de Mello & Mr A Berry, instructed by Harvey Son
                       & Philby Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr D'Silva, Home Office Presenting Officer

The Citizens Directive, 2004/38/EC, gives no absolute right of residence  to
a person not himself a national of a Member State who is  married  to  a  UK
national.  Even if the UK national has exercised Treaty  rights  by  working
in another Member State before  returning  to  the  UK,  the  UK  national's
movement unaccompanied by the spouse does not confer a  right  of  residence
on the spouse.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, to whom we shall also refer as "C", a citizen of  China,
    appeals against an EEA decision made by the respondent on  13  February
    2005 refusing to  issue  him  with  a  residence  permit  or  residence
    document.

 2. In this appeal, there is no dispute as to the facts.  The legal  issues
    raised are complex and of wider interest.   A  decision  was  therefore
    made to list the appeal for hearing before a panel constituted of three
    legally-qualified members.  We heard submissions on 8  June  2006.   We
    adjourned the appeal part-heard in order to await the decision  of  the
    European Court of Justice in Case C-1/105 Jia v Migrationsverket.   The
    Court's judgment was given on 9 January 2007.   We  then  attempted  to
    arrange a further hearing in order to decide whether the issues arising
    in this appeal should be referred to the Court.  Submissions were  made
    to two of us on 13  April  2007.   We  have  decided  no  reference  is
    necessary, and we make the present determination on the  basis  of  the
    arguments we heard on 8 June 2006.

 3. The appellant was born on 8 April 1972.  He came to the United  Kingdom
    and entered clandestinely on 31 October  or  1  November  1995,  having
    travelled from China via Moscow.  He remained unlawfully in the  United
    Kingdom.  In the summer of 1996 he was arrested and he  claimed  asylum
    on 12 August.  The  Secretary  of  State  considered  his  application,
    refused it, and on 2 May 2002 gave directions for his removal to  China
    as an illegal entrant.  The appellant  appealed  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.  The appeal was listed for hearing.  At the hearing  he
    withdrew his grounds insofar as they were based on any claim under  the
    Refugee Convention: his  argument  was  instead  based  solely  on  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  He said that if returned to China
    he would be at fear of retribution from the snakeheads from whom he had
    borrowed money in order to travel to the United Kingdom; but  the  main
    burden of his appeal was based on his activities since he came  to  the
    United Kingdom.  He said that he had entered into both  a  relationship
    and a business partnership with a British citizen,  to  whom  we  shall
    refer as "N".  Together he and she ran  a  Turkish-Chinese  restaurant.
    He was the cook; she was the front of house manager; they employed  two
    or three other staff.  The restaurant could not function  without  him.
    He has no passport and could not easily return to  China,  but  in  any
    event, his return to China even  for  the  short  period  necessary  to
    obtain entry clearance either as N's partner or for  business  purposes
    would destroy the business.  The Adjudicator believed everything he was
    told by all the witnesses  before  him,  and  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.  His determination was sent to the parties
    on 25 February 2004.   The  Secretary  of  State  sought  and  obtained
    permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on a  point  of
    law.  The hearing before the Tribunal was  on  20  January  2005.   The
    Tribunal decided that it was not in law  open  to  the  Adjudicator  to
    allow the appeal on the facts which he had found.  There was no  reason
    to suppose that the appellant could not obtain a  passport,  return  to
    China, obtain  entry  clearance,  and  regularise  his  position.   The
    Tribunal found that the circumstances of the  appellant's  private  and
    family life did not demand departure from the Immigration  Rules.   The
    effect of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal's decision was, of course, to
    restore  the  decision  against  which  the  appellant  appealed.   The
    Tribunal's determination was sent to the parties on 10 February 2005.

 4. On 22 February 2005 the  appellant  married  N  at  Leicester  Register
    Office.  Evidently the business could continue without N, for she  then
    went to the Republic of Ireland.  She appears to have started  work  in
    Eire a few days after the wedding, because her first pay appears to  be
    for a full week ending 4 March.  After about six months she returned to
    the United Kingdom. She obtained work.  Her employer is the  appellant.



 5. On the basis of these facts it is claimed that the  appellant  now  has
    the right of residence in the United Kingdom as the spouse  of  N,  she
    being a person having the nationality of a Member State of the European
    Union (in this case the United Kingdom) who is a  worker  in  a  Member
    State of the European Union (in this case also the United Kingdom).

 6. We need say little more about the  facts,  other  than  to  make  three
    observations.   The  first  is  that  it  is  common  ground  that  the
    relationship between C and N is a genuine one.  There is no  suggestion
    of a "marriage of convenience".  The second is that C has not left  the
    United Kingdom since he arrived in 1995.  He did  not  accompany  N  to
    Eire.  Thirdly, the appellant arrived without a passport.  Although the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal appears to have  taken  the  view  that  he
    would have little difficulty in obtaining one,  he  has  not  done  so.
    Indeed it is an incidental part of the case put on his behalf before us
    that he still has no passport.

 7. The respondent's decision was made, as we have  said,  on  13  February
    2006.  It was therefore made under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2000 (SI 2326/2000) as amended,  and  constituted  an
    EEA decision under those Regulations, which were intended to  implement
    a number of Directives and Regulations.  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the
    European Parliament and of the Council on the rights of citizens of the
    Union and their family members to move and  reside  freely  within  the
    territory of the Member States entered into force on 30 April 2004  and
    had to be implemented by Member States by 30 April 2006.  In the United
    Kingdom the implementation was  (or,  the  appellant's  representatives
    would prefer us  to  say,  was  intended  to  be)  by  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (SI  1003/2006).   Those
    Regulations came into force on 30 April 2006 and provide  in  paragraph
    5(1) of Schedule 5 that "where an appeal against an EEA decision  under
    the 2000 Regulations is pending immediately before 30 April  2006  that
    appeal should be treated as a pending appeal against the  corresponding
    EEA decision under these Regulations."  Under the old  Regulations  the
    appellant, as a person who is not a national of an EEA Member State but
    who claims to be the spouse of such a person sought a document called a
    residence document.  Under the new legislation the document in question
    is a residence card.  This appeal therefore now falls to be treated  as
    though the appellant had been refused a residence  card;  and  the  law
    governing the appellant is contained not in the 2000 Regulations but in
    the 2006  Regulations,  as  implementing  Directive  2004/38/EC,  which
    itself repeals earlier Directives on the same issue and Articles 10 and
    11 of Regulation (EEC) 1612/68.

 8. Article 17 of the consolidated version of the Treaty  Establishing  the
    European Community establishes  citizenship  of  the  Union,  which  is
    possessed by every person holding the nationality of  a  Member  State.
    That Article also provides that citizens of the Union shall  enjoy  the
    rights conferred by the Treaty.  Article 18, as amended by  the  Treaty
    of Nice, provides that:-

        "Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside
        freely within the territory of the Member States,  subject  to  the
        limitations and conditions laid down in  this  Treaty  and  by  the
        measures adopted to give it effect."


    Subsequent  Regulations  and  Directives,   in   particular   Directive
    2000/38/EC and those it replaces, have made various provisions removing
    what would otherwise be clogs on the freedom of a citizen of the  Union
    to move between Member States.  There are rules preventing  unnecessary
    demands for documents at state borders, and, in particular,  there  are
    rules enabling a person who is exercising Treaty rights, or moving from
    one Member State to another, to have close  family  members  move  with
    him.  The reason for these provisions is clear.  If a person could move
    to another Member State only at the cost of leaving his spouse  in  the
    country of his nationality, the right to move would  be  illusory.   It
    would not be a right of free movement.  That position is recognised  in
    broad terms in preamble 5 to Directive 2004/38/EC:


        "The right of all Union citizens to move and reside  freely  within
        the territory of the Member States should, if it is to be exercised
        under objective conditions of freedom and dignity, be also  granted
        to their family members, irrespective of nationality."

 9.  EU legislation therefore provides,  particularly  in  the  case  of  a
    worker's spouse, that such a person is entitled to move and reside with
    the worker exercising rights under the Treaties,  whether  or  not  the
    spouse is himself or herself a national of a Member State of the Union.
     The process adopted for enforcement of the rights  of  family  members
    including spouses is that, provided the relationship is established and
    is within the categories set out in  the  Directive,  a  family  member
    accompanying or joining the EU national is entitled to be issued with a
    residence card as evidence of the right of residence as such  a  family
    member.

10. The facts of the present case are apt to test the terms and  the  logic
    of these provisions to the utmost.  The  appellant  has  (save  on  the
    basis of his claim to a residence card) no right to be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He claims, however, that he cannot leave the United  Kingdom,
    because of his business.  He  also  perhaps  cannot  leave  the  United
    Kingdom because he has no passport and appears to propose  to  take  no
    steps to get one.  His wife is able to move within the  Member  States;
    her ability and freedom to do so are, on the  facts,  not  in  any  way
    affected by the failure to issue an EEA document to  her  husband.   He
    says that, because she has worked  in  another  Member  State  and  now
    returns, she is exercising Treaty rights.  He says that, because she is
    exercising Treaty rights, he has rights as her spouse  which  he  would
    not have if she had not worked for a few months in Eire and returned to
    the United Kingdom.  He says that the effect of his wife's movements is
    that he is now entitled to  be  regarded  as  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom and entitled to remain with her.  In other  words,  his  wife's
    movements have rendered his presence in the United Kingdom lawful.

11. We have to say that we should regard that conclusion as strikingly odd.
     In the absence of authority we should reject  the  argument,  for  the
    following reason.  The rights of free movement are the rights of the EU
    national: any rights that a family member may have are  dependent  upon
    the EU national's rights.  The purpose  of  the  Directives  and  other
    legislation to which we have referred is to  prevent  there  being  any
    clog on the EU national's right of free movement and residence.  But in
    order to avoid clogging the rights, all that is required is that the EU
    national be entitled to have family  members  with  him  or  her  under
    broadly the same conditions in any of the Member  States,  and  despite
    any movement between Member States.  There is no reason to suppose that
    it is intended that a family member's rights be enhanced by  the  Union
    citizen's movements.  In a case such as the present, the Union citizen,
    N, is married to a person who  is  unlawfully  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He may be required to leave at any moment.  That is a feature
    of the relationship between them.  The Regulations do their job if they
    prevent a deterioration in the relationship  being  caused  by  the  EU
    national's exercise of her Treaty rights.  As (following the  dismissal
    of his appeal) the appellant is not entitled to reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom (with or without N)  she  loses  nothing  if  he  is  also  not
    entitled to reside with her  in  any  other  Member  State.   She  also
    therefore loses nothing if, on her return to the United Kingdom, he  is
    not entitled to reside with her.  The purpose  of  the  rules  on  free
    movement of Union citizens with their families requires  no  more  than
    this.

12. For these reasons we should have taken the view in principle  that  the
    appellant's claim to  a  residence  card  cannot  succeed.   His  right
    depends on N's right of free movement; although he is married  to  her,
    her position is not at all affected if he has no EU right  to  be  with
    her.

13. The matter is, however, of course  not  free  of  authority.   For  the
    appellant, Mr de Mello relied in particular on  the  decisions  of  the
    European Court of Justice in Case C-1  370/90  R  v  IAT  and  Surinder
    Singh, ex parte SSHD [1992] ECR I-4265, Case C-459/99 Mouvement  contre
    le racisme, l'antis�mitisme et la  x�nophobie  ASBL  (MRAX)  v  Belgian
    State [2002] ECR I-6591 and Case C-60/00 Carpenter v SSHD [2002] ECR I-
    6279.  For the respondent Mr D'Silva relied  particularly  on  Case  C-
    109/01 Akrich v SSHD [2003] ECR I-9607.  Both parties  referred  us  to
    the opinion of the Advocate General  in  Jia,  then  available  (for  a
    reason that was not explained) only  in  French,  with  a  partial  and
    unofficial translation into English.

14. One of the issues which concerned both parties  was  whether  the  fact
    that the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom  (unless  legalised
    by his marriage to N) has always  been  unlawful  prevented  his  claim
    succeeding.  It is fair to say, however, that this was not the specific
    reason for the refusal of the appellant's application.  Further, it  is
    clear  that  it  is  not  possible  to  derive  from  either  Community
    legislation or from the decided cases any absolute prohibition  on  the
    accrual of a right of residence to a person who is not a national of  a
    Member State but is the family member of a  Union  citizen,  and  whose
    presence in a Member State has been unlawful.  That,  however,  is  the
    aspect of the case of which the Court's decision  in  Akrich  might  be
    seen as particularly relevant; and the Advocate  General's  opinion  in
    Jia sought to build on such a principle.  The Court itself in  Jia  did
    not find it necessary to express an opinion on this issue.  We also  do
    not need to do so.  As will be apparent from what follows, we  consider
    the appellant's  history  to  be  of  considerable  importance  in  the
    resolution of this appeal.  That is not, however, because, having  been
    here unlawfully, he cannot establish a right to residence as the family
    member of a Union  citizen.   It  is  because  every  case  has  to  be
    considered on its own facts.

15. For the appellant, Mr de Mello sought to establish a principle  that  a
    spouse of a Union citizen was always entitled to a right  of  residence
    with the Union citizen if the latter had exercised  or  was  exercising
    Treaty rights.  A right of residence, he said, flowed from the marriage
    itself.  That principle he sought to derive from  the  three  cases  to
    which we have referred.  We need to look at them in some detail.

16. In MRAX the claimant  body  sought  the  annulment  of  a  governmental
    circular dated 28 August 1997 relating to the "documents which must  be
    produced in order to obtain a visa for the  purpose  of  contracting  a
    marriage in [Belgium] or to obtain a visa for the purpose of  reuniting
    a family on the basis of a marriage contracted abroad".   The  circular
    provided that an application for residence on  the  basis  of  marriage
    should in principle be declared inadmissible if it was not  accompanied
    by a passport or substitute travel document and a visa permitting entry
    for the purpose of marriage or  family  reunification.   The  questions
    referred to the Court, by the Belgian Conseil d'Etat may be  stated  as
    follows:

      "1.   Must the European legislation be  interpreted  as  meaning  that
             the Member  States  may,  at  the  border,  send  back  foreign
             nationals subject to a visa requirement and married to a  Union
             citizen who attempts to enter the territory of a  Member  State
             without being in possession of an identity document or visa?
      2.    Must the European legislation be  interpreted  as  meaning  that
             Member States may refuse to issue a  residence  permit  to  the
             spouse of a Union  citizen  who  has  entered  their  territory
             unlawfully and may issue an expulsion order against him?
      3.    Does the  European  legislation  mean  that  Member  States  may
             neither withhold a residence permit nor expel a foreign  spouse
             of a Union citizen who has entered national territory  lawfully
             but whose visa has expired when application was  made  for  the
             issue of that permit?
      4.    Must the European legislation be  interpreted  as  meaning  that
             foreign spouses of Union citizens who are not in possession  of
             identity documents or a visa or whose visa has expired have the
             right to some sort of appeal against refusal  of  a  permit  or
             expulsion?"

    We have summarised the questions in order to avoid  complications.   We
    do not need to set out the European legislation, because it  is  common
    ground before us that the 2004 Directive has  for  these  purposes  the
    same effect as the legislation under consideration in MRAX.

17. The first question relates to the right of entry by a spouse of a Union
    citizen.  The answer given by the Court at [62] is that:

        "A Member State may not send back at the  border  a  third  country
        national who is married  to  a  national  of  a  Member  State  and
        attempts to enter its territory without being in  possession  of  a
        valid identity card or passport or, if necessary, a visa, where  he
        is able to prove his identity and the conjugal ties and there is no
        evidence to establish that he represents a risk to the requirements
        of public policy, public security, or public health."

18. The second question relates to a  spouse's  right  of  residence  after
    unlawful entry.  Although the Court's treatment of  the  issue  is  not
    absolutely specific, it is clear that the question  is  concerned  both
    with a person who has entered the country unlawfully subsequent to  his
    marriage, and a person who marries in the  country  subsequent  to  his
    unlawful entry.  That the  latter  was  in  issue  is  clear  from  the
    submissions of the claimant recorded in paragraph [74] of the  Advocate
    General's opinion.  In giving its answer,  the  Court  noted  that  the
    refusal of a residence  permit  (or,  a  fortiori,  the  making  of  an
    expulsion order) based "solely on the failure of the  person  concerned
    to comply with legal formalities  concerning  the  control  of  aliens"
    would strike at the heart of the right of residence.  It  answered  the
    question in the following way:

        "A Member State is not permitted to refuse  issue  of  a  residence
        permit and to issue an expulsion  order  against  a  third  country
        national who is able to furnish proof of his identity  and  of  his
        marriage to a national of a Member State on the sole ground that he
        has  entered  the  territory  of   the   Member   State   concerned
        unlawfully."

19. The third question concerns those who have entered lawfully, but  whose
    permission to remain in the Member State has expired at  the  time  the
    application for residence is made.  The answer given is that:

        "A Member State may neither refuse to issue a residence permit to a
        third country national who is married to a  member  of  a  national
        state and entered the territory of that Member State lawfully,  nor
        issue an order expelling him from the territory, on the sole ground
        that his visa expired before he applied for a residence permit."

20.  We do not need to look at the fourth question.

21. We are not persuaded that the judgment in the Court of MRAX establishes
    an absolute right arising from the marriage.  The Court dealt with  the
    three issues before it separately, but the underlying theme as  we  see
    it is that the  mere  absence  of  a  formal  requirement,  such  as  a
    passport, or a visa, or even lawful entry, is not of itself  sufficient
    to defeat the right of residence that the spouse would otherwise  have.
    In reaching its answers to the first  and  the  second  questions,  the
    Court  reminded  itself  of  its  decision  in  Case   48/75   Criminal
    proceedings against Royer [1976] ECR 497.  That  decision  establishes,
    in the Court's words:

        "That the mere failure by a national of a Member  State  to  comply
        with the formalities concerning the entry, movement  and  residence
        of aliens is not of such  a  nature  as  to  constitute  in  itself
        conduct threatening the requirements of public  policy  and  public
        security."

    It will be recalled that in the Court's  treatment  of  its  answer  to
    question 2 the Court noted that the claim is not to be defeated by  the
    "mere" lack of documents or "on the sole ground"  that  the  claimant's
    entry to the country was unlawful.

22. It is clearly the second question which is most apposite in considering
    the appeal before us.  Nevertheless, it is instructive to consider  the
    facts of the present case in the light of the three scenarios posed  by
    the claimant and answered by the Court in MRAX.

23. The first question relates to an individual, not a national of a Member
    State, who presents himself at the  border  of  the  Member  State  and
    asserts his right to entry and residence on the ground of his  marriage
    to a Union citizen.  He is a person who is (already) a family member of
    the Union citizen.  The Court's ruling in MRAX is that his  substantive
    rights as a family member of a Union citizen cannot be defeated by  the
    mere lack of the formal document normally required  for  entry  to  the
    Member State.

24. In the second situation, the claimant  has  entered  the  Member  State
    unlawfully, and by the time he makes his application is the spouse of a
    Union citizen.  The Court rules that for such a person also,  the  mere
    lack of formalities cannot defeat the right of residence that he has as
    the spouse of a Union citizen.  The Court makes it clear that the  lack
    of a formal permission to enter the country is not, for these purposes,
    to be taken  seriously  -  although  it  may  merit  a  fine  or  other
    proportionate measure.  What the Court does not  say  is  that  conduct
    going beyond the mere non-observance of formalities is to be  similarly
    condoned.  Royer establishes that mere non-observance of formalities is
    not a threat to public policy or  public  security;  but  there  is  no
    suggestion here that the deliberate flouting of immigration  law  by  a
    person who has no entitlement to be in the country is to be  viewed  in
    the same way.  The present appellant is, of course, not a person  whose
    failure can be regarded as purely formal.  He has been in  the  country
    since 1995, and although he was under domestic law  irremovable  during
    the course of the consideration  of  his  asylum  claim,  the  eventual
    withdrawal of that claim and the outcome of his appeal  shows  that  he
    had no right to be in the United Kingdom during that period.  The right
    he presently claims, if it exists at all, arises only from his marriage
    on 22 February 2005, after nine and a half years unlawful  presence  in
    the United Kingdom.  In our judgment he cannot realistically be treated
    as a person who has merely failed to comply with  formalities.   We  do
    not say, and the Secretary of State does not say,  that  he  should  be
    expelled on public interest or  public  security  grounds:  it  is  not
    necessary to go that far.  But, on the other hand, the  Court's  answer
    to the second question in MRAX does not apply to him.

25. We can treat the third question rather more summarily, as  we  did  the
    first.  Here the claimant is a person who entered the country lawfully,
    but has remained without leave.  Again, the Court's view  is  that  the
    substantive right of the spouse of the  Union  citizen  is  not  to  be
    defeated by the mere lack  of  formal  compliance  with  the  country's
    immigration laws, by allowing his permission to remain in  the  country
    to expire.  Again the Court gives no indication of whether it makes any
    difference whether the claimant overstays by a short or a long  period.
    One thing is clear,  however,  which  is  that  in  this  scenario  the
    claimant entered lawfully.  He made it clear, on arrival, that  he  was
    prepared at  that  state  to  submit  himself  to  the  Member  State's
    immigration law.

26. In the present case the appellant neither sought entry as a  spouse  on
    arrival, nor did he obtain lawful admission by  any  other  means.   So
    questions 1 and 3 are not directly applicable to him.   The  answer  to
    question 2 is not applicable to the facts  of  his  case,  as  we  have
    indicated.  It would be impossible to lay down any absolute  principles
    of whether a failure to comply with the requirements of immigration law
    is purely formal or whether it goes beyond that.  In the present  case,
    however, it is clear that there is more than a mere failure  to  comply
    with formalities.  The Court's judgment in  MRAX  does  not  show  that
    marriage to a Union citizen who has exercised or is  exercising  Treaty
    rights  will  cure  any  illegality:  it  establishes  only  that   the
    relationship arising from marriage is generally  to  be  considered  as
    more important than the compliance with purely formal legal rules.

27. We turn now to Carpenter.  The decision in  this  case  was  given  two
    weeks before that in MRAX,  but  the  constitution  of  the  Court  was
    identical in the two cases, which also had the  same  Advocate  General
    and the same Judge Rapporteur.  Whereas in MRAX the questions posed  to
    the Court arose  from  an  action  brought  in  general  terms  and  in
    principle by a pressure group, in Carpenter the questions posed to  the
    Court arose from the actual facts of an individual case.

28. In Carpenter, the appellant was a citizen of the Philippines.  She came
    to the United Kingdom lawfully in 1994 but overstayed  her  leave.   In
    1995 she began living with Mr Carpenter.  He had two  children  from  a
    previous marriage, which was dissolved in  1996,  following  which  the
    appellant and Mr Carpenter married.  On 15 July 1996  she  applied  for
    leave to remain as his spouse.  She was  refused,  and  the  respondent
    decided  to  deport  her  as  an  overstayer,  which  was  a  procedure
    applicable to mere overstayers at that time.  As the Court  noted,  the
    consequence of a deportation decision would  have  been  that,  if  the
    appellant did not leave the United Kingdom voluntarily,  she  would  be
    deported and could not  seek  leave  to  enter  as  the  spouse  of  Mr
    Carpenter until the deportation order had been revoked.

29. Mr Carpenter ran a business selling advertising space  in  medical  and
    scientific journals and offering various administrative and  publishing
    services  to  the  editors  of  those  journals.   The   business   was
    established in the United Kingdom, where the publishers of the journals
    were.  But a significant proportion of his business was conducted  with
    advertisers established in other Member States.  He travelled to  other
    Member States for the purposes of his business.   It  was  considerably
    easier for him to do so because the appellant  was  looking  after  his
    home and, in  particular,  his  children.   For  the  purposes  of  the
    question that the Court had to consider, there was no  doubt  that  the
    relationship between Mr and Mrs Carpenter was a perfectly genuine  one,
    and that Mr Carpenter would be less able to conduct his business in the
    United Kingdom if the appellant's absence from the United Kingdom  made
    him less able to travel abroad because there was nobody to  look  after
    the children.

30. The question for the Court was as follows:

        "In circumstances where (a) a national of a Member  State,  who  is
        established in that Member  State  and  who  provides  services  to
        persons in other Member States, (b) has  a  spouse  who  is  not  a
        national of a Member State, can the non-national spouse rely on (i)
        article 49 EC, and/or (ii) Council Directive 73/148/EEC of  21  May
        1973 on the abolition of restrictions on movement on and  residence
        within the Community for nationals of Member States with regard  to
        establishment and the provision of services, to  provide  the  non-
        national spouse with the right to reside with his or her spouse  in
        his or her spouse's Member State of origin?  Is the answer  to  the
        question referred different if the non-national  spouse  indirectly
        assists the national of a Member State in carrying on the provision
        of services in other Member States by carrying out child care?"

31. The Court noted at [28] that:

        "The provisions of the Treaty relating to the  freedom  to  provide
        services, and the rules adopted for their implementation,  are  not
        applicable to situations which do not present any link  to  any  of
        the situations envisaged by Community law."

    Mr  Carpenter's  business,   however,   in   providing   services   for
    remuneration  to  advertisers  established  in  other  Member   States,
    consisted of providing "services" within the meaning of Article 49  EC.
    He was therefore availing  himself  of  the  right  freely  to  provide
    services guaranteed by that Article.  There can be no doubt at all that
    the  nature  of  Mr  Carpenter's  business,  which   is   mentioned   a
    considerable number of times by  both  the  Advocate  General  and  the
    Court, was a crucial factor in the determination of the answer  to  the
    question posed.  There is no suggestion in Carpenter that the appellant
    acquired a right of residence in the United Kingdom simply by virtue of
    her marriage.

32. Secondly, the Court noted at [36] that:

        "Since the Directive [here 73/148/EEC which was one of the items of
        Community legislation considered  in  MRAX]  does  not  govern  the
        rights the residence of members of the family or  for  provider  of
        services in his Member State of origin, the answer to the  question
        referred  to  the  Court   therefore   depends   on   whether,   in
        circumstances such as those in the main  proceedings,  a  right  of
        residence in  favour  of  the  spouse  may  be  inferred  from  the
        principles or other rules of Community law."

33. Directive 2004/38/EC similarly does not govern the right  of  residence
    of members of the family of a Union citizen  in  his  member  state  of
    origin.  In Article 2.3, "host Member State" is defined as meaning "the
    Member State to which a  Union  citizen  moves  in  order  to  exercise
    his/her right of free movement and residence"; and in Article  3.1  the
    Directive is prescribed as applying to "all Union citizens who move and
    reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a  national,
    and to their family members as defined in point  2  of  Article  2  who
    accompany or join them".

34. Having made that observation, the Court reminded itself again that  the
    services provided by Mr  Carpenter  under  the  freedom  guaranteed  by
    Article 49 EC made up a sufficient proportion of his business, and went
    on to say that it was "in that context"  that  the  protection  of  the
    family life of nationals and Member States  was  of  great  importance.
    The remainder of  the  Court's  consideration  of  the  answer  to  the
    question consists of an application by it of the provisions of  Article
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights to the family situation of
    Mr and Mrs Carpenter and the  effect  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    proposal to deport Mrs Carpenter would have on it.  That is to say, the
    Court conducted an evaluation of the proportionality of  deporting  Mrs
    Carpenter, on the particular facts of her case.   The  Court  concluded
    that her deportation would be a disproportionate interference with "the
    exercise by Mr Carpenter of his right to respect for his  family  life"
    (paragraph [41]), because it "does not strike a  fair  balance  between
    the competing interests, that is, on the one  hand,  the  right  of  Mr
    Carpenter to respect for his family life, and, on the other  hand,  the
    maintenance of public order and public safety" (paragraph  [43]).   The
    Court's answer to the question referred was therefore as follows:

           "Article 49 EC, read in the light of the  fundamental  right  to
           respect for family life, is to be interpreted as precluding,  in
           circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, a  refusal,
           by the  Member  State  of  origin  of  a  provider  of  services
           established  in  that  Member  State  who  provide  services  to
           recipients established in other Member States, of the  right  to
           reside in its territory to that  provider's  spouse,  who  is  a
           national of a third country."

35. One of the issues considered by the Advocate General in Jia was whether
    the Court  in  Carpenter  had  been  right  to  consider  directly  the
    proportionality of the Member State's reposed action in Mrs Carpenter's
    case.  He took the view that, although the European Convention on Human
    Rights underlies Community law, it is not itself a  part  of  Community
    law, nor does it bind the organs of the Community.  That  is  a  matter
    upon which the Court Jia expressed no opinion, and neither do we.   The
    Court's  answer  in  Carpenter,  however,   is   clearly   limited   to
    circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, which included the
    nature of Mr Carpenter's business.  It is also very clearly  an  answer
    based on the particular facts of the case, which, as well as  those  of
    Mr Carpenter's business, included a relatively short  timescale  and  a
    relatively short period of overstaying by Mrs Carpenter, the fact  that
    she was, by  providing  childcare  during  his  absence,  assisting  Mr
    Carpenter  in  the  operation  of  his  business,  and  the  particular
    inconvenience of the proposed measure of deportation rather  than  mere
    removal.

36. We notice that the Court makes it clear, in its careful formulation  in
    paragraphs [41] and [43], which  we  have  cited  above,  that  it  was
    concerned with Mr Carpenter's Article 8 rights.  It was those,  coupled
    with his provision of services under  Article  49  EC,  that  made  Mrs
    Carpenter's deportation disproportionate.  Although Mrs  Carpenter,  as
    the family member of a Union citizen, came within the  jurisdiction  of
    Community law and therefore of the Court,  and  although  she  was  the
    claimant, there is no specific consideration of any Article 8 right  of
    hers.

37. The comparison between Carpenter and MRAX is instructive.  The  Court's
    consideration of the facts of an actual case in Carpenter shows  beyond
    any doubt the right of a non-Union citizen to enter, reside  or  remain
    in a Member State is not to be derived simply from his or her  marriage
    to a Union citizen.  The question is a complex one, to be  answered  on
    the facts of an individual case, with particular regard to issues  such
    as the activities of  the  Union  citizen  and  whether  they  are  the
    exercise of Treaty  rights,  the  conduct  of  the  claimant,  and  the
    proportionality of the measure proposed against the claimant.

38. In Surinder Singh the claimant married his wife, a British national, in
    the United Kingdom.  They then both went to Germany and  were  employed
    there.  In 1985 they both returned to the United Kingdom.  The claimant
    was granted limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  foreign
    spouse.  The marriage broke down and for that reason his leave was  not
    extended.  He was refused indefinite leave to remain as a  spouse.   He
    remained in the United Kingdom without  leave  and  became  subject  to
    deportation proceedings.  He claimed that his admission to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1985 ought  not  to  have  been  on  the  restrictive  terms
    generally available to the spouse  of  a  British  citizen,  but  ought
    instead to have been on the terms appropriate to the spouse  of  an  EU
    national  exercising  Treaty  rights.   His  claim  is  summarised   at
    paragraph 30 of the Court's judgment:

        "Mr Singh and the Commission submit that a  national  of  a  Member
        State who returns to establish himself in that State  after  having
        pursued an economic activity in another Member State is in the same
        situation as a national  of  another  Member  State  who  comes  to
        establish himself in that  country.   In  their  view  he  must  be
        treated in the same manner, in accordance with the  prohibition  of
        discrimination laid down in Article 7 of the  Treaty,  and  he  may
        therefore rely  on  Article  52  of  the  Treaty,  particularly  in
        relation to the right of residence of his spouse when the latter is
        not a national of a Member State."

39. The Court discussed briefly the rights of free movement of nationals of
    Member States and the derivative rights of their family  members.   Its
    conclusions were as follows:

        "21.     It follows that a national of a Member State who has  gone
             to another Member State in order to work there as  an  employed
             person pursuant to Article 48 of  the  Treaty  and  returns  to
             establish himself in order to pursue an  activity  as  a  self-
             employed person in the territory of the Member State  of  which
             he is a national has the right, under Article 52 of the Treaty,
             to be accompanied in the territory of the latter State  by  his
             spouse, a national of a  non-member  country,  under  the  same
             conditions as are laid down by Regulation No 1612/68, Directive
             68/360 or Directive 73/148, cited above.


      22.  Admittedly, as the United  Kingdom  submits,  a  national  of  a
             Member State enters and resides in the territory of that  State
             by virtue of the rights attendant upon his nationality and  not
             by virtue of those  conferred  on  him  by  Community  law.  In
             particular, as is provided,  moreover,  by  Article  3  of  the
             Fourth Protocol to the European Convention on Human  Rights,  a
             State may not expel one of its own nationals or deny him  entry
             to its territory.


        23.      However, this case is concerned not  with  a  right  under
             national law but with the rights of movement and  establishment
             granted to a Community national by Articles 48 and  52  of  the
             Treaty. These rights cannot be fully effective if such a person
             may be deterred from exercising them by obstacles raised in his
             or her country of origin to the entry and residence of  his  or
             her spouse. Accordingly, when  a  Community  national  who  has
             availed himself or herself of those rights returns  to  his  or
             her country of origin, his or her spouse must  enjoy  at  least
             the same rights of entry and residence as would be  granted  to
             him or her under Community law if his or her  spouse  chose  to
             enter  and  reside  in  another  Member  State.   Nevertheless,
             Articles 48 and 52 of the Treaty do not prevent  Member  States
             from applying to foreign spouses of their own  nationals  rules
             on entry and residence more favourable than those provided  for
             by Community law.


      ...


        25.      The answer to the  question  referred  for  a  preliminary
             ruling must therefore be that Article  52  of  the  Treaty  and
             Directive 73/148, properly construed, require a Member State to
             grant leave to enter and reside in its territory to the spouse,
             of whatever nationality, of a national of that  State  who  has
             gone, with that spouse, to another Member  State  in  order  to
             work there as an employed person as envisaged by Article 48  of
             the Treaty and returns  to  establish  himself  or  herself  as
             envisaged by Article 52 of the Treaty in the territory  of  the
             State of which he or she is a national. The spouse  must  enjoy
             at least the same rights as would be  granted  to  him  or  her
             under Community law if his or her spouse entered and resided in
             the territory of another Member State.

            ...

            On those grounds,
            THE COURT,
      in answer to the question referred to it by the High Court of Justice
        (Queen' s Bench Division) by  order  of  19  October  1990,  hereby
        rules:
      Article 52 of the Treaty and Council Directive 73/148/EEC of  21  May
        1973 on the abolition of restrictions  on  movement  and  residence
        within the Community for nationals of Member States with regard  to
        establishment and the provision of  services,  properly  construed,
        require a Member State to grant leave to enter and  reside  in  its
        territory to the spouse, of whatever nationality, of a national  of
        that State who has gone, with that spouse, to another Member  State
        in order to work there  as  an  employed  person  as  envisaged  by
        Article 48 of the  Treaty  and  returns  to  establish  himself  or
        herself as envisaged by Article 52 of the Treaty in  the  State  of
        which he or she is a national. A spouse must  enjoy  at  least  the
        same rights as would be granted to him or her under  Community  law
        if his or her spouse entered and resided in another Member State."

40. This was a case in which the  Union  citizen  was  accompanied  by  her
    spouse as she moved between Member States.  In such circumstances it is
    not difficult to understand a principle under which there is to  be  no
    difference if the movement is to the State of which the  Union  citizen
    is a national as distinct from another Member  State.   It  is  in  the
    context of that principle that  the  Court  made  its  observations  in
    Surinder Singh.  For those  reasons  we  take  the  phrase  "entry  and
    residence", when applied to the spouse of a Union citizen  who  is  not
    himself a Union citizen, as a unity: the rights discussed  in  Surinder
    Singh are the right to enter and the right, after entry, to reside.  We
    do not read Surinder Singh as conferring  on  the  spouse  who  is  not
    himself  a  Union  citizen  a  right  to  reside  in  a  Member   State
    unaccompanied by any right of entry.  The right that  a  Union  citizen
    has to be accompanied by his or her spouse when entering a Member State
    in the exercise of Treaty rights or even, as Surinder Singh  shows,  in
    the exercise of his or her rights of  nationality  does  not  imply  an
    ability to confer on the spouse a right of residence unassociated  with
    any movement by the spouse.  In terms  of  the  practicalities  of  the
    right of free movement, the  position  is  that  a  Union  citizen  who
    chooses to exercise the rights of free movement  unaccompanied  by  her
    spouse cannot confer rights on the spouse by her movement save  insofar
    as the spouse's rights are necessary to ensure the reality of the Union
    citizen's freedom of movement.

41. For these reasons we reject the argument that the decision of the Court
    in Surinder Singh gives a general right of residence  to  spouses.   It
    must be read as deciding that the spouse of a Union citizen  exercising
    Treaty rights who seeks entry to a Member  State  for  the  purpose  of
    residing with his or her spouse is entitled to  have  his  request  for
    entry and residence in the Member State determined by the provisions of
    EU law, even if the Member State is the state of his  or  her  spouse's
    nationality.

42. We conclude that the jurisprudence upon which Mr de Mello  relied  does
    not assist the appellant.

43. We turn now to the Citizens Directive.  The relevant provisions are  as
    follows.  Article 2 contains definitions of a "Union  citizen"  as  any
    person having the nationality of a Member State, a "family  member"  as
    including his or her spouse, and "host Member  State"  as  "the  Member
    State to which a Union citizen moves in order to exercise his/her right
    of free movement and residence".  Article 3 is headed  "beneficiaries".
    The first paragraph is as follows:

        "This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to  or
        reside in a Member State other  than  that  of  which  they  are  a
        national, and to their family members ...  who  accompany  or  join
        them".

    Paragraph 2 of Article 3 is not relevant to  this  appeal.   Article  4
    concerns the right of exit; Article 5  concerns  the  right  of  entry.
    Neither is relevant to this appeal.  Article 6 is as follows:

      "Right of residence for up to three months

      1.    Union  citizens  shall  have  the  right  of  residence  on  the
             territory of another Member State for a period of up  to  three
             months without any conditions or any formalities other than the
             requirement to hold a valid identity card or passport.
      2.    The provisions  of  paragraph  1  shall  also  apply  to  family
             members in possession of a valid passport who are not nationals
             of a Member State, accompanying or joining the Union citizen."

    Article 7, so far as relevant, is as follows:

      "Right of residence for more than three months

      1.    All Union citizens shall have the  right  of  residence  on  the
             territory of another Member State for a period of  longer  than
             three months if they:
            (a)  are workers or self-employed persons  in  the  host  Member
                 State; or
            (b)  have sufficient resources for themselves and  their  family
                 members not to become a burden  on  the  social  assistance
                 system of the host Member  State  during  their  period  of
                 residence and have comprehensive sickness  insurance  cover
                 in the host Member State' or
           (c)   -     are enrolled at a private or  public  establishment,
                     accredited or financed by the host Member State on the
                     basis of its legislation or  administrative  practice,
                     for the principal purpose of  following  a  course  of
                     study, including vocational training; and
                 -     have comprehensive sickness insurance cover  in  the
                     host Member State and  assure  the  relevant  national
                     authority, by  means  of  a  declaration  or  by  such
                     equivalent means as they may choose,  that  they  have
                     sufficient resources for themselves and  their  family
                     members not to become a burden  on  social  assistance
                     system of the host Member State during their period of
                     residence; or
            (d)  are family members accompanying or joining a Union citizen
                 who satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b)
                 or (c).
      2.    The right of residence provided for in paragraph 1 shall extend
             to family members who are not  nationals  of  a  Member  State,
             accompanying or joining the Union citizen in  the  host  Member
             State,  provided  that  such  Union   citizen   satisfies   the
             conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c)."

44. In this appeal the appellant claims a right of residence.   That  right
    would have to be derived from the Directive.  But the appellant is  not
    a beneficiary of the Directive as defined by Article 3, because he  has
    not accompanied or joined his wife.  He  has  merely  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom while she left him and returned to him.  We are inclined
    to think that Article 3(1) is in fact intended to refer only to  family
    members who accompany the Union citizen in his  movement  to  a  Member
    State other than that of which he is  a  national  or  join  him  as  a
    resident in such a state.  But  even  without  adopting  that  narrower
    interpretation, it is clear that the appellant is not a beneficiary  of
    the Directive.

45. Even if he were, he would have neither the right of residence for up to
    three months under Article 6 or the right of residence  for  more  than
    three months after Article 7, because he has not accompanied or  joined
    the Union citizen as required by Article 6(2) and Article 7(2).

46. Does Surinder Singh require the Directive to be read more  widely?   We
    think not.  Surinder Singh requires that the Directive be read in  such
    a way that a Union citizen returning to his country of nationality  has
    the same rights of free movement as a Union citizen going to any  other
    country, which means that his family members must have the same  rights
    as if he were moving to another Member State.  For that reason, it  may
    be that, in circumstances such as those in Surinder Singh  itself,  the
    phrase "host Member State" in Article 7(2) would have  to  be  read  as
    including the State of which the Union citizen was a national: that  is
    to say, for these purposes, the Union citizen would have to be regarded
    as moving "in order to exercise his/her  right  of  free  movement  and
    residence" even if he were returning to his own country of nationality.
      His  entry  into  that  country  might  indeed,  as  Surinder   Singh
    recognises, be an exercise of his rights as a citizen of that  country,
    but he might nevertheless, within the  meaning  of  the  definition  in
    Article 2(3), be moving "in order  to"  exercise  his  rights  of  free
    movement and residence.

47. Surinder Singh requires nothing  more.   In  particular,  it  does  not
    require  that  all  the  references  to  family  members  who  are  not
    themselves Union citizens accompanying or  joining  Union  citizens  be
    read as though they were references to the Union  citizen  joining  the
    family member.  The right of free movement and residence is  the  right
    of the Union citizen.  The family members' rights of free movement  and
    residence exist only in order to support the  Union  citizen's  rights.
    The fact that the Union citizen may have a family member already in the
    Member State to which he moves does not in any way affect his right  to
    move there or reside there, nor, in particular, does  it  make  it  any
    less likely that he will choose to move or reside there.   The  factual
    situation in this appeal is not one in which it can be  said  that  the
    failure to recognise a right in the appellant to reside in  the  United
    Kingdom affects the exercise of rights of free movement of his  spouse.



48. Although we have taken the view that illegal  presence  in  a  country,
    particularly long-term or flagrant illegality, ought to be  taken  into
    account in reading the judgments of the Court in the cases to which  we
    have referred, our own decision does  not  depend  on  the  appellant's
    illegal presence here.  It depends solely on the fact that, as  he  has
    not accompanied or joined his spouse, the Directive gives him no rights
    of entry or residence, and has no need to do so.  We do not say that it
    would never be relevant to consider whether  the  appellant's  presence
    was lawful, but we do not think that this case turns on it.  It is  for
    that reason that we have not found it necessary to analyse the decision
    of the Court in Akrich.   We  have  also  not  found  it  necessary  to
    consider the Directive's requirements as to documentation.  It  may  be
    (we say no more than that) that  a  person  claiming  a  right  arising
    solely from unlawful presence would find some difficulties in them.

49. The appellant has no right  under  EU  law  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The refusal to issue him a residence document (now, under the
    Transitional Provisions of the Immigration (EEA Regulations)  2006,  to
    be treated as the refusal to issue him a residence card) was  a  lawful
    decision.

50. For completeness we should add that the appellant has no  rights  under
    any other part of the Directive.  In particular, Article 3(2) does  not
    apply to him, because it does not apply to  spouses.   The  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, may, by Article  37  of  the
    Directive,  contain  provisions  more  generous  than  those   of   the
    Directive.  The Regulations are,  however,  of  no  assistance  to  the
    appellant, because he is not a spouse of  a  "qualified  person".   The
    reason for that is that "qualified person" is  defined  in  Regulations
    6(1) and 2(1) as a person who  is  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  is  a
    national of an EU State other than the United Kingdom.  If N had been a
    "qualified person" it may be that the  Regulations  would  indeed  have
    entitled the appellant to more by way of rights of  residence  than  EU
    law would have given him.  If so, the right would, we  apprehend,  have
    been a UK right rather than an EU right.  But the issue does not  arise
    here.  Regulation 9, which alone gives rights to the family members  of
    some UK nationals, does not apply to the appellant.

51. We turn now to Article 8.  The appellant claims that his  rights  under
    that Article would be interfered with  disproportionately  if  he  were
    required to leave the United Kingdom as a  result  of  the  refusal  to
    issue  him  with  a  residence  card.   There  are  provisions  in  the
    Immigration Rules enabling a person who  wishes  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a British citizen to  obtain  entry  clearance
    from abroad if he meets certain requirements.  It is  clearly  open  to
    the appellant to make such an application.   If  it  were  refused,  he
    could succeed in an appeal on  human  rights  grounds  if  the  refusal
    breached his human rights.  We are not concerned with the legality of a
    decision not yet made following an application not yet  made.   We  are
    concerned instead with the question whether requiring the appellant  to
    return  to  his  own  country  to  seek  entry   clearance   would   be
    disproportionate in his case.

52. He has a long-term relationship with his spouse, extending back  beyond
    their  marriage.   But  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  their
    separation for a short period (if she decided not to travel  with  him)
    would amount to an interference with their right to family life.  After
    all, they voluntarily separated for a period of  six  months  within  a
    week or two after the marriage.  In so far  as  it  may  constitute  an
    interference, however, we take it into account.  The appellant  has  no
    passport and has said that he  is  in  danger  in  China,  but  he  has
    exhausted his rights of appeal and we must treat him as  a  person  who
    would not be at risk on return to China.  Further, there is  no  reason
    to suppose that he cannot obtain a passport.  He has a business in  the
    United  Kingdom,  but  there  is  no  evidence,  other  than  his  bare
    assertion, that it cannot continue during a relatively short period  of
    absence by him.  In any event, he will  be  entitled  to  work  in  the
    United Kingdom if he obtains entry clearance as a spouse, and there  is
    no reason to suppose that he would  not  be  able  to  obtain  suitable
    employment if the business did not  continue.   The  appellant's  wife,
    similarly, although presently employed in the appellant's business,  is
    clearly able to obtain employment elsewhere, as her history shows.   We
    should add that, as we understand it, the appellant's working  and  his
    employment of his wife are both illegal, because he  has  no  basis  of
    stay in the United  Kingdom.   They  ought  probably  therefore  to  be
    regarded as inherently temporary.

53. In all the circumstances of this case we are entirely unpersuaded  that
    requiring the appellant to comply with the Immigration Rules applicable
    to spouses, and to obtain Entry  Clearance  from  abroad,  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the rights guaranteed by  Article  8
    or any other of his Convention rights.

54. For the foregoing reasons, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
