

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  2, 3, 4,  and 5 October 2012              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                     CM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mark Henderson, Phil Haywood and Catherine Meredith,
                 instructed by Turpin and Miller

For the Respondent:  Colin Thomann instructed by Treasury Solicitor

Public Interest Immunity Advocate:  Kate Olley, appointed by the Attorney
General

(1)  There is no general duty of disclosure on the  Secretary  of  State  in
asylum appeals generally  or  Country  Guidance  cases  in  particular.  The
extent of the Secretary of State's obligation is set out in R v  SSHD  ex  p
Kerrouche No 1 [1997] Imm AR 610, as  explained  in  R  (ota  Cindo)  v  IAT
[2002] EWHC 246 (Admin); namely, that  she  must  not  knowingly  mislead  a
court or tribunal by omission of material that was known or  ought  to  have
been known to her.

(2)   The  Country  Guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  in  EM  and   Others
(Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) on the position in Zimbabwe  as
at the end of January 2011 was not vitiated in any respect by the  use  made
of anonymous evidence from certain sources in the Secretary of State's  Fact
Finding Mission report of 2010. The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that
there had been a durable change since  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]
UKAIT 00083. The Country Guidance in EM does not require to be  amended,  as
regards the position at that time, in the light of-

     (a) the disclosure by the Secretary of State of any of  the  materials
    subsequently disclosed in response to the orders of the Court of Appeal
    and related directions of the Tribunal in the current proceedings; or


     (b) any fresh material adduced by the  parties  in  those  proceedings
    that might have a bearing on the position at that time.

(3)  The only change to the EM Country Guidance  that  it  is  necessary  to
make as regards the position as at the end of January 2011 arises  from  the
judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC  38.  The  EM  Country  Guidance  is,
accordingly, re-stated as follows (with the change underlined  in  paragraph
(5) below):

    (1)      As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


    (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).


    (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas  and
         there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
         sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.


    (4)    In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.


    (5)      A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


    (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.


    (7)      The issue of what is a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


    (8)  Internal relocation from a rural area to  Harare  or  (subject  to
         what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in  general,  more  realistic;
         but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
         reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
         order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         to expect them to relocate.


    (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since  the  period
         considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
         US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
         hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
         has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
         Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
         with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
         been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
         2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
         traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
         circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.


    (10)     As was the position in RN, those who are or have been teachers
         require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
         places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
         significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
         basis.


    (11)  In certain cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously  lacking  in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
         ... and remains valid.

(4) In the course of deciding CM's appeal, the present Tribunal has made  an
assessment of certain general  matters  regarding  Zimbabwe  as  at  October
2012. As a result, the following country information may  be  of  assistance
to decision-makers and judges. It is, however, not Country  Guidance  within
the scope of Practice Direction 12 and is based on  evidence  which  neither
party claimed to be comprehensive:

    a) The picture presented by  the  fresh  evidence  as  to  the  general
       position of politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe as at October
       2012 does not differ  in  any  material  respect  from  the  Country
       Guidance in EM.


    b)  Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it is unclear when.


    c) In the light of the evidence regarding the activities of Chipangano,
       judicial-fact finders may need to pay particular regard to whether a
       person, who is reasonably likely to go to Mbare  or  a  neighbouring
       high density area of Harare, will come to the adverse  attention  of
       that group; in particular, if he or she is reasonably likely to have
       to find employment of a kind that Chipangano  seeks  to  control  or
       otherwise exploit for economic, rather than political, reasons.


    d) The fresh evidence regarding the position at  the  point  of  return
       does not indicate any increase in risk since  the  Country  Guidance
       was given in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007]  UKAIT
       00094. On the contrary, the available evidence as to  the  treatment
       of those who have been returned to Harare Airport since 2007 and the
       absence of any reliable evidence of risk there means that  there  is
       no justification for extending the scope of who might be regarded by
       the CIO as an MDC activist.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This determination is arranged as follows:-

                         Paragraphs

Introduction  1 - 11

Preliminary issues for the
        12 - 63
management of this appeal


The procedure for determining disclosure issues  23 - 32

Extension of the disclosure application      33 - 54

Whether the present appeal should be listed      55 - 61
as a Country Guidance case on the position
in Zimbabwe in 2012

The appeal of JG  62 - 63


Issue 1: The effect on the Country Guidance  64 - 113
in EM of the materials subsequently disclosed
by the respondent

Introduction  64 - 71

The previously undisclosed materials    72

(a)  Views as to risks arising from future   73 - 79
     elections (the so-called "window of
     opportunity")

Discussion    80 - 93

(b)  The potential influence of the Zimbabwe     94 - 96
     Electoral Commission (ZEC), the Southern
     African Development Commission (SADC)
     and South Africa on the arrangements for
     and holding of elections

Discussion    97 - 99

(c)  Risk of serious harm in urban areas     100 - 108

Discussion    109 - 113


Issue 2: Was the Tribunal in EM entitled to  114 - 139
find a "well-established evidentially and
durable change" had arisen since the time
under consideration in RN?

Introduction  114 - 118

The rival submissions

(a)  Decrease in violence since elections    121 - 130

(b)  ZANU-PF control of relevant instruments     131 - 139
     of power

Issue 3: Did the use of anonymous evidence in    140 - 166
EM render the decision unfair or unreliable?

Issue 4: What is the impact of any of the above  167 - 235
and/or any fresh evidence adduced in the
individual appeal of CM?

Introduction  167 - 168

Nature of the fresh evidence    164 - 171

(a)  The outlook for constitutional reform,  172 - 175
     elections and the conditions in which
     they might be contested

(b)  Levels of politically motivated human   176 - 179
     rights violations in Zimbabwe

(c)  Problems in Harare    180

(d)  Returnees to Zimbabwe      181

(e)  Bulawayo and the Matabeleland provinces     182

The parties' submissions on the fresh evidence   183 - 188

(1)  Appellant's initial submissions    183 - 185

(2)  Respondent's submissions   186 - 187

(3)  Appellant's reply     188

The Tribunal's findings on the fresh    189 - 209
evidence regarding the situation in
Zimbabwe as at October 2012

(a)  The outlook for constitutional reform,  189 - 191
          elections and the conditions in which
          they might be contested

(b)  Levels of politically motivated human   192 - 195
          rights violations in Zimbabwe

(c)  Problems in Harare    196 - 201

(d)  Returnees to Zimbabwe 202 - 205

(e)  Bulawayo and the Matabeleland provinces 206 - 209

Effect of fresh evidence on country guidance     210 - 214
in EM, regarding the position in January 2011

Country Guidance in EM, as modified 215

Summary of the country information on   216
Zimbabwe as at October 2012

Deciding CM's appeal   217 - 235

The respondent's submissions    218

The appellant's submissions     219 - 225

The appellant's further oral submissions     226

The Tribunal's findings on CM   227 - 235

General conclusions    236 - 240


APPENDIX A: EXTRACTS FROM RN (RETURNEES ZIMBABWE CG [2008] UKAIT 00083 AND
EM AND OTHERS (RETURNEES) ZIMBABWE CG [2011] UKUT 00098 (IAC)

APPENDIX B: DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

APPENDIX C: TRANSCRIPT OF ORAL EVIDENCE


Introduction

1.    Once  more,  the  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and   Asylum   Chamber
    (following  on  from  its  predecessor  the  Asylum   and   Immigration
    Tribunal), is called on to decide an asylum  claim  by  a  national  of
    Zimbabwe with reference to a general assessment of risk  on  return  of
    those who are not supporters of the ZANU-PF party of President Mugabe.

2.   This appeal returns to the  Chamber  after  an  unfortunate  procedural
    history.  Between the 18 October 2010 and  the  14  January  2011  this
    panel heard the appeals of four  Zimbabweans  known  as  EM,  COM,  CLM
    (hereafter CM) and JG.  The subsequent decision in  those  appeals  was
    promulgated in March 2011 and reported as  EM  and  others  (Returnees)
    Zimbabwe CG [2011]  98  (IAC)  hereafter  EM.   The  appeals  had  been
    identified as suitable ones for the issue of Country  Guidance  because
    of conflicting approaches  by  immigration  judges  and  others  as  to
    whether the assessment of general risk given in RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe
    CG [2008] UKAIT 00083 (hereafter  RN)  remained  authoritative  or  had
    become displaced by fresh evidence.

3.   In EM we reviewed at [36] to [70]  the  sequence  of  Country  Guidance
    cases  relating  to  Zimbabwe  from  2005  to  2010.   We   noted   the
    circumstances in the months preceding  the  decision  of  RN.  We  were
    satisfied that the evidence relating to events and consequent risk from
    2009 through to January 2011 was not the same or similar to that  under
    consideration by the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  in  RN.  Having
    evaluated the evidence before us at [74] to [231] we concluded that the
    guidance in RN was no longer applicable.

4.   At [267] we replaced it by fresh guidance in the following terms:


           (1)  As a general matter, there is significantly less politically
             motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared  with  the  situation
             considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does
             not show that, as a general matter, the  return  of  a  failed
             asylum seeker from the United Kingdom, having  no  significant
             MDC profile, would result in that person facing a real risk of
             having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


         (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the  case
             of a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from  the
             United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area  of
             Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South.
             Such a person may well find  it  difficult  to  avoid  adverse
             attention, amounting to serious  ill-treatment,  from  ZANU-PF
             authority  figures  and  those  they  control.   The   adverse
             attention  may  well  involve  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm  in  the
             event of failure.  Persons who have shown themselves not to be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled  to  international
             protection, whether or not they could and  would  do  whatever
             might  be  necessary   to   demonstrate   such   loyalty   (RT
             (Zimbabwe)).


         (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural  areas
             and there may be reasons why a particular individual, although
             at first sight appearing to fall within the category described
             in the preceding paragraph, in reality does  not  do  so.  For
             example,  the  evidence  might  disclose  that,  in  the  home
             village, ZANU-PF power structures or other means  of  coercion
             are weak or absent.


         (4)   In general, a returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
             Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to
             face significant difficulty from ZANU-PF  elements,  including
             the security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC  member  or
             supporter. A person may, however, be able to show that his  or
             her village or area is one that, unusually, is under the  sway
             of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.


         (5)  A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
             difficulties, if going  to  a  low-density  or  medium-density
             area. Whilst  the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
             connections  will  not   face   significant   problems   there
             (including  a  "loyalty  test"),  unless  he  or  she  has   a
             significant MDC profile, which  might  cause  him  or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment,  or  would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


         (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will  in  general  not  suffer  the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, including the  security  forces,
             even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.


         (7)  The issue of what is a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
             internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and
             is not necessarily to be determined by reference to the  place
             a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her  rural  homeland.
             As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person with a well-
             founded fear of persecution in a major urban  centre  such  as
             Harare will have a viable internal relocation alternative to a
             rural  area  in   the   Eastern   provinces.   Relocation   to
             Matabeleland  (including   Bulawayo)   may   be   negated   by
             discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


         (8)  Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or (subject to
             what  we  have  just  said)  Bulawayo  is,  in  general,  more
             realistic;  but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in  which
             persons are reasonably likely to find themselves will need  to
             be considered, in order  to  determine  whether  it  would  be
             unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.


         (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved since the period
             considered in RN. The replacement of the  Zimbabwean  currency
             by the US dollar and the South  African  rand  has  ended  the
             recent hyperinflation. The  availability  of  food  and  other
             goods in shops has likewise improved, as has the  availability
             of utilities in Harare. Although these  improvements  are  not
             being felt by everyone,  with  15%  of  the  population  still
             requiring food aid, there has not been  any  deterioration  in
             the humanitarian situation since late  2008.  Zimbabwe  has  a
             large informal economy, ranging from street traders  to  home-
             based enterprises,  which  (depending  on  the  circumstances)
             returnees may be expected to enter.


         (10)     As was the position in RN, those  who  are  or  have  been
             teachers require to have their cases determined on  the  basis
             that this fact places them in an enhanced or  heightened  risk
             category, the significance of which will need to  be  assessed
             on an individual basis.


         (11)   In certain cases, persons found to be  seriously  lacking in
             credibility may properly be found as a result to  have  failed
             to show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they  would  not,  in
             fact, be regarded, on return, as aligned with  ZANU-PF  and/or
             (b) that they would be returning to a socio-economic milieu in
             which problems with ZANU-PF will arise. This  important  point
             was identified in RN, (see paragraphs 62  and  64  above)  and
             remains valid.


5.   In doing so, we were conscious that fresh elections in  Zimbabwe  might
    generate a further change of circumstances  and  pose  fresh  risks  to
    certain classes of Zimbabwean asylum-seekers, but we concluded that the
    uncertainties as to when such fresh elections would be called, how they
    would be  conducted,  and  what  the  influence  of  the  international
    community  would  be  in  restraining  a  repetition  of  the  violence
    encountered in 2008 were too speculative and uncertain as to constitute
    a present real risk of harm: see [263] to [265]. We noted at [50]  that
    the AIT in RN had  also  recognised  the  possibility  that  events  in
    Zimbabwe could change swiftly for better or worse.

6.   In the event, applying the new guidance to the individual appeals,  the
    appeal of COM on asylum grounds was allowed while those  of  the  other
    appellants on similar grounds were  dismissed.  The  appeal  of  JG  on
    Article 8 grounds would  have  been  allowed  had  not  the  respondent
    already  decided  to  grant  her  leave  to  remain  as  a  result   of
    reconsideration during the hearing of  the  evidence  relating  to  her
    personal circumstances. EM himself had disappeared without leaving  his
    solicitors with instructions and played no role in the appeal.  CM  and
    JG  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  having
    apparently been granted legal aid to do so despite the fact that JG was
    not going to be removed to Zimbabwe.

7.   The principal issue of concern before  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  the
    impact on the individual appeals and the Country Guidance issued in the
    appeals of data relating to assessment of risk in Zimbabwe available in
    January 2011 that had  not  been  disclosed  to  the  Tribunal  or  the
    claimants. This data had come to light in another case. Once permission
    to appeal had been granted, the Court of Appeal in January 2012  issued
    directions for further disclosure of material in  the  control  of  the
    respondent or the Foreign and Commonwealth Office dating from 1 January
    2010 until 10 March 2011 but were informed that compliance  with  these
    directions  would  give  rise  to  Public   Interest   Immunity   (PII)
    certificates issued by or on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    Foreign Affairs.

8.   On  13  June  2012,  before  the  appeal  had  either  proceeded  to  a
    substantive hearing or the  process  of  further  disclosure  had  been
    completed, the parties agreed that the respondent had failed to  comply
    with its disclosure obligations. A consent order was drawn up  with  an
    agreed statement of reasons that the appeals be allowed and remitted to
    the Upper Tribunal for re-determination in the light  of  a  number  of
    issues of law identified in the schedule  to  the  order.  For  present
    purposes we summarise these issues as follows:-

(i)  What is the impact on the Country Guidance of the material  not  before
    the Tribunal at the date of EM  that  has  now  been  provided  to  the
    appellant and/or may  be  provided  following  the  conclusion  of  the
    disclosure process and the claim to public interest  immunity  made  in
    respect of a volume  of  material  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Foreign
    Secretary?

(ii)     Was there a durable change of  circumstances  between  the  factual
    assessment in RN and EM?

(iii)    Was the Tribunal wrong to give any weight to  information  supplied
    to the Fact Finding Mission (FFM) by certain organisations that did not
    consent to their identity  being  supplied  to  the  appellant,  having
    regard to the observations of the European Court  of  Human  Rights  in
    Sufi and Elmi v United Kingdom [2011] ECHR 1045, [2012] 54 EHRR 9 ?

(iv)     What is the impact of any of the above and or  any  fresh  evidence
    adduced on the individual appeals?

9.   As the appeals had been allowed, the Tribunal's decision  in  EM  could
    no longer stand as Country Guidance. The position  was  therefore  that
    the last Country Guidance issued about generic risk to those not  loyal
    to Zanu-PF was RN in 2008. This consequence was noted  by  the  Supreme
    Court when it considered the appeal on a point of law in the case of RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 at [2] and [3] but that point of  law  itself
    arose out of the requirement to show loyalty to Zanu-PF by returnees to
    Zimbabwe which requirement was based on the evidential assessment in RN
    that we concluded in EM was no longer generally applicable.

10.  Judges of both immigration  chambers  were  left  to  determine  future
    Zimbabwe appeals from the starting point of RN despite the fact that we
    had considered that the evidential  assessment  in  that  case  was  no
    longer valid. The Tribunal's decision in EM  has  remained  on  the  UT
    website as a reported case albeit with the warning that  the  Court  of
    Appeal had remitted the case for re-determination.

11.  Although they were not required  to  treat  the  assessment  in  EM  as
    authoritative it was open to judges deciding  Zimbabwe  cases  to  have
    regard to the evidence set out therein, the appendices  containing  the
    oral and documentary evidence that was before us, and our  analysis  of
    that evidence, albeit subject to the proviso that the consideration  of
    the matters remitted to us might result in a different conclusion.

Preliminary Issues for the management of this appeal

12.   Once this Tribunal received the judgment and order  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal we directed a preliminary hearing where we hoped to  map  out  a
    procedure and timetable for remaking of these appeals.  There  were  at
    least four preliminary issues for us to consider:-

(i)  The  first  issue  was  how  the  process  of  disclosure  and  further
    disclosure and evaluation of the PII claim should  be  undertaken.  The
    parties were at odds as to whether the Tribunal  should  undertake  the
    exercise for itself in private, appoint a specially appointed  advocate
    to assist them or adopt some other course.

(ii) The second issue was whether further directions for  disclosure  should
    be issued. Mr  Henderson  for  the  appellant  submitted  that  further
    disclosure should be ordered of relevant data  up  to  a  date  shortly
    before the date set for substantive determination of this appeal.

(iii) The third issue was whether the re-determined appeal  should  be  case
    managed as a Country Guidance case. Mr Henderson contended that as  the
    Country Guidance in EM had been set aside, directions should  be  given
    for the appeal to be listed as  new  Zimbabwean  Country  Guidance.  Mr
    Thomann for the Secretary of State opposed that  course  and  indicated
    that all that was required was that CM's  appeal  be  re-determined  in
    accordance with the Court of Appeal's order.

(iv) The fourth matter concerned JG's future participation  in  the  appeal.
    We were informed that although JG had been party to the appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal, the legal aid authorities had concluded that  she  was
    no longer eligible for legal aid to pursue the asylum appeal before us.
    She  was  unrepresented  at  the  direction  hearing  as  her  existing
    representatives could not continue to act for her.

13.  There were links between each of these issues.  We  asked  for  written
    submissions on the scope of the appeal, the  scope  of  the  disclosure
    duty  and  related  matters.   We  concluded  that  we  needed  to  set
    directions and a timetable to determine the appeal on  the  information
    before us at the end of July 2012.

14.  That information did not include  any  fresh  evidence  by  either  the
    appellant or the respondent  indicative  of  a  significant  change  of
    circumstances since we delivered the decision  in  EM  in  March  2011,
    although we recognised this may turn out to be  the  case.  The  issues
    that had been remitted to us for determination  concerned  whether  the
    decision in EM was flawed by  reason  of  non-disclosure  or  error  of
    approach as opposed to whether it  had  been  overtaken  by  subsequent
    events and fresh evidence.

15.  We intimated at an early stage in the proceedings  our  view  that  the
    appeal should be listed for re-determination as soon as was  reasonably
    practical having regard to the issues to be  resolved.  Each  of  these
    appeals had originally been determined or ordered on reconsideration to
    be re-determined in 2009. The process of case  management,  directions,
    oral hearing, supplementary submissions  and  promulgation  meant  that
    nearly two years had elapsed before we gave our decision in EM in March
    2011 and it was only after a further period of 15 months that the Court
    of Appeal returned two of the appeals to  us  in  June  2012.   It  was
    important in the public interest as  well  as  the  interests  of  both
    parties, that these proceedings reached a final conclusion.

16.  Any Country Guidance case involves general considerations broader  than
    the precise basis for determining an individual  appeal.  Depending  on
    the country and issue in question such cases potentially  affect  large
    numbers of claimants. We were informed at the end  of  the  proceedings
    that several hundred Zimbabwean cases were likely to be affected by the
    outcome in this case.

17.  If, despite our conclusions in EM on the evidence  then  available,  we
    were now to conclude that the claimant and many, most or all  of  those
    in a similar position to him should be recognised as  refugees  it  was
    important that we reached this conclusion promptly,  so  the  years  of
    uncertainty could be brought to an end. As the Tribunal  noted  in  RN,
    establishing stable Country Guidance in respect of Zimbabwe has been  a
    particularly challenging task in the light of the history  of  appeals,
    re-determinations, and changes in evidence since the  case  of  SM  and
    others (MDC-internal flight-risk categories) Zimbabwe CG  [2005]  UKIAT
    00100  in 2005.

18.  By contrast, if we concluded that our analysis  in  EM  remained  sound
    and other claimants in  a  broadly  similar  position  to  those  whose
    appeals had been dismissed were  not  entitled  to  refugee  status  or
    complementary protection and had no other basis of stay, it was equally
    inappropriate that they should continue to remain here if there were no
    human rights reasons to prevent removal.

19.  We were also concerned at the state of uncertainty resulting  from  the
    agreed order setting aside our determination in EM would have on judges
    of the First-tier Tribunal: should they adjourn all  Zimbabwean  asylum
    appeals or proceed to determine  them  and  if  so  from  what  Country
    Guidance starting point and on what post- RN evidence as to risk?

20.  Unlike a case such as PO (Nigeria) [2011] EWCA Civ 132  [2011]  Imm  AR
    466 where the Court of Appeal had set aside a  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  for identifiable error  set  out  in  the  judgment  but  had
    preserved those parts of the Country Guidance not affected by the error
    of approach, the whole guidance had been set aside in EM and  no  final
    conclusions had been reached on the impact on the original decision and
    the Country Guidance given in it of the various grounds of appeal.

21.  We were conscious that in EM much argument had  been  deployed  on  the
    question of when the  next  round  of  Parliamentary  and  Presidential
    elections would take place. From the perspective of  the  claimants  in
    autumn 2010 the worst case scenario was that elections would be  called
    unilaterally by the President in early 2011  before  the  programme  of
    reform agreed by the coalition  government  and  urged  by  influential
    members of the international community had been completed. In the event
    that worst case scenario had not come about, and it seemed in July 2012
    that elections were now unlikely to  be  called  until  the  spring  or
    summer of 2013 when  they  were  required  under  the  Constitution  of
    Zimbabwe. Given the potential impact of violent elections on  risk  for
    non Zanu-PF supporters there was  a  risk  that  any  conclusion  about
    categories of general risk in 2011 or 2012 would need revisiting by mid
    2013.

22.      For these reasons  we  indicated  that  we  intended  to  hear  the
    appeals in October 2012 and would issue the  directions  we  considered
    appropriate in order to meet that time-table.


The procedure for determining disclosure issues

23.  We first consider  Mr  Henderson's  submission  that  as  a  matter  of
    principle, we should ask for a special  advocate  to  be  appointed  to
    represent  the  interest  of  the  appellant  before  determining   the
    outstanding issues of disclosure. He relied on the observations of  the
    Master of Rolls given in AH v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  287  [2009]  1  WLR
    2049 at [20], [35], [37] and [38].

24.  AH was a case where the claimants sought judicial review  of  decisions
    by the Secretary of State to refuse naturalisation on the grounds  that
    he was not satisfied that each was of good character.  That  conclusion
    was substantially based on material that the  Secretary  of  State  was
    unwilling to disclose for reasons of national security.  A  preliminary
    issue arose in the judicial review proceedings as to whether a  special
    advocate should be appointed. One reason to do so  was  to  assist  the
    Tribunal on whether a gist or  an  expanded  gist  of  the  undisclosed
    reasons could  be  given.  There  was  a  close  relation  between  the
    preliminary issue, the question of whether a gist of closed information
    could be given and the substantive issue whether the Secretary of State
    was entitled to reach the conclusions he did.

25.  The present  case  concerns  an  adjudication  on  a  claim  to  public
    interest immunity made by the Foreign Secretary and his Permanent Under-
    Secretary in respect of material relating to an evaluation of political
    circumstances in Zimbabwe of potential relevance to the  assessment  of
    risk on return for those claiming asylum in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    material in dispute does not relate to the appellant personally at all.
    It is not relied on by the Home Secretary as the reason to  refuse  his
    protection claim. Its potential relevance to this asylum appeal relates
    to the background assessment of the stability of  political  change  or
    improvements or deterioration in the security situation in Zimbabwe.

26.  This is a conventional public interest  immunity  problem  that  arises
    from time to time in civil litigation where either the trial  judge  or
    an applications judge can decide  the  issue  in  private  and  without
    extraneous assistance (see AH at [20]).   We  were  not  persuaded  the
    discussion of principle and the guidance issued in that  case  made  it
    necessary in the interests of justice to request the appointment  of  a
    special advocate to represent the interests of the appellant.

27.  Nevertheless, we were conscious of both the scale  of  the  outstanding
    disclosure issues, the limited time to complete it, the intervention of
    the long vacation and the possibility that the process  of  determining
    the public interest immunity issue would require an oral  hearing  when
    we would hear submissions from the Secretary of State in the absence of
    the appellant and his legal team.

28.  We further recognised the risk that had such a  hearing  been  convened
    we might have been party to disclosure of information that went to  the
    merits of the appeal or otherwise conclude that fairness required us to
    recuse ourselves. We were anxious to adopt a procedure that could avoid
    such risk and the possibility of further  delay  in  reaching  a  final
    determination.

29.   We  accordingly  adopted  the  exceptional  measure  of  inviting  the
    Attorney General to appoint an advocate to  assist  the  Tribunal  with
    respect to the resolution of  the  public  interest  immunity  process.
    This material now extended to four volumes of material that in our view
    needed to be assessed for the following purposes:-

    (i)  to determine if it was relevant  to  the  issues  in  the  appeal,
         having regard to what was already known to  the  Tribunal  and  the
         appellant; and, if so:-


    (ii) to decide whether the claim for public interest immunity was  made
         out;


    (iii) if PII applied, to  assess  whether  the  material  was  of  such
         significance to the appeal that fairness required us to direct that
         the material in whole  or  in  part  should  be  disclosed  to  the
         appellant.

    This task included completing the process of reviewing  the  redactions
    already made during the Court of Appeal proceedings. It  was  necessary
    to  review  the  redactions  made  on  relevance  grounds,  and  if  we
    considered the material to be relevant ascertain whether  a  PII  claim
    arose in respect of it.

30.  We have already explained our view that  expedition  was  desirable  in
    this appeal.  As  a  matter  of  practical  reality  the  prospects  of
    progressing disclosure during the long vacation when holiday and  other
    commitments prevented the panel from meeting regularly or at all  until
    late September would de-rail any reasonable prospect of starting  these
    appeals in the first week of October as we had indicated was  otherwise
    appropriate.

31.  The procedure that we were able to adopt with  the  assistance  of  the
    Attorney General addressed all potential obstacles to our satisfaction.
    Ms Kate Olley was appointed a PII advocate by  the  Attorney.  She  has
    acted at our direction and has been able to  review  all  the  material
    timeously; make her own independent assessment of the  three  questions
    we posed for her to consider; discuss her conclusions with  members  of
    the panel; engage in discussion with the counsel for the  Secretary  of
    State about issues that remained unresolved  including  the  extent  to
    which any gist of the material to which PII did apply could be provided
    to the appellant.

32.  We are most grateful to  her  for  the  assistance  provided  over  the
    period of the long vacation. The outcome of the process  meant  further
    information was supplied to the appellants  shortly  before  the  start
    date for these appeals without the need for  a  PII  hearing.  Although
    there  have  been  subsequent  slippages  in  the  timetable  set   for
    determining this appeal and consequently the  time  available  for  the
    panel to be able to promulgate  its  determination,  the  hearing  days
    assigned were productively deployed in hearing the  evidence  and  core
    submissions.

Extension of the disclosure application

33.  Second, we declined Mr Henderson's invitation to extend the  disclosure
    process beyond the period that  had  been  directed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

34.  As we have  already  noted,  we  regarded  the  issues  that  had  been
    remitted to us for determination to be essentially historic  ones.  The
    task of determining them did  not  itself  require  further  disclosure
    beyond 10 March 2011.  We infer that this date was chosen by the  Court
    of Appeal in January 2012 because this was the date of promulgation  of
    the decision in EM. The Court was looking back to what we  should  have
    had then rather than forward to what may have come to light since.

35.      We did not rule out the  possibility  that  an  evaluation  of  the
    information already supplied to us or indeed any further fresh evidence
    that was submitted  might  lead  to  further  questions  arising  about
    information within the knowledge of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
    after March 2011. However that was not the nature  of  the  application
    before us; the appellant's request was general rather than specific.

36.      As a starting point and in contrast to ordinary  civil  litigation,
    we recognise that there is no general requirement for disclosure of all
    relevant data  held  by  the  Home  Secretary  or  indeed  the  Foreign
    Secretary in asylum appeals. These are appeals to a  Tribunal  governed
    by a statutory regime and the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 as amended. Neither these Rules nor the AIT (Procedure) Rules 2005
    made provision for general disclosure.

37.      In principle, the starting point was similar  to   that  considered
    by the House of Lords in Abdi and Gawe [1996] 1 WLR 298   [1996]  ImmAR
    288 where Lord Lloyd concluded that neither the express  provisions  of
    the rules then applicable nor the interests  of  justice  required  the
    Secretary of State  to give discovery in asylum appeals. The  case  was
    concerned with return to a safe third country, and it is clear from the
    speech of Lord Lloyd and the partly concurring speech of  Lord  Mustill
    that the  circumscribed  timetable  of  third  country  appeals  was  a
    material factor in determining what the interests of justice required.

38.  R v SSHD ex p Kerrouche  No 1 [1997] Imm  AR   610  was  another  third
    country case; Lord Woolf  said:

          "While Lord Lloyd's approach must be the starting  point  for  the
         consideration of this issue, there are limits to  the  approach  he
         indicated  in  that  case.  The  decision  would  not  justify  the
         Secretary of State knowingly misleading  the  Special  Adjudicator.
         The obligation of the Secretary of State cannot be put higher  than
         that he must not knowingly mislead. Before the Secretary  of  State
         could be said to be in that position, he must know or ought to have
         known that the material which it is said he should  have  disclosed
         materially detracts from that on which he has relied."

39.  This observation was applied in R (ota Cindo) v  IAT  [2002]  EWHC  246
    Admin. This was a judicial review of a substantive asylum appeal on the
    grounds of non-disclosure. Maurice Kay J (as he then  was)  quoted  the
    passage in Kerrouche and emphasised the words "ought to have known" and
    said:
         "10.     The words I have emphasised  point  to  the  inclusion  of
             constructive knowledge. This was taken up by Simon Brown  L.J.
             in Konan v SSHD (CA, 20 March 2000), who  also  observed  that
             (para 24):
                 ".....the Secretary of State's obligation in a full  asylum
                 appeal like this may well be  higher  than  in  cases  like
                 Kerrouche and .... Abdi and Gawe, cases concerned with safe
                 third country appeals".
         11.  Taking a  broad  view  of  the  authorities,  they  appear  to
             illuminate these principles: (1) there is a duty on  the  part
             of the Secretary of State not  knowingly  to  mislead  in  the
             material he places before the  Adjudicator  or  the  IAT;  (2)
             "knowingly" embraces that which he ought to have known; (3)  a
             breach of that duty may found judicial  review  on  the  basis
             that either (a) the decision was reached on a  "wrong  factual
             basis" (see Wade & Forsyth, Administrative Law, 8th Ed. Pp.283-
             284); or (b) the proceedings were tainted with unfairness."
40.  The AIT concluded in MS  and others (risk  on  return)  Kosovo   [2003]
    UKIAT 00031 (reported as FZ  and others [2003] Imm AR 633) applying the
    dictum in Abdi and Gawe)  that:

         "There was no duty on the Secretary of  State  to  embark  upon  an
         investigation to  identify  evidence  not  in  his  hands  for  the
         preparation of country reports, in order to assist these appellants
         in making their cases".

41.  We conclude that this observation is subject  to  the  requirements  of
    fairness as noted by Maurice Kay J. We are not aware of  any  authority
    on the point that advances  the  obligation  beyond  the  duty  not  to
    mislead by omission of material that was known or ought  to  have  been
    known to the Secretary of State.

42.  Mr Henderson's  submission  was  founded  on  two  different  lines  of
    authorities. The first  was  the  principle  that  in  judicial  review
    proceedings once permission is granted, a  respondent  should  disclose
    all relevant data about the decision and the process by  which  it  was
    made (cf R v Lancashire CC ex p Huddleston [1986] 2 All ER  941,  cited
    in the commentary in  the  White  Book  to  CPR  54.14).  There  is  an
    obligation on a  public  authority  whose  decision  is  challenged  by
    judicial review, to set out the relevant facts and reasoning behind the
    decision making process:  see  also  Tweed  v  Parades  Commission  for
    Northern Ireland [2007] I AC 650 at [31] and [54].  The second was  the
    developing line of authorities identifying  the  respondent's  duty  to
    search for and disclose to a special advocate exculpatory  material  in
    the context of  proceedings  before  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
    Commission (SIAC) or other closed proceedings.

43.  We find neither strand supportive of a contention for  a  general  duty
    to search for and disclose data relevant to risk in an asylum appeal or
    a Country Guidance case. In judicial  review,  the  obligation  on  the
    respondent is to explain the decision and make relevant  disclosure  of
    the materials on which the decision  was  actually  based.  It  is  not
    suggested  in  these  proceedings  that  the  respondent  actually  had
    possession or sight of the subsequently disclosed FCO materials at  the
    time of the decision to refuse asylum or resist this appeal[1].

44.  In SIAC or other closed proceedings the appellant is excluded from  the
    closed parts of the hearing and is unable to present his  own  evidence
    in rebuttal of any closed  data  against  his  interests.  The  special
    advocate  is  unable  to  take  the  appellant's  instructions  on  any
    potentially exculpatory material and will generally be  precluded  from
    making inquiries of his or her own in open material as, by one means or
    another, this would generate a risk of disclosure of the  substance  of
    closed material. In that special context,  the  general  principles  of
    common law fairness required that  the  respondent  did  not  pick  and
    choose between the closed data under her control and there was  a  duty
    to search for and provide to the special advocate material that may  be
    considered exculpatory.

45.  In our judgment, in asylum appeals  and  Country  Guidance  cases,  the
    duty not to mislead provides a sound basis for  evaluation  of  country
    material. Where the respondent relies on absence of  material  risk  by
    reference to Country of Origin Information Service (COIS) reports, UKBA
    Operational Guidance Notes (OGN),  or  responses  to  the  evidence  of
    others, she cannot make assertions that she knows or ought to know  are
    qualified by other material under her control or in the  possession  of
    another government department.

46.  We anticipate that UKBA assessments of risk in foreign  countries  will
    frequently be informed by information emanating from the UK  diplomatic
    mission in the region or other data in the possession  of  the  Foreign
    and Commonwealth Office. In the case of Zimbabwe we know that this  has
    been  substantially  the  case  for  some   time.   The   UKBA   relied
    substantially on the  expertise  of  the  British  High  Commission  in
    preparing the fact-finding mission  and  the  evaluation  of  political
    circumstances. We would expect the UKBA to  ask  for  and  be  informed
    about any reliable material that might qualify a published  assessment.
    We would expect COIS reports to be updated  regularly  and  kept  under
    review. Where new  material  comes  to  light  an  OGN  can  be  issued
    promptly, even if it is not itself a source of independent evidence. We
    observe that it was on the basis of an OGN as to enhanced risk of  non-
    Arab Darfuris in Khartoum that  the  AIT  was  able  to  promptly  vary
    previous  Country  Guidance  in   AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris-  relocation)
    (Sudan) CG [2009] UKAIT 0056.

47.  Nevertheless, the respondent's duty to act fairly and  not  mislead  is
    supplemented by the power of the Tribunal to issue specific directions.
    The Upper Tribunal's powers are set out in rule 5:
                   ...
         (2)  The Upper Tribunal may give a direction  in  relation  to  the
             conduct or disposal of proceedings at any  time,  including  a
             direction amending, suspending or  setting  aside  an  earlier
             direction.


         (3)  In particular, and without restricting the general  powers  in
             paragraphs (1) and (2), the Upper Tribunal may-
                  ...
             (n)      require any person, body or other tribunal whose
                  decision is the subject of proceedings before the Upper
                  Tribunal to provide reasons for the decision, or other
                  information or documents ...

48.  The reasons why the Tribunal had exercised its case  management  powers
    in the autumn of 2010 and directed  disclosure  of  documents  over   a
    specific period, was because the appellant had disputed the accuracy of
    a public statement made by Ministers in the context of  the  resumption
    of enforced returns of failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe  (see  further
    paragraph 65 below). It seemed to us appropriate in the  light  of  the
    public statements made and the nexus to the Country Guidance appeal  we
    were then embarked  on  to  see  if  material  existed  to  support  or
    undermine the contention that the previous suspension of  removals  was
    for political rather than safety reasons.

49.  Before the Court  of  Appeal  the  respondent  accepted  that  previous
    disclosure was incomplete and that there was a failure of the  duty  of
    disclosure in the light of the issue identified above that  had  caused
    the Upper Tribunal to exercise its case management powers.

50.  This again was a historic rather than current  issue.  It  went  to  an
    issue as to why the  respondent  had  decided  to  resume  removals  to
    Zimbabwe. In the absence of a general duty to place before the Tribunal
    all contemporary data relating to an assessment on Zimbabwe, we saw  no
    reason to exercise our case  management  powers  to  achieve  the  same
    result.

51.  There was further  a  risk  of  a  never  ending  cycle  of  disclosure
    requests, PII applications and so on. Disclosure by  the  Secretary  of
    State of material held by the Foreign Office did  involve  PII  issues,
    and the  process  for  manual  search,  evaluation,  submission  for  a
    certificate, judicial scrutiny of the merits of the certificate and the
    assessment whether there was a compelling case for  disclosure  in  the
    interests of fairness was a laborious and time-consuming  process.  The
    volume of material in issue far exceeded the  slender  bundle  we  were
    able to assess for ourselves in December 2010.  The whole  process  was
    bound to be measured in months rather than weeks or days. By  the  time
    one application was determined the passage of  time  might  lead  to  a
    further application and so on. We consider that the issue of directions
    requiring either the respondent or a fortiori a third party, to provide
    material in an asylum appeal is an unusual and exceptional  course.  If
    it were regularly and routinely  undertaken,  it  would  be  likely  to
    significantly delay the listing and determination of any appeal.

52.  We recognised that, if there was recent  material  that  was  known  or
    ought to be known to the Home Secretary suggesting that,  whatever  the
    position in the past, it would now be unsafe to return the appellant to
    Zimbabwe, her  legal  representatives  had  accepted  that  a  duty  of
    disclosure would arise, in the event  that  it  was  decided  still  to
    oppose the appeal. The discharge of such  a  duty  did  not  depend  on
    directions from this Tribunal.

53.  We accept Mr Henderson's submission that asylum appeals in general  are
    decided on up  to  date  assessment  of  risk  and  the  Tribunal  will
    frequently  need  to  consider  post-decision   evidence   of   country
    conditions applying the principles set  out  in  the  leading  case  of
    Sandralingam and  Ravichandran  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [1996] Imm AR 97 at p112-113 per Simon Brown  LJ,  hereafter
    Ravichandran.

54.  Such material in asylum appeals is  usually  provided  by  the  parties
    rather than by direction of the Tribunal.  As  already  noted  no  such
    information had been provided to us by the appellant at the time of the
    case management directions.

Whether the present appeal should be listed as a Country  Guidance  case  on
the position in Zimbabwe in 2012

55.  A decision whether a case is reported  at  all  or  is  reported  as  a
    Country Guidance case is one for the Tribunal alone  that  it  performs
    through the function of the reporting committee. The process is set out
    in   Presidential   Guidance   Note   2011   No   2    (available    at
    http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/tribunals/immigration-and-asylum/
    upper/guidance-note-no2-reporting-decisions-of-the-utiac.pdf.)  It   is
    not a decision in which  the  parties  have  an  interest:  see  Senior
    President's Practice Statement at 11 (revised September 2012).   It  is
    only at the end of the process that the Tribunal can  be  assured  that
    the investigation has been sufficiently well-informed and comprehensive
    as to be able to constitute authoritative guidance on  the  conclusions
    to be drawn from a given body of material. However, best practice is to
    case manage a potential Country Guidance case with this possibility  in
    mind;  normally  by  combining  the  appeals   of   several   different
    appellants, and identifying the topic on which guidance is likely to be
    given in advance and thereby enabling the appellant and the  respondent
    to identify the relevant evidence to be adduced.

56.  Country Guidance is intended both to be an instrument for the fair  and
    effective use of resources in  Tribunal  asylum  determination,  and  a
    means of avoiding inconsistent approaches to the same material  thereby
    generating uncertainty  and  duplication  of  appeals.  It  is  usually
    deployed where there are a  large  number  of  appeals  from  the  same
    country of origin raising the same or  similar  claims,  and  where  an
    exhaustive examination of the material evidence is considered desirable
    in the interest of efficiency and consistency. The  principle  is  that
    like cases should be decided  alike.   The  material  evidence  is  all
    relevant information that  the  parties  choose  to  place  before  the
    Tribunal or the Tribunal is able to deploy during the appeal  from  its
    own resources and expertise.

57.  The status of a Country Guidance determination once  reported  as  such
    is established by the Senior President's Practice Direction 12:-

         "12.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT or the  IAT
             bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated as an  authoritative
             finding on  the  Country  Guidance  issue  identified  in  the
             determination, based upon the evidence before the  members  of
             the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that determine the appeal. As
             a result, unless it has been expressly superseded or  replaced
             by any later "CG" determination, or is inconsistent with other
             authority that is binding on  the  Tribunal,  such  a  Country
             Guidance case is authoritative in any  subsequent  appeal,  so
             far as that appeal:-


             (a)  relates to the Country Guidance issue in question; and
             (b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence.


         12.3     A list of current CG  cases  will  be  maintained  on  the
             Tribunal's website. Any representative of a party to an appeal
             concerning  a  particular  country  will  be  expected  to  be
             conversant with the current "CG"  determinations  relating  to
             that country.


         12.4 Because of the principle that like cases should be treated in
             like  manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,   apparently
             applicable Country Guidance case or to show  why  it  does  not
             apply to the case in question  is  likely  to  be  regarded  as
             grounds for appeal on a point of law."


58.      It is of importance to note that a Country Guidance  case  is  only
    authoritative in so far as the evidence in any subsequent appeal is the
    same or similar. It is thus not a binding precedent that  can  only  be
    varied by the Upper Tribunal or the higher courts. Where  the  evidence
    is materially different it is the duty of the judge of the First  -tier
    Tribunal to evaluate it and reach his or her  own  conclusion,  but  in
    doing so he or she will start from the  last  extant  Country  Guidance
    case and see what if anything has changed.

59.  Where the nature of the  appeal  or  the  rapidity  of  change  in  the
    country of origin is such that the Tribunal concludes it does not  have
    a fully informed or durable picture, the relevant assessment may  still
    be reported as a country information case,  without  the  status  of  a
    Country Guidance case.  Given the inability of the existing  technology
    to permit subject matter searches of unreported decisions of the  Upper
    Tribunal the Reporting Committee is conscious of the need from time  to
    time to bring cases containing relevant country information  to  public
    attention.

60.      With these principles in mind, we were not persuaded in  July  2012
    that we should case manage this appeal as a new Country  Guidance  case
    on the up-to-date position in Zimbabwe, for the following reasons:-

    (i)  The principal issue was whether the assessment in  EM  was  flawed
         for the reasons of concern to the Court of Appeal.  If it  was  not
         then its status as Country Guidance when it  was  issued  could  be
         restored pending any change of circumstances.  Until  these  issues
         were determined it was premature to conclude that the  decision  no
         longer had any value as guidance.


    (ii) Whereas the EM  group  of  cases  involved  four  appellants  from
         different locations and  with  different  personal  histories,  the
         reheard appeal on which we were embarked seemed likely  to  involve
         only one appellant from a low or medium density suburb  of  Harare.
         This was not a satisfactory basis to  make  the  general  appraisal
         that the Upper Tribunal had delivered in EM.


    (iii)    Although EM had been under  appeal  from  the  Upper  Tribunal
         since March 2011, no fresh evidence suggesting a significant change
         of circumstances had been presented to us by July 2012  that  would
         have enabled us to explore with particularity what fresh issue  was
         being considered for guidance.


    (iv)     We had a duty to determine CM's individual appeal in the light
         of updated information and  would  receive  any  fresh  information
         presented to us. If it were materially different from the  previous
         Country  Guidance  case  we  were  required  by  the  principle  in
         Ravichandran to reach the appropriate conclusions to be drawn  from
         the material as a whole.


    (v)  It was probable given the importance of the issues remitted to  us
         for adjudication that our final determination would be reported  in
         due course, but whether any fresh evidence  was  such  to  make  it
         suitable for reporting as a Country Guidance case was a  matter  to
         be considered in the light of what was presented at the appeal  and
         conclusions on it.

61.  Again, this decision did not  preclude  a  later  conclusion  that  the
    fresh evidence did, after all, make it appropriate to issue  up-to-date
    Country Guidance on Zimbabwe, in the context of CM's  remitted  appeal.
    However, at the time of the case-management directions, we had  neither
    such evidence before us nor the expectation that it would  come  before
    us and offer a materially different picture. The reason the appeal  was
    before us at all was not  because  there  were  conflicting  First-tier
    assessments of post- EM material, but  because  the  assessment  in  EM
    might prove to be flawed by the three arguable errors identified in the
    Court of Appeal proceedings.

The appeal of JG

62.  As a result  of  the  legal  aid  problems  noted  above,  JG  did  not
    participate in the directions hearing and make detailed submissions  on
    the preliminary issues. In the event we  were  informed  that  she  had
    secured representation by  solicitors  and  would  participate  in  the
    appeal set down for the autumn.

63.      However, when her skeleton argument  was  received  shortly  before
    the hearing it was apparent that she wished to  develop  a  wholly  new
    point never previously canvassed, namely that her child was at risk  of
    social group persecution if (hypothetically) returned to Zimbabwe as  a
    result of medical needs. The Secretary of State objected to  this  late
    change of case without an opportunity to consider  and  investigate  it
    and in those circumstances, we concluded that it was necessary  in  the
    interests of justice to separate her appeal from that of CM and adjourn
    it for separate consideration on its own individual facts.

Issue 1: The  effect  on  the  Country  Guidance  in  EM  of  the  materials
subsequently disclosed by the respondent

Introduction

64.  Paragraph 3(a)(i) of the Tribunal's directions of 14th  September  2012
    made plain that one of the purposes of the present  proceedings  is  as
    follows:-

         "(a)     to determine whether the Country Guidance in EM and Others
             (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT  98  (IAC)  regarding  the
             position in Zimbabwe as at March 2011  should  be  amended  as
             regards the position at that time by reference to:


             (i)  any material subsequently disclosed by the respondent  in
                  response to the orders of the  Court  of  Appeal  and  any
                  related further directions of the Tribunal."


65.  The background to the matter is set out at [130] and [131] of EM:-

         "130.    Prior to the hearing in October 2010,  appellants  JG,  EM
             and CLM requested  disclosure  of  all  documents  within  the
             control of the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  or
             other government departments relating to  assessments  of  the
             political situation in Zimbabwe for the purpose of determining
             whether  to  commence  enforced  returns,  pursuant   to   the
             ministerial statement of 29 October  2009.   That  ministerial
             statement had indicated that the UKBA would begin  work  on  a
             process aimed at normalising the returns policy  to  Zimbabwe,
             moving towards resuming  enforced  returns  as  and  when  the
             political situation developed.  The appellants'  purpose  was,
             in essence, to  ascertain  what  lay  behind  the  ministerial
             statement in October 2010, that the  situation  was  now  such
             that (subject to what might be said by this  Tribunal  in  the
             present proceedings  by  way  of  Country  Guidance)  enforced
             returns to Zimbabwe could recommence.


         131.     In a letter of 18 October 2010 from the FCO Zimbabwe  Unit
             to Mr Walker, it was said that the FCO had always  been  clear
             that  enforced  returns  were  related   to   foreign   policy
             considerations, in particular the stability of  the  inclusive
             government in Zimbabwe, and were not related  to  security  or
             safety of returnees.  On 20 October the Tribunal directed  the
             disclosure of "any material emanating from the  FCO  regarding
             its assessment of the political situation in Zimbabwe  from  1
             August  2010".   On  22  December  2010  certain  egrams  were
             supplied to  the  appellants  and  the  Tribunal,  subject  to
             certain redactions and gists.  This followed  an  analysis  of
             FCO material, in which Junior Counsel for the  respondent  was
             involved, to identify material potentially falling within  the
             scope of  the  Tribunal's  direction,  including  (of  course)
             material that might be said to undermine the respondent's case
             and/or support the cases of the appellants.  Ten  egrams  were
             identified."

66.  In the course of litigation  involving  another  Zimbabwe  citizen  who
    wished to resist lawfulness of detention, material had  come  to  light
    which cast doubt on the accuracy of what the FCO was recorded at  [131]
    as having  told  Mr  Walker.   This  material  led  to  the  appellants
    formulating ground 1 of their grounds of application to  the  Court  of
    Appeal, as follows:-

         "Whether the  respondent  failed  to  comply  with  its  disclosure
         obligations and whether the respondent's statement of  the  Foreign
         Office 'had always been clear that its concerns on enforced returns
         were related to foreign policy  considerations  ...  and  were  not
         related  to  the  security  or  safety  of  returnees'   had   been
         misleading."

67.  It is common ground that the documentation not seen by the Tribunal  in
    EM disclosed an interest on behalf of the United Kingdom government  in
    implementing enforced returns to Zimbabwe, before future elections  and
    the violence considered to be associated with them.   The  significance
    of future elections in Zimbabwe was discussed at [232] to [265] of  EM.
    At [264] the Tribunal said this:-

         "264.    Drawing all these threads together,  we  do  not  conclude
             that our evaluation of who is or is not presently at  risk  if
             returned to Zimbabwe is undermined, by the  possibility  of  a
             return to violence at 2008 levels in the  event  of  elections
             being called in the foreseeable future.  The  combined  effect
             of the evidential uncertainty of when elections may be  called
             and what might happen when they are produces a picture that is
             too equivocal or obscure to amount to a real  risk  of  future
             ill treatment."

68.  In granting permission to appeal on 20th December 2011,  the  Court  of
    Appeal (per Sullivan LJ) was recorded as stating as follows:-

         "It seems to me that it is at least arguable on the  material  that
         we have now seen that there was a failure to make proper disclosure
         to the Tribunal - for whatever reason, it matters  not  -  and,  in
         very brief summary, that it is arguable  that  the  material  which
         related to the Foreign Office concerns that  there  was  a  limited
         window of opportunity in which Zimbabweans  might  be  returned  to
         Zimbabwe  and  that  window  of  opportunity  was  limited  because
         elections  were  anticipated  within  a  relatively  short   period
         (various periods are given,  including  the  period  of  twelve  to
         eighteen months) and that there was a real likelihood  of  violence
         at those elections ... was arguably  relevant  and  might  arguably
         have had an impact upon the critical conclusion  of  the  Tribunal:
         namely, that the combined effect of the evidential  uncertainty  of
         when elections may be called and what might happen when  they  are,
         produced a picture that was too equivocal or obscure to amount to a
         real risk.  It is arguable that the additional material might  have
         persuaded the Tribunal that the picture of when elections  will  be
         called and what was likely to happen when they were called, was not
         too equivocal or obscure.  I express no conclusion  as  to  whether
         that is the case since this is simply a permission application."

69.  In the light of the emergence of this previously  undisclosed  material
    the Court of Appeal on 24th January 2012 decided to make its own orders
    for disclosure, as follows:-

    (a)  No later than March  16th  2012  the  respondent  was  ordered  to
         disclose those documents in the respondent's or the FCO's  control,
         dating from 1st January 2010 to 10th March 2011,  touching  on  the
         timing of elections in  Zimbabwe  and  the  risk  of  a  return  to
         violence  in  connection  with  those  elections.   The  obligation
         extended to a manual search by the  respondent  and  a  manual  and
         electronic search by the FCO.


    (b)  No redactions were to be made on public interest immunity  grounds
         (and previously  served  redacted  documents  to  be  re-served  in
         unredacted form) unless a public  interest  immunity  exercise  had
         been  carried  out  and  public  interest   immunity   certificates
         pertaining to the appeal served by the respondent,  no  later  than
         16th March.


    (c)    In the event that the respondent invoked PII for those documents
         already served on 25th October 2011, the gist was  to  be  provided
         for the redacted passages [listed in an annex] ...  no  later  than
         4pm on 16th March.

70.  On 18th May 2012 the  appellants  issued  an  application  seeking  the
    Court  of  Appeal's  review  of  the  respondent's  claim  to  withhold
    documents, or parts thereof, on grounds of relevance  or  a  claim  for
    public interest immunity.  The hearing of that application was, in  the
    event, overtaken by the parties' agreement as to the grounds  on  which
    the appeals would be remitted to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  respondent
    accepted  there  had  been  a  procedural  irregularity  affecting  the
    Tribunal's determination, amounting to a  material  error  of  law,  by
    reason of her failure to provide at least some part of  the  disclosure
    now made in the Court of  Appeal.   It  was  therefore  considered,  by
    consent, that all of the material disclosed to the appellants, and thus
    before the Court of Appeal, should be considered by the Tribunal.   The
    parties also agreed that the outstanding  review  of  the  respondent's
    claim to withhold disclosure should be addressed by the Tribunal.

 71. We have explained in  the  first  section  of  this  determination  the
    approach taken by the Tribunal to these outstanding tasks.

The previously undisclosed materials

72.   Having explained the background, we turn now to assess the  previously
    undisclosed materials  ("the  new  materials"),  in  order  to  decide,
    pursuant to the directions  of  September  2012,  whether  the  Country
    Guidance given in EM requires amendment as regards the position at that
    time.  In their submissions, the parties have chosen to deal with  this
    matter by reference to separate headings, which appear to the  Tribunal
    to be sensible, and which we describe as follows:-


    (a)  Views as to risks arising from  future  elections  (the  so-called
         "window of opportunity");


    (b)  The potential influence of  the  Zimbabwean  Electoral  Commission
         (ZEC), Southern African  Development  Community  (SADC)  and  South
         Africa on arrangements for and the holding of elections;


    (c)  Risk of serious harm in urban areas.

(a)  Views as to risks arising from future elections (the so-called  "window
    of opportunity")

73.  We have had regard to all  the  new  materials;  in  particular,  those
    specifically relied  on  by  the  parties.  The  following  paragraphs,
    although selective, give a sufficient indication of their nature.

 74.     At vol. 2, tab 23, there is a lightly redacted copy  of  a  report,
    compiled by Dominique Hardy, on a visit by  United  Kingdom  government
    officials to Zimbabwe of 15th-18th February  2010.   The  visit  was  a
    joint FCO/UKBA exercise.  The team spoke with officials in the  British
    Embassy and the Government of Zimbabwe, as well as  with  the  Zimbabwe
    Lawyers for  Human  Rights,  the  Counselling  Services  Unit  and  the
    Institute of Migration (who put the team in touch with three  voluntary
    returnees from the United Kingdom).

75.  The report noted that political  tensions  were  ""apparent"  and  that
    "human rights concerns remain.  Subject to the conditions on the ground
    at the time, we are likely to have a  small  window  in  later  summer,
    ahead of fresh elections, to seek HMG agreement to resume  returns  and
    return a few people".  However, "we need to be alert to the  real  risk
    of violent elections likely to be in early 2011 and a potential  repeat
    spike in intake."  Footnote 10 recorded that the  expected  "AIT  (sic)
    decision on Zimbabwe Country Guidance [was] expected in July 2010."  Ms
    Hardy wrote that "violence and human rights abuses are not  as  bad  as
    they were in 2008, but there is evidence violence is  on  the  increase
    and the machinery  to  unleash  more  remains."   There  is  then  this
    comment, particularly relied on by the appellant:  "Without  exception,
    all observers we met predict a violent next election, perhaps even more
    so than 2008".  The hoped for period of enforced returns was  suspected
    by Ms Hardy to be followed "by a further suspension of returns  (and  a
    real risk intake will spike once again due to the size of the  Diaspora
    in the UK) if elections are as violent as expected".

76.  At vol.1, tab 6 an email  opined  that  "we  have  a  small  window  of
    opportunity in which to  enforce  returns  -  between  the  forthcoming
    Country Guidance  case  and  the  inevitable  escalation  of  political
    violence ahead of the Zimbabwe elections whenever in  2011  they  are".
    At vol. 3, tab 15 an email from the British Embassy Harare sent in June
    2010 said "until the political situation in this  country  is  resolved
    there will never be the ideal window  but  one  of  sorts  -  with  the
    situation now more stable and elections, and  the  violence  they  will
    bring, probably still 12-18 months away - is now in view".   That  view
    found its way into a draft response from the FCO Migration  Directorate
    to the Home Secretary (1st July 2010: vol. 3, tab 19), which included a
    comment that "the situation  is  now  more  stable  than  in  2008  and
    elections, and the risk of violence they may entail,  are  probably  at
    least a year or more away.  While we cannot be certain, the  window  of
    opportunity may extend through 2011."   Likewise,  a  letter  from  the
    Foreign Secretary to the Home Secretary of 14th July 2010 describes the
    situation as "more stable in  2008  and  elections,  and  the  risk  of
    violence they may entail, are probably still at least a  year  or  more
    away".  At vol. 3, tab 43 the FCO commented in September 2010 that "the
    opportunity actually to resume enforced returns that the [CG] case will
    create,  will  be  of  limited  duration.   As  elections  approach  in
    Zimbabwe, renewed political violence may well drive a further change in
    the ground rules".

77.  Elsewhere, the new materials underscore the  FCO's  concerns  regarding
    the effect of a resumption of  enforced  returns  on  the  position  in
    Zimbabwe.  Thus, at vol. 2, tab 5 Margaret Belof of the  Zimbabwe  Unit
    noted on 24th July 2009 that "the  enforced  return  of  failed  asylum
    seekers would be a difficult handling issue for the MDC"  and  that  it
    was  "crucial  that  the  resumption  of  enforced  returns  does   not
    destabilise the political situation in Zimbabwe" (gist).   At  vol.  2,
    tab 12 the Foreign Secretary told the Home Secretary in September  2009
    that "sporadic incidents of violence and intimidation and evidence that
    ZANU-PF is not only maintaining but  increasing  the  capacity  of  its
    latent terror machine"  were  testament  to  the  fact  that  political
    progress "to date is far from irreversible".  In June 2010 (vol. 3, tab
    7) the UKBA's head of immigration suggested to the Home Secretary  that
    enforced returns should start "with a very small  number  of  carefully
    selected cases where their asylum claim is without any  merit  and  the
    individual is not even protected by the very low threshold set  out  in
    the existing RN case law".

78.  An email of 2nd March 2010 (vol. 2, tab  21)  described  a  seminar  on
    future elections and conflict prevention held  in  Nyanga  in  February
    2010, under the auspices of the Centre for Peace Initiatives in  Africa
    (CPIA).  Participants included political parties, civil society  church
    group ministers,  the  army,  CIO,  tribal  chiefs,  war  veterans  and
    diplomats.  Although "debate was polarised" dialogue "was  surprisingly
    open".  "It was agreed that from the time that Zimbabwe was  colonised,
    each transfer of power and/or elections had come  with  violence.   CIO
    and military presence said nothing to suggest that the  next  elections
    would be any different.  It was agreed that communities had a  role  to
    play in building peace and resisting violence".  An FCO  egram  of  8th
    March 2010 (vol. 2, tab  24)  noted  the  United  Kingdom  was  raising
    concerns  "about  the  next  elections  repeating  the   violence   and
    intimidation of the previous election and it was important that that be
    avoided".  Two days later, an FCO email chain (vol. 2, tab  26)  stated
    that "concerns over a repeat of the violence seen  in  June  2008  were
    well-founded but that was  not  inevitable".   In  April  2010  an  FCO
    briefing (vol.  2,  tab  32)  noted  that  "an  election,  without  the
    necessary ground work, will result in a  great  deal  of  violence  and
    intimidation and another stolen poll".

79.  The gist of an FCO email of 25th August 2010 (vol. 3,  tab  39)  stated
    that  there  were  "many  variables  bearing  upon/affecting  any  road
    map/timeline, including the electoral act, the  constitutional  process
    and any referendum".  Matters which needed to be addressed in order  to
    avoid a repeat of 2008 were (1)  the  climate  of  fear  needed  to  be
    tackled (there was some evidence that  ZANU-PF  was  deploying  similar
    tactics via its constitutional outreach program albeit at a lower key);
    (2) vote  rigging  needed  to  be  addressed  and  a  reliable  way  of
    recording, collating and announcing the results needed to be found; and
    (3) the security sector had prevented President  Mugabe  from  stepping
    down in 2008, reform of that sector would be necessary.   A  submission
    from the Africa Directorate to the Foreign Secretary  in  October  2010
    included the view that "in the absence of sustained engagement  by  the
    international community, Zimbabwe would fall back to the  violence  and
    chaos".  Henry  Bellingham,  Minister  for  Africa,  the  UN,  Overseas
    Territories and Conflict Issues states in November 2010  (vol.  1,  tab
    21) that "effective election monitoring  at  an  early  stage  will  be
    critical if there is to be no repeat of the 2008  elections".   On  7th
    February 2011 a briefing  for  Henry  Bellingham  stated  that  it  was
    "widely accepted that a premature election without  completion  of  the
    constitutional process would be like the last election  -  violent  and
    stolen".

Discussion

80.  Although we have chosen to address the relevance of the  new  materials
    by reference to the above-mentioned headings, we would stress that  our
    conclusions have  not  been  reached  by  treating  those  headings  as
    "watertight" compartments.  Rather, we have taken a  holistic  view  of
    the new materials; as well as examining them by reference to  the  very
    large body of material that was presented in EM.

81.  The case for the appellant under this heading is, in essence, that  the
    new material,  particularly  the  report  by  Dominique  Hardy  on  the
    February 2010 visit and the draft and final responses from the  Foreign
    Secretary to the Home Secretary of July 2010, meant  that  the  Country
    Guidance issued in March 2011 should  have  maintained  the  wide  risk
    categories identified in RN.  To  quote  from  paragraph  7(a)  of  the
    appellant's response to the respondent's "reply to appellant's  closing
    submissions":-

         "The  limited  window  reflects  the  FCO's  assessment  that   the
         election, whether early or later, will not be  properly  supervised
         and will bring risk to  returnees,  whether  or  not  identical  to
         2008."

82.  As is clear from RN and from the evidence before us now and  which  was
    before the Tribunal in EM, the  extent  of  the  violence  and  general
    persecutory activity associated with the elections in Zimbabwe in 2008,
    was unprecedented in its scope and intensity.  But, as an  analysis  of
    the previous Country Guidance and relevant background  materials  makes
    plain,  election  violence  has  been  a  regular  feature   of   post-
    independence Zimbabwe.

83.  Thus, at  [37]  of  SM  and  Others  (MDC  -  internal  flight  -  risk
    categories) Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKIAT 00100, it was recorded that:

         "elections were held in  June  2000  and  there  was  a  systematic
         campaign of violence towards  supporters  of  potential  opposition
         politicians.  Many acts of violence  were  perpetrated  by  ZANU-PF
         militants and war veterans.  Politically motivated violence  mostly
         perpetrated by government supporters against the MDC and commercial
         farmers continued throughout 2001 after the parliamentary elections
         and in 2002 in the run up to the  presidential  election  of  March
         2002".

    At [44] the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  found  that  there  was  "a
    heightened risk during election periods and their immediate  aftermath.
    This reflects the pattern which has been followed since  2000.   Before
    an election there is intimidation of opposition  supporters  and  those
    perceived to be encouraging support for the opposition,  in  particular
    teachers and civil servants".  As we have already noted, the report  of
    the March 2010 CPIA seminar recorded agreement that "each  transfer  of
    power and/or elections had come with violence".

84.  What was exceptional about the election violence in June 2008 is  well-
    described at [212] to [220] of RN.  Instead  of  merely  targeting  MDC
    activists, members and supporters, ZANU-PF, through its use of militias
    deployed in urban areas, and militias, road blocks and no-go  areas  in
    certain rural provinces, unleashed a wave of persecution that brought a
    real risk of serious harm to those who could not demonstrate loyalty to
    the regime.

85.  It is in this important context that the views  expressed  in  the  new
    material regarding the likelihood  of  violence  at  further  elections
    needs  to  be  viewed.   With  one  possible  exception,  there  is  no
    indication that the comments in the new  material,  regarding  election
    violence, ought to be read as considered assessments  that  any  future
    elections would, in substance, lead to a repetition of what was seen in
    2008. This went beyond anything seen before and drew the finding in RN,
    regarding risk on return, not just to those with a MDC profile, but  to
    anyone who could not demonstrate loyalty to the  regime.  The  possible
    exception, in Dominique Hardy's report,  that  "all  observers  we  met
    predict a violent next election, perhaps even more  so  than  2008"  is
    (understandably, in its context) imprecise and cannot be regarded as an
    indication that the observers in question were agreed that  the  nature
    of any future violence would take the same form as  that  deployed   in
    2008.

86.  This is particularly  so,  given  that  one  of  those  observers,  the
    Counselling Services Unit, was interviewed by the FFM  team  in  August
    2010, and said this:-

         "The Source considers  that  both  ZANU-PF  and  the  military  are
         desperate for political legitimacy. They are also very aware of the
         intense regional pressures to form a civilian  government  and  are
         keen to rebuild their reputation in the region and with  the  West,
         not least because they feel that the relationship with China is not
         going to be a comfortable one ...


         They will therefore seek to rely as far  as  possible  on  measures
         short of large-scale political violence in  the  election  campaign
         and believe that they can achieve a clear majority without  needing
         to resort to large-scale  violence.   Instead  they  will  seek  to
         exploit the deep divisions in the MDC, which is close to fracturing
         into two distinct factions, led by Makoni and Biti, with the former
         keeping Tsvangirai as a front."

87.  Although at [116] of EM the Tribunal explained that it had  given  only
    limited weight to the views of the Counselling Services  Unit,  in  the
    light of the significance now sought to be placed by the  appellant  on
    the Dominique Hardy report and the "observers" that she  and  her  team
    met, we consider that what the Counselling Services Unit saw fit to say
    only a few months later is worthy of note.

88.   The  new  materials  themselves  contain  indications  that  the  2008
    election violence was exceptional. In a FCO paper of 4 March 2011 (vol.
    4, tab 148), it was observed that:

          "The explosion of violence in the run-up to the June 2008 election
         was probably a  one-off.  ZANU  paid  a  high  price  for  Mugabe's
         victory, since SADC observers declared the election did not reflect
         the will of the people.  The  preferred  model  will  be  the  2005
         election, which ZANU won convincingly (recovering the  ground  they
         had lost in 2002) and which was not questioned by SADC."

89.  Reliance was placed by the appellant on a comment in an  Embassy  egram
    of February 2011, at vol. 4, tab 126, that:

         "This is unlikely to  be  the  'bloodiest  election  in  Zimbabwe's
         history' (as some commentators say) unless  ZANU  panics  (as  well
         they might)" (our emphasis).

    This comment was, however, addressing  the  "early  election  scenario"
    discussed in EM, which the Tribunal in that case considered  would  not
    materialise and which we know did not materialise. The comment  has  no
    material bearing on  the  more  distant  scenario,  addressed  in  that
    determination.

90.  It appears to be part of the appellant's case under this  heading  that
    the respondent's view of the likelihood that it would be  necessary  to
    suspend removals when an election was called meant that the picture was
    not "too equivocal or obscure" to amount to a real risk of future  ill-
    treatment (cf [264] of EM).  However,  the  fact  that  the  respondent
    must, quite properly, keep under review the  continued  appropriateness
    of any policy of enforced returns to a  particular  country,  does  not
    automatically have any bearing on the validity of any Country  Guidance
    issued by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  respect  of  that  country.   This
    relationship was made plain by the Tribunal at  [265]  of  EM.   Having
    explained why the Tribunal did not consider that the prospect of future
    elections, viewed from March 2011, demonstrated a real risk  of  future
    ill-treatment to the entire  category  of  those  covered  by  RN,  the
    Tribunal said this:-

         "... There is  also  the  following  important  point.   If,  after
         promulgation of this determination, evidence emerges that elections
         will be held at a particular time, without any  of  the  safeguards
         and other countervailing  features  we  have  described,  then  the
         structures underpinning the Country  Guidance  system  ensure  that
         judicial fact-finders will be required to have regard  to  the  new
         state of affairs, in reaching  determinations  on  Zimbabwe  cases.
         The effect of Practice  Direction  12.2  is  such  that  a  Country
         Guidance case is authoritative in a subsequent appeal, only so  far
         as that appeal relates to the Country Guidance  issue  in  question
         and depends upon the same or similar evidence (our  emphasis).   By
         the same token, we would expect the respondent to take  account  of
         that  situation,  both  in  reaching  decisions  on  asylum  claims
         involving Zimbabwe (including fresh claims under paragraph  353  of
         the Immigration Rules) and in deciding whether to  give  directions
         for a person's removal to Zimbabwe."

91.  Mr Henderson submits that the respondent's view of the likely  need  to
    suspend returns whenever an election would be  called  means  that  the
    respondent envisaged there would be a  generalised  real  risk  to  all
    returnees in any election period, whether or not the  violence  was  as
    grave as in 2008.  We do not accept this submission.  It  was  not  the
    respondent's case that this was how the views  expressed  in  2010/2011
    should be interpreted. Looked at together with all the other  evidence,
    such an interpretation is  simply  not  possible.  The  fact  that  the
    respondent must keep any policy  she  has  regarding  enforced  returns
    under review (whether or not formed in the light  of  existing  Country
    Guidance from the Tribunal) does not mean that the country in  question
    is presently unsafe, or even that every  utterance  of  the  respondent
    regarding the possible future  operation  of  her  policy  must  be  of
    decisive or even material relevance to her current view of risk;  still
    less to the view of the Tribunal. We further conclude  for  reasons  we
    will set out shortly that it is not  a  correct  approach  to  view  an
    earlier determination giving Country  Guidance  as  laying  down  fact-
    specific conditions that are automatically binding on a Tribunal giving
    subsequent Country Guidance.

92.  Mr Henderson also sought to rely on a comment  from  the  Head  of  the
    Zimbabwe Unit, in the context of considering in 2010 the resumption  of
    forced returns, that Zanu PF "might oppose the return of large  numbers
    of probably MDC supporters". There is nothing to suggest the respondent
    had a considered view that Zanu-PF would oppose such  returns  or  ill-
    treat such returnees. In any event, the comment does  not  advance  the
    appellant's case for amending the Country Guidance as given in EM. That
    case did not give Country Guidance as to risk at the  point  of  return
    (Harare Airport) and thus recognised and applied the  previous  Country
    Guidance on that issue  (HS  (Returning  asylum  seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00094), that those known to the security  services  to  be
    MDC activists and targeted as such might  still  be  at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment by  the  Central  Intelligence  Organisation  (CIO)  at  that
    airport. The Country Guidance in EM  concerned  the  position  after  a
    returnee had left the airport.

93.  In conclusion on this heading, we do not consider that  the  disclosure
    material relied on by the appellant undermines our assessment or  makes
    it appropriate to revise the Country Guidance given in EM or to qualify
    the finding at [264] of that determination.

(b)  The potential influence of the  Zimbabwe  Electoral  Commission  (ZEC),
    the Southern African Development Commission (SADC) and South Africa  on
    the arrangements for and holding of elections

94.  We have examined the new materials for what light they  might  shed  on
    these issues. (What we say at paragraph 80 above  applies  here  also.)
    The appellant contends that in EM the Tribunal  placed  weight  on  the
    role of the ZEC.  At [47] of the  appellant's  closing  submissions  on
    disclosure, it is asserted that the Tribunal in EM "was prepared on the
    evidence placed before it to place weight on the role of ZEC  in  light
    of the new  Chair".   The  new  material,  however,  (vol.  1,  tab  1)
    indicates that it was thought essential for the Chair of the ZEC to  be
    "full time and located in Zimbabwe".  There was FCO concern  that  this
    Chair (a respected legal academic resident in Angola) might not be able
    to entirely commit himself to the work  of  the  commission  and  whose
    presence may be little more than symbolic given commitments out of  the
    country.

95.  In EM the Tribunal considered that "more important" than the ZEC:

         "will  be  the  attitude  of  the  SADC  and,  in  particular,  the
         government of South Africa.  Again, the earlier  evidence  in  this
         regard to which we have been referred paints a  somewhat  uncertain
         picture.  However, the later evidence indicates a greater degree of
         commitment to ensuring that any future elections  in  Zimbabwe  are
         not characterised by the sort of violence seen in 2008" [236].

96.  At vol. 3, tab 62 a gisted Embassy egram of October 2010 recorded  that
    "President  Zuma  had   become   distracted   by   domestic   political
    developments  and  wider  regional  trouble.   Sources  were  reporting
    reduced engagement with the Zimbabwe portfolio" (as at  October  2010).
    A further egram of 9th December 2010 opined that

         "if there were elections, it would still  be  the  military  forces
         that had the upper hand ...  SADC  and  South  Africa  had  reacted
         weakly which reflected the strong  position  of  President  Mugabe"
         (vol. 4, tab 88).  At vol. 4, tab 140 an interlocutor was noted  as
         making the "interesting observation that although SADC wants change
         in the leadership of ZANU-PF, they do  not  want  any  other  party
         other than ZANU-PF to run the country.   Their  ideal  choreography
         would be a ZANU-PF victory, followed by an orderly succession".

Discussion

97.  We do not consider that the new materials bearing on the  ZEC  has  any
    effect on the Country Guidance findings in EM.  At [236]  the  Tribunal
    found that

         "whilst we do not overestimate the power of the Zimbabwe  Electoral
         Commission,  we  note  the  evidence   that   its   Chair   is   an
         internationally respected  jurist,  who  has  already  indicated  a
         reluctance to be rushed into elections, before proper  preparations
         have been made; in particular, reform of the electoral roll."

    This finding was made in the context of the Tribunal's analysis of when
    elections in Zimbabwe would be  called;  in  particular,  whether  they
    would occur in 2011 (see [235] and [236]).  The only other  finding  in
    EM relating to the ZEC is at [263], where it was concluded that

         "the scenario of elections being  held  in  mid-2011,  or  slightly
         later, in defiance of international (especially  regional)  opinion
         and the Electoral Commission, and in circumstances  where,  despite
         his indications to  the  contrary,  Morgan  Tsvangirai  decides  to
         expose the MDC  to  danger  by  contesting  the  elections,  is  an
         unlikely one, on the balance of probabilities, albeit that there is
         a chance it might happen".

    Those findings proved  correct:  as  at  the  beginning  of  2013,  the
    elections have not been held.

98.  None of these new materials detracts from the  overall  thrust  of  the
    evidence as a whole, including that before the  Tribunal  in  EM,  that
    both SADC and South Africa were anxious to ensure, not only that  there
    would be no repeat of the 2008 election violence in Zimbabwe, but  also
    that future elections would be regarded internationally as  legitimate.
    As is pointed out at  [32]  of  the  respondent's  reply,  the  British
    Ambassador in an egram of 1st December 2010  (that  was  before  us  in
    2011) commented that, despite his many  other  distractions,  President
    Zuma remained both engaged on Zimbabwe and  concerned  "that  elections
    proceed without violence".  The fact that, like any other major leader,
    President Zuma has many pressing demands on his attention seems  to  us
    axiomatic and does not mean that he is  thereby  incapable  of  dealing
    with them.  As for  the  interlocutor's  observation  regarding  SADC's
    preference for ZANU-PF to run the country, such a desire does  not,  in
    our view, run counter to the aims of SADC, as just described.  The same
    report (at 22nd February 2011)  went  on  to  state  that  "Zuma  wants
    credible elections and should exert pressure on ZANU-PF".

99.  Overall, the new materials regarding the SADC and South Africa fit  the
    pattern of the material disclosed to the Tribunal in EM.  It  does  not
    suggest that the United Kingdom government or other  similar  observers
    regard the efforts being made by SADC and South  Africa  as  having  no
    realistic prospect of avoiding a repeat of 2008.  On the contrary,  the
    degree of interest and encouragement points in the opposite direction.

(c)  Risk of serious harm in urban areas

100. At [198] to [218] of EM, the Tribunal examined the political and socio-
    economic positions in Harare and Bulawayo, the main  urban  centres  in
    Zimbabwe.  So far as Harare was concerned, the Tribunal's analysis  was
    as follows:-

         "199.    The Tribunal in RN noted a difference between the position
             in, respectively, high and low-density  areas  of  Harare.   A
             person living in a low-density area would, in summary, not  be
             reasonably likely to face a "loyalty" challenge  from  militia
             or  war  veterans.   In   relation   to   the   period   under
             consideration in RN, however, it was found that the  situation
             would be otherwise in high-density areas.


         200.      The  evidence  before  us  demonstrates  that  there  are
             difficulties  faced by those living in high density areas  not
             faced by those living in other urban areas: there is a greater
             prevalence of criminal disorder and reduced personal security;
             where it is  available  at  all  accommodation  will  be  very
             crowded and a lower standard; street traders  working  in  the
             informal economy may be the subject of harassment  from  state
             officials; persons perceived to be active in MDC politics  may
             face the risk of targeted reprisals.  The Zimbabwe Lawyers for
             Human Rights  described  high-density  areas  as  experiencing
             "occasional arrests and beatings".  The evidence  taken  as  a
             whole  does  not  present  a  picture  of  such  intensity  or
             regularity as to suggest that any resident of a  high  density
             area having no active involvement in MDC politics would be  at
             risk of harm. The picture of ZANU-PF activity in  these  areas
             is significantly different from rural  areas:  the  system  of
             control through ZANU-PF chiefs and  village  headmen  and  the
             ability to monitor the  identity  of  new  arrivals  in  rural
             communities have no proper  counterparts  in  Harare.  We  are
             accordingly unable to accept the evidence of  those  witnesses
             who suggested that the risk level was the same  in  the  rural
             and high density urban areas.


         201.     It is common ground that the MDC tend  to  dominate  high-
             density areas.  In his response to the FFM team,  W80  of  the
             Zimbabwe  Human  Rights  NGO  Forum  said  that  it  would  be
             difficult for ZANU-PF to harm MDC supporters in MDC  dominated
             areas "because the MDC tend  to  be  quite  well-organised  in
             those areas and can protect those who might  otherwise  be  at
             risk of political violence by the threat of retribution".   In
             his statement on behalf  of  the  appellants,  W80  sought  to
             qualify those remarks.  He said that what he was referring  to
             were isolated pockets  of  resistance  that  had  appeared  on
             occasions and he did not mean that there  were  areas  of  the
             country  that  the  MDC  controlled  or  that  the  MDC  could
             generally  protect  its  supporters.   The  infrastructure  of
             violence was  still  intact  and  ZANU-PF  remained  in  total
             control of the coercive arms of the state.


         202.     We accept W80's point  that,  since  ZANU-PF  does  indeed
             remain in de facto control of the  army,  police  and  similar
             services, it is wrong to  speak  of  any  particular  area  of
             Zimbabwe as being "controlled" by the MDC.   Nevertheless,  it
             is apparent that in his response to  the  FFM  team,  W80  was
             describing the present  position,  where  in  practice  it  is
             indeed  "difficult  for  ZANU-PF  supporters   to   harm   MDC
             supporters in MDC-dominated areas".  The  position  might,  of
             course, be different if, immediately  prior  to  an  election,
             Mugabe and ZANU-PF were to launch a  significant  campaign  of
             violence in Harare, such as in 2008.  That  is  not,  however,
             the position at present.


         203.     We say  this,  having  particular  regard  to  the  latest
             evidence, from January 2011, concerning  various  disturbances
             in Harare, which are said to have been instigated  by  ZANU-PF
             elements. The alleged establishment in high-density  areas  of
             campaign  bases  in  the  homes  of  ZANU-PF   leaders   falls
             significantly short of the kind of militia bases described  in
             the  evidence  in  relation  to  certain  rural  areas.  There
             continues to be an absence of reliable evidence  that  militia
             bases have been established  in  Harare.  The  setting  up  of
             campaign  bases  in  peoples'  homes  is,  if   anything,   an
             indication of the relative weakness of ZANU-PF in the capital.
             The report of 26 January 2011 that carried the story of  these
             bases referred to ZANU-PF and  MDC  youths  being  engaged  in
             clashes, which, again, differs from the descriptions  of  what
             is going on in rural areas, where the picture is often one  of
             villagers being coerced into silent submission  by  a  ZANU-PF
             gang. Overall, we find that this and  the  other  most  recent
             evidence  underscores  the  position  that  emerges  from  the
             earlier evidence, which is that the focus of such current ZANU-
             PF activity as there is in the high-density areas of Harare is
             on MDC activists, as opposed to the general population.


         204.      We  accordingly  conclude  that,  at  the  present  time,
             although a person having no significant MDC profile, returning
             to a high-density area of  Harare,  is  likely  to  face  more
             difficulties than someone returning to a low-density area,  he
             or she would not at present face a  real  risk  of  having  to
             prove loyalty to  ZANU-PF  in  order  to  avoid  serious  ill-
             treatment. So far as living conditions in  high-density  areas
             are concerned, the only witness to assert that the housing  in
             such areas was unfit for human habitation was  the  person  we
             have  described  as  W79  of   the   Zimbabwe   Human   Rights
             Association.  We do not conclude from this that anyone  having
             to live in such a  high  density  area  would  be  exposed  to
             inhuman or degrading  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3.  Mr
             Henderson did not attempt to submit to us that  this  was  the
             case. Whether any individual having to live  rough  in  shanty
             accommodation  or  other  grossly  overcrowded  and   insecure
             arrangements would be exposed to treatment of  this  level  of
             severity  would  depend  on  an   individual   assessment   of
             circumstances including age, gender, health, earning capacity,
             social assistance arrangements, the presence of young children
             and the like.


         205.   We have spoken so far of  high  and  low-density  areas  in
             Harare.  Professor Ranger, however, told us  that  there  were
             three  kinds  of  zone  in  Harare.   The  low-density   areas
             comprised the white  community,  the  coloured  community  and
             Africans "who were not so poor.   The  low-density  areas  had
             more Africans than in the past."  Then  there  were  areas  of
             intermediate-density.  Here, although there were problems with
             dereliction, there were not problems  with  gangs.   These  he
             categorised as "medium-density areas".   Finally,  there  were
             the high-density areas, which,  although  they  had  problems,
             nevertheless "had some services".   The  Tribunal  also  notes
             that appellant JG described her home  area  of  Queensdale  as
             "kind of medium-density".  She said that it was not  far  from
             Epworth "where many rowdy gangs" existed; and Queensdale might
             therefore be "a vulnerable  location".   Many  cities  in  the
             world, including ones in the United  Kingdom,  have  areas  of
             affluence adjacent or close to areas of relative  deprivation.
             This fact would  generally  not  give  rise  to  a  claim  for
             international protection or furnish evidential support  for  a
             contention that it would be unduly harsh to expect a person to
             relocate to accommodation there.  Particularly given  what  we
             have had to say about the present position of the high-density
             areas in Harare, we do not consider that the  distribution  of
             high,  medium  and  low-density  areas  has  significance,  as
             regards the matters with which we are concerned."


101.     At [239] the Tribunal considered  the  appellant's  submissions  of
    28th January 2011 regarding a report  that  80,000  youth  militia  etc
    would be mobilised across the country to cow the population in the run-
    up to elections "and that this process may already be  beginning".   At
    [240] the Tribunal gave  some  weight  to  these  "alleged  plans"  but
    considered that the article in which they were described  might  itself
    be part  of  a  plan  to  pre-empt  such  a  mobilisation  by  exciting
    international interest, "in particular, SADC and  President  Zuma".  It
    was also, the Tribunal considered, at present speculative as to whether
    hard line elements in ZANU-PF and the military had the  upper  hand  in
    what appeared to be a power struggle within that party and whether they
    would in  the  event  be  prepared  to  resist  international  pressure
    "particularly given the reported concern of at least some  of  them  of
    being brought before the international criminal court".

102.     At [241] to [243] the Tribunal considered the position  in  Harare,
    in the event of elections being held early in defiance of international
    opinion.  So far as Harare was concerned, the Tribunal found that:-

         "... whilst it may be reasonably likely that ZANU-PF  militias  etc
         would be bussed in to that city in order to cause  problems  during
         an election campaign, the present evidence is such that it would be
         merely speculative to conclude this would have  a  material  impact
         upon those living in low-density areas.  In addition, even in  this
         scenario, we do not consider the  present  evidence  suggests  that
         ZANU-PF  would  be  able  to  engage  in  the  kind  of  systematic
         intimidation, which it would deploy in rural areas of  the  eastern
         provinces.  In  this  regard,  we  note  the  absence  of  reliable
         evidence regarding militia bases. The report of  26  January  2011,
         regarding the alleged use of ZANU-PF leaders' homes  in  Harare  as
         campaign bases, is said to be confined to high-density  areas  and,
         in any case, appears to be of a different and lesser order  to  the
         sort of camps and bases established in rural areas in 2008.  Whilst
         we accept the evidence of the appellants, that even in high-density
         areas in which it dominates, the MDC would be unable  to  resist  a
         military or quasi-military assault, it is questionable whether ZANU-
         PF would, in 2011, choose to launch such an assault, given the high-
         profile nature of Harare and the international  condemnation  which
         would ensue.  The evidence of January 2011  regarding  disturbances
         in Harare instigated by ZANU-PF elements does not begin  to  amount
         to  such  a  state  of  affairs,  notwithstanding  the  report   of
         Tsvangirai's having raised the disturbances  with  President  Zuma.
         Those involved in the disturbances were MDC members and  supporters
         (voanews.com article of  24  January)  and  the  evidence  of  non-
         political residents suffering in this regard is sparse."

103. At [267(5)] the Tribunal  gave  its  Country  Guidance  in  respect  of
    Harare, viewed as at March 2011, as follows:-

         "(5)     A returnee to Harare will in general face  no  significant
             difficulties, if going  to  a  low-density  or  medium-density
             area. Whilst  the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
             connections  will  not   face   significant   problems   there
             (including  a  "loyalty  test"),  unless  he  or  she  has   a
             significant MDC profile, which  might  cause  him  or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment,  or  would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF."

104. The new materials contain further references to the  unrest  in  Harare
    in late January 2011, described in the EM determination. (What we  said
    at paragraph 80 above again applies.)  At vol. 4, tab 102 an  email  to
    the British Ambassador of Harare described "violence  in  Harare  high-
    density suburbs over the weekend" and that "ZANU youths were brought in
    to cause trouble".  The email considered that the unrest "suggests that
    ZANU are still looking at a vote in 2011".  At vol. 4, tab 103 an egram
    from HM Embassy Harare of 24th January 2011 referred to:

         "a worrying increase in  tension"  and  that  ZANU-PF  youths  were
         bussed in "to intimidate and assault MDC  supporters  in  three  of
         Harare's high density outlying areas.  ZANU youths attacked two MDC-
         T officials in Budiriro, along with their families,  and  destroyed
         and looted their homes.  One party official is in hospital  with  a
         gunshot wound, a ward chairman is believed to  have  been  abducted
         and another supporter is in  hiding  after  being  assaulted.   The
         militia also attacked people at a bar on Saturday night and smashed
         TV sets and windows before closing the place  down.   In  Mbare,  a
         Harare suburb, a large group of ZANU youths attacked the MDC office
         on Saturday,  assaulting  24  MDC  youths  who  were  guarding  the
         office."  In Chitungwiza, "ZANU youth assaulted an MDC official and
         his family and destroyed his home.  Another MDC activist  sustained
         serious head injuries after being assaulted with bottles".

    The email concluded that it was "unclear, however, to what  extent  the
    violence was planned centrally or reflects lawlessness at local level."



105. An MDC MP was described as regarding "the violence  this  weekend  [as]
    the worst she had seen since 2008".  A House of Lords briefing paper of
    25th January 2011 said that:

         "Mugabe, supported by some of the military, has  officially  called
         for elections in June 2011.  However, the  MDC  and  a  significant
         part of ZANU-MDC were opposed to elections before further  economic
         consolidation and, on MDC's part, before important electoral, media
         and security reforms are  carried  out  and  a  credible  long-term
         monitoring mission established.  Constitutionally elections do  not
         have to be held until 2013.  A recent increase in ZANU intimidatory
         tactics (thuggery in Harare, setting up of militia camps)  suggests
         that securocrats are positioning themselves for an early  election,
         but there is no certainty yet."

106. At vol. 1, tab 37, an email of 28th January referred to  "Budiriro  ZPF
    youths ... using a house belonging to Gladys Hokoyo,  losing  candidate
    in the last election, as a mobilising centre to carry out  violence  in
    the suburb".  This and other activities were considered to  be  "all-in
    bid to provoke MDC to retaliate and of course it is the MDC youths  who
    always end up in police cells".  The email was in response  to  an  FCO
    email posing the question "is this true - the setting  up  of  campaign
    bases in Harare?".

107. At vol. 4, tab 113, an FCO email of 31st January 2011 referred  to  the
    incidents as "violence against MDC supporters".  The British Ambassador
    in an egram of  4th  February  2011  (vol.  4,  tab  117)  referred  to
    "intensified  harassment  of  MDC  members"  in  late   January   2011.
    Questioning whether the violence was a pre-election attempt to  "soften
    up the opposition", the Ambassador considered that "in practice  Mugabe
    would face extreme difficulty - both because of opposition  within  his
    own party and from the region - in engineering a precipitate election".
     The violence was "being targeted at MDC support  structures  in  high-
    density areas, and rural constituencies crucial to  ZANU-PF  fortunes".
    An Embassy egram of 8th February 2011 (vol.  4,  tab  121),  apparently
    based on a  conversation  with  an  interlocutor,  described  MDC-T  as
    condemning "rising instances of state-orchestrated violence against its
    structures and supporters".  The recent violence was considered  to  be
    "an attempt by a small clique at the top" but that "MDC-T  was  playing
    its part by restraining its youths from fighting back.  Retaliation was
    exactly what those instigating the violence wanted".  Vol. 1,  tab  45,
    an email from the British  Ambassador  of  8th  February,  referred  to
    political violence as being targeted "at rural areas crucial to the ZPF
    and at MDC support structures in the high density  suburbs".   Although
    the point of this might be to instigate  "precipitate  elections",  the
    Ambassador considered that Mugabe "will want to steer a careful  course
    - ramping things up, but not to the extent that they too obviously  put
    themselves on the wrong side of regional opinion".  Although there were
    risks of starting something that could not  be  stopped,  Zimbabwe  was
    "going to be back on radar screens with a vengeance at  some  point  in
    the next twelve months".

108. At vol. 4, tab 148, a gisted FCO paper of March 2011,  in  an  apparent
    reference to this violence, said that

         "Although in general ZANU had lost the  major  urban  areas,  there
         were signs it was mounting a  counter  attack  in  Harare.  It  was
         possible it wanted to tighten its grip on the city  in  advance  of
         any demonstrations provoked by a stolen election".

    There followed some discussion  of  militia  bases;  it  seems  in  the
    context of Zimbabwe as a whole. The paper contains no reference to  any
    then existing militia bases in Harare.

Discussion

109. We have carefully considered the new  materials  but  do  not  conclude
    that they come near to undermining the EM Country Guidance or requiring
    it to be amended.  On the contrary, we consider that the new  materials
    underscore the appropriateness of that guidance.

110. It is clear that the violence in late January/February 2011  in  Harare
    was directed against MDC elements.  That is a  constant  theme  of  the
    emails and egrams.  The evidence that the violence might have  had  any
    wider ambit is sparse and equivocal: e.g. the description of an  attack
    on a bar.  Overall, the Harare violence, as described in  the  totality
    of the evidence now available, is very far  indeed  from  disclosing  a
    state of affairs such  as  was  described  in  RN,  where  the  general
    population in high  density  urban  areas  risked  being  subjected  to
    loyalty challenges, backed up by an immediate threat  of  serious  ill-
    treatment.

111. The new materials do not suggest that the Tribunal in EM was  wrong  to
    conclude, that there was no evidence to indicate militia bases had been
    or were being established in Harare urban areas, so as  to  inflict  on
    the population  the  kind  of  problems  that  arose  during  the  2008
    elections.  On the contrary, the evidence at vol. 1, tab  37  regarding
    use of a private house and an office reinforces what the  Tribunal  had
    to say in EM.

112.  The House of Lords briefing at vol. 4, tab 105 contrasts "thuggery  in
    Harare" with the "setting up of militia camps" and does  not  refer  to
    the setting up of such camps in the capital.  The comment  at  vol.  4,
    tab 103 from the MDC MP about the late January weekend  violence  being
    "the worst she had seen since 2008" cannot properly be read as  a  view
    that the violence was as bad as in 2008; in any event, such a  view  is
    not borne out by the new materials.

113. The new materials underscore the view that ZANU-PF  was  factionalised;
    that the violence in Harare in early 2011 was probably orchestrated  by
    the small clique of hardliners referred to in the  emails  and  egrams;
    and that, as the Tribunal in EM  concluded,  the  pressures  (including
    international)  against  holding  early  elections  proved   the   more
    powerful. As part of Issue 4 below, we examine  what  light  the  fresh
    evidence covering the period up  to  2012  might  shed  on  the  Harare
    disturbances (paragraphs 210-213 below).

Issue 2: Was the  Tribunal  in  EM  entitled  to  find  a  "well-established
evidentially  and  durable  change"  had  arisen  since   the   time   under
consideration in RN?

Introduction

114.     We have already noted that permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal was granted on  this  ground  (ground  4)  but  the  appeal  was
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal without any view being expressed by that
    Court.

115.     In RS and Others (Zimbabwe) (AIDS) CG [2010]  UKUT  363  (IAC)  the
    Upper Tribunal was concerned with the giving  of  Country  Guidance  in
    respect of the position of those in Zimbabwe suffering  from  HIV/AIDS.
    At the hearing the respondent (Secretary  of  State)  argued  that  the
    panel in RS should revisit the general Country Guidance set out in  RN.



116.     In the course of rejecting that proposal, the Tribunal in  RS  said
    this:

         "199.    We do not propose to dwell on this issue.  The  status  of
             RN as the relevant Country Guidance is not a substantive issue
             before us, and we understand that it is likely that later this
             year RN will be revisited.  In any event such evidence  as  we
             have before us to  the  extent  that  we  have  considered  it
             appropriate   to   give   consideration   to   it,   indicates
             sufficiently clearly to our view, that bearing in mind that it
             is limited evidence only, that there is no  reason  to  depart
             from RN as the Country Guidance that  should  lie  behind  our
             decision insofar as it is relevant to do so.  Matters such  as
             the State Department Report of 11 March 2010, and  the  report
             of Professor Ranger, indicate to us sufficiently clearly, that
             bearing in mind the terms of Practice Statement  12,  we  have
             not been provided with the kind of clear  and  cogent  reasons
             which seem to us to be  required  in  cases  involving  issues
             relating to aspects of  country  conditions  as  a  whole  for
             departing from RN as Country Guidance.  It  remains  therefore
             very much of significance in this case as background  (and  in
             some  cases  as  foreground)  to  the  issues  that  we   must
             consider."

117. The effect of previous Country  Guidance  cases  upon  subsequent  such
    cases was addressed in detail by the Tribunal in EM:-

         "69.   For the appellants  in  the  present  case,  Mr  Henderson,
             relying upon paragraph 199 of RS,  submitted  that,  not  only
             should extant Country Guidance provide the starting point, but
             also that it could be departed from only if there were  "clear
             and  cogent  reasons"  for  doing  so.   In  support  of  that
             submission,  Mr  Henderson  relied  upon  what  the   Tribunal
             (Carnwath LJ, Deputy President Ockelton and Senior Immigration
             Judge Storey) had said in paragraph 13(ii) of TK (Tamils -  LP
             updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049:-

             '(ii)    ...all parties should understand that when a case  is
                  set down to review existing Country Guidance,  the  latter
                  is to be taken as a starting-point.  The Tribunal has  not
                  ruled out that in some cases there could be a challenge to
                  the  historic  validity  of  Tribunal   Country   Guidance
                  (although such would require the  production  of  evidence
                  pointing both towards and against  the  accuracy  of  that
                  guidance  at  the  relevant  time:  see  AM  &  AM  (Armed
                  conflict; risk categories) CG Somalia [2008] UKAIT 00091);
                  but that will be rare.  Ordinarily (as here), the  process
                  is incremental: the parties do not seek  to  dispute  that
                  the Tribunal's Country Guidance was valid at the time, but
                  only to argue that it now needs alteration in the light of
                  fresh evidence (see AIT Practice  Direction  18.2).   That
                  being the case,  there  is  no  place  for  the  wholesale
                  reiteration of background country evidence that was before
                  the previous Tribunal.  Expert reports  should  not  trawl
                  over old ground...'

             ... (paragraph 70 recites  the  Practice  direction  noted  at
             paragraph [57]  above).

         71.      The  proposition  that  a  Country  Guidance  case  should
             provide the  "starting  point"  for  a  subsequent  case  that
             relates to the Country  Guidance  issue  is  inherent  in  the
             Practice Direction (and its  AIT  predecessor).   Whether  the
             subsequent case is being "set down to review existing  Country
             Guidance" or not, the effect  of  Practice  Direction  12  and
             section 107(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
             2002 is to require the existing Country Guidance  case  to  be
             authoritative, to the extent that the requirements in Practice
             Direction 12.2(a) and (b) are met. This  is  fully  in  accord
             with what the House of  Lords  (per  Lord  Brown)  held  in  R
             (Hoxha) v Special Adjudicator [2005] UKHL 19. If the  existing
             Country Guidance is such as to favour appellants (to a greater
             or lesser extent), it will in practice be for  the  respondent
             to adduce before a subsequent Tribunal "sufficient material to
             satisfy them" that the position has changed" (Paragraph 66).


         72.      We do not find that the Upper Tribunal's conclusion in  RS
             at paragraph 199 is of assistance to our task in  the  present
             case. There the Upper Tribunal was expressing a view about the
             need for cogent evidence to  depart  from  an  extant  Country
             Guidance case in a case that was not itself intended to  be  a
             Country Guidance case on the  issue  before  us.  The  present
             cases have long been designated Country Guidance on the  issue
             of a change in circumstances since RN, and we are re-examining
             all  material  data  to  inform  ourselves  what  the  present
             evidential  position  is.   We  recognise  that  the   Country
             Guidance system has limitations if extant decisions become out
             of date and not based on  relevant  assessments  as  close  as
             reasonably practicable  to  the  date  of  the  decision.  The
             solution is two fold. First, in individual appeals where there
             is fresh material not available at the  time  of  the  Country
             Guidance the Immigration Judge will be entitled to depart from
             the Country Guidance in the particular case on the basis  that
             the guidance was either not directed to the  particular  issue
             in the subsequent appeals, or the factual  assessment  in  the
             guidance case has now to be updated in the light  of  relevant
             cogent fresh information. Second, it is for  the  Tribunal  to
             identify appeals as suitable for fresh Country Guidance  where
             a fundamental  review  of  all  relevant  material  should  be
             undertaken to see whether  the  situation  has  changed.   The
             observations in TK were directed to the  first  class,  rather
             than setting a test for departure from Country Guidance in all
             circumstances. We nevertheless recognise that where a previous
             assessment has resulted in the conclusion that the  population
             generally or certain sections  of  it  may  be  at  risk,  any
             assessment that the material circumstances have changed  would
             need to demonstrate that such  changes  are  well  established
             evidentially and durable. That is the test that we will  apply
             in our consideration of the material but not as a  preliminary
             reason to decide whether we should revisit RN at all.


         73.      Mr Henderson's related submission regarding RS  was  that,
             with the exception of the FFM report, the  evidence  submitted
             by the respondent to the panel  in  RS  was  in  substance  no
             different  from  that  submitted  to  us;  and  that,  on  any
             reasonable view, developments in Zimbabwe since March 2010 had
             been  a  deterioration  rather  than   an   improvement.    In
             considering this submission, it is important to bear  in  mind
             that, as the RS Tribunal said in paragraph 199, the status  of
             RN as the relevant Country Guidance  was  not  "a  substantive
             issue before us".  The focus in RS  was  the  availability  in
             Zimbabwe of medication for  the  treatment  for  HIV/AIDS  and
             whether  such  availability  was   influenced   by   political
             factors.  A Country Guidance case  provides  guidance  on  the
             issue that the case is considering rather than generally. Some
             of the expert material relied on before us was included in the
             material before the Tribunal in RS where comments  of  a  more
             general nature were made by  the  witnesses  but  that  is  no
             reason for us not to evaluate all the material  now  available
             to decide the issue at stake in the present case. In short  we
             reject the contention that we should not embark on the enquiry
             that follows."

118. What the Tribunal said at  [72]  of  EM  is  not  to  be  construed  as
    imposing some sort of legal "gloss" on Practice Direction 12, so as  to
    place  greater  restrictions  on  a  Tribunal  making  a  "later   'CG'
    determination" than, say, a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  hearing  "any
    subsequent appeal".  It is clear that the Tribunal was not  seeking  to
    set a test to be satisfied before Country Guidance could be varied, but
    merely a means of approaching and evaluating the nature of the  changes
    in the evidence. Where a regime has engaged in persecutory conduct of a
    particular type even for a limited  period,  the  judge  undertaking  a
    subsequent analysis will need to be satisfied that the cessation of the
    conduct was durable before  concluding  that  either  Country  Guidance
    should not be followed or (if engaged in a Country  Guidance  exercise)
    that the Guidance itself needed to be amended. There is no rule of  law
    here but simply an application of the precautionary principle  relating
    to the assessment of reasonable likelihood of harm, where the  previous
    assessment of risk was  itself  based  on  an  unusually  virulent  and
    widespread outburst of persecutory activity dating from June 2008,  the
    nature and duration of which needed to be assessed with care.

The rival submissions

119.     In essence, Mr Henderson's present approach is  the  same  that  he
    adopted in EM.  This is that the Country Guidance in RN  -  which  held
    that risk on return  was  "no  longer  restricted  to  those  who  were
    perceived to be members of the MDC but includes anyone who is unable to
    demonstrate support for or loyalty to the regime or ZANU-PF" - ought to
    have remained Country Guidance  in  early  2011  because:  (a)  the  RN
    guidance took into account the decrease in violence in  the  autumn  of
    2008, compared with the election period  that  year;  and  (b)  ZANU-PF
    remained in control of the State and non-State  instruments  of  power,
    both of which had been used to  terrorise  the  population  during  the
    elections.

120.     The fact that these submissions involved both parties  engaging  in
    a  highly  detailed  exegetic  analysis  of  the  determination  in  RN
    underscores the general observations we have just  made;  nevertheless,
    we shall address those submissions.  For ease of reference, in  Part  1
    of Appendix A to this determination, we set  out  paragraphs  from  RN,
    drawn from (but not confined to) references made  in  those  respective
    submissions.

(a) Decrease in violence since elections

121.     We accept that the Tribunal in RN arrived at its  Country  Guidance
    regarding the risk of a "loyalty test" in the light of  the  diminished
    levels of violence in Zimbabwe in the autumn  of  2008,  following  the
    presidential elections in June.  This does not, however, mean,  as  the
    appellant in effect contends, that those  lower,  autumn  figures  form
    some sort of binding benchmark,  restricting  the  ability  of  the  EM
    Tribunal to find that there was not, in 2011,  any  current  nationwide
    real risk of facing such a loyalty test.

122.      As  is  apparent  from  various  passages  in  RN,  the   Tribunal
    considered that, even after  the  elections,  the  problems  from  ill-
    disciplined militias, that had been unleashed in both urban  and  rural
    areas during the election period, and the problem of roadblocks and no-
    go areas in rural parts, established during that period,  continued  to
    be present risks. Thus, at [122] the Tribunal stated that

         "it is no longer the professional security staff at Harare  Airport
         who are the main concern for returnees, it is the  ill-disciplined,
         irrational and unpredictably violent militias to be confronted upon
         return to the home area" (our emphasis).

    At [123] it was found that it was "not hard to see how anyone returning
    from the  United  Kingdom  would  be  associated  with  the  hysterical
    propaganda that continues to be peddled  to  these  various  groups  or
    militias  who  appear  to  be  acting  with  impunity"(our   emphasis).




123. At [198] the Tribunal considered that the power sharing  agreement  had
    not yet resulted in any significant change and that the regime appeared
    to be intent on recovering control  of  Parliament  and  retaining  the
    presidency "by keeping in place and by continuing to exercise  militias
    and party machinery that were deployed following the March  elections".
    We shall deal in due course with the issue relating to control of state
    and party machinery.  So far  as  militia  activities  were  concerned,
    however, the Tribunal in EM at [141] to [158] set  out  cogent  reasons
    why, as of early 2011, the population of Zimbabwe was not, as a general
    matter, facing a real risk of loyalty challenges from  militias  and/or
    at roadblocks.

124. At [218] of RN the Tribunal found that the violence set  in  motion  in
    2008 was not limited to delivering victory to Mugabe in the runoff vote
    but also to ensuring:

         "that the MDC support base was sufficiently dismantled as to ensure
         that it ceased to exist in a meaningful way as to remain  a  threat
         to ZANU-PF's hold on power.  That explains why, notwithstanding the
         talks taking place following the memorandum  of  understanding  and
         the fact that the elections are, for now at least,  concluded,  the
         violence continues".

125.     The appellant relies on the sentence which follows:

         "Although this violence is not at the level seen during the  summer
         of this year, everything remains in place for it  to  be  repeated,
         should the regime deem this necessary".

126. The RN Tribunal continued as follows:-

         "219. We are satisfied that the militias  have  established  no  go
             areas and road blocks to  ensure that abuses that continue  in
             rural areas where the MDC had made inroads  into  the  Zanu-PF
             vote go unreported wherever possible  and  so  that  displaced
             people are not allowed to return to their home areas.


         220.     For these reasons we do not see that there can be said  to
             be an end  in  sight  to  the  real  risk  of  violence  being
             perpetrated on those identified as disloyal to the regime  and
             therefore as potential supporters of the MDC.


         221.     As we have  seen, by the time the hearing  was  reconvened
             on 30th October  such  a  power  sharing  agreement  had  been
             reached but, for the reasons given above, that has not led  us
             to  a  different  conclusion  from  that  we  reached  at  the
             conclusion of the first part of the hearing when we  initially
             reserved our decision.


         222.  Even though a form of agreement has now been reached in these
             talks, it remains to be seen whether that will bring about any
             reduction  in  the  level  of  risk  to  those  not  able   to
             demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF. After all, the  Memorandum  of
             Understanding that was signed by Mr Mugabe on  behalf  of  his
             party and the regime contained assurances about the  cessation
             of  politically  related  violence  but  that  has  not   been
             delivered. It is not readily apparent how the militias and War
             Veterans who have been meting out violence would be  disbanded
             without  genuine  commitment  by  Mr  Mugabe  and  his  senior
             supporters to the sharing of power. It  is  evident  from  the
             failure to implement the power sharing agreement that no  such
             intention presently exists.


         223.  For these reasons we are not satisfied that the power sharing
             agreement has given rise in itself to any  significant  change
             on the ground in Zimbabwe, so far as international  protection
             issues are concerned. There is, moreover, no evidence to  show
             that, in the absence of more effective  foreign  political  or
             other political pressure, the position  is  likely  to  change
             spontaneously."


127. Taking these passages as a whole, the clear  picture  that  emerges  is
    that it was too early to conclude in the autumn of 2008 that the  risks
    that had arisen in June 2008 had disappeared, particularly where  there
    were instances  of  the  survival  of  the  same  kind  of  harm  being
    perpetrated by or otherwise involving  the  very  instruments  of  harm
    (viz. militias; war veterans;  road  blocks)  that  had  delivered  the
    violence that summer.

128.     At [227] the Tribunal in RN considered the nature  of  the  loyalty
    test. Production of a ZANU-PF card  was  likely  to  suffice  where  an
    individual was  confronted  with  such  a  demand,  for  example  at  a
    roadblock.   At [228] it was found that people living "in high  density
    urban areas will face the same risk from marauding gangs of militias or
    war veterans as do those living in  the  rural  areas,  save  that  the
    latter are possibly at greater risk if their area has  been  designated
    as a no-go area by the militias".

129.      Accordingly,  we  consider  that  the  Tribunal  in  RN  made  its
    assessment of a real risk of facing a loyalty test or challenge on  the
    basis that, notwithstanding the  falling  off  of  violence  since  the
    summer of 2008, roadblocks, marauding gangs and militias were still, in
    effect, "on the  ground"  in  Zimbabwe.  So  far  as  urban  areas  are
    concerned, that assessment is graphically borne out at [190] and [192],
    where the Tribunal cited evidence from late September 2008 that  "ZANU-
    PF torture bases are still operational in Mbare (a high density  suburb
    of Harare)" (our emphasis).

130.     As can be  seen,  one  of  the  factors  underpinning  the  Country
    Guidance in RN was the perception that, in late 2008, in the  immediate
    aftermath of the  power-sharing  agreement,  Mugabe  and  ZANU-PF  were
    intent on using the  oppressive  agents  brought  to  bear  during  the
    election campaign, in order to eradicate the  power  of  the  MDC.   By
    early 2011, by contrast, it was manifest that any  such  aim  had  long
    since failed: see [149]  of  EM.   There  was  also  highly  compelling
    evidence, including from the appellants, that roadblocks were no longer
    a real risk: [152] and [153].  So far  as  Harare  was  concerned,  the
    Tribunal in EM likewise had cogent evidence before it to indicate that,
    even  during  problematic  periods  such  as  the  COPAC  (Constitution
    Parliamentary Committee) campaign and the unrest  in  early  2011,  the
    position in high density areas remained materially different  from  the
    period under consideration in RN. This can be seen by reading [159]  to
    [173], [176], [201] to [205] and [243] of  the  EM  determination  (set
    out,  for  ease  of  reference,  in  Part  2  of  Appendix  A  to  this
    determination). So far as the unrest in early 2011  is  concerned,  see
    also paragraphs 102 to 106 above.

(b)  ZANU-PF control of relevant instruments of power

131. As we have already seen,  Mr  Henderson  placed  considerable  reliance
    upon this sentence in [218] of RN:  quoted at paragraph 125  above.  In
    short,  the  appellant's  submissions  are  that  since  ZANU-PF  still
    effectively controls the CIO, army, police, so-called war veterans  and
    various youth groups, the Tribunal in EM was not entitled to find there
    had been a "durable change" since the period considered in RN.

132. We do not agree. There is a danger of an inappropriate and  mechanistic
    imposition of a date beyond which the evidence must have  significantly
    changed. It is  an  illustration  of  the  dangers  of  treating  every
    utterance  by  a  Tribunal  in  a  Country  Guidance  determination  as
    constituting some kind of ratio decidendi that is  binding  on  another
    Tribunal giving later Country Guidance in respect of the same  country.
    In fact, [218] of RN is not even part of the Country Guidance issued by
    that Tribunal; the Country Guidance conclusions are at [258] to [264].

133.     The future assessment of risk in the guidance given in  RN  was  as
    follows:-

         "263. Although a power sharing agreement has been signed between Mr
             Mugabe on behalf of Zanu-PF and Mr Tsvangirai on behalf of the
             MDC, it is too early to say that will remove the real risk  of
             serious harm we have identified for  anyone  now  returned  to
             Zimbabwe who is not  able  to  demonstrate  allegiance  to  or
             association with the Zimbabwean regime.


         264.     Further  international  intervention  or  some  unforeseen
             upheaval inside Zimbabwe itself may change the  position,  for
             example, by giving the MDC real control of the police. In such
             an eventuality  it  will  be  for  judicial  fact  finders  to
             determine the extent to which the evidence before them differs
             from that which is before us, pending fresh Country  Guidance:
             see Practice Direction 18.2."

 134. Two matters are noteworthy.  First, at [263] the RN Tribunal  adopted,
    in effect, the approach described at [72] of EM; namely, to ask whether
    the then recent making of the power-sharing  agreement  between  Messrs
    Mugabe  and  Tsvangirai  constituted  a  well-established  and  durable
    change, such as to remove the real risk of serious harm.  In the autumn
    of  2008,  only  a  matter  of  weeks  after  the   unprecedented   and
    internationally-condemned violence of  the  elections  period,  it  was
    plainly appropriate to adopt the "precautionary" approach  set  out  at
    [263].  In assessing the durability  of  a  state  of  affairs,  it  is
    obviously relevant to take account of how long that  state  of  affairs
    has, so far, endured.  It would clearly not have  been  right  for  the
    Tribunal in RN to have decided that the state of  affairs  in  Zimbabwe
    had materially changed, on the basis  of  a  recent  and  unprecedented
    arrangement between hostile parties, that was yet to be implemented and
    when many informed observers  were  sceptical  as  to  its  ability  to
    deliver any tangible results.

135. A similar precautionary approach by the Tribunal can  be  seen  in  the
    Country Guidance given  in  AMM  and  Others  (Conflicts;  humanitarian
    crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC),  where  the
    Tribunal decided in the autumn of 2011, that it  was,  in  effect,  too
    soon to say that the  withdrawal  of  conventional  Al-Shabab  fighting
    forces from Mogadishu in early August 2011 meant there was no longer in
    that city any real risk to civilians, of the kind described in  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

136.  By contrast, the Tribunal in EM was assessing the  position  over  two
    years after the end of the period considered in RN.   The  position  on
    the ground in Zimbabwe had, for some significant time, been  different.
    The  power-sharing  agreement  had  given  rise  to  the   transitional
    government, with several ministries being occupied by MDC members.  The
    feared eradication of the MDC as a political force  had  not  happened.
    International (especially regional) pressure was being brought to  bear
    on Mugabe and Zanu-PF. As [157] of EM  noted,  the  British  Ambassador
    could say in September 2010: "Had we in the chaos and violence of  2008
    been offered a glimpse of the Zimbabwe of today, there is little  doubt
    we would have seized it.  Tsvangirai, harshly criticised for going into
    the coalition, has been proved right."

137. Accordingly, even though the instruments of  relevant  State  and  non-
    State control remained in Zanu-PF's hands (a point  reiterated  in  the
    new materials: eg vol. 4, tab 148), the Tribunal  in  EM  was  properly
    able to conclude that the previous finding regarding a nationwide  risk
    of a loyalty test for those who were opposed or indifferent to  Zanu-PF
    required to be amended. The amendments were, essentially, in respect of
    the risk in certain urban areas, and  in  Matabeleland.  In  the  rural
    Eastern provinces, Zanu-PF's control (as a general matter)  meant  that
    the real risk of serious adverse attention (and, thus,  harm)  remained
    in the case of a person without Zanu-PF connections,  albeit  that  the
    immediate means for delivering such harm  (in  particular,  roadblocks)
    might not be the same, compared with the time of RN.

138. The second matter concerns the guidance at  [264]  of  RN.   Here,  the
    Tribunal gave an indication of what, from its vantage point in 2008, it
    considered might cause the generalised real risk of a loyalty  test  or
    challenge to change.  In no sense can [264] be regarded as  an  attempt
    by the RN Tribunal to circumscribe the  ambit  of  any  future  Country
    Guidance analysis on Zimbabwe.  The appellant appears to point  to  the
    fact that there has been no assumption of control over  the  police  by
    the MDC as necessarily demonstrating that there has not been a "durable
    change" since RN.  We do not accept that  submission.  If  the  comment
    regarding the police has the force for  which  Mr  Henderson  contends,
    then the logic of his position would be that, if the MDC were  to  gain
    control of the police, a subsequent Country Guidance Tribunal would  be
    required to find there had been a durable change in  generalised  risk,
    even though other factors might have dictated otherwise.  In any event,
    read as a whole, [264] makes it  plain  that  the  Tribunal  was  there
    distinguishing between the approach to be taken by, on  the  one  hand,
    judicial fact-finders operating under Practice Direction 12.2  and,  on
    the other, a future Country Guidance Tribunal, which would be assessing
    in-depth the wide-ranging background evidence that is a feature of most
    Country Guidance cases.

139.     For these reasons, we are fully satisfied that the Tribunal  in  EM
    asked itself the  right  question,  considered  the  relevant  evidence
    comparing the position in 2008 and 2011 and made no error  in  reaching
    the conclusions it did. It was entitled to reach the findings it  made,
    applying the approach it described at [72] of  its  determination.   We
    have already decided that the disclosure material as a  whole  did  not
    undermine that conclusion and we will consider whether anything in  the
    fresh evidence submitted to us has that effect under Issue 4 below.

Issue 3:  Did the use of  anonymous  evidence  in  EM  render  the  decision
    unfair or unreliable?

140.     At the hearing in  2010  the  Tribunal  received  in  evidence  the
    report of a Fact Finding  Mission  (FFM)  made  by  UKBA  officials  to
    Zimbabwe with  FCO  support.  Various  problems  were  identified  with
    aspects of the information recorded but by the end of  the  hearing  we
    were satisfied that the information contained in Appendix D represented
    a fair summary of the  exchanges  between  the  investigators  and  the
    informants.

141.        The    FFM    interviewed    members    of     the     following
    organisations/individuals:

         1.   Zim Rights 5 Aug 2010.
         2.   An anonymous organisation 3 August 2010.
         3.   Research and Advocacy Unit 17 August 2010.
         4.   Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe 17 August 2010.
         5.   Zimbabwe Association Doctors for Human Rights 12 August 2010.
         6.   Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights 12 August 2010
         7.   Counselling Services Unit   12 August 2010
         8.   An organisation referred to in the report as an international
             organisation but whose identity and stature was known to the
             appellants 12 August 2010.
         9.   An organisation in Zimbabwe 11 August 2010.
         10.  A major NGO 11 August 2010.
         11.  Zimbabwe Human Rights Forum 13 August 2010.
         12.  Catholic Commission for Peace and Justice Zimbabwe 11 August
             2010.
         13.  Anastasia Moyo, human rights activist 16 August 2010.
         14.      Bulawayo Progressive Residents Association 16 August 2010.
         15.      An organisation referred to as a faith based organisation
             but whose identity and stature was known to the appellants 16
             August 2010.
         16.      Major international humanitarian organisation 17 August
             2010.
         17.      Commercial Farmers Union 12 August 2010.
         18.    Radio Dialogue 16 August 2010.


142.     The Tribunal was informed that the six un-named  organisations  had
    indicated a wish to remain anonymous because  any  publicity  given  to
    their comments on events inside the country  might  be  prejudicial  to
    their ability to work in Zimbabwe and  the  best  interests  of  people
    working with and for them. By the time of the hearing only four of  the
    six remained unknown to the  appellants.  The  details  of  the  "major
    international  humanitarian   organisation"   became   known   to   the
    appellant's witness W 66. In summary, the FFM recorded information from
    18 organisations or individuals who worked for NGOs active in Zimbabwe,
    of which 15 were known to the appellants  or  their  witness  and  were
    acknowledged to be appropriate interlocutors for the purpose of the FFM
    inquiry.  In  substance,  therefore,  three  such  organisations   were
    anonymous in the sense that their identities were known to the FFM  and
    the respondent but not to the appellants or the Tribunal.

143. In addition the FFM  interviewed  seven  people  who  had  returned  to
    Zimbabwe  voluntarily  with  the  assistance   of   the   International
    Organisation for Migration.

144.     During the hearing in EM the appellants questioned  the  weight  to
    be adduced to the evidence of anonymous organisations. We noted at [96]

         "Four of the  interviewees  in  the  FFM  report  asked  to  remain
         anonymous.  Mr Henderson questioned the weight that could be placed
         upon these, particularly in the light of his submissions  regarding
         Practice Direction 10."

145.  The  reference  to  Practice  Direction  10  was  an  attempt  by  the
    appellants to submit that country information could only be  introduced
    into the hearing when it complied with the conditions for the admission
    of an expert's report. We rejected that submission  and  there  was  no
    appeal from that conclusion. No other legal principles were cited.

146.  The  Tribunal  addressed  the  issue  of  weight  at  [97]  to  [102].
    Following the promulgation of this decision the European Court of Human
    Rights published its judgment in the  case of Sufi and  Elmi  v  United
    Kingdom [2011] ECHR 1045  28 June 2011.  Reliance was  placed  on  this
    authority by those appellants who appealed to the Court of Appeal.

147. This case was concerned with country conditions in Somalia with a  view
    to assessing Article 3 risk to individuals liable  to  be  returned  to
    Mogadishu.  A material part of the information  before  the  Court  was
    information derived in Kenya from  anonymous  organisations  apparently
    operating in Somalia. This lead to a submission by the  applicants  and
    an adjudication on the issue in the following terms:

         "3. The weight to be attached to the  report  of  the  fact-finding
             mission to Nairobi (see paragraph 80, above)

         (a)  The parties' submissions
         227. The applicants submitted that  following  NA.  v.  the  United
             Kingdom, no. 25904/07,  118 - 122,  17  July  2008,  BAILII:
             [2008] ECHR 616, little or no weight should be attached to the
             report of  the  fact-finding  mission  as  it  did  not  visit
             Somalia, did not appear to contact anyone in Somalia, and  the
             majority of "sources" were anonymous, identified only  as  "an
             international  NGO",  "a diplomatic  source",  or  "security
             advisors". No information was provided about the extent of the
             sources'  presence  in  Somalia,  their  roles  within   their
             respective organisations, or the type of work  (if  any)  that
             they carried out in Somalia. This was of particular concern on
             account of  the  fact  that  so  few  international  NGOs  and
             diplomatic missions had any presence in Somalia.
         228. In response, the Government  submitted  that  such  criticisms
             were misplaced and  unjustified.  Although  they  acknowledged
             that the mission did not travel to Somalia, they claimed  that
             this was pursuant  to  advice  provided  by  the  Foreign  and
             Commonwealth Office which  warned  British  nationals  against
             travel to Somalia. The Mission went instead to Nairobi,  which
             was the location of the African  Headquarters  of  the  United
             Nations, the location of the highest concentration  of  inter-
             governmental and non-governmental organisations  operating  in
             and with  daily  contact  to  the  situation  in  Somalia.  In
             Nairobi, the  Mission  was  able  to  interview  a  number  of
             contacts who had recently returned to  Nairobi  from  Somalia,
             some of whom had been in Somalia for a number of weeks in  the
             period immediately preceding the mission.
         229. The Government  further  acknowledged  that  the  majority  of
             sources were not named in the report. However, they  submitted
             that anonymity had been granted at  the  sources'  request  as
             they were concerned about the risk  to  their  operations  and
             staff and they asked the Court to take notice of the fact that
             the sources cited in the report by the  Norwegian  Directorate
             of Immigration were also anonymous.

         (b)  The Court's assessment
         230. In assessing the weight to be attributed to country  material,
             consideration must be given to its source, in  particular  its
             independence,  reliability  and  objectivity.  In  respect  of
             reports, the authority  and  reputation  of  the  author,  the
             seriousness of the investigations by means of which they  were
             compiled, the  consistency  of  their  conclusions  and  their
             corroboration by other sources are all relevant considerations
             (Saadi v. Italy [GC], no. 37201/06,    143,  ECHR  2008 ..,
             BAILII: [2008] ECHR 179. and NA. v. the United Kingdom,  cited
             above,  120).
         231. The Court also recognises that consideration must be given  to
             the presence and reporting capacities of  the  author  of  the
             material in the country in  question.  In  this  respect,  the
             Court observes that States (whether the respondent State in  a
             particular case or any other  Contracting  or  non-Contracting
             State), through their diplomatic missions and their ability to
             gather information, will often be  able  to  provide  material
             which may be highly relevant to the Court's assessment of  the
             case before it. It finds  that  the  same  consideration  must
             apply, a fortiori,  in  respect  of  agencies  of  the  United
             Nations,  particularly  given  their  direct  access  to   the
             authorities of the country of destination  as  well  as  their
             ability to carry out on-site inspections and assessments in  a
             manner which States and non-governmental organisations may not
             be able to do.
         232.  The  Court  appreciates  the  many  difficulties   faced   by
             governments and NGOs gathering information  in  dangerous  and
             volatile situations. It accepts that it  will  not  always  be
             possible for investigations to be carried out in the immediate
             vicinity  of  a  conflict  and,  in  such  cases,  information
             provided by sources with first-hand knowledge of the situation
             may have to be relied  on.  The  Court  will  not,  therefore,
             disregard a report simply on account  of  the  fact  that  its
             author did not visit the area in question and  instead  relied
             on information provided by sources.
         234.  That  being  said,  where  a  report  is  wholly  reliant  on
             information provided by sources, the authority and  reputation
             of those sources and the  extent  of  their  presence  in  the
             relevant area will  be  relevant  factors  for  the  Court  in
             assessing the weight to be attributed to their  evidence.  The
             Court recognises that  where  there  are  legitimate  security
             concerns, sources may wish to remain  anonymous.  However,  in
             the absence  of  any  information  about  the  nature  of  the
             sources' operations in the relevant area, it will be virtually
             impossible  for  the  Court  to  assess   their   reliability.
             Consequently, the approach taken by the Court will  depend  on
             the consistency of the sources' conclusions with the remainder
             of the available information. Where the  sources'  conclusions
             are consistent with other country information, their  evidence
             may be  of  corroborative  weight.  However,  the  Court  will
             generally  exercise  caution  when  considering  reports  from
             anonymous sources which are inconsistent with the remainder of
             the information before it.
         235. In the present case the Court observes that the description of
             the sources relied on by the fact-finding mission is vague. As
             indicated by the applicants,  the  majority  of  sources  have
             simply been described either as  "an  international  NGO",  "a
             diplomatic source", or "a security advisor". Such descriptions
             give no indication of  the  authority  or  reputation  of  the
             sources or of the extent of their  presence  in  southern  and
             central Somalia. This is of particular concern in the  present
             case, where it is accepted that the presence of  international
             NGOs and diplomatic missions in southern and  central  Somalia
             is limited. It is therefore impossible for the Court to  carry
             out any assessment of  the  sources'  reliability  and,  as  a
             consequence,  where  their  information  is   unsupported   or
             contradictory, the  Court  is  unable  to  attach  substantial
             weight to it."
148. Paragraphs [230] and [231] of Sufi above are in substantially the  same
    terms as  paragraphs 120 and 121 of  NA v United  Kingdom  [2008]  ECHR
    616  that were adopted as relevant guidance by the AIT in TK (Tamils-LP
     updated-Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 49. In so far as the Court  in  Sufi
    and Elmi was applying its own guidelines in NA v  United  Kingdom,  its
    decision was not a new development. As we have noted the Tribunal in EM
    explained why in each case the anonymous source was capable of carrying
    weight albeit that  the  weight  actually  applied  to  each  piece  of
    information provided varied.

149. In his submissions, the appellant relies on the decision  in  Sufi  and
    Elmi to attack the Tribunal's observations in EM at  [145]  and  [198].
    These passages are concerned with assessment of a  partial  improvement
    in police performance.

150. At [145] the Tribunal was summarising the evidence on the issue:

         "The anonymous organisation interviewed  by  the  FFM  team  on  11
         August 2010  (No 9   above)  spoke  of  people  in  Zimbabwe  being
         "tentative about the  current  peace  and  ...  aware  that  it  is
         fragile".  Again, however, there was concern about  the  "potential
         for violence in many rural  communities".   There  was  a  "general
         opinion that [the police] are less tolerant of political  violence"
         than in the past; although the evidence  overall  means  that  that
         last remark must be treated with considerable caution.   There  is,
         however, support for it in the view of the major NGO interviewed on
         11 August (No 10  above) , which considered  that  in  urban  areas
         "the  police  are  more  likely  to  intervene  to  stop  political
         violence, whoever the perpetrator".  The Zimbabwe Human Rights  NGO
         Forum  considered  that   there   were   problems   regarding   the
         constitutional outreach process (about which we shall have more  to
         say);  but  that  otherwise  "levels  of  political  violence   are
         currently low, with more emphasis on threats  along  the  lines  of
         stay in line or expect to face worse violence than in  2008".   The
         Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace Zimbabwe considered  that
         there  was  "little  actual  political  violence  at  the  moment",
         although this was said to be because the population  had  been  "so
         cowed by previous violence that they are afraid to do the  sort  of
         things that would provoke further actual violence".  Whilst we have
         tempered the weight to be placed on the views of  Bulawayo  Agenda,
         so far as more general issues are  concerned,  it  is  nevertheless
         noteworthy that they considered that threats and physical  violence
         within Matabeleland North and South, Bulawayo,  Midlands,  Masvingo
         and Manicaland had declined since the formation of the GNU.  By the
         same  token,  the  Bulawayo   Progressive   Residents   Association
         considered the current situation to be "peaceful - for the  moment,
         at least.  Violence is much less widespread  and  the  violence  is
         less open."

151. At [198] it reached its conclusions on comparative  political  violence
    between 2008 and 2010:

         "Harare and Bulawayo are, by some margin, the main urban centres in
         Zimbabwe, each having  the  status  of  a  Province.   Our  general
         assessment of the evidence before us is  that,  in  both  of  these
         cities, ZANU-PF's inclination and ability to control and coerce the
         population is significantly less than in the rural  areas  of,  for
         example, Mashonaland and Manicaland, where the party has  not  lost
         hope of securing electoral success.  We have already described  the
         events regarding the COPAC outreach meetings in  Harare.   Although
         there was some  violence  involving  the  September  meetings,  the
         outreach process was quickly postponed when violence flared.   This
         lends  support  to  the  view  of  those,  such  as  the  anonymous
         organisation in Zimbabwe quoted in the FFM report, that the  police
         are generally better disciplined and  less  tolerant  of  political
         violence, in the main urban areas.  We have also noted the evidence
         in the  "A  Place  in  the  Sun"  report,  concerning  the  greater
         independence of magistrates in those areas, which found support  in
         the evidence of Professor Ranger.  The October meetings  in  Harare
         went off without any significant violence, albeit  that  they  fell
         far short of COPAC's wish to engender full  and  frank  discussions
         between the rival political parties" (our emphasis).

152. Thus what the Tribunal was doing at [145] was noting a range  of  views
    on police response to politically motivated violence and recording that
    the views of organisation 9 were supported by those of organisation 10.
    In its  conclusions  at  [198]  it  was  identifying  open  uncontested
    information about the response to violence at a COPAC outreach  meeting
    as supportive of a view expressed by an informant from organisation  9.
    That informant's views  were  not  unique  or  eccentric  but  directly
    supported by organisation  10  who  drew  attention  to  the  extensive
    monitoring  by  civil  society  and  its  institutions  of  politically
    motivated violence in Zimbabwe as a restraining factor on Zanu-PF.

153. Further it should be noted that this was part of the assessment of  the
    general background to personal security in Zimbabwe and did not form  a
    specific part of the guidance issued. The issue in question was  not  a
    free standing assessment of the current state of police discipline  and
    independence  but  whether  the  incidence  of  politically   motivated
    violence had reduced in the urban centres, for  which  there  was  near
    unanimity of view between informants.

154. The Tribunal was not, therefore, giving decisive or undue weight  to  a
    single unsupported source.  Moreover  the  interview  process  elicited
    details of the extent to which the two organisations referred  to  were
    able to operate in Zimbabwe. Organisation 9 was able to operate  freely
    throughout Zimbabwe and the environment had improved over the  last  18
    months but mostly within a year  of  the  political  agreement.   Where
    there were directives from local officials to stop working  in  limited
    cases, the problem could be overcome through negotiation. There were  a
    few districts where  access  was  not  granted  but  these  were  small
    geographical areas.  Organisation 10  said  it  was  'able  to  operate
    freely in respect of some aspects of its operations but in relation  to
    work  with  IDPs  (internally  displaced  persons)   there   are   some
    constraints on physical aspects to some areas. They are often  overcome
    through local explanation and negotiations but concerns remain and  the
    situation is expected to get worse as  the  next  elections  approach'.
    There is thus nothing inconsistent between the use the Tribunal made of
    the two organisations in question and  the  guidance  in  NA  v  United
    Kingdom repeated in Sufi and Elmi v United Kingdom.

155. At [44] of the appellant's skeleton argument he appears to  go  further
    than the Strasbourg Court and submit that  a  fair  hearing  compatible
    with the standards of  Article 47 of  the  EU  Charter  on  Fundamental
    Rights precludes any reliance on anonymous evidence in asylum  appeals.
    This cannot be right. Neither the ECHR nor the EU Charter amount  to  a
    detailed code for the admissibility of evidence in asylum appeals, such
    matters are largely for national  law  to  determine  and   the  United
    Kingdom's  Procedure  Rules  enable  the  Tribunal   to   receive   any
    information  whether  admissible   in   civil   proceedings   or   not.
    Flexibility in receiving relevant information where the subject  matter
    concerns people  and  places  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom  is  an
    important aspect of Tribunal justice. With the  exception  of  evidence
    demonstrated to have been obtained by torture, human  rights  norms  do
    not mandate exclusion of evidence in proceedings that are not  criminal
    in character. The analogy with proceedings by or against  the  security
    services is again misconceived, as  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    seeking to make out a case against or defend a claim by  the  appellant
    by use of secret evidence.

156. For the reasons given by the European Court of Human Rights in  NA  and
    the passages repeated in Sufi and Elmi, in asylum determination,  there
    are sound reasons why sources who may have valuable information to give
    to diplomatic missions, international organisations like UNHCR or  non-
    governmental organisations like Amnesty International would wish to  do
    so under conditions of anonymity. In some cases  an  order  prohibiting
    the publication of the sources may  suffice  to  give  re-assurance  in
    others it may not. Where they do not, potential sources of concern  may
    not always be confined  to  government  agents  and  their  supporters.
    Providing  information  to  an  appellant  or  his  legal  team  on   a
    confidential basis  may  thus  provide  the  source  with  satisfactory
    protection.

157. Anonymous material is not  infrequently  relied  on  by  appellants  as
    indicative of deteriorating conditions or general  risk.  The  Tribunal
    should be free to accept such material but will do its best to evaluate
    by reference to what  if  anything  is  known  about  the  source,  the
    circumstances in which information was given and the overall context of
    the issues it relates to and the rest of the evidence available.

158. The problem is not one of admissibility of  such  material  as  forming
    part of the background data from which risk assessments are  made,  but
    the weight to be attached to such data. It is common sense  and  common
    justice that the less that is known about a source  and  its  means  of
    acquiring information, the more hesitant should a Tribunal judge be  to
    afford   anonymous   unsupported   assessment    substantial    weight,
    particularly where it conflicts with assessment from sources  known  to
    be reliable. In our judgment it is neither possible nor desirable to be
    more prescriptive than this, and the task of evaluation of weight is  a
    matter for the judgment of an expert Tribunal that is  regularly  asked
    to take into account un-sourced data whether submitted by claimants  or
    respondents. Provided a judge  is  alert  to  the  problems  caused  by
    anonymous evidence and the principles we have summarised above,  we  do
    not consider that an issue of law arises.

159. The report of the FFM under consideration in EM  was  not  a  model  of
    best practice in a number of respects, many of which  were  exposed  at
    the hearing. We were, however, satisfied that the informants with  whom
    contact was made were selected in good faith by the  mission  with  the
    assistance of locally based diplomats. We  were  also  satisfied   that
    ultimately the interlocutors (whether they wished to be  quoted  in  an
    individual or representative capacity)  were  content  with  the  final
    version of the summaries of their information and knew the  context  in
    which it was being gathered (cf [106] to [107] in EM).

160. By contrast with the position pertaining in Sufi and Elmi, each of  the
    four anonymous organisations had  a  presence  in  Zimbabwe  and  brief
    descriptions had been supplied of their status and  ability  to  gather
    information. The  informants  in  the  report  were  not  predominantly
    anonymous.  The known sources were all reputable  and  independent  and
    had the capacity to supply relevant data within the area  or  field  of
    their operation. We had no reason to suspect that unknown sources  were
    different in kind to known, and in  respect  of  organisation  16  this
    seems to have been  accepted  by  W66.   To  reject  anything  said  by
    informants from the unknown group on the basis  that  it  was  possible
    that they alone were not independent, objective, or had the capacity to
    acquire the information they were passing on, would be  very  close  to
    questioning the good faith of the respondent in  submitting  this  data
    for our assessment.

161. In summary,  we are satisfied that the use we made of  Organisations  9
    and 10 on the passages under challenge was  not  unlawful,  unfair,  an
    irrational exercise of judgment or in breach of the general  principles
    set out in NA v United Kingdom and approved by the AIT and  the  higher
    courts in the United Kingdom.

162. There is no need for this panel to be drawn  into  a  consideration  of
    whether the application of those principles by the  European  Court  of
    Human Rights in Sufi and Elmi is something that should generally  apply
    in UK Country Guidance cases.  In our judgment the issues in the  case,
    the degree of reliance on the  reports   from  anonymous  organisations
    contacted outside Somalia and the lack of  any  information  about  how
    those organisations acquired information in Somalia are all  materially
    different from the present issues of evaluation, as is  the  comparison
    between the activities of civil society in urban  Zimbabwe and Somalia.

163. Our legal duty is to take account of Strasbourg decisions  rather  than
    invariably apply every last conclusion, and  this  is  particularly  so
    where the subject matter of the  decision  is  weight  to  assigned  to
    evidence rather than the formulation of general principles of approach.
    We note the concerns expressed by another constitution of this Tribunal
    in AMM and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
    Somalia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  445  (IAC)  and  recognise  that  an   over-
    prescriptive approach may undermine developing state  practice  in  the
    European  Union,  where  cooperation  with  informants  in  places   of
    potential danger is likely to require assurances of anonymity.

164. We accept that where reliance is placed on  informants  from  anonymous
    organisations and an undertaking of confidentiality is  not  sufficient
    to give assurance to the informant to cooperate with the investigation,
    the respondent should normally give all reasonable  assistance  to  the
    appellant and the Tribunal in evaluating the nature, size, capacity and
    independence of the source in question, and the  extent  to  which  its
    opinions are supported or contradicted by others.

165. Where there is a breach of recognised guidelines and best  practice  it
    is open to the judge deciding an asylum appeal to afford no  weight  to
    unsupported anonymous material because no realistic assessment  can  be
    made of its reliability.  However, this is a  fact  sensitive  case  by
    case assessment and not the application of a general exclusionary rule:
    see by analogy the  observations  of  Elias  LJ  with  respect  to  the
    admissibility of a child's asylum interview in AN and FA v SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1636 at [160] to [173], with which Maurice Kay and  Black  LJJ
    agreed at [184] and [124] respectively.

166. Accordingly, this ground of appeal fails  as  a  reason  to  set  aside
    either the conclusions on individual risk or the general guidance given
    in EM and quoted at the beginning of this determination.

Issue 4: What is the impact of any of the above and/or  any  fresh  evidence
adduced in the individual appeal of CM?

Introduction

167.     As formulated in the Tribunal's directions of September  2012,  the
    fourth issue in these proceedings is to  determine  CM's  international
    protection case in the light of (a) the conclusions we reach about  the
    current status of EM and the Country  Guidance  as  assessed  at  March
    2011; and (b) any fresh evidence adduced as to the position in Zimbabwe
    as at October 2012. Those directions also specifically  envisaged  that
    the fresh evidence would be analysed by the Tribunal in  order  to  see
    whether it has any effect on the position in Zimbabwe as at March 2011:
    ie whether the Country  Guidance  in  EM  requires  amendment  in  that
    respect. Finally, the directions made it clear that  the  Tribunal  was
    not minded to give any Country Guidance regarding the  position  as  at
    October 2012. Both parties have assembled their fresh evidence on  that
    basis. To have attempted to give up to date Country Guidance would have
    led to an unacceptable delay in resolving the important  issue  of  the
    status of EM and its Country Guidance.

168.  That said, we recognise that any analysis of the  fresh  evidence  may
    have a bearing, not merely  on  the  fate  of  CM's  appeal,  but  more
    generally; and, because  this  determination  will  be  reported,  that
    decision makers, claimants and judicial fact-finders may have regard to
    it, for what we say about various issues, such as the present state  of
    Harare. As a result, we set out at the  end  of  this  section  of  the
    determination what we describe as country information on  Zimbabwe,  as
    at  October  2012  (paragraph  214  below).  We  emphasise  that   this
    information is not to be treated as statutorily  authoritative.  It  is
    not Country Guidance within the terms of Practice Direction 12. It  is,
    however, both a source of evidence and a statement of the findings of a
    Presidential panel on that evidence; no more, no less.

Nature of the fresh evidence

169.  Both sides adduced oral  and  documentary  evidence.  The  documentary
    evidence included witness statements


     from the appellant:

        i.   Mr Mavhinga *
        ii.  Witness 77*
        iii. Witness 66
        iv.  Mr Reeler
        v.   Professor Ranger
        vi.  Witness 83 *
        vii.     Ms Mukoko
        viii.     Appellant CM *


        from the respondent:


         viii.    Mr Ives *
         ix.    Ms Scruton (Mr Griffiths *)
         x.     Ms Goodier


170.  Besides  these  witness  statements,  the  documentary  evidence  also
    included press reports and NGO reports. A summary of both  the  witness
    statements and the other documentary evidence is contained in  Appendix
    B to this determination.   The  names  of  those  who  also  gave  oral
    evidence are marked above with an asterisk. Mr Griffiths  spoke  to  Ms
    Scruton's statement, in her absence. A transcript of the oral  evidence
    is contained in Appendix C. That transcript,  which  the  parties  were
    shown in draft, and which takes account of  their  agreed  corrections,
    records  instances  where  what  was  said   was   inaudible   to   the
    transcribers. In making our assessment of the  evidence,  we  have  had
    regard both to the transcript  and  to  the  panel's  own  records.  We
    nevertheless consider that it is helpful on this occasion to append the
    transcript. Where the transcript states [SSHD unable to  confirm]  this
    refers to corrections filed by the appellant which have been taken into
    account by the Tribunal but which  the  respondent  indicated  she  was
    unable to confirm or dispute from her notes.

171. What follows is a synopsis of the major themes in the written and  oral
    evidence. We stress that we have considered that evidence  overall,  in
    reaching our conclusions.

(a)  The outlook for constitutional reform, elections and the conditions  in
    which they might be contested

172.  Mr Mavhinga of the "Crisis in Zimbabwe  Coalition"  was  sceptical  of
    reports that indicated a degree of consensus between the MDC  and  ZPF,
    going into the then awaited second stakeholders'  conference  organised
    by COPAC in respect of a new Constitution for Zimbabwe (Appendix  C,  2
    October) but opined that, in any  event,  ZPF  did  not  regard  a  new
    Constitution as "the big game in town".

173.  W77,  an  informed  observer  on  Zimbabwe  from  the  civil   society
    viewpoint, whilst noting delays and obstacles apparently occasioned  by
    ZANU-PF in the Constitutional process, accepted  that  there  had  been
    positive developments. Historically, ZANU-PF had always wanted to  have
    early elections, as opposed to the MDC, who wished them to  be  delayed
    so that safeguards could be in place (Appendix C, 3 October). According
    to W77, holding elections in 2013 under the existing Constitution would
    have a greater capacity for violence, compared  with  the  position  if
    there were Constitutional reforms (Appendix B, paragraph  8).  W77  did
    not, however, consider it likely that ZPF would in any  event  use  the
    same form of violence or apply the same intensity of   violence  during
    elections as had been the case in 2008 (Appendix C,  3  October).  This
    view was echoed by Mr Ives of the FCO (Appendix B,  paragraph  54).  Mr
    Reeler regarded the COPAC process as inadequate and flawed, and  not  a
    major  advance  on  the  Lancaster  House  Constitution  (Appendix   B,
    paragraph 14).

174.  As an indicator of an improved political  atmosphere,  the  respondent
    pointed to the recent completion  of  the  census  project,  undertaken
    according to UN principles and SADC guidelines (Appendix  B,  paragraph
    86). W77 was asked about this in oral evidence (Appendix C, 3 October).

175.  Regarding  SADC/regional  involvement,  Mr  Mavhinga   described   his
    personal involvement with SADC ambassadors in September 2012  (Appendix
    B, paragraph 31). Certain proposals put by him and his colleagues, such
    as confining soldiers to barracks during elections, had been  dismissed
    as "interference". President Zuma was, however, more  critical  of  ZPF
    than  had  been  his  predecessor.  Mr.  Ives  regarded  SADC  and,  in
    particular, South Africa, as having important roles to play (Appendix B
    paragraph 54). The evidence in general was that SADC and  South  Africa
    remained engaged on the issue of Zimbabwe  and  its  political  future,
    although the case for the appellant was that, as submitted  to  the  EM
    Tribunal, this had not shown itself to be such as to eliminate  a  real
    risk of harm during a future election period.

(b)  Levels of politically motivated human rights violations in Zimbabwe

176.  The respondent placed considerable emphasis on the Monthly  Monitoring
    reports of the ZPP (Zimbabwe Peace Project) (Appendix B paragraphs  80-
    85). These showed what the respondent submitted was a significant fall,
    across the intervening years, in reported politically  motivated  human
    rights violations, compared with 2008. For instance, in the report  for
    June 2012, figure 1 shows trends for politically motivated  violations.
    There were 3758 such incidents in June 2008, 1558 in June 2009, 913  in
    June 2010, 1014 in June 2011  and  42  in  June  2012.  Harassment  and
    intimidation were said to be the most common type of  violations  being
    recorded. The report stated that

          "An analysis of the violations trends during  the  month  of  June
         over the past five years reveals that the month has always had high
         figures of politically motivated human rights  violations  compared
         to the other months".

177. A description of salient elements of  the  ZPP  reports  for  July  and
    August 2012 are to be found at paragraphs 82-84 of Appendix B. The main
    sources of conflict nationally  were  inter  and  intra-party  conflict
    between ZPF and the MDC-T. Although MDC supporters remained  the  major
    victims of politically motivated human rights violations, the number of
    ZPF victims had increased substantially, to 20% of all victims recorded
    for July 2012. As with June, a similar downward trend was recorded  for
    the months of August 2008 to 2012.

178.  W77 was asked about these ZPP reports  (Appendix  C,  3  October);  in
    particular, as to overall trends. W77 agreed that  the  downward  trend
    shown  by  the  ZPP  reports  was   "indisputable"   and   that   other
    organisations, such  as  Amnesty  International,  who  reported  higher
    figures "are often accused of double counting".

179.  Justina Mukoko, executive director of the ZPP,  provided  a  statement
    on behalf of the appellant (Appendix B paragraphs 39-40), in which  she
    referred to a "really worrying rise in militia activity in  Harare  and
    other urban areas since the beginning of 2012".  Having  described  the
    methodology employed by the ZPP and its monitors, she said it was  more
    difficult "to individually verify and record a large proportion of  the
    current violations by militia in Harare because of the high density  of
    people living there and the numbers affected".

(c) Problems in Harare

180. The  Tribunal  was  referred  to  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence
    regarding the activities of a group, sometimes described as a  militia,
    known as Chipangano  (eg Appendix B paragraphs 9-11, 19,  33,  63,  69,
    71, 73, 75, 83, 85, 89, 97 ; Appendix C, 2 October). The group is  said
    to have links with ZPF and to operate mainly but not exclusively in the
    high density area of Mbare, Harare,  where  it  has  sought  to  impose
    financial demands on  transport  operations,  by  means  of  touts  (or
    Mandimbandiba), as well as market operations carried on by those in the
    informal employment sector. It appears on one  occasion  to  have  been
    responsible for disrupting Parliament.  Evidence  describes  Chipangano
    hostility towards MDC supporters. There is some evidence of  Chipangano
    activity outside Harare (eg Mutare). In September 2012 there appears to
    have been an army operation against  these  touts.  It  was  said  that
    Chipangano was no longer controlled by ZPF, having  become  financially
    independent.

(d)  Returnees to Zimbabwe

181.  A summary of Ms Scruton's evidence on this subject  is  at  paragraphs
    55-58 of Appendix B (see also Mr Griffiths at Appendix C,  3  October).
    23 enforced returns to Zimbabwe have taken place since  publication  of
    EM. The criteria adopted in 2011 for selection of returnees  appear  to
    have included only those who failed (or would  have  failed)  in  their
    claims to international protection under the Country  Guidance  in  RN.
    Returnees are observed "airside" at  Harare  Airport  by  a  Migrations
    Delivery Officer (MDO), who makes contact with the leader of the escort
    group once the returnees have disembarked but who then withdraws whilst
    the returnees go through immigration control. Usually, the MDO is  able
    to observe the returnee  through  the  open  door  of  the  immigration
    interview room. Once "landside" the MDO observes the  progress  of  the
    returnees from interview room  to  immigration  desk  and  then  on  to
    baggage reclaim. The MDO then observes the returnee leave  the  airport
    terminal building. The whole process takes about 40 to 60 minutes.


(e)  Bulawayo and the Matabeleland provinces

182.   Professor  Ranger's  statement   opined   that   the   security   and
    humanitarian situation in Bulawayo had seriously deteriorated since  he
    last gave evidence (Appendix B paragraph 26). W77's statement  referred
    to violence including areas of  Matabeleland.  Mr  Mavhinga  would  not
    describe Bulawayo as a safe place (Appendix B paragraph 37), whilst W83
    was aware of a communiqu that MDC members had  been  attacked  by  war
    veterans whilst travelling to Bulawayo on the occasion of  the  party's
    thirteenth anniversary (Appendix B paragraph 43).

The parties' submissions on the fresh evidence

(1) Appellant's initial submissions

183. The written  submissions  on  the  appellant's  behalf  were  that  the
    updated country evidence showed that  intimidation  and  violence  from
    militias in urban areas is on the increase.  This was the view taken by
    W77, Professor Ranger, Mr Reeler, Ms Mukoko and Mr Mavhinga.

184.      Militias  and  gangs  had  been  responsible  not  only  for   the
    infliction of physical violence  but  also  in  taking  on  quasi-state
    functions in urban areas.  Many of the  press  reports  in  the  public
    domain showed the  activities  of  gangs,  militia  and  ZANU-PF  youth
    including Chipangano.

185. The  updated  evidence  also  showed  that  the  military,  police  and
    security forces remain under  the  control  of  ZANU-PF  and  that  the
    military and police were involved in intimidation and violence.   There
    were substantial prospects of violence in the 2013 elections.

(2)   Respondent's submissions

186. Mr Thomann's written submissions in summary are that:-

    (i)  The  updated  country  evidence,  and  the  evidence  particularly
         regarding Harare, does not cast doubt upon the observations made by
         the Tribunal in EM regarding the comparative security positions  in
         low, medium or high density areas.


    (ii) The evidence of Chipangano activities outside its Mbare  base  and
         immediate vicinity is scant and does not found a  general  risk  of
         persecution in respect of  dwellers  of  high  density  suburbs  of
         Harare.  Still less does it indicate that a returnee to  a  low  or
         medium suburb of Harare would be placed at real risk of persecution
         or serious harm on return.


     (iii)   Further elections will be held at some point in 2013 and  that
         the  implementation  of  the  GPA  and  the  adoption  of   a   new
         Constitution remain incomplete.   Nonetheless,  the  Government  of
         National Unity endures and plans for general elections in 2012 have
         been finally abandoned.  Regional interlocutors remain engaged.


    (iv)     The COPAC process has not reached an impasse and there  remain
         a number of countervailing safeguards  undermining  the  contention
         that there is a real risk to a returnee to Harare of persecution or
         serious harm, let alone a  putative  returnee  to  low  and  medium
         density suburbs.


    (v)  Witness  77's  evidence  largely  consisted  of  broad  statements
         regarding the position in Harare but these were  not  founded  upon
         specific incidents or reports.  His  evidence  of  a  deteriorating
         human rights position in Harare was not reflected in the  generally
         authoritative, albeit inevitably incomplete, monitoring of the ZPP.
          Some of his evidence, tested in examination, was more nuanced than
         initially appeared in his written report.


    (vi) Mr Mavhinga's evidence was rather general  and  suffered  from  an
         absence of specifics.   He  accepted  that  he  was  not  aware  of
         specific incidents of politically motivated violation  in  Harare's
         low and medium density suburbs.  He appeared to suffer from a  lack
         of awareness or unwillingness to accept a  widely  reported  recent
         development in the COPAC process, namely ZANU-PF's acceptance  that
         the previously agreed draft of the Constitution,  rather  than  its
         tabled amendments, would be presented.


    (vii) Professor Ranger and W66  were  only  able  to  provide  evidence
         indicating broad agreement with Witness 77's report.


    (viii)  Mr  Reeler  and  Ms  Mukoko  were  not  available  for   cross-
         examination.


    (ix)     By contrast with some of the hypothetical answers given by  Mr
         Mahvinga and witness 77 as to what a returnee would  be  likely  to
         experience on return to  Zimbabwe,  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
         respondent in the witness statement of Anne Scruton and the  UKBA's
         returns team described  the  uneventful  return  of  the  first  23
         enforced returnees.


    (x)  The monitoring reports from ZPP covering the period from  June  to
         August 2012 do not purport to  be  exhaustive  but,  significantly,
         they fail to indicate  a  rising  trend  in  politically  motivated
         violations over 2012 and the number of incidents reported in Harare
         is strikingly constant and low.  The  overall  trend  for  Zimbabwe
         shows a significant reduction from 2011 levels.


    (xi)  So far as the activities of the group  Chipangano  is  concerned,
         the Tribunal has been provided with a  number  of  reports  in  the
         public domain  regarding  its  operations.   Whilst  the  appellant
         submits that its activities are steered by  ZANU-PF,  the  evidence
         provides at best an ambivalent picture.  There is some evidence  of
         a link but more recently, Chipangano has been described  as  linked
         to rogue elements within ZANU-PF or as  having  become  financially
         independent and therefore beyond the party's control.


    (xii)    Recent evidence suggests a  crackdown  on  the  activities  of
         extortion groups linked to Chipangano. Overall, the  evidence  does
         not show that Chipangano's activities are a  recent  phenomenon  or
         that its activities have  made  a  significant  difference  to  the
         security situation in Harare.  There is some evidence of incursions
         beyond  Mbare,  linked  to  recent  events  and   of   Chipangano's
         activities spreading to neighbouring high density areas but, in the
         round, the most that can  be  said  is  that  its  activities  have
         intensified in Mbare, albeit not to a degree which  has  led  to  a
         significant rise in the overall number of human  rights  violations
         in Harare.


    (xiii) The date most often referred to in relation to  the  holding  of
         elections is June 2013.  Witness 77 suggests  that  there  has  not
         been sufficient progress towards security reforms  to  prevent  the
         violence of the 2008 elections being repeated.  He accepted in oral
         evidence that future progress could not be ruled out.  Reforms  and
         further progress in the implementation of the GPA are, however, one
         facet of the potential safeguards in place which militate against a
         repeat of the indiscriminate violence of 2008.  Monitoring and  the
         role of the Electoral Commission  have  repeatedly  been  cited  as
         important to free and fair elections and the role of  South  Africa
         and SADC remains capable of bringing pressure to bear.


    (xiv) So far as the imminence of elections is  concerned,  the  current
         timeframe is not significantly different from  that  considered  by
         the Tribunal in EM in March 2011,  when  most  observers  predicted
         elections in late 2011 or 2012.


    (xv)     The recent country evidence  does  not  show  that  the  COPAC
         process  has  stalled,  the  Second  Stakeholder  Conference  being
         scheduled to  take  place  in  late  October.   The  countervailing
         factors in the assessment include the  prospect  of  monitoring  by
         SADC and the AU,  the  prospect  of  further  legislative  changes,
         including the implementation  of  a  new  Constitution  and  a  new
         Electoral Amendment Act, the ongoing engagement of SADC  and  South
         Africa, the lack of likelihood that ZANU-PF would seek to engage in
         a campaign of violence resembling 2008 as such a campaign would not
         result in legitimisation,  doubts  that  the  MDC  would  willingly
         partake in a poll resembling that of  2008,  evidence  of  disunity
         within ZANU-PF and a disconnect between pronouncements by  security
         chiefs and their actions in private and the views held by the  rank
         and file.


    (xvi) These factors are particularly pertinent in relation  to  Harare,
         where ZANU-PF has little prospect of significant electoral  success
         and where the eyes of the international community and civic society
         are firmly directed.   The  election  would  be  supervised  by  an
         Electoral Commission, the Honourable Justice Simpson  Mutambanengwe
         remaining at its head and with likely scrutiny by the international
         community.


    (xvii) The respondent accepts that there is a credible risk of violence
         instigated at local levels  and  a  risk  that  violence  would  be
         deployed following a disputed election but  the  prospect  of  such
         violence rendering a returnee to a low or medium density suburb  of
         Harare at risk remains a matter of speculation and does not  amount
         to a real risk.

187. In his oral submissions, Mr Thomann emphasised these points and noted:-



    (i)  Both the disclosed  material  and  the  updated  material  showing
         circumstances since March 2011 reveal a reduction in violence since
         the 2008 peak.


    (ii) In her statement, Ms Mukoko referred to a worrying rise in militia
         activity in Harare in the informal economy sector but what was  not
         clear was the geographical location or whether  the  incidents  had
         spread beyond Mbare.


    (iii)    The ZPP reports did pick up on violations by Chipangano, which
         also featured in the press reports before the Tribunal.   The  high
         point of claims that Chipangano had links with ZANU-PF appeared  to
         be the article in The Zimbabwean published on 2nd August 2011  (A's
         singular bundle at page 167) and a Voice of America  article  (page
         162).


     (iv)    There was, however, no evidence of specific incidents  outside
         Mbare or in low or medium density  areas.   September  2012  saw  a
         crackdown on the incidents related to the Mbare Bus Station,  where
         mention was made of Chipangano's influence in Mbare and surrounding
         suburbs.  All of this formed the background to the recent  backlash
         against the gang.  Overall, the evidence showed that Chipangano was
         not engaged in a political campaign.


    (v)  They were engaged in criminal activities, carried out under claims
         of political cover, with the addition  of  incidents  where  people
         were asked for ZANU-PF cards or shepherded into meetings.   A  gang
         member appeared to have confessed that there were links with  ZANU-
         PF.  Evidence from the Harare Residents' Trust, in the  South  West
         Radio report at tab 33 of the respondent's rebuttal evidence bundle
         suggested that ZANU-PF no longer had control of the gang.


    (vi) Evidence before  the  Tribunal  in  EM  included  a  news  article
         published on 16th August 2010, regarding the eviction from  markets
         by the gang of MDC-T youths in Mbare.  The  updating  evidence  did
         not show any substantial change since then.


    (vii)    Although Ms Mukoko, Mr Mavhinga and  Witness  77  opined  that
         there had been an intensification of activity,  these  claims  were
         not borne out by the trends  shown  in  the  ZPP  reports  and  the
         evidence of a recent backlash against Chipangano from army members,
         the police and perhaps even within ZANU-PF.


    (viii)    Beyond Mr Mavhinga's evidence there  was  scant  evidence  of
         specific incidents  involving  Chipangano.   At  its  highest,  the
         evidence  perhaps  suggested   some   intensification   in   Mbare,
         consisting of the attempts by touts and rank marshals to intimidate
         drivers.

(3)  Appellant's reply

188. In his reply, Mr Henderson said that:-

    (i)  The increased militia activity in Harare is  relevant  to  the  RN
         loyalty test risk.  There was a risk that violence  would  increase
         again through  the  forthcoming  elections  and  the  apparatus  of
         oppression remains in place.


    (ii) Elections would be called by June 2013 at the latest.


    (iii)    The recent police activity, which included  beating  up  touts
         and innocent people, did not amount to a crackdown  on  Chipangano,
         still less a block on the power or influence of ZANU-PF.


    (iv) The Tribunal should  prefer  the  direct  evidence  given  by  the
         appellant's witnesses and the senior figures in Zimbabwe  who  have
         provided statements to the evidence  from  the  newspaper  articles
         relied upon by the Secretary of State.  There is, in any event,  no
         inconsistency between the two.  The suggestion that there has  been
         a reduction in violence and intimidation is a misconceived spin  on
         the ZPP monthly reports.


    (v)   The evidence shows that Chipangano and the gangs  are  linked  to
         ZANU-PF and that their activities are not limited to  Mbare,  which
         is simply the focus of their Harare activities.  Everything  is  in
         place for violence to resume should the regime deem this necessary.




    (vi)  The position is arguably more acute than was the case at the time
         of RN as elections would be underway by June 2013.


    (vii)    Chipangano's  activities  were  recorded  as  having  extended
         beyond Mbare, and in any event Mbare and surrounding areas  covered
         a large part of Harare. The evidence showed that most Harare public
         transporters suffered problems at the hands of the militia.


    (viii)   The  evidence  also  showed  consistently  that  the  security
         apparatus remains solidly behind ZANU-PF.


    (ix) The appellant's experts all agreed  that  there  had  been  little
         progress in reforms.  A new Constitution might  be  in  development
         but it would have  limited  impact  without  real  reforms  to  the
         security apparatus.  The COPAC process showed that ZANU-PF might be
         happy to be flexible on presentation but would not  be  willing  to
         compromise on the retention of power.


    (x)  Witness 77's and Ms McGregor's work was of great importance, there
         being new and compelling evidence  of  the  position  in  periurban
         areas, for example.  Witness 77 had access to  a  variety  of  good
         sources.


     (xi)    Mr Reeler's report considered the ZPP monthly summaries and he
         concluded that they were not a true  reflection  of  the  position.
         There were two monitors per constituency  and  they  were  able  to
         report only what came to them.  They might pick up matters  arising
         as a  result  of  the  COPAC  process  but  there  was  significant
         underreporting of violations and abuses.


    (xii)    The monthly reports did not show the extent to which the  poor
         in high density areas have to buy ZANU-PF cards or are required  to
         show loyalty to the party.  The reports give no clear indication of
         what constitutes a violation.  Violations are only recorded if they
         arise as a result of the  political  process.   If  events  in  the
         political process did not occur, the numbers  of  violations  would
         drop but it did  not  follow  that  violence  and  intimidation  by
         Chipangano dropped.


    (xiii)   Witness 77's evidence was also supported by Professor  Ranger.
         Mr Mavhinga had been prominent in Zimbabwe civil society  for  some
         time and was able to attend and give evidence before the  Tribunal.
         His evidence had significant weight.  His view was that SADC  would
         not intervene in any meaningful way.


    (xiv)    All the witnesses called by the appellant took the  view  that
         militia activity in urban areas is increasing.   Mr  Mavhinga  said
         that there was no crackdown on Chipangano; action  has  been  taken
         against the touts, which some  say  are  linked  to  ZANU-PF.   The
         evidence does not show real police action, in his view.


    (xv) In relation  to  the  countervailing  factors  identified  by  the
         Secretary of State, there was no substantial sign that SADC or  the
         AU would be in place to monitor the elections.


     (xvi) The prominent judge chairing the ZEC was a titular head only.


    (xvii) All the commentators agreed that real  reform  of  the  security
         forces was missing and any disunity in ZANU-PF did not amount to  a
         substantial safeguard. There were isolated news reports,  including
         the article entitled "security chiefs  panic"  but  this  fell  far
         short of showing a durable change.


    (xviii) Overall, the evidence showed that militias  allied  to  ZANU-PF
         were now active, a few months before the elections.   The  evidence
         of the enforced returns was of limited  weight  as  the  particular
         returnees would have failed under  RN  and  so  would  be  able  to
         demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF. The ILPA  correspondence  exhibited
         to Ms Scruton's witness statement was of importance here.

The Tribunal's findings on the fresh evidence  regarding  the  situation  in
Zimbabwe as at October 2012

(a)  The outlook for constitutional reform, elections and the conditions  in
    which they might be contested

189. Whilst we accept the point made by the  appellant  that  constitutional
    reform is no guarantee of what may happen on the  ground,  particularly
    during an election period, we consider it significant  that  the  COPAC
    process remains in being, albeit that  progress  has  not  always  been
    smooth. The agreement reached between Mugabe, Tsvangirai and Deputy  PM
    Mutambara that the COPAC draft would be the document used in the second
    stakeholders'  conference  is  a  sign  of  progress.  So  too  is  the
    successful census exercise. There remains  the  realistic  prospect  of
    monitoring of the elections by  SADC  and  of  oversight  by  the  ZEC,
    despite the apparent difficulties faced by its Chair. We  take  account
    of the appellant's submissions that  the  instruments  of  state  power
    remain in the hands of ZANU-PF; but the  evidence  of  a  plurality  of
    views within that party has grown since the period under  consideration
    in EM.

190. There is  no  evidence  to  compel  the  conclusion  that  ZANU-PF  are
    reasonably likely to  defy  regional  opinion  as  to  the  conduct  of
    elections, whether from SADC or South  Africa  itself.  We  accept  the
    views of the FCO that the roles of both are of  great  significance  in
    this regard. The evidence does not suggest that there is  a  reasonable
    likelihood of either having become disengaged  since  EM,  albeit  that
    there may be a regional reluctance to agree with  all  the  demands  of
    Zimbabwean civil society, such as requiring troops to  be  confined  to
    barracks during the elections. We  accept  the  FCO's  assessment  that
    there may well, nonetheless, be  violence  when  elections  are  called
    (which could be as late as November 2013).  But,  as  the  analysis  at
    Issue 1 above makes plain, violence has been  a  feature  of  elections
    generally in Zimbabwe since independence. The  2008  violence  was  far
    greater than any seen before. Both the FCO and W77 consider  that  such
    violence is unlikely to be repeated in 2013.

191. Overall, whilst we recognise that reasonable commentators are  entitled
    to pessimistic views about the future  prospects  of  stable  political
    settlement and the risk of a return to much higher rates  of  political
    violence, that is not the picture  that  is  presented  to  us  in  the
    present proceedings, and has not been the picture for four  years  now.
    The assessment of real risk has to be based on an evaluation of what is
    happening on the ground where that proves to be  durable,  rather  than
    possibilities  of  future   breakdown   where   that   is   necessarily
    speculative. This leads us to the second general issue.

(b)  Levels of politically motivated human rights violations in Zimbabwe

192. This panel recognises, as have  previous  constitutions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the AIT, that  Zimbabwe  remains  a  society  where  great
    brutality and human rights  abuses  have  taken  place,  and  both  the
    political instigators of those abuses and the personnel  who  inflicted
    them remain in existence. We recognise as the appellant's experts  have
    reminded us that there has been no abiding political and constitutional
    solution of the divisions that led to the intense violence  around  the
    second round of Presidential elections of June 2008.  Nevertheless,  as
    we read the documentary material presented to us and follow  the  trend
    of reporting in the ZPP monthly reports, we are struck by  two  general
    observations.

193.     First, there remains in Zimbabwe an active and vocal civil  society
    prepared to criticise the government in general  and  ZANU-PF  and  its
    leaders in particular and, despite the  threats  of  violence  and  the
    disturbances that have arisen from  time  to  time,  the  appetite  for
    change in civil society remains.

194.     Second, whatever failings ZPP reports may have in  not  being  able
    to record every  single  act  of  politically  motivated  human  rights
    violations (PMV) in Zimbabwe, they plainly and  powerfully  demonstrate
    the general downwards trend since the summer of 2008. W77  acknowledged
    that the downward trend was "undisputable". Since we were not  provided
    with any evidence to show that the ZPP's methodology had  changed,  the
    trend is significant. We reject the suggestion from Mr Reeler that  the
    ZPP summaries are, in this respect, not  an  accurate  summary  of  the
    position. We do  so,  having  regard  to  Ms  Mukoko's  statement  that
    violations by militias in Harare are difficult to  verify  individually
    and to record because of the high density of people  living  there  and
    the numbers affected. We are  not  aware  of  the  reports,  which  are
    otherwise highly detailed and  evidently  carefully  prepared,  issuing
    such specific caveats. We note the comments in 14.44 of the  July  2012
    COIS, that recommends:

         "officials exercise caution  in  considering  and  assessing  ZPP's
         data. While the ZPP may go to reasonable  lengths  to  confirm  the
         veracity of reported cases of politically  motivated  human  rights
         violations, it  does  not  set  out  how  exactly  the  events  and
         motivations of the perpetrators are verified. Conversely,  ZPP  (or
         indeed other sources referred) does not claim  to  have  documented
         all incidents of human rights violations; not all will come to  the
         attention of and be documented by ZPP monitors  for  a  variety  of
         reasons including, for example,  victims'  fear  of  reprisal.  The
         quantitative data should therefore not be considered  comprehensive
         or  exhaustive  but  an  indication  of  the  levels,  nature   and
         distribution of politically motivated human  rights  violations  in
         Zimbabwe in the period concerned".

     We endorse and apply that observation. We also agree with Mr Thomann's
    submission,  that  the  ZPP  reports  did  pick  up  on  violations  by
    Chipangano in Harare (as to Harare, see further paragraphs 196-201  and
    211-213 below). The overall  evidence  as  to  the  downward  trend  of
    politically motivated human rights violations in Zimbabwe is, in short,
    cogent.

195. Since the ZPP  reports  specifically  address  instances  of  political
    intimidation, within the ambit of PMV, the Tribunal in EM was  entitled
    to rely on them in reaching its conclusion as to risks at  road  blocks
    or of loyalty challenges and there is no new  category  of  information
    that requires this assessment to be revisited, as at October 2012  when
    we completed the task of  receiving  evidence.  Overall,  there  is  no
    evidence to suggest that the nation-wide findings of RN as regards  the
    risk of having to show loyalty to  ZANU-PF  have  any  bearing  on  the
    present position in Zimbabwe.

(c) Problems in Harare

196. As can be seen from the above and from Appendices B and  C,  there  was
    much discussion by the witnesses and submissions by the representatives
    about the origin, nature and activities  of  Chipangano.  Although  the
    respondent pointed out that there was a piece of  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal in EM, to the effect that  "ZANU-PF,  Mbare  youths  popularly
    known  as  Chipangano  are  closing  down  all  markets  belonging   to
    opposition supporters in the  area"  (16  August  2010),  it  is  quite
    evident that it is only relatively recently that the group's activities
    have attracted widespread publicity and condemnation. It  is  evidently
    with Chipangano in mind that Ms Mukoko referred in her statement  to  a
    rise in militia activity in  Harare  "since  the  beginning  of  2012",
    although we note that  the  disturbances  in  Parliament  organised  by
    Chipangano occurred in October 2011. We do not  accept  W77's  evidence
    that militia bases comparable to those in 2008 have been re-established
    around Mbare.  If this were so, there would be much more  about  it  in
    the media  and  other  reports  in  the  fresh  evidence.  Mr  Reeler's
    reference to "regular alerts" of  militia  bases  being  re-opened  was
    unspecific. By contrast, the ZPP report of July 2012 described a  trend
    for the re-emergence of "terror bases" in Mashonaland West, Central and
    East and Masvingo (Appendix B paragraph 82).

197. The press reports show that it  was  Chipangano's  criminal  activities
    and their extortion at cab ranks in particular that led to  a  backlash
    in September 2012.  Kombi operators and drivers complained  that  those
    demanding money claimed to be ZANU-PF youths who were free to act  with
    impunity as the party was in power.  The police were reported in  early
    September as having engaged all stakeholders in the  dispute.   In  the
    second week of September,  two  uniformed  members  of  the  army  were
    assaulted by members  of  a  gang  believed  to  be  Mandimbandiba,  an
    offshoot of Chipangano, and this led to the revenge attack reported  by
    South West Radio Africa on  11th  September  2012.   Soldiers  attacked
    touts,  rank  marshals  and  innocent  bystanders  and  then  stationed
    themselves, in civilian clothes, at strategic points on  omnibus  ranks
    in Harare.  The soldiers were reported as saying that  they  wanted  to
    get rid of all extortion business as it  had  brought  anarchy  to  the
    streets of Harare.  The disturbances took place close to Harare Central
    Police Station but the police did not intervene.  Military police  were
    deployed to stop the violence  escalating.   ZANU-PF  was  reported  as
    having tried to distance itself from the gang's activities.

198. Weighing the evidence, we find that  Chipangano  has  been  responsible
    for  acts  of  violence  and  intimidation  outside  Mbare  on  limited
    occasions and largely in  neighbouring  suburbs  such  as  Epworth  and
    Highfields.  The  backlash  in  September  2012  shows  that  professed
    allegiance to ZANU-PF was not sufficient to insulate Chipangano from  a
    crackdown on their activities.  There is scant evidence that Chipangano
    has any significant range or influence in low or medium density suburbs
    of Harare, and their forays into the centre of the city are infrequent.
     Notwithstanding the consistent claims of direction or control by ZANU-
    PF, we find that the evidence falls short of showing that Chipangano is
    an arm of the party, capable of being deployed at will to further ZANU-
    PF's ends.  The evidence of  the  press  and  media  reports  suggests,
    rather, that the threats and extortion at the  commuter  omnibus  ranks
    are signs of autonomy.  Mr Mavhinga's evidence,  including  his  rather
    general mention of reports of  Chipangano  activities  in  neighbouring
    suburbs, is consistent, we find, with what emerges from the  press  and
    media reports.  Overall, Chipangano's criminal activities, no  doubt  a
    cause of considerable anxiety in high density suburbs in  Harare,  have
    not, on the evidence, led to a significant rise in the  overall  number
    of human rights violations in the city.

199. We find that the recent crackdown in Chipangano  has,  as  its  target,
    the gang's organised attempts to intimidate and extort and  the  action
    taken by the police may not simply be characterised, as suggested by Mr
    Mavhinga, as an unfocused action against touts and innocent people.

200.  Whatever may have been Chipangano's  origins,  we  consider  that  the
    evidence shows it has become an organisation that is  intent  on  self-
    enrichment (at least of its leaders), at the expense of  those  working
    in transport and  in  the  informal  economy  (such  as  stallholders),
    primarily in the high density area of Harare known  as  Mbare.  Despite
    the crackdown by the army on its activities, we accept that  Chipangano
    may be a cause of difficulty for a person returning or otherwise  going
    to Mbare from the United Kingdom, who is reasonably likely to  have  to
    seek employment of such a kind as to encounter Chipangano  "touts",  or
    the like. However, we do not consider that any such difficulties can be
    said as a general matter  to  have  any  actual  or  imputed  political
    element, in the sense that Chipangano will be hostile to the person  in
    question because he or she is viewed as having a  particular  political
    affiliation. In particular, there is no credible  evidence  to  show  a
    reasonable likelihood that Chipangano  will  impose  on  the  person  a
    political loyalty test or challenge.

201. These are our findings, based on the  evidence  before  us,  which  the
    parties did not suggest was comprehensive.  Pending  any  new  Zimbabwe
    Country Guidance case, judges may wish to have regard to these findings
    and the evidence  underpinning  them,  but  will  need  to  make  fact-
    sensitive findings of their own. So,  for  instance,  if  it  is  being
    asserted that a person could relocate to Mbare or other areas where the
    evidence established high levels of Chipangano  activity,  it  will  be
    necessary to consider whether  any  difficulties  posed  by  Chipangano
    would, on their own or cumulatively, make such relocation  unreasonable
    in Januzi terms.



(d)  Returnees to Zimbabwe

202. As  we  have  already  made  clear,  we  are  not  purporting  in  this
    determination to give any new Country Guidance regarding  risk  at  the
    point of return  in  Zimbabwe;  namely,  Harare  Airport.  The  Country
    Guidance on that topic remains HS. Nevertheless, like any  other  fact-
    finding Tribunal we have a duty under Practice Direction 12  to  follow
    that Country Guidance only to the extent that (inter alia) the evidence
    before us is the same or similar to that which was before the  Tribunal
    in HS.

203. In this regard, the Tribunal now has the significant  advantage  of  Ms
    Scruton's evidence of what has been happening since EM was promulgated.
    Mr Henderson cautions us that the criteria  selected  for  return  were
    generally those who could be removed applying the RN  guidance,  rather
    than despite it. But, even if  it  were  the  case  that  none  of  the
    returnees had any pro-MDC sympathies, which we rather doubt, the  point
    is that the evidence as a whole reveals no case of scrutiny for loyalty
    at the airport. Ms Scruton's evidence ends where  the  returnee  leaves
    the airport terminal; but nowhere in any of the evidence before  us  is
    there any indication that  there  are  roadblocks  en  route  from  the
    airport to Harare or Bulawayo, where checks are made on sympathies,  to
    the peril of those who cannot honestly proclaim support for ZANU-PF. We
    note that Mr Mavhinga said he thought returnees  would  be  subject  to
    such checks but, when pressed, he could not give any example  known  to
    him of it happening at the  present  time  or  since  2009.  His  video
    evidence was the high point of people being invited to apply for  ZANU-
    PF cards, but this was an assembly, not a road block and, from what  we
    heard and saw, there was no menace of threats of violence.

204. As the guidance in EM states, and as aspects of the  evidence  confirm,
    the position in certain rural areas may be different, albeit  that  the
    test of loyalty may arise otherwise  than  at  a  roadblock,  following
    curiosity about the returnee,  but  we  are  primarily  concerned  with
    whether there is a widespread and generic risk, as there  was  assessed
    to be in RN. In 2012 as in 2011, we are completely satisfied that  this
    is not the position and durably not the position.

205.  To return to the position at the point of return of  the  airport,  we
    are fully  satisfied  that  the  fresh  evidence  completely  fails  to
    disclose any change in the position as described in HS, as  tending  to
    suggest any heightened scrutiny of  returnees.  On  the  contrary,  the
    evidence of Ms Scruton, together with  that  of  the  7  returnees  who
    featured in the 2010 FFM Report, clearly  shows  no  justification  for
    regarding low level MDC supporters as the sort of activists, who the HS
    Tribunal  thought likely to fall foul of the CIO. We will address  this
    issue later, when considering the facts of the appellant's case. But it
    would be wrong not to observe here that there is no  evidence  to  show
    the CIO are, for example, likely to detain at the airport and torture a
    person for having attended a MDC branch meeting in the United Kingdom.



(e)  Bulawayo and the Matabeleland provinces

206.     Appellant CM is not from Matabeleland  and  no  one  is  suggesting
    that he could or should go there, following  any  return  to  Zimbabwe.
    Nevertheless, the position of Bulawayo and Matabeleland was touched  in
    the evidence and it is therefore  convenient  to  say  something  about
    them, by way of country information.

207.     In EM, the Tribunal found that, in general,  a  returnee  from  the
    United Kingdom to rural Matabeleland North or South was highly unlikely
    to face significant difficulty from  ZANU-PF  elements,  including  the
    security forces, even if the returnee was a member or supporter of  the
    MDC. The position was, accordingly, different from  the  rural  Eastern
    provinces, where certain returnees were still reasonably likely to face
    a loyalty challenge from ZANU-PF elements. A returnee to Bulawayo would
    in general not suffer the adverse attention of ZANU-PF etc, even if  he
    or she had a significant MDC profile. By contrast, such a profile could
    put a person at risk in Harare. That was the  Country  Guidance  as  at
    January 2011 and, as we have held, that Guidance was sound, as at  that
    time.

208.  Professor Ranger's view that the security and  humanitarian  situation
    in Bulawayo has seriously deteriorated since he gave evidence in EM  is
    lacking in detail  and,  in  any  event,  is  not  supported  by  other
    evidence.  (W77's  view  that  current  violence  "includes  areas   of
    Matabeleland" was sourced by only one news  report  of  January  2012.)
    Professor Ranger refers to greater police presence and tensions in  the
    townships, neither of  which  are  necessarily  indicative  of  ZANU-PF
    politically motivated human rights violations. Indeed, the ZPP  reports
    show extremely low numbers of such violations in  Matabeleland  and  in
    Bulawayo. For instance, no aid  related  violations  were  recorded  in
    Bulawayo  or  Matabeleland  South  in  June  2012  and  only   one   in
    Matabeleland North. Overall  PMVs  in  September  2012  totalled  2  in
    Bulawayo, 0 in Matabeleland North and 5 in  Matabeleland  South.  W77's
    evidence was, likewise, unpersuasive on  this  subject.  Mr  Mavhinga's
    statement that he would not describe Bulawayo as  a  "safe  place"  was
    vague. His view that Shona facing problems elsewhere would not relocate
    to Bulawayo is in line with the Country Guidance in EM, which held that
    such relocation "may be negated by discrimination" on the part  of  the
    Ndebele towards the Shona.

209.  In  conclusion,  on  the  fresh  evidence  before  us,  there  is   no
    justification for regarding the  position  in  Matabeleland  North  and
    South and Bulawayo as being any different in late 2012 than it  was  in
    January 2011.

Effect of fresh evidence on Country Guidance in EM, regarding  the  position
in January 2011

210.  At the beginning of this section (paragraph 167 above),  we  indicated
    that it would be necessary to analyse the fresh evidence  in  order  to
    see whether it has any effect on the position in Zimbabwe as at January
    2011: ie whether the Country Guidance in EM requires amendment in  that
    respect. Having done so, we do not consider that it does.

211. In every respect save one, it is quite evident that, if  anything,  the
    fresh evidence underscores the soundness of that Country  Guidance,  so
    far as the evidence can be said to bear on circumstances in early 2011.
     The one issue that does require more comment is  in  relation  to  the
    position in high density areas of Harare. As we have seen,  in  EM  the
    Tribunal found that, despite the disturbances that had taken  place  in
    January 2011, it was in general not the case that significant  problems
    would be faced by those without a significant MDC profile, or who would
    otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the  adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF.

212. We have already concluded that there is nothing in the newly  disclosed
    FCO materials that causes this aspect of the EM Country Guidance to  be
    amended. The evidence described in Schedule B, regarding  incidents  in
    Harare in February and March 2011, might have a degree of  relationship
    with the events in late January 2011; but, even so, we do not find that
    the material calls for any revision of the overall  findings  regarding
    Harare in EM, including the high density areas. Looking at the position
    nationally (and so including the  rural  Eastern  provinces,  where  EM
    found a continuing generalised real risk), the FCO Human Rights  report
    2011 concluded that

         "Following a worrying rise in political violence  and  intimidation
         at the start of the year, Zimbabwe's human rights situation by  the
         end of 2011 had returned to the relative stability  experienced  in
         2011 (COIS, July 2012, 14.69)."

    The report described the early spate  of  politically  motivated  human
    rights abuses as targeting "political and  civil  society  groups".  No
    mention is made of loyalty challenges or the like being applied to  the
    general population. In its March 2012 report, the  ZPP,  whilst  noting
    the rise in PMVs that month, said that "compared  to  the  same  period
    [January to March in 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011] the levels seen so  far
    are still  lower  than  in  previous  periods"  (14.56).   It  is  also
    noteworthy that Ms Mukoko of the ZPP refers  to  a  rise  in  what  she
    describes as militia activity in Harare since  the  beginning  of  2012
    (Appendix B paragraph 39). Insofar as she may have  been  referring  to
    the activities of Chipangano,  we  refer  to  what  we  have  found  at
    paragraphs 196-201 above.

213. Having regard  to  all  the  material  and,  in  particular,  taking  a
    holistic view of the relevant evidence both  in  the  new  (disclosure)
    materials and the fresh evidence,  we  do  not  consider  that  the  EM
    Country Guidance regarding  the  position  in  Harare  requires  to  be
    amended.

214.  The position we have therefore reached is that  there  is  nothing  in
    either the materials belatedly disclosed by  the  respondent  (Issue  1
    above) or in the fresh evidence (Issue 4)  that  requires  the  Country
    Guidance in EM to be modified. There is, however, a modification  which
    we consider it appropriate to make, which does not flow from either  of
    these strands of evidence. Rather,  it  arises  in  the  light  of  the
    judgments of the Supreme Court in RT (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  UKSC  38.  The
    guidance in EM was given in the light of the Court of Appeal  judgments
    in RT (see [267(2) of EM), which were  upheld  in  the  Supreme  Court.
    However, for the avoidance of doubt, at [267(5)]  the  reference  to  a
    person facing significant problems in Harare if he or  she  "would  ...
    engage in political activities likely to attract the adverse  attention
    of ZANU-PF" needs to be read as encompassing a reference  to  a  person
    who would be reasonably likely to engage in such activities, but for  a
    fear of thereby coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

215.  It is therefore convenient at this point to set out  (i)  the  Country
    Guidance in EM, as so modified; and  (ii)  a  summary  of  the  country
    information on Zimbabwe as at October 2012.

    (i)   Country Guidance in EM, as modified


    (1)      As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


    (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).


    (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas  and
         there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
         sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.


    (4)    In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.


    (5)      A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


    (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.


    (7)      The issue of what is a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


    (8)  Internal relocation from a rural area to  Harare  or  (subject  to
         what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in  general,  more  realistic;
         but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
         reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
         order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         to expect them to relocate.


    (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since  the  period
         considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
         US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
         hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
         has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
         Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
         with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
         been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
         2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
         traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
         circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.


    (10)     As was the position in RN, those who are or have been teachers
         require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
         places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
         significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
         basis.


    (11)   In certain cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously  lacking in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
         ... and remains valid.

(ii)  Summary of the country information on Zimbabwe as at October 2012

216. We reiterate that what we have to say in this  regard  is  not  Country
    Guidance. The picture presented by the fresh evidence as to the general
    position of Zimbabwe as at October 2012 does not differ in any material
    respect from the Country Guidance in EM. Elections are due to  be  held
    in 2013; but it is unclear when. In the light of the evidence regarding
    the activities of Chipangano, judicial-fact finders  may  need  to  pay
    particular regard to whether a person, who is reasonably likely  to  go
    to Mbare or a neighbouring high density area of Harare,  will  come  to
    the adverse attention of that group; in particular, if  he  or  she  is
    reasonably likely to have to find employment of a kind that  Chipangano
    seeks to  control  or  otherwise  exploit  for  economic,  rather  than
    political, reasons.  The fresh evidence regarding the position  at  the
    point of return does not  indicate  any  increase  in  risk  since  the
    Country Guidance was given in HS.  On  the  contrary,  the  absence  of
    reliable evidence of risk at Harare Airport  means  that  there  is  no
    justification for extending the scope of who might be regarded  by  the
    CIO as an MDC activist.

Deciding CM's appeal

217. Having made findings as to the status of  EM  and  as  to  the  current
    general position in Zimbabwe, it is necessary to consider whether CM is
    entitled to international protection. A summary of his evidence  begins
    at paragraph 209 of Appendix 2 and the transcript which begins at  page
    41 of Appendix C sets out what he said at the hearing.

The respondent's submissions

218.  Mr Thomann's submissions can be summarised as follows:-

    (i)      It remains the position that CM has accommodation available in
         what his  own  evidence  indicates  is  a  sought-after  suburb  of
         Hatfield.


    (ii)   As a returnee to, at worst, a medium density suburb  of  Harare,
         he would not be  at  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm.   Mr
         Mavhinga conceded that he is not aware of a single incident in  low
         or medium density parts of the city and this picture is  consistent
         with Professor Ranger's evidence in  October  2011,  summarised  at
         paragraph 128 of EM (and see also paragraph 100 of EM, the evidence
         of Witness 77). There is no reported evidence suggesting that areas
         such as Hatfield can be compared to townships, let alone Mbare,  in
         respect of security.


    (iii)    CM has not provided updating evidence casting doubt on the  EM
         Tribunal's finding that health  issues  he  has  mentioned  do  not
         preclude him from working, if need be in the informal sector.   The
         updated evidence regarding the security position in Harare does not
         show that CM will be at risk on return.


    (iv)     The assessment of risk to CM  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  a
         preserved finding that any political profile he had in Zimbabwe was
         "of the lowest level", as found by the Tribunal in EM.  He  claimed
         to be politically active in the UK but waited some two years before
         joining the MDC here and the minutes provided at  meetings  at  his
         local branch showed that his record of attendance was irregular and
         characterised by a conspicuous lack of activity.


    (v)  The Tribunal had previously noted that his return would  be  to  a
         low or medium density suburb and that even in the unlikely event of
         his returning to a high density suburb, there was no real  risk  of
         his being subjected to a loyalty test ([295-296] of EM).  CM's case
         in October 2012 is that he would be at risk on return as he intends
         to relocate to join his brother in  Karoi,  Mashonaland  West.   He
         claims he would there be at risk of having to  demonstrate  loyalty
         to ZANU-PF or attend ZANU-PF meetings. In fact he would not have to
         relocate to Karoi, Mashonaland West.


    (vi)     He claims that he needed to move to Karoi  by  reason  of  his
         fear of persecution, linked to his profile in Hatfield  as  an  MDC
         activist and his claim that even in a low or medium density area he
         would be randomly at risk, even absent profile, of subjection to  a
         requirement to demonstrate loyalty.


    (vii)    He states he would be without means in Hatfield and his  house
         there was dilapidated.  He also relies upon his  medical  condition
         as well as his age and the state  of  the  economy.   He  had  been
         previously economically active in Harare and  his  reason  for  the
         failure of a business set up with  his  son,  D,  of  the  business
         premises being destroyed by politically motivated persons, was  not
         accepted by the Tribunal.


    (viii) CM claims also to be at risk of targeted at  the  airport  as  a
         known MDC activist of interest to the security services.  There  is
         no real prospect that any CIO agent infiltrating CM's local  branch
         would report him as someone  worthy  of  intensive  interest.   The
         letter of support from W83 of 20th September 2012 does not  detract
         from this assessment; nor does the oral evidence of CM and W83.  CM
         would not be at risk on arrival at  the  airport  or  en  route  to
         Hatfield and would  face  no  real  risk  that  he  would  have  to
         demonstrate his loyalty to ZANU-PF.


    (ix)     The updated evidence does not show that his medical  condition
         would put him at risk, drugs being available in Harare to treat his
         ill-health.  CM remains  capable  of  economic  activity,  and  has
         previously held well paid employment. He might have  to  resort  to
         the informal sector.  He has a house available in a low  or  medium
         density suburb and the updated evidence does not cast doubt on  the
         Tribunal's earlier assessment that he  would  not  be  at  risk  by
         reason of his claimed former role as an MDC organising secretary at
         local level.


      (x)  CM had changed his evidence regarding the enquiries he  made  of
         his aunt, in the light of the respondent's case that CM could  rely
         on the prospect of support from this relative.  CM  had  failed  to
         show a real risk in Hatfield.


The appellant's submissions

219. Mr Henderson submitted that, prior to leaving Zimbabwe,  CM  had  lived
    in Hatfield, Harare.  When he left Zimbabwe his adult children from his
    first marriage and his second wife and youngest child were  all  living
    in Harare.  CM has a son living in the United Kingdom.  His four oldest
    children were living in Hatfield, Southerton and  Westgate  suburbs  in
    Harare.  He claimed to be organising secretary in his local MDC  branch
    in Hatfield, a claim rejected by the Designated Immigration  Judge  who
    heard his appeal in October 2009.  The preserved findings made  by  the
    first judge included his acceptance that CM had been  involved  in  his
    local branch of  the  MDC,  albeit  not  to  the  extent  claimed.   CM
    therefore had a connection with the MDC whilst in Zimbabwe and had been
    involved with the MDC in this country, through his connection with  the
    local branch.

220. When the appeal returned to the  Upper  Tribunal,  CM  adduced  further
    evidence including local party minutes and screen prints of photographs
    of MDC meetings posted on Flickr, in which  he  could  be  seen.   That
    evidence was clearly material and important.  A letter  from  the  MDC,
    attached to CM's witness  statement  and  dated  20th  September  2012,
    further confirmed his connection with the party.  CM's further  witness
    statement provided the Tribunal with current evidence of  his  family's
    circumstances in Zimbabwe.

221.  The house where  CM  had  been  living  in  Hatfield  lies  empty  and
    dilapidated and his second wife and one of his sons have gone  to  live
    in Malawi.  His four children in Zimbabwe live away from Harare and  in
    difficult circumstances so that they would be unable  to  support  him.
    CM fears return to Hatfield, where he had been  known  as  a  long-term
    resident, as he was opposed to ZANU-PF, had been a member  of  the  MDC
    there and in view of the location of Hatfield, close to  Epworth.   The
    evidence shows that Hatfield is a medium density area, as  the  article
    attached to the appellant's witness statement  confirms  ("Shanty  Town
    Menace Haunts Harare").

222. According to Mr Henderson, the risk to  CM  on  return  arises  in  two
    ways:  first, because of the risk of adverse identification  at  Harare
    Airport.  CM has been involved with the  MDC  via  involvement  at  his
    local UK party branch and that connection, at  the  very  least,  is  a
    matter  of  public  record   and   a   source   of   possible   adverse
    identification.  W83 had given evidence  of  CM's  MDC  activities.   A
    photograph showing CM appeared on the MDC website.   Secondly,  and  on
    the accepted evidence, CM is not  only  non-aligned  with  ZANU-PF  and
    opposed to it, but a supporter and member of the MDC.  He was  a  local
    activist in Zimbabwe, engaged in fundraising activities and  likely  to
    be of interest to ZANU-PF and the CIO, particularly with the  elections
    being imminent.  There was a real risk of intrusive questioning at  the
    airport in Harare.  Even if he were able to pass through  the  airport,
    he would be at risk in Hatfield.

223.  CM cannot be expected to dissemble and to falsely profess a  political
    alignment that he does not hold:  RT [2012] UKSC 38.  In  this  regard,
    CM's evidence is that he would go to live with his brother  in  a  high
    density area of the town of Karoi in Mashonaland West, where there  was
    a real risk that he would have to attend ZANU-PF meetings, although  he
    did not wish to do so.

224. If CM were to remain in Harare, his home area of Hatfield is  a  medium
    density suburb.  CM would be returning as a man in his sixties  and  in
    all likelihood would have to rely on the informal economy.   His  house
    was not habitable and he might be forced to seek shelter in a shack.

225.   In summary, CM was a refugee in the light of HS and RT.

The appellant's further oral submissions

226.  At the hearing on 5 October, Mr Henderson  additionally  submitted  as
    follows:

    (i)  CM's risk arose in consequence of his low profile in  the  MDC  in
         Zimbabwe and his activities at his local branch here in the  United
         Kingdom.  W83 had given evidence of CM's activities.  A  photograph
         showing CM appeared on the MDC website.


    (ii) CM was a local activist  engaged  in  fundraising  activities  and
         likely to be of interest to ZANU-PF and the CIO, particularly  with
         the elections being imminent.  There was a real risk  of  intrusive
         questioning at the airport in Harare.  Even if he were able to pass
         through the airport, he would be at risk in Hatfield.


    (iii)    There was an existing finding  regarding  his  MDC  activities
         there.   Hatfield  is  a  medium  density  suburb.   The   problems
         regarding CM's house were reiterated.


    (iv)  The Secretary of State speculated that CM might receive help from
         his aunt.  In the light of all of this, CM  would  relocate  to  be
         with his brother but he would face problems in Karoi,  where  there
         was a real risk that he  would  have  to  attend  ZANU-PF  meetings
         although he did not wish to do so.  CM's brother lived  in  a  high
         density area in Mashonaland West.


    (v)    In summary, CM was a refugee in the light of HS and RT.





The Tribunal's findings on CM

227. We will start with CM's own evidence, although we stress that  we  have
    taken into account the background country  evidence  in  assessing  his
    credibility.

228.  We found CM to be a very unimpressive witness in the evidence he  gave
    to us. He was evasive, lacking in telling detail and inconsistent about
    such details as he did provide. We were left with a  strong  impression
    that he was inventing aspects of his  evidence  as  he  went  along  to
    support the case he was endeavouring to make.

229. We were equally unimpressed by his attempts to present  himself  as  an
    MDC activist in his local United Kingdom branch, despite  the  previous
    findings of the AIT judge and the assessment in  EM  (as  to  which  no
    arguable error of law has been identified). The materials show that  he
    does continue to participate in branch activities but, having regard to
    our assessment of his oral evidence as a whole, we conclude  that  this
    reliance is part of a deliberate attempt to redress  previous  negative
    findings and induce us to change our assessment of his personal status.
    It does nothing to show a real risk that he would be regarded as worthy
    of hostile interest on or after return.

230. We consider it improbable in the  extreme  that,  if  CM  was  the  MDC
    activist he claimed to be, that he would contemplate moving to a  ZANU-
    PF stronghold to be with his son.  This significant shift in his likely
    place of residence on return to Zimbabwe appears to be  an  attempt  to
    fit into the class of risk identified in the Supreme Court decision  of
    RT (Zimbabwe).

231. His attempt to use the opportunity presented by the  remittal  of  this
    appeal to make out a serious Article 8  case  for  the  first  time  is
    equally unconvincing.  Whilst we recognise that he has been in  the  UK
    for a number of years, as this protracted appeal has gone  through  the
    various levels of decision making, he has never had any claim to remain
    here other than for alleged reasons of international protection and, by
    contrast with JG in the  EM  group  of  appellants,  CM  has  not  been
    responsible for small children growing up in the United Kingdom, as the
    years pass  by.   Whatever  his  state  of  health,  future  employment
    prospects or the state of disrepair of his house, they do not amount to
    reason to remain in the United Kingdom. We would be reluctant  to  take
    at face value anything CM tells us  about  his  personal  circumstances
    that is unsupported by reliable independent evidence.

232. Despite the evidence of W83, we were wholly  un-persuaded  that  CM  is
    now or would be on return of interest to  the  Zimbabwe  CIO  or  other
    State security services. There is no reliable reason to believe that he
    would be interrogated about MDC activities  at  the  airport  and  fall
    within one of the risk categories in HS.  If the web-based  information
    regarding CM had come to anyone's attention at all, which we doubt,  it
    would not lead to a risk of ill-treatment for that reason alone. In the
    light of the preserved assessment of absence  of  any  significant  MDC
    activities in Zimbabwe, we do not consider that there is any real  risk
    that he would be assessed as an activist on return or  would  genuinely
    wish to engage in such activism. We do not find any  reason  to  change
    the previous findings regarding CM's assertion of  activism  whilst  in
    Zimbabwe (EM [290]).

233. Accordingly, his case  for  international  protection  depends  on  the
    generic risk to any low level MDC supporter who is returned  to  Harare
    at the  time  of  the  promulgation  of  this  decision.  Applying  the
    conclusions we have set out earlier regarding  the  status  of  EM  and
    having regard to the fresh evidence concerning the general position  as
    at October 2012 (which is the latest we have) and our findings  thereon
    at paragraph 216 above, it is manifest that CM's claim fails.

234. Whether Hatfield is regarded as a low or as a medium density suburb  of
    Harare, it is certainly not a high density one and it is  not  a  place
    where there is any reliable evidence of significant Chipangano activity
    or any other malign presence that could properly be said to  give  rise
    to a real risk of CM's facing a RN-style loyalty challenge. There is no
    credible evidence that CM would be forced through economic necessity to
    seek work outside Hatfield, so as to come into contact with Chipangano.
    His true economic position is unclear, as a result of his propensity to
    say whatever he thinks might best serve  his  aim  of  staying  in  the
    United Kingdom, come what may; but he cannot properly use that lack  of
    clarity to his advantage. Even if he in truth lacks  means,  he  has  a
    property in Zimbabwe, which he has not shown to  be  uninhabitable.  He
    has a means of support from his  aunt,  as  well  as  the  prospect  of
    financial help from the United Kingdom government's returns  programme.
    He has worked as a small businessman (EM [295]). Neither  his  age  nor
    his health suggests that he would lack means of support.

235.     In conclusion, CM has failed to show a reasonable likelihood  that,
    if returned to Zimbabwe, he would suffer persecution or  other  serious
    ill-treatment. His Article 8 case is  hopeless.  He  has  no  protected
    family life here. Whilst he has a protected private life, this  remains
    exiguous (EM [297]). He has the usual medical conditions to be expected
    with late middle age. No case has been advanced that it would,  in  the
    circumstances, be disproportionate to  remove  him,  given  the  United
    Kingdom's interests in maintaining immigration controls.

General conclusions

236.     As can be seen, the appeal of CM is a simple  one  that  by  itself
    would not merit the degree of analysis that preceded  our  conclusions:
    he has no profile making him of interest to the authorities on  arrival
    at Harare Airport. There is no  reason  to  believe  that  he  will  be
    stopped and interrogated on his journey from the airport to Harare.  He
    has lived and retains premises in a low or  medium  density  suburb  of
    Harare where gang activity is not endemic. The house may be in need  of
    some repair but CM has family who are potentially able to help him  and
    asylum or subsidiary protection is not extended according to the degree
    of repair work needed on leaky roofs.

237.     We have addressed each of the issues left undecided  by  the  Court
    of Appeal in this case and have concluded that none alone  or  together
    undermines the guidance we reached on a more extensive  examination  of
    risk in Zimbabwe that we undertook in 2010-11 than  we  have  in  2012.
    Although the fresh evidence that we  have  received  demonstrates  that
    there is a need for caution in respect of gang  related  activity  with
    respect to some at least of the high density areas of  Harare,  and  no
    one can rule out a resumption of some  politically  motivated  violence
    when  elections  are  called,  there  is  no  inevitability   or   even
    probability that elections  will  see  a  complete  repetition  of  the
    actions taken in 2008.

238. A Country Guidance case is designed to be a fair and efficient  way  of
    assessing evidence relating to country conditions,  so  the  exhaustive
    process is not unnecessarily  repeated  at  different  hearing  centres
    throughout the country, and so that the inferences to be drawn from the
    available data are consistent and legal having regard  to  the  anxious
    scrutiny given to cases where there  is  a  reasonable  possibility  of
    risk. A Country Guidance case is not a straitjacket and  if  conditions
    deteriorate in a manner that affects the previous assessment  a  First-
    tier judge is able to act on the fresh evidence and we would expect  an
    OGN or COIS report to speedily note developments. In such circumstances
    the Tribunal can convene a fresh Country Guidance case to alert  judges
    and  other  stakeholders  of  the  changes  in  position  as  soon   as
    practicable.

239. The present appeal has been outstanding for some years. The process  of
    disclosure and evaluation of PII claims has been laborious  and  costly
    in terms of resources for both the government departments concerned and
    the workload of the Tribunal. In the event we have concluded  that  the
    disputed material did not paint a materially different picture from the
    material that we had received. We accept that the material should  have
    been before us in 2010 and early 2011 given the particular  history  of
    this case, but in general the duty to act fairly by not misleading  and
    its concomitant duty not to maintain an uncritical  assessment  of  the
    absence of risk where there is material  known  to  the  respondent  or
    ought to have been known to her that requires a different assessment to
    be made, ensures that appeals are conducted fairly.

240. Where exceptionally, further material is needed the  judge  can  assess
    that claim in the exercise of case management powers. This  will  be  a
    departure from the normal run of cases, and neither the  directions  we
    made in 2010 nor the appointment of the PII advocate that we sought  in
    2012 should be seen as the norm for asylum appeals or Country  Guidance
    appeals.  Indeed we doubt whether the overriding objective  of  dealing
    with a case fairly and justly set out in rule 2 of the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules has been advanced by what has occurred in  this  case,  with  the
    consequent considerable cost to public funds of the disclosure exercise
    and the associated delay in finally determining this appeal.[2]

241.   We have all contributed to this determination.




Decision

We re-make the decision in the case  of  CM  by  dismissing  his  appeal  on
asylum and human rights  grounds.  He  is  not  entitled  to  the  grant  of
humanitarian protection.

Anonymity

 Pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008), we continue the anonymity order in respect of CM.



Signed

         [pic]


The Hon Mr Justice Blake

Chamber President

Date 31 January 2013






                                 APPENDIX A

   EXTRACTS FROM RN (RETURNEES) ZIMBABWE CG [2008] UKAIT 00083 AND EM AND
           OTHERS (RETURNEES) ZIMBABWE CG [2011] UKUT 00098 (IAC)


                                   PART 1

         EXTRACTS FROM RN (RETURNEES) ZIMBAWE CG [2008] UKAIT 00083

121.     The argument that those returned to Zimbabwe after having  made  an
    unsuccessful claim for asylum in the United Kingdom would  be  regarded
    as spies or saboteurs sent to destabilise  the  country,  often  called
    "Blair's spies", was considered by the Tribunal in HS and  rejected  as
    being unfounded. The CIO,  being  the  organisation  who  would  assess
    returnees,  was  described   as   a   sophisticated   organisation   of
    professional  intelligence  officers.  They  acted  on  the  basis   of
    intelligence obtained not  least  from  the  extensive  investment  the
    regime had made in infiltrating the MDC in  the  United  Kingdom.  Such
    professional intelligence officers would not believe  that  the  United
    Kingdom, if minded to send spies to Zimbabwe, would do so in a category
    of those returning who were bound to attract attention, unlike ordinary
    travellers who would pass through the airport unhindered.

122.     But the answer  to  that  reasoning  is  now  found  in  the  final
    paragraph of the extract from the evidence of W2 set out above.  It  is
    no longer the professional security staff at Harare airport who are the
    main concern for returnees. It is the ill-disciplined,  irrational  and
    unpredictably violent militias to be confronted upon return to the home
    area.

123.     In our view, the evidence indicates  that  those  groups  act  with
    unprecedented brutality towards a broad range of people on the basis of
    suspicions of disloyalty and  that  they  have  been  indoctrinated  to
    believe that the United Kingdom, and those associated with it, are  the
    source of Zimbabwe's problems today. It is plainly the  case  that  the
    Zimbabwean community in the United Kingdom is an area of solid  support
    for the MDC. It would, in our view,  be  naive  to  assume  that  those
    tasked with eliminating potential support for the MDC in Zimbabwe would
    not be aware of that. There is a large body of evidence that membership
    of a community perceived to support the MDC is  sufficient  to  mark  a
    person out for violent harassment or worse treatment. It is not hard to
    see how anyone returning from the United Kingdom  would  be  associated
    with the hysterical propaganda that continues to be  peddled  to  these
    various groups or militias who appear to be acting with impunity.

     ...

166.     We do not find  surprising  that  the  presence  of  Zanu-PF  youth
    groups has declined in the more wealthy suburbs of  Harare.  Those  are
    unlikely to be areas within which much support would be found  for  the
    MDC. We have seen evidence of the "high walls" behind which people live
    in these suburbs, an expression which, as  we  understand  it,  extends
    beyond the protection of bricks  and  mortar  so  as  to  involve  also
    security measures that are not available outside  such  areas.  On  the
    other hand, it is  difficult  to  see  how  a  confident  view  can  be
    expressed concerning declining levels of violence within areas to which
    access has been restricted by those who are said to be responsible  for
    that violence.

     ...

183.     Despite the doubts and reservations expressed after the signing  of
    the Memorandum of Understanding, the talks that took place  between  Mr
    Mugabe and the opposition did result in what has been  described  as  a
    power  sharing  agreement.  Understandably,  this  was  met  with  high
    expectations for resolution of the problems that have  beset  Zimbabwe.
    After all, if that agreement eventually leads to the establishment of a
    government of national unity, with the MDC playing a full  role  as  an
    equal partner in the government of Zimbabwe, it would be  difficult  to
    see how its supporters could be at any continuation of  risk.  Further,
    the establishment of such a government, with  Mr  Tsvangirai  as  Prime
    Minister, would unlock access to huge monetary and other  aid  that  is
    needed to start the process of rebuilding Zimbabwe's shattered  economy
    and so improving living conditions for ordinary citizens.

184.     As we have mentioned, at the resumed hearing on 30th October  there
    were two further sources of evidence upon  which  both  representatives
    made submissions. There was a collection  of  news  reports  about  the
    power sharing agreement and a number of reports of interviews conducted
    by Embassy staff in Harare  with  organisations  said  to  be  able  to
    comment upon the situation "on the ground" consequent to the signing of
    that agreement on 15th September 2008. We  deal  first  with  the  news
    reports.

    ...

190.     On 24th September a Voice of America news item reported that:

         "Political violence is on the rise again in  Zimbabwe  despite  the
         signature less than two weeks ago of an agreement  to  establish  a
         unity government in which power would be shared by the long  ruling
         ZANU-PF party of President  Robert  Mugabe  and  the  Movement  for
         Democratic Change, now in majority  in  Parliament,  MDC  officials
         said.


         ...


         Some of that violence has been taking place in  Mbare,  a  populous
         Harare suburb where according to MDC sources some 61 families  were
         attacked by ZANU-PF militia members in full view of police  at  the
         Matapi station, who took no action.


         ...


         Witnesses said two truckloads  of  ZANU-PF  militia  including  the
         notorious Chipango gang associated with ZANU-PF invaded the  police
         station singing songs denouncing the MDC and beating party  members
         while the police passively looked on."


         And  in  an  Independent  on  line  report  of  25th  September   a
         spokesperson for the National Constitutional Assembly, a forum  for
         trades unions, NGOs and church organisations, said that  he  feared
         that the power sharing agreement was designed simply to absorb  the
         MDC rather than to share power with it:


         "We will be happy if it fails. The  people  were  running  Mugabe's
         torture camps in the June election are now the same  ones  who  are
         explaining the agreement to people in the rural areas.


         "They are saying it gobbles the MDC up into Zanu-PF," he added.


         ...


         MDC spokesperson Nelson Chamisa said on Wednesday  night  political
         violence was continuing in some  parts  of  the  country.  He  gave
         details of three separate incidents, and added that no arrests  had
         been made despite reports to the police. "Zanu-PF torture bases are
         still operational in Mbare and other parts of the country, but  the
         police are not doing anything to dismantle them."


         ...

195.     It  can  be  seen  from  this  material  that  Mr  Mugabe  and  his
    supporters appear determined to retain control of the instruments  used
    previously to deliver the "right" result at any future  elections.  And
    the recent news reports indicate that such elections  may  well  be  in
    contemplation. This is for two reasons. First there are now six  vacant
    seats in Parliament. There is said to be provision in the power sharing
    agreement for continuity in that where a by-election is necessary  only
    the party  holding  the  seat  that  becomes  vacant  would  put  up  a
    candidate. But even if that provision were honoured, it would apply  to
    only three of the six seats and, in view of the very slim majority that
    is presently held by the combined MDC factions when voting together  it
    is not hard to see the importance of any such elections.

196.     Secondly, as it  has  become  increasingly  clear  that  the  power
    sharing agreement is unable on its own  to  produce  a  national  unity
    government acceptable to all concerned there have been calls for  fresh
    elections generally. We refer to a BBC report  headed  "MDC  seeks  new
    election" published on 21st October:

         "New polls are "the only  way  forward",  Movement  for  Democratic
         change spokesman Nelson Chamisa told the BBC.


         Neighbouring Botswana has also called for new  elections,  after  a
         regional summit on Zimbabwe was postponed.


         ...


         At a summit in Swaziland to discuss  the  deadlocked  power-sharing
         agreement was postponed for a week after the MDC insisted that  its
         leader Morgan Tsvangirai be granted a passport."

197.     Drawing all  this  together,  considered  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole, we conclude that  the  agreement  signed  on  15th
    September in Harare has not resulted in the Mugabe  regime  ceding  any
    real power to the MDC.

198.     Of course it always remains possible that the  worsening  chaos  of
    the  Zimbabwean  economy  and  the  pressure  from  the   international
    community, which stands ready to pump massive aid into the country  but
    not until there is real change, will bring about just that. But we have
    to reach our conclusions  upon  the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  is
    available to us. That evidence leads us to find that the power  sharing
    agreement signed on 15th September has not resulted in any  significant
    change in the  political  situation  in  Zimbabwe  and  that  the  real
    intention of  the  regime  appears  to  be  to  claw  back  control  of
    parliament and to retain the presidency by  keeping  in  place  and  by
    continuing to exercise the  militias  and  party  machinery  that  were
    deployed following the March elections.

...

202.     It is correct to say  that  the  level  of  reported  human  rights
    violations has reduced since the height  of  the  violence  during  the
    period leading up to and immediately after the run off  vote.  But  the
    militias and Zanu-PF groups, encouraged by state  agents,  have  sealed
    off the areas in which the have focused their  attentions  and  we  are
    satisfied that has been done specifically to prevent  access  by  those
    who would report such events. It  is  also  correct  to  say  that  the
    absolute ban upon NGOs' food relief programs has been lifted but it  is
    clear also that these organisations do not  in  general  have  anything
    approaching the freedom they need to carry out these aid operations  as
    they would wish. There is  evidence  before  us  that  one  reason  for
    limiting the scope of these aid operations is  to  restrict  access  to
    areas in which abuses continue to be perpetrated by  those  seeking  to
    maintain the current regime in power.

203.     Turning to  the  interview  summaries  themselves,  we  find  there
    further evidence to support, rather than to diminish, the  concerns  we
    have expressed above. Some of  the  interview  summaries  express  more
    positive assessments than others but they include the following:

    The European Commission:

         "Currently there are very few (if any) gross  violations  of  human
         rights in  terms  of  assaults,  murders  etc  but  the  threat  of
         repetition  of  this  violence  remains.  Perpetrators  are   still
         deployed to rural  areas  and  there  is  an  atmosphere  of  fear,
         intimidation and mistrust."


         "The  police  ....  Have  not  generally  taken  steps  to  protect
         victims...  In  some  cases  the  police  have  been   perpetrators
         themselves."


         "... It is likely to be very  difficult  for  [voluntary  returnees
         from  the  United  Kingdom]  to  return   to   their   communities,
         particularly in the rural  areas.  The  environment  remains  quite
         tense, and  there  is  likely  to  be  suspicion  about  returnees'
         political affiliation. It is likely that they would find it  harder
         than others to get access to food and services."


    Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum:


         "the police are not doing anything to protect the victims and  have
         even been perpetrators themselves.


         We have regular reports  of  discrimination  on  the  part  of  the
         government in distributing aid.


         Returnees would come back to a situation of  uncertainty,  economic
         disaster, hunger and poverty. They would not be  able  to  rely  on
         social or health or education services, unless they could afford to
         go privately. The local authorities are likely to be suspicious  of
         them, just by the fact of having been to the UK. They might well be
         labelled sell-outs or MDC supporters. They would  be  disadvantaged
         if  they  tried  to  get  access  to  GMB  food,  land  or  BACOSSI
         distributions. In certain areas, depending on the  profile/activism
         of the returnee and the local presence of Zanu-PF  supporters/youth
         militia, they might be at risk of physical harm. Returning to urban
         areas is probably safer than to rural areas. It is hard to  predict
         how the central authorities would react - some returnees  might  be
         welcomed back to prove that the government is reformed and ready to
         welcome back its citizens. Others might be arrested."


    Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights:


         "Overtly, there has been a  reduction  in  the  level  of  violence
         compared to the electoral period,  but  this  might  give  a  false
         picture because many of the internally displaced  people  have  not
         yet returned home. In addition, the  structures  of  state  control
         remain in place. After the signing of the deal there was an  easing
         of the situation but in the last couple  of  weeks,  we  have  seen
         authorities returning to their usual attitudes and behaviour."


    Witness 4 of Source D:


         "There are signs of hate speech starting again e.g. over  sanctions
         and MDC being puppets of the West. And in rural  areas  things  are
         still tense. The deal has not changed realities on the ground. Some
         of the celebrations over the signing of the power-sharing agreement
         were broken up. People are still fearful and suspicious, and afraid
         of retribution if they show support for MDC. An MDC event in Makoni
         to explain what was happening was disrupted by soldiers, who wanted
         to make people attend a rival ZANU-PF meeting."


    Source R:


         "[Source R] continues to get reports of beatings and torture of MDC
         supporters around the  country  e.g.  15  people  were  treated  in
         Buhera,  Manicaland  on  1  October.  Structures  of  control   and
         intimidation are still in place (made up of army, war vets, CIO and
         rogue elements of the police) but  the  bases/structures  are  more
         active in some places than others.  In  some  areas,  the  ZANU  PF
         activists are telling the MDC to forget the agreement, as  it  will
         not be implemented. In addition there is a purge exercise going  on
         among ZANU PF local structures  to  ensure  only  Mugabe  loyalists
         attend the Congress in December."

        ...

216.     This campaign has  been  rolled  out  across  the  country  not  by
    disciplined state forces but by the loose collection  of  undisciplined
    militias who have  delivered  a  quite  astonishingly  brutal  wave  of
    violence to whole communities thought to bear  responsibility  for  the
    "wrong" outcome of the March 2008 poll. It is precisely because of that
    that any attempt to  target  specifically  those  who  have  chosen  to
    involve themselves with the MDC has been abandoned. In our  view  there
    can be no doubt at all from the evidence now before the  Tribunal  that
    those at risk are not simply those who are seen to be supporters of the
    MDC but anyone who cannot demonstrate positive support for  Zanu-PF  or
    alignment with the regime.

217.     We are reinforced in that conclusion by the reports that even  some
    Zanu-PF supporters  have  suffered  beatings  when  confronted  by  the
    militias and when they have been unable to demonstrate their loyalty.

218.     The evidence demonstrates also, in our  view  clearly  and  without
    ambiguity, that the aim of the violence was not limited  to  delivering
    for Mr Mugabe victory in the run-off vote, but to ensure that  the  MDC
    support base was sufficiently dismantled as to ensure that it ceased to
    exist in any meaningful way as to remain a threat to Zanu-PF's hold  on
    power. That  explains  why,  notwithstanding  the  talks  taking  place
    following the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  and  the  fact  that  the
    elections are, for now at least,  concluded,  the  violence  continues.
    Although this violence is not at the levels seen during the  summer  of
    this year, everything remains in place for it to  be  repeated,  should
    the regime deem this necessary.

219.     We are satisfied also that the  militias  have  established  no  go
    areas and road blocks to ensure that  abuses  that  continue  in  rural
    areas where  the  MDC  had  made  inroads  into  the  Zanu-PF  vote  go
    unreported wherever possible and  so  that  displaced  people  are  not
    allowed to return to their home areas.

220.     For these reasons we do not see that there can be  said  to  be  an
    end in sight to the real risk of violence being  perpetrated  on  those
    identified as  disloyal  to  the  regime  and  therefore  as  potential
    supporters of the MDC.

221.     As we have seen, by the time the hearing  was  reconvened  on  30th
    October such a power sharing agreement had been reached  but,  for  the
    reasons given above, that has not led us to a different conclusion from
    that we reached at the conclusion of the first part of the hearing when
    we initially reserved our decision.

222.     Even though a form of agreement  has  now  been  reached  in  these
    talks, it remains  to  be  seen  whether  that  will  bring  about  any
    reduction in the level of risk to those not able to demonstrate loyalty
    to Zanu-PF. After all, the Memorandum of Understanding that was  signed
    by Mr Mugabe on behalf of his party and the regime contained assurances
    about the cessation of politically related violence but  that  has  not
    been delivered. It is not readily apparent how  the  militias  and  War
    Veterans who have been meting out violence would be  disbanded  without
    genuine commitment by Mr  Mugabe  and  his  senior  supporters  to  the
    sharing of power. It is evident from the failure to implement the power
    sharing agreement that no such intention presently exists.

223.     For these reasons we are  not  satisfied  that  the  power  sharing
    agreement has given rise in itself to any  significant  change  on  the
    ground in Zimbabwe, so  far  as  international  protection  issues  are
    concerned. There is, moreover, no evidence to show that, in the absence
    of more effective foreign political or other  political  pressure,  the
    position is likely to change spontaneously.

...

226.     That risk arises throughout the country, in both  urban  and  rural
    areas. A person may be faced with the need to demonstrate such  loyalty
    to the ruling party in varying circumstances. The youth militias,  "War
    Veterans" and other groups put together  under  the  direction  of  the
    state authorities  have  established  camps  or  bases  throughout  the
    country from which they operate. Although the  evidence  suggests  that
    some of those camps or bases have closed down after the run off vote in
    July of this year it is plain that many remain and that they are to  be
    found throughout the country in both rural and  urban  areas.  Ordinary
    Zimbabwean citizens may encounter these groups at road blocks set up to
    establish no go areas or simply when at home as the militias move  into
    areas thought to harbour MDC support.

227.     The means by which loyalty to the regime may be  demonstrated  will
    vary depending upon who is demanding it. Production of a  Zanu-PF  card
    is likely to suffice where an individual  is  confronted  with  such  a
    demand, for example at a road block. But even that may not protect  the
    holder from serious harm in rural areas where the adverse  interest  is
    in the community as a whole because the area is one in  which  the  MDC
    made inroads in the Zanu-PF vote at the March 2008 elections.

228.     People living in high density urban areas will face the  same  risk
    from marauding gangs of militias or War Veterans as do those living  in
    the rural areas, save that the latter are possibly at greater  risk  if
    their area has been designated as a no go area by the militias.

229.     The evidence suggests that those living in the  more  affluent  low
    density urban areas or suburbs are likely to avoid  such  difficulties,
    the relative security  of  their  homes  and  their  personal  security
    arrangements being sufficient to keep out speculative visits.  Many  of
    those with the means to occupy such residences are in general likely to
    be associated with the regime and so not  a  target  on  the  basis  of
    doubted loyalty. Others may enjoy such a lifestyle as  a  result  of  a
    more circumspect relationship with the regime falling short  of  actual
    association, but which is, nevertheless, such as to give the appearance
    of loyalty.

...

258.     The evidence establishes clearly that those at risk  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe  on  account  of  imputed  political  opinion  are  no  longer
    restricted to those who are perceived to be members  or  supporters  of
    the MDC but include anyone who is unable to demonstrate support for  or
    loyalty to the regime or Zanu-PF. To that extent the  Country  Guidance
    in HS is no longer to be followed.

259.     The fact of having lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  significant
    period of time and of having made an unsuccessful asylum claim are both
    matters capable of giving rise to an enhanced risk because, subject  to
    what we have said at paragraph 242 to 246 above, such a  person  is  in
    general reasonably likely to be assumed to be a supporter  of  the  MDC
    and so, therefore, someone who is unlikely to vote for or  support  the
    ruling party, unless he is able to demonstrate the loyalty  to  Zanu-PF
    or  other  alignment  with  the  regime  that  would  negate  such   an
    assumption.

260.     The attempt by the regime to identify and  suppress  its  opponents
    has moved from the individual to the collective.  Thus,  a  person  who
    returns to a home in an area where the MDC made inroads into the  Zanu-
    PF vote at this year's  elections  faces  an  enhanced  risk  as  whole
    communities are being punished for the outcome in an attempt to  change
    the political landscape for the future and to eliminate the MDC support
    base.

261.     There is clear evidence also that teachers in Zimbabwe  have,  once
    again, become targets for persecution in Zimbabwe. This is confirmed by
    the evidence of Professor Ranger considered at  paragraph  96  of  this
    determination and reinforced by the news reports, examples of which are
    given at paragraphs 130 and 148. As many teachers have  fled  to  avoid
    retribution, the fact of being a teacher or having been  a  teacher  in
    the past again is capable of raising an enhanced risk, whether or not a
    person was a polling officer, because when encountered it will  not  be
    known what a particular teacher did or did not do in another area.

262.     It is the CIO, and not  the  undisciplined  militias,  that  remain
    responsible for monitoring returns to Harare  airport.  In  respect  of
    those returning to the airport there is  no  evidence  that  the  state
    authorities have abandoned any attempt  to  distinguish  between  those
    actively involved in  support  of  the  MDC  or  otherwise  of  adverse
    interest and those who simply have not  demonstrated  positive  support
    for or loyalty to Zanu-PF. There  is  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
    assessment made in HS of those who would be identified at  the  airport
    of being of sufficient interest to merit further interrogation  and  so
    to be at real risk of harm such as to infringe either Convention.

263.     Although a power sharing  agreement  has  been  signed  between  Mr
    Mugabe on behalf of Zanu-PF and Mr Tsvangirai on behalf of the MDC,  it
    is too early to say that will remove the real risk of serious  harm  we
    have identified for anyone now returned to Zimbabwe who is not able  to
    demonstrate allegiance to or association with the Zimbabwean regime.

264.     Further international  intervention  or  some  unforeseen  upheaval
    inside Zimbabwe itself may change the position, for example, by  giving
    the MDC real control of the police. In such an eventuality it  will  be
    for judicial fact finders to determine the extent to which the evidence
    before them differs from that which is before us, pending fresh Country
    Guidance: see Practice Direction 18.2.



                                   PART 2

 EXTRACTS FROM EM AND OTHERS (RETURNEES) ZIMBABWE CG [2011] UKUT 00098 (IAC)


159.  In  making  our  findings,  we  have  had  particular  regard  to  the
    activities of the Constitutional Parliamentary Committee (COPAC), which
    in the summer of 2010 undertook a large number of  "outreach"  meetings
    across Zimbabwe, with the aim of gathering the public's  views  on  the
    proposed new constitution for that  country.   It  is  noteworthy  that
    these meetings were well underway at the time that  the  civil  society
    interviewees gave their views to the FFM team in August 2010.  W66 said
    in oral evidence that  he  was  sure  that  those  who  attended  COPAC
    outreach meetings and had a political profile were at higher risk  than
    those whose profile was low.  W77 placed  on  the  debit  side  of  his
    "balance sheet" the continuing use of youth militia to attack suspected
    opposition figures and supporters, as well as  those  speaking  out  at
    constitutional outreach meetings (or even attending them).  The present
    violence tended to be focused on the COPAC process.   Professor  Ranger
    referred to the violence when COPAC reached Harare, in September  2010,
    leading to the postponement of the  outreach  meetings  in  that  city.
    This had overshadowed the COPAC process in Bulawayo, where the meetings
    were "violently noisy, if not subject to violence by  means  of  sticks
    and stones".

160.     Professor Ranger agreed that the COPAC process served as the  focus
    for such intimidation and violence as there was at  the  present  time.
    This chimed with the Peace Project  report  in  appellants'  bundle  B,
    dealing with the position in August  2010.   The  MDC  had  provided  a
    number of chairmen in the COPAC process, who had initially spoken about
    it highly.  Professor Ranger considered that an ordinary villager would
    conclude from the activities of ZANU-PF  at  COPAC  outreach  meetings,
    that it was "too dangerous to support the MDC".

161.     Anthony Reeler, in his statement, considered that people  attending
    outreach meetings had to say the right things "otherwise they might  be
    assaulted by militia".  When COPAC reached Harare, ZANU-PF  people  had
    been bussed into the city in order to commit violence.   Dewa  Mavhinga
    of Crisis Zimbabwe Coalition, whilst noting that  levels  of  organised
    violence were lower than during the election period, observed that  the
    COPAC process had brought a wave of violence.  The problems in  Harare,
    which had left a person dead, had, he considered, "put to rest the idea
    that urban areas were safe".  For the same reason, W78 had changed  his
    earlier view that urban areas were still relatively safe from organised
    violence.  W79 of the Zimbabwe Human Rights Association  thought  that,
    since being interviewed by the FFM team in August,  the  situation  had
    deteriorated, owing to the COPAC process, with  violence  inflicted  by
    people bussed in by "certain anti-democratic political  parties".   W80
    of the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum likewise  thought  that  ZANU-PF
    had imposed its authority on Harare through organised violence  related
    to the COPAC process.

162.     In its July 2010 summary on politically motivated human rights  and
    food-related violations, the Zimbabwe  Peace  Project  considered  that
    villagers suspected of belonging to the MDC-T were being told to  "shut
    up during COPAC processes and also  selected  ZANU-PF  supporters  were
    allowed  to  speak  during  the  outreach  meetings   in   most   rural
    constituencies across the country".  In its August  2010  summary,  ZPP
    noted an upsurge "in the number of intimidation  and  harassment  cases
    related to the  COPAC  outreach  programme.   The  highest  numbers  of
    violations were recorded in the Manicaland province", which remained "a
    hotspot of violations".  On the  other  hand,  Matabeleland  North  and
    South recorded only "minimal cases of violations despite the enthusiasm
    that has been associated with the  constitution  making  process".   In
    Bulawayo,  most  cases  reported   were   those   of   harassment   and
    intimidation.  A press report in September 2010  recorded  that  up  to
    sixteen outreach meetings had been  cancelled  in  Manicaland  province
    because of violence from ZANU-PF supporters.

163.     The Radio Africa correspondent in Harare thought  that  Mugabe  and
    ZANU-PF were using the outreach exercise "not only to test  the  waters
    but to remind people just how violent his thugs could be  and  how  far
    they were willing to go to get their way".  On 7 November, there was  a
    report that at least fifteen resettled farmers near Masvingo  had  been
    "severely tortured by ZANU-PF youths ... for failure to attend a  rally
    held in Manwenge  area".   The  farmers  were  "too  afraid  to  go  to
    hospital".  On the other hand, a  report  of  10  November,  also  from
    Masvingo, noted that villagers were refusing to pay a levy of two goats
    per family or a  $70  fine  for  refusing  to  support  ZANU-PF-imposed
    village heads and that attempts by ZANU-PF to reorganise their  party's
    leadership at grassroots level was facing resistance from villagers who
    "vowed to challenge the goat levy in  the  courts".   A  report  of  11
    November  describes  something  called  "Operation  Headless  Chicken",
    described by an anonymous ZANU-PF official as  identifying  youths  and
    party leaders "who will be trained in beheading people".

164.     In the FFM report, ZimRights, whilst noting that the COPAC  process
    had been used by ZANU-PF to trigger violence,  was  encouraged  by  the
    fact that, contrary to expectations, people were happy to speak  direct
    to a video camera, as part of a ZimRights project, and that "they  were
    clearly not afraid".  In the rural areas people had not been turning up
    to COPAC meetings "simply because they don't want to hear from or about
    ZANU-PF anymore".  It would be difficult for ZANU-PF to regain  control
    in areas such as Manicaland. The fact that, in rural  areas,  villagers
    were not, as a general matter, coerced into attending COPAC meetings is
    also borne out by the article of 12 July in the Zimbabwean,  concerning
    the touring play "Waiting for the constitution". The article  described
    people saying that COPAC asked them to gather at certain venues  "where
    they could not go because they were being  watched".  The  people  knew
    they "have power for a "NO" vote if they are  prevented  from  speaking
    out during the constitutional process".  The Research and Advocacy Unit
    (Anthony Reeler) told the FFM  team  that  now  that  the  constitution
    making process had begun, political space was closing down dramatically
    and  there  were  increasing  reports   of   political   violence   and
    intimidation.  Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights  told  the  team  that
    with the advent of COPAC, violence had surfaced again in  a  number  of
    provinces and COPAC outreach meetings had had to be cancelled  in  some
    areas due to intimidation, disruptions and monitoring.

165.     The Counselling  Services  Unit  considered  that,  although  there
    would still be intimidation as seen in the COPAC process, ZANU-PF would
    try to suppress large- scale pre and post-election political  violence,
    out of a fear of being indicted by the  International  Criminal  Court.
    The international organisation interviewed on 12 August, whilst  noting
    that violence was occurring in the outreach  process,  considered  that
    ZANU-PF "has taken an active decision not to unleash the full force  of
    political violence in relation to the  constitutional  referendum,  not
    least because to have done so would have infuriated the South  Africans
    during the soccer World Cup".  The Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum told
    the team that the violence linked to  the  outreach  process  was  "not
    systematic but such as there is tends to be perpetrated by  war  vets".
    Although ordinary people "who say the wrong things at  meetings"  might
    be threatened, or worse, higher  profile  figures  were  liable  to  be
    arrested and, if so, tortured.  Otherwise, levels of political violence
    were low with more emphasis on threats.

166.     Although physical violence undoubtedly occurred from time  to  time
    during outreach meetings (as to which we have noted the MDC's  list  of
    some incidents it said had then occurred,  mainly  in  Mashonaland  and
    Masvingo), it is evident from the evidence as a  whole,  including  the
    Zimbabwe Peace Project reports, that most of  the  violations  did  not
    involve physical violence.  For example the  Harare/Bulawayo  report  -
    shadowing the outreach process - recorded  only  3%  of  violations  as
    involving violence, with the majority relating to  coaching,  political
    interference and harassment.  There were,  however,  disturbances  that
    were said to have rocked outreach meetings in Mbare, Harare.   It  was,
    in our view, significant that the decision was very  quickly  taken  to
    suspend  the  outreach  meetings  in  Harare,  rather  than   let   the
    difficulties continue.  A further report of the Peace Project described
    the resumed  consultations  in  Harare  on  30  and  31  October  2010,
    following the September suspensions.  The report identified the  reason
    for the suspension as "inter-party violence between supporters  of  the
    two main rival parties, ZANU-PF and the MDC-T".  The MDC list, to which
    we have referred,  describes  a  small  number  of  physical  assaults,
    involving MDC members and supporters, at outreach meetings.

167.     At the resumed October meetings, COPAC was applauded for  deploying
    police to all outreach venues, albeit that  this  created  "a  somewhat
    intimidating, subdued, sombre and agitated atmosphere".  The  political
    mood in October was described as "brittle,  temperamental  and  visibly
    polarised along party  lines".   It  appears  that  ZANU-PF,  no  doubt
    through the bussing in of supporters, were able to turn  many  outreach
    meetings into  political  rallies.   In  Harare  North  there  were  no
    reported incidents of political skirmishes or violence, although  "hate
    language" was said to have haunted the proceedings.

168.     Despite  the  problems  experienced  in  Harare  during  the  COPAC
    activities, it is plain that they were on nowhere near the scale of the
    2008 election violence.  Unlike reports in  respect  of  certain  rural
    areas,  where  there  is  suggestion  that  villagers  may  have   been
    threatened or otherwise cajoled to attend  meetings,  the  evidence  in
    respect of  Harare  does  not  indicate  that  (leaving  aside  ZANU-PF
    supporters who were bussed there), attendees  at  meetings  were  there
    otherwise than of their own free will.

169.   It would also be wrong to categorise the COPAC outreach meetings  as
    entirely negative.  In a press report of 5 November, it was  said  that
    the  deliberations  exhibited  "a  general  consensus  that   the   new
    constitution shall have a bill of rights  and  that  people  should  be
    guaranteed their freedom of expression and association".  This supports
    positive statements made in respect of the process by Morgan Tsvangirai
    and an MDC spokesman, who indicated that it would  be  wrong  to  think
    that the MDC would campaign for a "No" vote in any future referendum on
    the constitution. It also fits with the evidence regarding the separate
    "transitional justice" process, commented on by Professor  Ranger,  who
    acknowledged there had been relatively open discussions  in  connection
    with that process. Likewise, the British Embassy in Harare reported  to
    the FCO on 29 October that, despite ZANU-PF's  mobilising  to  dominate
    many  outreach  meetings,  "the  outreach  process  has  educated   and
    empowered many Zimbabweans" and that despite the serious flaws "it  has
    been remarkable to see an exercise of this scale unfold in the  way  it
    has".

170.     The Zimbabwe Peace Project reports in respect of  COPAC  activities
    in Bulawayo indicate that these "generally went well though with a  few
    isolated chaotic incidents".  This reflects  the  general  position  in
    that city, which we shall describe in more detail in due course.

171.     Instances of significant problems,  including  intimidation  backed
    by threats designed to instil serious fear,  are,  however,  much  more
    evident in reports relating to rural areas (other  than  Matabeleland),
    although these were not  always  overt.   The  Zimbabwe  Peace  Project
    report entitled "Shadowing the  Outreach  Process"  spoke  of  outreach
    violations in rural communities as being "craftily committed through an
    array of hard to detect  strategies  that  include  ferrying  of  party
    supporters from one venue to another, posting  party  youths/supporters
    at outreach venues, grouping  communities  under  their  head  men  and
    conducting of roll calls after meetings" etc.  According  to  the  same
    report, cases of harassment remained "disturbingly visible".

172.     The suggestion that all outreach meetings were dominated  by  ZANU-
    PF is, however, to  some  extent  contradicted  by  a  passage  in  the
    Zimbabwe Peace Project weekly report of 19 to 25 July, which  describes
    responses at meetings as being along political lines with  ZANU-PF  and
    MDC-T "actively involved in selling their constitutional  positions  by
    way  of  distributing  flyers  before  the  arrival  of  COPAC  teams".
    Contributions either reflected MDC-T or  ZANU-PF  positions  "depending
    which  political  party  was  dominating  at  the  outreach   meeting".
    Compatibly with what we have earlier noted, the reports said that areas
    that were less politically sensitive appeared to result  in  "consensus
    after serious debates", at least in the case of  meetings  in  Midlands
    province.

173.     Overall, we do not consider that the problems  emanating  from  the
    COPAC exercise in the period June-October 2010 justify  the  view  that
    there  has  been  a  significant  deterioration  in   general   country
    conditions, as seems to have been asserted by some of  the  appellants'
    witnesses.  The COPAC exercise has, however, served to  underscore  the
    difference in circumstances between those living  in  urban  and  rural
    areas respectively.  In particular, in some  instances  at  least,  the
    combination of coercion to  attend  meetings  and  the  nature  of  the
    threats made, appear to us to be capable of being  persecutory,  within
    the ambit of the Refugee Convention.  We do not, however, consider as a
    general matter  that  everyone  living  in  rural  areas  is  currently
    suffering persecution. But  the  evidence  regarding  COPAC  points  to
    differences between urban and rural  areas,  and  between  rural  areas
    themselves, which have relevance to the position of a person  returning
    from the United Kingdom, and which require a detailed appraisal. It  is
    to this that we now turn.

...

176.     ZimRights stated that urban areas were politically more  open  than
    rural ones and that violence was more common in "Mashonaland, Midlands,
    Manicaland and Masvingo.  These are  all  ex-ZANU-PF  strongholds  that
    ZANU-PF wants to win back  from  the  MDC.   They  are  doing  this  by
    cracking down on the people that they think made them lose."  A  little
    later, the same organisation stated that the  "remotest  parts  of  the
    rural areas are the most affected by violence".  So far  as  Manicaland
    was concerned, however, the interviewee thought that it would  be  very
    difficult for ZANU-PF to regain control, as the Zimbabwean people "have
    lost their patience".  The first now anonymous  interviewee  (paragraph
    97 above) told the FFM team that Harare was "more politically open than
    the rural areas.  Areas that were strongly contested  during  the  last
    election and where majorities  are  slim  are  still  battlegrounds  in
    political terms."  In this regard the interviewee referred  to  Bindura
    (in Mashonaland Central) and Buhera (in Manicaland).

...

201.     It is common ground that the  MDC  tend  to  dominate  high-density
    areas.  In his response to the FFM team,  W80  of  the  Zimbabwe  Human
    Rights NGO Forum said that it would be difficult for  ZANU-PF  to  harm
    MDC supporters in MDC dominated areas "because the MDC tend to be quite
    well-organised in those areas and can protect those who might otherwise
    be at risk of political violence by the threat of retribution".  In his
    statement on behalf of the appellants,  W80  sought  to  qualify  those
    remarks.  He said that what he was referring to were  isolated  pockets
    of resistance that had appeared on occasions and he did not  mean  that
    there were areas of the country that the MDC controlled or that the MDC
    could generally protect its supporters.  The infrastructure of violence
    was still intact and ZANU-PF remained in total control of the  coercive
    arms of the state.

202.     We accept W80's point that, since ZANU-PF does indeed remain in  de
    facto control of the army, police and similar services, it is wrong  to
    speak of any particular area of Zimbabwe as being "controlled"  by  the
    MDC.  Nevertheless, it is apparent that in  his  response  to  the  FFM
    team, W80 was describing the present position, where in practice it  is
    indeed "difficult for ZANU-PF supporters to harm MDC supporters in MDC-
    dominated areas".  The position might,  of  course,  be  different  if,
    immediately prior to an election, Mugabe and ZANU-PF were to  launch  a
    significant campaign of violence in Harare, such as in 2008.   That  is
    not, however, the position at present.

203.     We say this, having particular regard to the latest evidence,  from
    January 2011, concerning various disturbances in Harare, which are said
    to have been instigated by ZANU-PF elements. The alleged  establishment
    in high-density areas of campaign bases in the homes of ZANU-PF leaders
    falls significantly short of the kind of militia  bases  described   in
    the evidence in relation to certain rural areas. There continues to  be
    an  absence  of  reliable  evidence  that  militia  bases   have   been
    established in Harare. The setting up of  campaign  bases  in  peoples'
    homes is, if anything, an indication of the relative weakness of  ZANU-
    PF in the capital. The report of 26 January 2011 that carried the story
    of these bases referred to ZANU-PF and  MDC  youths  being  engaged  in
    clashes, which, again, differs from the descriptions of what  is  going
    on in rural areas, where the picture is often one  of  villagers  being
    coerced into silent submission by a ZANU-PF gang. Overall, we find that
    this and the other most recent evidence underscores the  position  that
    emerges from the earlier evidence, which is  that  the  focus  of  such
    current ZANU-PF activity as there  is  in  the  high-density  areas  of
    Harare is on MDC activists, as opposed to the general population.

204.     We accordingly conclude that,  at  the  present  time,  although  a
    person having no significant MDC profile, returning to  a  high-density
    area of Harare, is  likely  to  face  more  difficulties  than  someone
    returning to a low-density area, he or she would not at present face  a
    real risk of having to prove loyalty  to  ZANU-PF  in  order  to  avoid
    serious ill-treatment. So far  as  living  conditions  in  high-density
    areas are concerned, the only witness to assert  that  the  housing  in
    such areas was unfit for  human  habitation  was  the  person  we  have
    described as W79 of the Zimbabwe Human Rights Association.  We  do  not
    conclude from this that anyone having to live in such  a  high  density
    area would be exposed to inhuman or  degrading  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3. Mr Henderson did not attempt to submit to us that  this  was
    the case. Whether  any  individual  having  to  live  rough  in  shanty
    accommodation or other grossly overcrowded  and  insecure  arrangements
    would be exposed to treatment of this level of severity would depend on
    an  individual  assessment  of  circumstances  including  age,  gender,
    health, earning capacity, social assistance arrangements, the  presence
    of young children and the like.

205.     We have spoken so far of high  and  low-density  areas  in  Harare.
    Professor Ranger, however, told us that there were three kinds of  zone
    in Harare.  The low-density areas comprised the  white  community,  the
    coloured community and Africans "who were not so poor.  The low-density
    areas had more Africans than in the past."  Then there  were  areas  of
    intermediate-density.   Here,  although  there   were   problems   with
    dereliction, there were not problems with gangs.  These he  categorised
    as "medium-density areas".  Finally, there were the high-density areas,
    which, although they had problems, nevertheless  "had  some  services".
    The Tribunal also notes that appellant JG described her  home  area  of
    Queensdale as "kind of medium-density".  She said that it was  not  far
    from Epworth "where many rowdy gangs"  existed;  and  Queensdale  might
    therefore be "a  vulnerable  location".   Many  cities  in  the  world,
    including, ones in the United Kingdom, have areas of affluence adjacent
    or close to areas of relative deprivation.  This fact  would  generally
    not give rise to  a  claim  for  international  protection  or  furnish
    evidential support for a contention that it would be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect a person to relocate to accommodation there.  Particularly given
    what we have had to say about the present position of the  high-density
    areas in Harare, we do not consider  that  the  distribution  of  high,
    medium and low-density areas has significance, as regards  the  matters
    with which we are concerned.

...

243.     What we have just said  about  Matabeleland  applies  to  Bulawayo,
    even in the early election scenario.  As for Harare, whilst it  may  be
    reasonably likely that ZANU-PF militias etc would be bussed in to  that
    city in order to  cause  problems  during  an  election  campaign,  the
    present evidence is  such  that  it  would  be  merely  speculative  to
    conclude this would have a material impact upon those  living  in  low-
    density areas.  In addition, even in this scenario, we do not  consider
    the present evidence suggests that ZANU-PF would be able to  engage  in
    the kind of systematic intimidation, which it  would  deploy  in  rural
    areas of the eastern provinces.  In this regard, we note the absence of
    reliable evidence regarding militia bases. The  report  of  26  January
    2011, regarding the alleged use of ZANU-PF leaders' homes in Harare  as
    campaign bases, is said to be confined to high-density  areas  and,  in
    any case, appears to be of a different and lesser order to the sort  of
    camps and bases established in rural areas in 2008.  Whilst  we  accept
    the evidence of the appellants, that  even  in  high-density  areas  in
    which it dominates, the MDC would be unable to  resist  a  military  or
    quasi-military assault, it is questionable whether  ZANU-PF  would,  in
    2011, choose to launch such an assault, given the  high-profile  nature
    of Harare and the international condemnation which  would  ensue.   The
    evidence of January 2011 regarding disturbances in Harare instigated by
    ZANU-PF elements does not begin to amount to such a state  of  affairs,
    notwithstanding  the  report  of   Tsvangirai's   having   raised   the
    disturbances with President Zuma. Those involved  in  the  disturbances
    were MDC members and supporters (voanews.com article of 24 January) and
    the evidence of non-political residents suffering  in  this  regard  is
    sparse."


                                 APPENDIX B

                            DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE


                                   PART 1

                              WITNESS STATEMENTS

(1)  Appellant

Witness 77

1.     W77  is  a  member  of  several  networks  of  NGOs  and  faith-based
    organisations and has provided information at meetings with the Foreign
    and Commonwealth Office, Zimbabwe Unit.  He has continued  to  exchange
    information with his office in Zimbabwe and members of the diaspora and
    has made yearly visits to Zimbabwe, including in 2011 and  March  2012.
    He provided a written report dated 24th September 2012.

2.   In summary, he considers that there has been  no  significant  progress
    towards security reforms to prevent the violence of the 2008  elections
    being repeated or other reforms to ensure free and fair elections.  The
    GPA requires a referendum on a new Constitution before elections but  a
    recent impasse has occurred with  the  ZANU-PF  politburo  rejecting  a
    previously agreed draft.  If there are no reforms to the  Constitution,
    the elections required to be called by June 2013 will have to  be  held
    under the current constitutional arrangements which W77  believes  will
    lead to a greater capacity for violence.  Neither the MDC nor  SADC  is
    able  to  overcome  ZANU-PF's  political  and  military  control.   W77
    referred  to  recent  reports  suggesting  that  levels  of  fear   and
    mobilisation necessary to ensure ZANU-PF's continuation in  power  will
    be maintained.

3.   A recent Zimbabwe Election Support  Network  ("ZESN")  update  contains
    information on reduced levels of violence in certain constituencies but
    points to issues of  political  intimidation  over  songs,  reading  of
    certain newspapers, the wearing of party regalia and an intolerance  of
    opposing views.  W 77 states that most in Zimbabwe believe that ZANU-PF
    is gearing up for elections using  "favoured  tactics"  of  repression,
    denial of political space, intimidation and misinformation.

4.   The COPAC process to agree a new Constitution hit an impasse in  August
    2012,  with  a  draft  intended  to  go  to  the  second  stakeholders'
    conference.  This draft was  believed  by  some  in  civil  society  to
    contain some progressive  elements  but  recurring  delays  caused  the
    proposed referendum date of 30th September 2012 to  be  lost.   In  the
    event, ZANU-PF demanded many changes to the document.

5.   W77 is of the view that the MDC is unable to force changes through  the
    Interim Government ("IG")  and  that  Mugabe  retains  control  of  the
    military and intelligence ministries and the system of governance  from
    the Joint Operations Command ("JOC") downwards  to  ZANU-PF  supporting
    civil servants and the security forces.  All major civil service  posts
    and officials at  local  level  continue  to  be  occupied  by  ZANU-PF
    appointees.  Alongside this, there exists a parallel state with militia
    and gangs taking on  quasi-state  functions  such  as  controlling  the
    ability to work in the informal economy by demanding ZANU-PF cards  and
    money to operate in markets.

 6.  W77 states  that  the  police  remain  partisan  in  terms  of  who  is
    arrested, with government supporting perpetrators enjoying almost total
    immunity  and  others,  especially  opposition  supporters  and   civil
    society, still being subject to arbitrary arrest.  There  is  a  strong
    likelihood that violence will increase with the  elections,  especially
    now that ZANU-PF has rejected the COPAC draft.  In the opinion of  W77,
    consistent with views held by local partners, there has been a lack  of
    real change since late 2008 and those unable to demonstrate loyalty  to
    ZANU-PF would run  the  risk  of  ill-treatment.   After  the  election
    period, the position in late 2008 was described by  W77  as  being  not
    significantly different from subsequent years.

7.   This year, there has been increasing ZANU-PF  gang  activity  in  urban
    areas.  There has been factional fighting inside ZANU-PF, regarding the
    succession to Mugabe and ensuring continued access to legal and illegal
    resources.  This has increased since the  suspicious  death  in  August
    2011 of General Solomon Mujuru, husband of Vice President Joyce Mujuru,
    and head of one of  the  ZANU-PF  factions.   The  December  2011  ZANU
    conference saw new appointments to the Politburo to strengthen Mugabe's
    hand.  W77 opined that ZANU-PF might be in more turmoil than  the  MDC,
    not so much over political differences as between those  more  disposed
    towards political violence to solve problems  and  those  who  see  the
    dangers.  There are many reports of ZANU-PF gearing up for intimidation
    in electoral terms, with the expectation that violence will be directed
    at those areas that abandoned  ZANU-PF  in  2008.   Although  ZANU-PF's
    capacity and willingness to use violence did not appear to have abated,
    intimidation and  some  violence  rather  than  systemic  violence  are
    described by witness 77  as  current  characteristics,  a  footnote  to
    paragraph 19 of his statement drawing  attention  to  the  ZPP  Monthly
    Monitor for June 2012.  Zimbabwean civil society sees the role of SADC,
    as GPA guarantor, as being crucial to ensure that democratic  elections
    comply with SADC principles and guidelines.   Although  SADC  has  made
    clear that it wants free and fair elections, in  the  opinion  of  W77,
    they are unable to provide the means needed to enforce their will.

8.   Urban violence in townships in  Harare  has  increased,  including  the
    activities of the Chipangano gang in the Mbare township in Harare.  W77
    refers to a description of Chipangano as essentially an authorised ZANU-
    PF thug association, the source being a conversation in Brussels with a
    group of activists in October 2011.  Townships like Mbare are  volatile
    areas, ZANU-PF intensifying  its  strategies  for  controlling  or  re-
    imposing power over urban areas.  Although most of the residents, along
    with most townships in the greater Harare region,  support  the  MDC-T,
    there is a strong and threatening ZANU-PF presence.

9.   In preparing this part of his report, W77 spoke to Dr  Joann  McGregor,
    reader in human geography at UCL, who gave him access to  the  research
    she is currently working on, regarding violence in urban areas, with  a
    focus on Harare.  Dr McGregor has read and approved this part of  W77's
    report.  ZANU-PF's aims in intensifying its efforts  to  control  urban
    areas appears to be to win selected urban  constituencies,  to  control
    urban economic opportunities and resources and  distribute  them  in  a
    partisan manner  and  to  undermine  and  discredit  MDC-run  municipal
    councils.  Violence and economic incitements have been used to  achieve
    these ends, including the deployment of militias such as Chipangano.

10.  According to a Crisis Coalition briefing paper, Chipangano is  "growing
    its tentacles in all urban areas of Zimbabwe",  the  same  organisation
    pointing to links between ZANU-PF and  the  militia  group.   The  same
    briefing paper refers to Chipangano being in Mutare, Zimbabwe's  fourth
    biggest  urban  centre,  in  February  2012  during  Mugabe's  birthday
    celebrations.  Many residents were force marched to Sakubva Stadium for
    the festivities.  Dr  McGregor  believes,  as  do  witness  77's  local
    partners, that Chipangano is hijacking local state  roles  in  Harare's
    main markets, being particularly active in the high density  suburb  of
    Mbare.  This reflects the area's importance as a hub for  the  informal
    economy,  with  its  extensive  markets  and  the  main  bus   station.
    Chipangano has exercised control and  surveillance  and  has  regularly
    closed the markets and forced all traders to attend ZANU-PF rallies and
    events, monitoring attendance by maintaining registers.

11.  W77 states that militia bases comparable to those in 2008 have been re-
    established around Mbare and surveillance reinforced so that  the  area
    has become "no go" for MDC councillors and its MP.  Transport hubs, bus
    and "kombi" ranks throughout the city have come under comparable  ZANU-
    PF control.  In some areas, the MDC and local traders have been able to
    put forward some temporary resistance to these.  Violence has escalated
    recently in relation to protection  fees  demanded  by  ZANU-PF  linked
    militia from minibus operators in the capital, W77 giving as a source a
    report published on 29th May 2012 by CHRA.   Taking  into  account  the
    acute shortage of housing in Harare and other urban areas and the  lack
    of capacity available to the MDC councils  to  provide  housing,  those
    without independent means returning or moving to urban areas, including
    removed asylum seekers, would now find it even more  difficult  in  the
    high density areas to which they would have to  go.   Without  existing
    housing or relatives to live with, they would be liable to  end  up  in
    high density overspill areas where loyalty to ZANU-PF is most likely to
    be demanded.  Without support mechanisms, the people  in  high  density
    areas will be forced into the informal  sector  to  earn  their  living
    where groups such as  Chipangano  charge  protection  fees  and  demand
    displays of loyalty or ZANU-PF cards.

12.  So far as the humanitarian situation  in  Zimbabwe  is  concerned,  W77
    described this as precarious.  Food distribution  is  still  liable  to
    politicisation in distribution and there are acute water  shortages  in
    certain areas.  Cholera, which had been halted, now seems to be on  the
    point of returning and malaria and  measles  have  been  endemic  since
    2010.  The economy appears to be losing momentum,  with  donor  funding
    and  investment   problems   due   to   coalition   disagreements   and
    indigenisation worries.  A footnote to this  part  of  W77's  statement
    includes a news item reporting that the growth forecast in Zimbabwe had
    been cut to 5.6%, in  mid  July  2012.   Although  there  has  been  an
    improvement in livelihoods in urban areas, W77 described this  as  very
    partial and largely restricted to  those  with  access  to  dollars  or
    rands.  Those who previously worked in the informal  sector  have  seen
    their position worsen  and  the  small  rise  in  employment  will  not
    necessarily last.   The  rural  poor  are  more  or  less  out  of  the
    mainstream  economy  and  are  dependent  on  harvesting,  trading  and
    survival.

Anthony Reeler

13.  Antony Reeler, director of the  Research  and  Advocacy  Unit  ("RAU"),
    provided  a  statement  dated  25th  September  2012.    He   and   his
    organisation have been involved  in  comprehensive  monitoring  of  the
    political  situation  in  Zimbabwe.   The  RAU  has  a  wide  range  of
    partnerships  with  other  Zimbabwean  non-governmental   organisations
    working in Zimbabwe in urban and rural communities.  Mr  Reeler  states
    that the present government may continue  in  office  only  until  June
    2013.  If elections  are  called  at  the  last  possible  moment,  the
    electoral process itself could theoretically take until  the  start  of
    November 2013 to conclude but the rainy season  in  Zimbabwe  makes  it
    difficult to hold elections after September due to poor  conditions  in
    rural areas.

14.  The COPAC process to agree a new Constitution has been  badly  delayed,
    ZANU-PF rejecting a compromise draft which  had  earlier  been  agreed.
    The two MDC factions have rejected ZANU-PF's list of  amendments.   The
    next stage will be the second stakeholders' conference.  This might  be
    held "in house" with all representatives of civil society excluded, the
    political parties seeing this as a means to increase the chances  of  a
    compromise draft being agreed.   So  far  as  a  referendum  on  a  new
    Constitution is concerned, this  is  dependent  on  the  resolution  of
    disagreements between the parties over the content of  the  draft.   Mr
    Reeler  states  that  it  is  possible  that  disagreements  over   the
    Constitution may be so severe that the COPAC process will fail.   There
    will then remain a legal  necessity  for  general  elections.   In  the
    absence of a new Constitution, these will be held  under  the  existing
    Lancaster House Constitution.   Even  if  the  COPAC  draft  previously
    negotiated were to remain in place, this would represent  a  compromise
    text that a substantial part of civil society has already  rejected  as
    inadequate and flawed.  Mr Reeler states that in his  view,  the  COPAC
    draft is not a major advance on the Lancaster House Constitution.

15.  In any event, even if the  draft  were  passed  and  came  into  effect
    before  the  elections,  it  would  have  little  impact  in  terms  of
    preventing the tactics used by ZANU-PF in the 2008 elections  as  there
    have been no significant reforms to the institutions  which  Mr  Reeler
    describes as key to whether the 2008 violence  will  be  repeated.   He
    states that there has been no real change to the operation of JOC,  the
    police, the partisanship of the  attorney-general  or  the  traditional
    leadership.  There is no evidence that there has been any  real  reform
    of the formal state organisations, including the army, the  police  and
    the CIO that have been regularly  reported  as  involved  in  political
    violence and intimidation.  No reliable commentator  has  identified  a
    change  for  the  better   in   the   independence,   reliability   and
    professionalism of the police as compared to late 2008.   The  security
    chiefs also retain their  explicit  political  affiliations,  the  most
    senior officers in the army publicly expressing their support for ZANU-
    PF  and  denigrating  opposition  political  parties.   Notwithstanding
    legislation requiring the police to be  non-partisan,  the  Police  Act
    expressly forbidding policemen from belonging to a political party, the
    Commissioner  General  of  the  Zimbabwe  Republic  Police,   Augustine
    Chihuri, has publicly expressed his  support  for  ZANU-PF  and  recent
    weeks have seen attacks by the police on gays, lesbians and women.

16.  There are also frequent statements by ZANU-PF  supporters  and  members
    of the government denigrating and threatening NGOs. Abel Chikomo of the
    Human Rights Forum has been arrested repeatedly in 2011 and  2012.   Mr
    Reeler states that there is little evidence that  there  has  been  any
    attempt to control or  bring  to  justice  any  of  the  War  Veterans,
    traditional leaders,  youth  militia,  local  government  officials  or
    political party supporters.  There has been a  number  of  prosecutions
    for murder and  rape  but  there  remain  outstanding  several  hundred
    murders that are not receiving any "plausible attention".  The work  of
    the RAU does not indicate that the propensity  for  political  violence
    and intimidation has declined.  In the statement he made to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in EM in 2010,  Mr  Reeler  observed  that  violence  was  not
    currently as high as  during  the  2008  election  period.   The  worst
    violence occurred between the March and June elections in that year and
    in the days immediately after the  June  election.   The  situation  in
    October and November 2008 is  described  by  Mr  Reeler  as  "basically
    similar to the current situation: a polarised situation with a  reduced
    level of violence compared to the  2008  election  period  but  ...  no
    movement on reforms that would mitigate against that level of  violence
    being unleashed again."  The apparatus to  unleash  such  violence  has
    been maintained in place and there are currently regular  alerts  about
    militia bases being reopened.

17.  Mr Reeler states that although SADC has  made  some  strong  statements
    about the need for reform in the last two years, the  strength  of  its
    statements has had no effect in terms of its ability to achieve  change
    on the ground.  Although SADC has  placed  two  persons  in  the  JOMIC
    secretariat, the machinery for conducting and supervising the elections
    is mostly under the control of ZANU-PF, which has  a  majority  in  the
    Zimbabwe Electoral Commission and is  in  charge  of  the  Ministry  of
    Justice, which in turn controls the Registrar General's office and  the
    maintenance of the voters roll.  ZANU-PF also controls the machinery by
    which ordinary citizens can be influenced or compelled to vote, such as
    state institutions and  proxy  forces,  including  youth  militia,  War
    Veterans and ZANU-PF supporters.

18.  Mr Reeler states that intensive monitoring might make a  difference  to
    vote-rigging and violence and intimidation, of the kind implemented for
    the 1994 South African elections.  This would include high level police
    officers from other countries placed within the police and monitors  on
    the ground in communities.  All of this would need to be in  place  six
    months ahead of the actual elections.  This has never been achieved  in
    Zimbabwe. Most of the monitors in 2008 arrived only a couple  of  weeks
    immediately prior to the polls and were powerless to prevent  violence.
    If elections are to take place in June  2013,  monitors  and  observers
    would need to be in place in Zimbabwe in January in state  institutions
    such as the ZEC, the Registrar General's office,  the  police  and  the
    army as well as on the ground.  There have been  no  steps  since  June
    2010 to put that sort of monitoring in place.  The reality is that  the
    security forces, the police and ZANU-PF are absolutely opposed to  this
    sort of monitoring and are determined to prevent it.

19.  Mr Reeler states that there are reports that "the  heat  is  rising  in
    both rural and urban areas, so it looks as if there is mobilising going
    on."  There are more ZANU-PF groups operating in urban areas, including
    Chipangano in Harare and Al Shabaab in Midlands.

20.  Although the monthly totals of violations produced by the ZPP are  less
    this year than in previous years, in his view this does not give a true
    reflection of the extent of intimidation and violence happening on  the
    ground, especially in urban areas.  It can be seen from numerous recent
    news reports that what is going on in Harare is not  reflected  in  the
    ZPP numbers for the  city.   ZPP  has  a  couple  of  hundred  monitors
    covering the whole country and it is more difficult for them to monitor
    and report on individual incidents  in  high  density  urban  settings,
    especially for Harare and Chitungwiza.  The ZPP  reporting  process  is
    only  intended  to  present  those  incidents  that  its  monitors  can
    personally either observe or establish after the event, through reports
    to them.  Unlike reports produced by  the  Human  Rights  Forum,  which
    aimed to collate all credible reports based on all news reports and  on
    information from all NGOs, as well as first  hand  testimony,  the  ZPP
    only collates reports from its own monitors.   It  is  easier  for  ZPP
    monitors to observe and establish individual violations connected  with
    political processes on the ground and monitors  living  in  communities
    can only do their work by remaining anonymous.  The monitors  may  have
    advance notice of political processes where violations are  likely  and
    may be able to observe and record violations connected with them.

21.    Local political structures may  also  have  established  confidential
    lines of communication with  monitors  through  which  reports  can  be
    channelled after the event.  On the other  hand,  ZANU-PF  militia  and
    gang intimidation and violence directed against ordinary  citizens  are
    more random and unpredictable and so an  observer  is  unlikely  to  be
    present by chance to observe an incident.  Unless the ordinary  citizen
    is willing and able to make a report to a monitor, the monitor will not
    be able to report an incident and it will not be recorded in a  report.
    Mr Reeler states  that  only  a  fraction  of  incidents  are  recorded
    individually by NGOs and individual incidents that are reported  cannot
    be assumed to be representative of what is  happening  on  the  ground.
    Another issue is what constitutes a violation for the purposes  of  the
    ZPP statistics.  Does  a  single  violation  have  one  victim  or  100
    victims?  Are different types of violations counted in  the  same  way?
    The nature of the reports of violations means that they  are  a  sample
    rather than a national picture and it is necessary to  refer  to  wider
    commentary, including news reports.

22.  Mr Reeler states that one of the most significant  recent  developments
    is an appreciable rise in ZANU-PF militia activity in urban areas  over
    the last nine months.  Chipangano, which  he  describes  as  a  ZANU-PF
    affiliated gang, has been active throughout Harare and the neighbouring
    town of  Chitungwiza  and  has  carried  out  violence,  extortion  and
    intimidation with complete impunity.  The gang has displaced  non-ZANU-
    PF persons from employment,  arrested  persons  selling  from  informal
    markets or the roadside and even threatened  a  businessman  trying  to
    develop a petrol station.  There has even  been  adverse  comment  from
    ZANU-PF officials about the gang's activities but Mr  Reeler  described
    denials of affiliation as not credible.

23.  So far as roadblocks are  concerned,  Mr  Reeler  states  that  militia
    roadblocks have always been more a rural  feature  and  are  most  used
    during elections.  The militia in urban areas  did  not  generally  use
    roadblocks  but  moved  around  inflicting  violence   on   the   urban
    population.  However, there are currently dozens of roadblocks in rural
    and urban areas throughout the country  set  up  by  the  police,  used
    primarily to extract bribes and providing a continuous reminder of  the
    power of ZANU-PF, as the police owe public affiliation  to  the  party.
    There is little evidence that the MDC can provide effective  protection
    from ZANU-PF, even as part of the Inclusive Government.   What  efforts
    the  party  can  make  to  help  people  will,  stated  Mr  Reeler,  be
    concentrated on their own activists rather than non-aligned people.

24.  Mr Reeler describes the humanitarian situation as  having  deteriorated
    this year, with severe outbreaks of typhoid in several urban areas  and
    growing food insecurity.  He refers to Mr Dewa Mavhinga as a  good  and
    well-informed observer and as having written eruditely on Zimbabwe.  Mr
    Reeler has seen W77's report for the appeal and considers  it  accurate
    and up-to-date.

Professor Ranger

25.  Professor Terrance Ranger provided a short undated statement.   He  has
    suffered from ill health recently and has been unable to travel outside
    Oxford in 2012.  He has kept  in  touch  with  events  in  Zimbabwe  by
    reading international  and  local  human  rights  reports,  maintaining
    correspondence with friends and students in Zimbabwe  and  through  the
    Zimbabwe association and the British Zimbabwe Society.

26.  He states that he is familiar with  the  research  of  Dr  McGregor  on
    Harare and  in  addition  receives  regular  reports  from  researchers
    including former students in Bulawayo.  He has read  W77's  report  and
    wishes to endorse the points made in it.  He adds that the security and
    humanitarian situation in Bulawayo has seriously deteriorated since  he
    last gave evidence,  in  EM.   The  humanitarian  situation  is  pretty
    desperate and unemployment high.  Professor Ranger states that Zimbabwe
    is in a complex situation.  By selective quotation one can cite  Morgan
    Tsvangirai for the opinion that  Mugabe  and  even  the  generals  will
    accept electoral defeat like gentlemen.  This is said in the hope  that
    it might put some constraint on ZANU-PF.  The real  situation  and  its
    dangers are as in W77's report.

Witness 66

27.  A similar short statement was  provided  by  W66.   He  has  previously
    given written and oral evidence in appeals concerning  Zimbabwe  before
    the Upper Tribunal.  He has read the report prepared by W77 and  agrees
    with his analysis.

Mr Mavhinga

28.  Mr Dewa Mavhinga made a statement on 26 September 2012.   Until  August
    2012, he was regional coordinator for the Crisis in Zimbabwe  Coalition
    and has worked in Zimbabwe in civil society since 2003,  for  different
    organisations.  Mr Mavhinga states that the current term of office  for
    President Mugabe and the parliament expires in June 2013 and  elections
    must be called by then.  The first round of elections is  traditionally
    held in March.  He states that violence similar to 2008 or  even  worse
    is expected in the forthcoming elections.

29.   There are tensions within ZANU-PF regarding the succession  to  Mugabe
    which make the outlook even more unstable.  Although the military  were
    of course closely involved in the 2008 violence, the security forces in
    Zimbabwe are not simply an instrument of Mugabe.  They have  their  own
    interests to protect,  including  economic  interests.   These  include
    interests in mines in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the  Marange
    diamond fields.  Mr Mavhinga states that the security  forces  have  an
    interest  in  preventing  any  risk  of  prosecution  domestically   or
    internationally.

30.   In his view this concern will not prevent the  violence  of  the  2008
    elections being repeated.  Although the MDC have said that  they  would
    consider some form of  amnesty,  in  Mr  Mavhinga's  view  this  was  a
    worthless guarantee. There was previously a willingness  by  the  group
    led by the late General Solomon Mujuru to negotiate.  There is a strong
    suspicion in Zimbabwe that  he  was  murdered  in  consequence  of  his
    connection  with  this  group.   A  condition  of  the  GPA   was   the
    establishment of the National Security Council  to  replace  the  Joint
    Operations Command (JOC).  Although the council was set up, it does not
    function and  has  met  no  more  than  four  or  five  times,  without
    discussing substantial policy issues.  The JOC, however, has  continued
    to meet outside  the  framework  of  government,  making  key  national
    security decisions and reporting directly to Mugabe outside the GPA.

31.  Mr Mavhinga states that he expects the  JOC  to  play  a  role  in  the
    violence in the  forthcoming  elections.   The  draft  constitution  is
    currently subject to political negotiation.  The COPAC  draft  requires
    free and fair elections but the  legislative  framework  in  2008  was,
    states Mr Mavhinga, already reasonable  in  terms  of  electoral  laws.
    What  matters  for  ZANU-PF  is  their  ability  to  inflict  violence,
    intimidation and fear on the population to control the electorate.  The
    proposed new Constitution will not change that.  Mr  Mavhinga  expected
    in October 2010 that elections would be held in 2011.   That  elections
    were not held was due to some extent to the influence from ZANU-PF  MPs
    who did not want to expose themselves to early elections.  Mr  Mavhinga
    believes that Mugabe and ZANU-PF have treated the GPA as if it  were  a
    ceasefire  agreement,  allowing  them  to  regroup.   ZANU-PF  and  the
    security forces have benefitted economically, through access to diamond
    revenues controlled by the  military  and  the  implementation  of  the
    indigenisation policy, requiring companies worth more  than  US$500,000
    to cede 51% of their shares.

32.  Mr Mavhinga states that free and fair elections will depend  on  reform
    of the security sector and effective  monitoring.   Civil  society  has
    demanded early deployment of effective monitors with unfettered access,
    six months before elections.  However, ZANU-PF will reject this sort of
    monitoring and the SADC guidelines only require  deployment  two  weeks
    before the elections are held.  Mr Mavhinga and his colleagues met with
    the executive director of SADC in August 2011 and with SADC ambassadors
    in September 2012, to advocate reform of the security sector and  long-
    term, effective monitoring.  They propose that  SADC  should  call  for
    soldiers to be confined to barracks during the elections, to limit  the
    intimidation of citizens.  SADC replied that this would  amount  to  an
    interference.  Responsibility for facilitating the GPA rests  primarily
    with South Africa.  Although President Zuma has been more critical than
    Mbeki, there remains a base of sympathy and solidarity in the  ANC  for
    ZANU-PF.

33.  Mr Mavhinga states that in urban areas  in  recent  months,  there  has
    been increased ZANU-PF militia and gang activity, compared to 2010  and
    2011.  Chipangano is based in Mbare, a high density suburb  of  Harare.
    It operates across the  city,  forcing  people  in  different  ways  to
    profess loyalty to ZANU-PF through intimidation, threats and  violence.
    There is no clear distinction between Chipangano and the youth militia.
     Mbare has a large population and is the main commercial and  transport
    hub, with the largest markets in Harare.  Many from outside the  suburb
    go there to work in the informal economy.  Unemployed  youth  in  Mbare
    form a critical mass and can be  easily  recruited  as  instruments  of
    intimidation and violence.  Residents have to show  ZANU-PF  cards  and
    attend meetings.  There has been no reform of the police,  who  provide
    no real protection to citizens from the militia.

34.  The Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition obtained a secret video  of  a  forced
    meeting in Harare  in  2012.   This  is  evidence  that  would  not  be
    reflected in reports such as the ZPP's monthly statistics.  Mr Mavhinga
    describes reports of ZANU-PF denying an association with Chipangano  as
    not credible as there  are  eyewitness  reports  where  senior  ZANU-PF
    officials have been seen acting together with these  groups  to  create
    terror and intimidation.   The  leader  of  Chipangano  is  the  Harare
    province ZANU-PF youth  leader.   Militia  operations  have  also  been
    happening in other towns and cities although it can be unclear  whether
    the militia are based there or travel in.  The MDC has no real capacity
    to protect ordinary citizens and can only make  public  statements  and
    ask for support.

35.  Mr Mavhinga states that a person returning to Zimbabwe with  no  family
    to support him would end up in a high density or  periurban  area,  the
    only chance of employment being in the informal economy.  Such a person
    would come into contact with the militia or gangs and have  to  profess
    support for ZANU-PF.  Such  a  person  would  face  being  required  to
    present a ZANU-PF card to work in the markets and to  show  loyalty  by
    attending meetings and buying  membership  of  ZANU-PF.   If  a  person
    travelled from the airport with no funds or family to go to,  he  would
    arrive at Mbare.  Epworth  high  density  suburb  is  another  possible
    destination,  where  it  is  easier  to  build  a  shack.   ZANU-PF  is
    particularly prevalent in these areas and in order to be  permitted  to
    build a shack loyalty would have to be professed to the party.   People
    without resources are now forced into the overspill  in  the  periurban
    areas where they depend on local ZANU-PF gangs to make and  keep  their
    shacks.

36.      Such people would be intimidated  and  required  to  take  part  in
    night vigils and even to  participate  in  intimidation  and  violence.
    Everyone in the locality is required to attend  re-education  campaigns
    for the whole night.  These activities will become  more  prevalent  as
    the elections approach.  The militia and gangs will become increasingly
    active around the city, as will the  army.   Mr  Mavhinga  comments  on
    medium density areas.  He describes them as relics from  town  planning
    before independence.  These areas have more in common with high density
    areas than low density ones.

37.  So far as Bulawayo is concerned, Mr Mavhinga would  not  describe  this
    as a safe place.  Shona people facing serious problems in Harare  would
    not travel to Bulawayo by bus to try to establish themselves  there  if
    they had no ties or family in the city.  Bulawayo also has high density
    and periurban areas but simply turning up there without any ties  would
    attract attention, especially if such a person could  communicate  only
    in English.  Throughout Zimbabwe, people want to  know  where  you  are
    from  and  why  you  are  present  and  information   travels   through
    communities quickly.  This makes it easy for local militia to check out
    newcomers and test their political allegiance.

38.  Urban areas do not have traditional chiefs but they do have local ZANU-
    PF and militia instead.  The position regarding the supply of  food  is
    worse than for the past couple of years, meaning that  people  in  high
    density and periurban areas as well as rural areas will be dependent on
    food aid as the elections approach.  This increases the risk of ZANU-PF
    interference.

Justina Mukoko

39.  Ms Justina Mukoko, executive director of  the  Zimbabwe  Peace  Project
    ("ZPP") made a statement on 25th September 2012.  She describes herself
    as a human rights activist and former journalist and as a recipient  in
    March 2010 of the US State Department's International Women of  Courage
    Award.  She describes as really worrying a rise in militia activity  in
    Harare and other urban areas since the beginning  of  2012.   Residents
    have been obstructed from earning their living in the informal  economy
    if they cannot show allegiance to ZANU-PF.  The Chipangano militia have
    required market stalls to be closed in order to force people to  attend
    ZANU-PF meetings.  Stalls are only permitted to reopen once the meeting
    is over.

40.  Ms Mukoko states that  ZPP  has  two  monitors  in  each  parliamentary
    constituency.  They remain anonymous so as to minimise  risk  to  them.
    ZANU-PF, the security forces and the militia do not like  human  rights
    violations being publicised by ZPP.   In  2008,  the  organisation  was
    targeted as it was in a position to publicise victims and  perpetrators
    in the election violence.  ZPP's monthly reports are summaries compiled
    at the national office, based on reports  from  constituency  monitors.
    Verification is an important component and the organisation vests a lot
    in this.  Violations are only recorded once verified. Monitors  on  the
    ground do the initial verification and information is  then  passed  to
    provincial coordinators.  National officers also have a role.  Where  a
    single violation is recorded, this might involve  a  single  victim  or
    many  victims,  depending  on  the  nature  of  the   violation.    The
    organisation is working on providing definitions of the categories used
    to identify violations.  The violations given in  the  monthly  summary
    reports are those that have been individually  verified  and  recorded.
    Ms Mukoko states that it is more difficult to individually  verify  and
    record a large proportion of  the  current  violations  by  militia  in
    Harare because of the high density  of  people  living  there  and  the
    numbers affected.

Witness 83

41.  W83 is an MDC representative in the United  Kingdom  and  Ireland  with
    authority to speak on their behalf.  W83 has known CM since early  2007
    and wrote letters in support in February 2009 and September  2012.   He
    gave evidence before the judge at the original hearing of CM's  appeal.
    He is able to confirm that CM regularly attended meetings during  W83's
    time as branch chair. W83 maintains contact with the local  branch  and
    its members and is able to confirm that  CM  has  continued  to  attend
    meetings.  The activities of the local branch were  not  well-known  or
    publicised when CM joined and the branch was not really active prior to
    2007, when it was properly constituted.  W83 would describe  the  local
    branch as important in the overall structure of the MDC in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is the branch where a number of important  campaigns  were
    initiated, to involve local community groups and organisations  in  the
    town.  The branch also had prominence because of  its  links  with  the
    national leadership, W83 and  another  member  of  the  branch,  Adella
    Chiminya being well-known and having leadership roles in the MDC in the
    United Kingdom.  W83 states that CM has been involved with  fundraising
    activities at the branch and has  helped  with  fundraising  activities
    organised by other branches.   W83  recalls  travelling  to  events  in
    Peterborough  and  Portsmouth  in  2008  with  CM.   CM  has   attended
    demonstrations organised by the MDC and travelled  to  Leeds  with  the
    local branch to attend the  Congress  in  April  2011,  where  W83  was
    elected to his current post.

42.  The MDC in Zimbabwe draws on financial support  from  branches  abroad,
    including the UK and Ireland branch.  Contributions  from  this  branch
    stand at around ten times  higher  than  contributions  made  by  other
    branches in other countries.  In 2008, the MDC in the  UK  and  Ireland
    was vital in funding campaigns  in  30  to  40  key  constituencies  in
    Zimbabwe, by providing funds directly to them, the balances being  sent
    to the MDC central organisation in Zimbabwe.   At  present,  the  south
    west district in the United Kingdom is twinned with  constituencies  in
    Mashonaland East, where some of the worst violence  in  2008  occurred.
    The UK and Ireland branch also has a good website  and  a  calendar  of
    fundraising and branch level activities.  W83 states that the party  is
    concerned about potential infiltration by the CIO and ZANU-PF.

43.  It is difficult to control or vet access to branch activities  such  as
    meetings and party events are regularly photographed, not least because
    members want to keep a record of their activities.  It is difficult for
    the MDC to check the background of people joining.  In  W83's  opinion,
    the political temperature in Zimbabwe is rising.  The weekend before he
    made his statement in early October 2012, he received a communiqu from
    the MDC in Zimbabwe concerning attacks by War Veterans on  MDC  members
    travelling to Bulawayo  on  the  occasion  of  the  party's  thirteenth
    anniversary.  Some required hospital treatment.  In his opinion,  being
    involved in activities in the MDC here would  place  an  individual  at
    risk on return to Zimbabwe.  In W83's view,  the  security  forces  and
    ZANU-PF are increasingly  paranoid  about  the  possibility  of  regime
    change following the forthcoming elections.  The CIO is present at  the
    airport and questions passengers forcibly returned to Zimbabwe from the
    United Kingdom.  Someone returned would in all  likelihood  be  stopped
    and asked what they had been doing in the United  Kingdom  and  whether
    they had connections with the MDC.  This  would  not  be  dependent  on
    whether the CIO had an intelligence based record on the  returnee.   If
    CM  answered  truthfully  about  his  MDC  involvement,  he  would   be
    questioned in greater detail and that would be linked with  a  risk  of
    ill-treatment.  After arrival in Zimbabwe,  a  person  outside  of  the
    country for a long period would be in great difficulty  as  they  would
    lack the ability to repeat the current slogans and were  likely  to  be
    suspected of being not supporters of ZANU-PF  if  the  current  slogans
    were not known.  Newcomers to a particular locality would be likely  to
    be questioned by the militia, including questions regarding a  person's
    politics.

The appellant

44.  CM's immigration history, the circumstances in which he  left  Zimbabwe
    and his account of events since his arrival in the United  Kingdom  are
    summarised in EM at  paragraphs  20  to  23  and  284  to  298  of  the
    determination.  The findings of fact made by a  Designated  Immigration
    Judge, in dismissing CM's appeal in October 2009, have been  preserved.
    These included adverse credibility findings, the judge did  not  accept
    CM's evidence about what he had done for the MDC in Zimbabwe  and  what
    had happened to him as a  result  and  concluding  that  any  political
    profile CM had with the MDC in Zimbabwe was at the lowest level.

45.  The panel found in EM that there was no reason  to  believe  that  CM's
    vestigial connections with the MDC would put him at risk in  Harare  of
    adverse interest, including having to demonstrate  loyalty.   This  was
    especially true if he resides in the low or medium density suburbs with
    which he has been historically connected, including Hatfield, his  last
    place of residence.

46.  Even in the unlikely event of his living in high density  suburbs,  the
    Tribunal concluded that there was no real risk of his  being  subjected
    to a loyalty test or serious harm, applying  the  Country  Guidance  at
    paragraph 276(5) of the determination.  No Article 8 case was  advanced
    on behalf of appellant CM and the Tribunal saw nothing in the  evidence
    to suggest why one might have been.  His  20  year  old  son  lived  in
    Oldham but his other children remained in  Harare.   CM  was  separated
    from his wife.

47.  CM has since provided two witness statements, dated 26th September  and
    3rd October 2012.  His  last  permanent  address  in  Zimbabwe  was  in
    Hatfield Harare.  At the time he left Zimbabwe, his second  wife,  Mary
    was living in the house.  At the end of 2010,  she  left  Zimbabwe  and
    returned to Malawi with the couple's youngest son, D.  CM  states  that
    his wife and D have remained in Blantyre in Malawi ever since and  that
    he has not had contact with them since they went to live there.   Their
    older son, S, came to the United Kingdom in 2007.  In his statement, CM
    describes  Hatfield  as  a  medium  density  suburb.   In  his   asylum
    interview,  he  erred  in  describing  Hatfield  and  the  suburbs   of
    Southerton and Westgate, where his children were living, as low density
    areas.  All three areas are medium density.  The suburb  of  Hatcliffe,
    where he lived in the period before he left Zimbabwe, is a high density
    area.

48.  Since his second wife left  for  Malawi,  the  house  in  Hatfield  has
    remained empty.  A friend who visited Zimbabwe in  May  and  June  2012
    went to look at it and told CM that it is in a dilapidated state.   The
    bathroom and bedroom windows are broken, the back door to  the  kitchen
    is damaged and tiles on the  top  of  the  lounge  have  been  removed,
    causing leaking and damage to the floors.

49.  CM states that he has no family remaining in  Harare.  His  first  wife
    divorced him in 1982 and relations between them are not good. His  four
    adult children from his first marriage were living  in  Harare  at  the
    time of his asylum interview but all have left since then. They  remain
    in Zimbabwe but CM is not in regular contact with any  of  them.   They
    live in different parts of the country, struggling to make  ends  meet.
    CM's son, DN, lived in Southerton for a  while  but  went  to  Masvingo
    towards the end of 2010, seeking work.  CM last spoke to him about  six
    months ago.  He lives in Mucheke Township, a high density area, with  a
    friend.  DN has not found work and does not have his own accommodation.
     CM's son, C Junior, lived in Hatcliffe for a while before leaving  for
    Kariba in Mashonaland West,  where  he  was  offered  a  job  with  the
    fisheries.  He met his wife in Kariba and they have two  children.   CM
    states that his son does not earn very much and the family struggles to
    make ends meet.  He last spoke to C Junior five or six months ago, when
    they were living in two rooms with the children.  His older daughter  P
    went to live with her mother in Wedza towards the end of 2010.   P  has
    four children, two of whom live with her.  She is  separated  from  the
    father of the children.  Wedza is a rural area and, so  far  as  CM  is
    aware, the family survives by growing food and selling  some  of  their
    produce.  CM has had little contact  with  P  as  there  is  no  mobile
    telephone reception and has not spoken to her  for  many  months.   His
    younger daughter, R, lives with her  aunt  in  Chinoyi  in  Mashonaland
    West.  Contrary to what appears in the Asylum Interview Record,  R  has
    never married.  She lived with DN in  Southerton  for  a  while  before
    leaving for Masvingo.  CM does not know R's aunt as he  separated  from
    his first wife a long time ago.  R is not working and  neither  is  her
    aunt.  CM has little contact with them.

50.  CM states that he still fears return to Hatfield as he  is  opposed  to
    ZANU-PF.  He had lived in Hatfield since 1988 and fears that  he  would
    be known if he returned there, even  after  a  few  years  of  absence.
    Hatfield is about one and a half miles from Epworth, which also  causes
    him concern.  He believes that none of his children would  be  able  to
    support him as they are all in difficulties economically.  It would  be
    difficult for CM to move to a new place, particularly in the  light  of
    his age, to find any form of work or accommodation.  The only place  he
    believes he would be able to return to in  Zimbabwe  is  his  brother's
    place in Karoi. CM has kept in touch with WM, his younger brother.   He
    lives with his family in Chikangwe, a high density  area  of  Karoi,  a
    town in Mashonaland West, not far from Kariba.   CM  believes  that  he
    could stay there initially although probably not on a long-term  basis.
    CM states that he continues to attend MDC meetings in the town where he
    lives in the United Kingdom and has participated  in  fundraising  with
    the local branch and attended demonstrations.

51.  Attached to his first statement is a letter from W83, a  representative
    of the MDC United Kingdom and Ireland with authority to speak on  their
    behalf, in which CM is described as a longstanding  and  fully  paid-up
    member of the local branch who is involved in branch activities.   Also
    attached to his statement is a  newspaper  article  from  an  "in-depth
    reporter" regarding occupation of  land  between  Hatfield  and  Harare
    International  Airport.   A  settlement  cleared  away   in   Operation
    Murambatsvina has established itself  there,  although  the  government
    supports a drive by the local authority to  clear  illegal  structures.
    In the article, a prominent figure in the settlement claimed  that  the
    authorities envied the occupied land because of its  proximity  to  the
    airport "and the nearby medium density suburb of Hatfield".

52.  CM added more detail regarding his health in his second statement.   He
    has been taking  medicines  to  control  hypertension  and  high  blood
    pressure since about 1982.  Without his medicines, his legs  swell  and
    it becomes difficult  for  him  to  walk.   He  also  suffers  from  an
    irregular heartbeat.   CM  states  that  his  60th  birthday  falls  in
    November 2012.  He has been absent from Zimbabwe for seven and  a  half
    years and will be unable to compete with younger men to find work.   He
    would have no way of earning money in Harare and would have  no  choice
    but to return to his brother, WM, who would be able to house  and  feed
    CM for at least a while.  His brother's job involves driving lorries on
    a route from Johannesburg to the DRC, via  Zambia  and  Zimbabwe.   His
    brother can be absent for months at a time.  CM states  that  over  the
    last couple of years, WM has told him in their telephone  conversations
    about ZANU-PF meetings  that  have  been  held  in  Chikangwe,  ZANU-PF
    supporters regularly going from house to house asking people to  attend
    the meetings.  He spoke to  his  brother  the  day  before  making  his
    statement and was told that these events are still happening.   ZANU-PF
    supporters knock on WM's door.  CM's  brother  and  his  wife  are  MDC
    sympathisers.  When asked by ZANU-PF to attend a  meeting  he  and  his
    wife will do so through fear.  It is harder for  CM's  brother's  wife,
    who is always there, and so she ends up attending more meetings.   CM's
    brother and his wife have not told him of any  specific  problems  that
    they have had with ZANU-PF, beyond having to attend  meetings.   If  CM
    stayed with them in Chikangwe,  he  would  not  want  to  attend  those
    meetings as he does not support ZANU-PF.
(2)  Respondent

Debbie Goodier

53. Ms Goodier is a Senior Country Researcher for Somalia  and  Zimbabwe  in
    the Country of Origin Information Service, UKBA.  Her  short  statement
    introduced  the  respondent's  bundle  of  recent  country  information
    (described further below) "covering a number of the key  issues  raised
    in the witness statements" of [W77} and Mr Mavhinga. She said  that  in
    the very limited time available it had not been  possible  for  her  to
    provide a comprehensive survey of  the  available  country  information
    arising over recent months, but she considered the materials provided a
    "fair reflection of the presently available country information".

Wayne Ives

54.  Wayne Ives is a member of HM Diplomatic Service. He  is  currently  the
    head of the Zimbabwe Unit within the FCO, a position he has held  since
    January 2011. The FCO anticipates that elections  will  take  place  in
    Zimbabwe in 2013. There had been "some important  steps  forward  under
    the  Inclusive  Government,  although  the  pace  of  political  reform
    continues to be slow. Some degree of violence is expected  [in  respect
    of the elections], although we do not expect it  to  reach  the  levels
    seen in June 2008". The role of the SADC was regarded as  "particularly
    important" and South Africa had a "key role to play, "in particular  in
    persuading ZANU-PF and the Zimbabwean security chiefs  not  to  disrupt
    the next election".

Anne Scruton

55.  Ms  Scruton  is  Country  Manager  Africa  1  in  the  Country  returns
    Operations  and  Strategy  Team  of  UKBA,  which  facilitates   travel
    documentation for returnees from the  United  Kingdom  and  coordinates
    "focussed returns strategies". After the suspension of  forced  returns
    from the United Kingdom to Zimbabwe in September 2006, those found  not
    to be in need of international protection were still expected to  leave
    the United Kingdom voluntarily. Furthermore, between September 2006 and
    1 September 2010 the respondent enforced the removal of 81  Zimbabweans
    who were refused leave to enter and who did not claim asylum.

56.  After promulgation of EM, enforced returns resumed, with the fist  such
    return taking place on 6  April  2011.  There  have  so  far  been  187
    removals of Zimbabweans, of whom 150 departed voluntarily  and  5  were
    third country removals. Ms Scruton is personally aware of  23  enforced
    returns of failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe since  April  2011.  There
    have also been at least 11 returns under the Facilitated Returns Scheme
    for foreign national offenders.

57.   Exhibited  to  Ms  Scruton's  statement  are  copy  letters   to   the
    Immigration Law Practitioners' association from UKBA of 9  May  and  20
    April 2011. In the former, it was stated that UKBA carefully  monitored
    developments in Zimbabwe, pot EM. Although it  was  not  accepted  that
    only those not in RN risk categories should be  forcibly  returned,  in
    practice those selected for initial returns had had their asylum claims
    rejected and their appeals dismissed "during the  period  that  the  RN
    caselaw was extant". Criteria for selection also included  having  been
    in the United Kingdom for a relatively short period, coming from  urban
    areas of Zimbabwe and being found either to lack credibility or to have
    connections with ZANU-PF. The  letter  of  20  April  stated  that  the
    criteria mentioned in the earlier letter were  factors  that  currently
    helped UKBA to prioritise cases. It was not "a  necessary  precondition
    of removal that one, all or any of the factors are present".

58.  On 3 October 2012, the respondent served  a  copy  email  in  which  Ms
    Scruton described in  more  detail  the  procedure  of  observation  of
    returnees by the respondent's  Migration  Delivery  Officer  at  Harare
    Airport.

59.  Mr Griffiths spoke to Ms Scruton's statement at the  hearing  (Appendix
    C, page 2 (day 2)).


                                   PART 2

             OTHER DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE ADDUCED BY THE APPELLANT

60.  A substantial number of reports appeared in Part A of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  The reports relied upon are drawn from a variety  of  sources,
    including newspapers published in Zimbabwe  and  abroad,  international
    human rights  organisations,  including  Amnesty  International,  radio
    broadcasters in Zimbabwe, South Africa and further afield and date from
    mid February 2011 to the end of the first  week  in  October  2012.   A
    helpful schedule of essential paragraphs appeared  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle of supplementary materials.

61.  Many of the articles and reports concerned calls  from  abroad  for  an
    end to ZANU-PF sponsored violence  and  for  reforms  to  the  security
    services, police in order to implement key reforms in readiness for the
    forthcoming elections.  The Zimbabwean, for example, reported  on  11th
    February 2011 that ZANU-PF youths looted shops and  destroyed  property
    in Harare's central business district and that ZANU-PF  thugs  attacked
    MDC officers and the home of an MDC councillor in  Mbare.   There  were
    calls from the United States and the United Kingdom for  action  to  be
    taken in the light of the violence, the embassy of  the  United  States
    stating that those responsible were youths and opportunists  affiliated
    with elements of ZANU-PF.

62.  In a public statement from Amnesty International in mid February  2011,
    SADC and the African Union were said to have  missed  opportunities  to
    end human rights violations in Zimbabwe.  On 7th  February  that  year,
    vendors from the NewsDay, an independent newspaper, were beaten  up  in
    Harare's central  business  district  by  alleged  ZANU-PF  supporters.
    Amnesty  reported  that  the  Crisis  in  Zimbabwe  Coalition  strongly
    condemned the escalation of politically motivated violence  perpetrated
    by suspected ZANU-PF supporters, as reported by kubatana.net,  the  NGO
    Network Alliance Project in Zimbabwe.

63. The Standard, a prominent Sunday newspaper in  Zimbabwe,  reported  that
    villagers were forced to sign a ZANU-PF  petition  or  face  death,  in
    Mashonaland East, West and Central as well as Mazvingo  and  Guto.   In
    Harare, such activities were restricted to high density areas  such  as
    Mbare, Epworth, Kmbuzuma and Warren Park, where residents  were  forced
    to attend ZANU-PF meetings, ZANU-PF youth militia moving from house  to
    house.  In the same month, The Zimbabwean reported that MDC  supporters
    were being uprooted from market stalls in Mbare, ZANU-PF  being  backed
    with "passion and sycophancy" by the Chipangano militia.   Although  no
    deaths were reported in Mbare, scores had been beaten and some  ZANU-PF
    supporters suffered revenge attacks.  The local MDC-T MP,  Pinel  Denga
    was reported as having a good chance of retaining his constituency  and
    was optimistic that MDC supporters would not be cowed.

64.   The same newspaper contained a report published on the same  day  that
    ZANU-PF youths rounded up market traders and other residents and force-
    marched them to a rally, singing  songs  and  carrying  a  pro  ZANU-PF
    banner.  On 2nd March  2011,  The  Zimbabwean  carried  a  report  that
    newspaper vendors in Harare city centre had been  forced  to  flee  for
    safety following an attack by ZANU-PF terror gangs, instructing them to
    attend the ZANU-PF's anti-restrictive measures campaign.   One  of  the
    vendors was said to have been assaulted  and  could  be  seen  bleeding
    profusely and another sought refuge at the NewsDay  newspaper  offices.
    On the same  day,  the  newspaper  reported  that  most  Harare  public
    transporters were diverted from their normal routes  by  ZANU-PF  thugs
    who blocked roads with the help of police to direct people towards  the
    same campaign meeting.  Harare businessmen were summoned to  a  meeting
    at ZANU-PF's provincial headquarters at  which  they  were  ordered  to
    support a petition calling for the removal of western visa restrictions
    and an end to the asset freeze imposed on Mugabe and his lieutenants.

65.  Voice  of  America  reported  on  7th  March  2011  that  human  rights
    activists were  warning  that  an  upsurge  of  political  violence  in
    Zimbabwe was threatening reconciliation and might make it impossible to
    hold free and fair elections which were due  in  the  next  year.   The
    author of a Human Rights Watch report said that there had been no human
    rights reforms on the ground in Zimbabwe and no accountability for  the
    killings and other acts of violence that  occurred  in  2008.   ZANU-PF
    youth militia were reported in The Zimbabwean on  10th  March  2011  to
    have mounted a  24  hour  illegal  roadblock  in  Chimanimani,  forcing
    motorists and their passengers to sign an anti-sanction petition.   The
    same newspaper reported  that  "desperate"  anti-sanctions  campaigners
    from ZANU-PF invaded schools countrywide, forcing  teachers  and  young
    children to sign up or face death.

66.  SADC leaders were urged by Human Rights Watch in  late  March  2011  to
    publicly press President Mugabe and ZANU-PF to end their harassment and
    arbitrary arrests of civil society activists and political opponents.

67.  The New York Times reported  on  18th  April  2011  that  more  than  a
    quarter of Mugabe's opponents in parliament had been arrested since the
    power-sharing arrangement was made, part of an intensifying campaign of
    harassment, the source  being  "officials  from  both  sides".   Morgan
    Tsvangirai  insisted  that  he  would   not   leave   the   government,
    notwithstanding arrests, a police beating, assassination attempts and a
    treason trial over the past decade.  The  Zimbabwean  reported  on  the
    same day that "rights lawyers" in Zimbabwe  had  said  that  they  were
    appalled that police brutality, abuse of rights laws by the police  and
    politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe was increasing.   The  Civil
    Society Monitoring Mechanism Report published  on  9th  May  2011  (for
    February and March of that year) found  that  state-sponsored  violence
    and repression increased markedly in the period  under  review,  mainly
    attributable to the organs associated with  and  operated  by  ZANU-PF.
    Voice of America reported on 25th May 2011 that many of Zimbabwe's  top
    lawyers had said that the 2008 political agreement, the  foundation  of
    the Inclusive Government, would  not  achieve  its  goal  of  producing
    undisputed elections unless the present attorney general  was  replaced
    by a professional legal officer.  The report noted that  many  analysts
    blamed partisan police for the arrests of opponents to Robert Mugabe.

68.  The New York Times reported on 23rd June 2011  that  Brigadier  General
    Douglas Nyikayaramba, a high-ranking general in  the  Zimbabwean  Army,
    described Morgan Tsvangirai as a  national  security  threat  who  took
    instructions from foreigners.

69.  The extent of Chipangano activities was considered in several  articles
    published in the summer and autumn of 2011  and  in  early  2012.   The
    Zimbabwean reported on 2nd August 2011 that the  Chipangano  gangs  are
    led by Tendai Savanhu and Amos Midzi, the Harare ZANU-PF chairmen, in a
    carefully  coordinated  campaign  of  political  violence.    A   young
    Chipangano  militia  member  interviewed  by  the  newspaper   candidly
    admitted that he does not support Mugabe or ZANU-PF and became involved
    for purely financial motives.  When  asked  how  he  would  vote  in  a
    presidential poll, he said that he was  an  MDC  supporter.   Voice  of
    America reported on 21st  September  2011  that  Chipangano,  based  in
    Mbare, had been stepping up criminal activities  in  recent  days  with
    extortion at bus terminals and seizing control of market  stalls.   The
    co-minister of home affairs had said that Harare  was  overrun  by  the
    gang, alleged to have ties to ZANU-PF.  Commuter omnibus operators were
    assaulted at the bus terminus opposite Harare  Central  Police  Station
    and police officers who came to investigate were  beaten  up.   ZANU-PF
    officials denied that Chipangano was tied  to  the  party.   Chipangano
    used to operate mainly in high density suburbs  or  townships  but  the
    deputy mayor of Harare said in the same  article  that  there  was  now
    anarchy throughout the city as the organisation seized control of every
    open space.  A press release from the embassy of the United  States  on
    September 28th 2011 made mention of an unrestrained  show  of  violence
    and extortion  along  political  lines  around  Harare  by  Chipangano,
    described as a ZANU-PF allied  gang.   The  Standard  reported  on  6th
    November 2011 that Chipangano  had  unleashed  a  reign  of  terror  in
    Harare, threatening to take over businesses and land.  Legislators  and
    journalists  were  attacked  inside  parliament.   A   media   scholar,
    Brilliant Mhlanga was reported as saying that ZANU-PF  hoped  that  the
    threat of violence would continue to loom over the heads of  people  so
    that in the event of elections the party would be in the ascendency.

70.   On 22nd January 2012, The Standard reported  that  political  analysts
    had warned that recent running battles between police  and  vendors  in
    Harare, the arrests and torture of MDC-T activists across  the  country
    and ZANU-PF's continued reluctance to implement the roadmap to free and
    fair  elections  were  telltale  signs  of  imminent  political  chaos.
    Chipangano was reported on 28th January 2012, by The  Standard,  to  be
    disrupting construction work in Mbare, as part of a  protest  by  local
    residents who claim that they were not consulted by the local authority
    in relation to the project.   Construction  workers  were  attacked  by
    Chipangano members and were only able to resume work when the coast was
    clear.  Across the road, the group was parcelling out stalls to ZANU-PF
    supporters.  Chipangano was reported  as  having  disrupted  a  housing
    scheme the previous year, established under the auspices  of  the  Bill
    and Melinda Gates Foundation.

71.  The following month, on 18th  February,  the  same  newspaper  reported
    that Chipangano had managed to instil fear into the hearts of residents
    of Mbare, rowdy young men and women moving from house to house ordering
    residents to attend ZANU-PF meetings.  Those who tried to  resist  were
    dragged to the militia's bases dotted around  the  suburb,  where  they
    were tortured.  Attempts by the city council to evict  them  have  been
    met with violent resistance.  MDC-T said that the group  was  sponsored
    by known senior ZANU-PF officials,  some  of  whom  were  aspiring  for
    political office  in  the  constituency.   Chipangano's  influence  was
    described as not limited to politics as it determined who would  get  a
    stall at informal markets.  The Harare  Residents'  Trust  coordinator,
    Precious Shumba, was reported as saying  that  if  a  person  lived  in
    Mbare, he or she would rarely be protected by  the  police.   Residents
    reported cases such as theft to ZANU-PF structures as  in  most  cases,
    police officers were openly defied by the militia.  Chipangano received
    further attention from the media in Zimbabwe in March and  April  2012.
    Nehandaradio.com reported on March 26th that the  acts  of  Chipangano,
    described as a notorious shadowy militant  ZANU-PF  group  from  Mbare,
    could be described  by  one  word:  terrorism.   Zimbabwe  Briefing,  a
    publication from the Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition, in its 28th March to
    3rd  April  2012  edition,  stated  that  Chipangano  was  growing  its
    tentacles in all urban areas in Zimbabwe.

72.   The group was described as having been reported to be behind  a  spate
    of violence in many parts of Harare beyond Mbare.  An  MDC-T  rally  in
    Sunningdale was disrupted in mid March 2012  and  the  same  group  was
    behind a spate of violence in Chitungwiza in late 2011.  The author  of
    the briefing report, a Zimbabwean journalist and human rights activist,
    was in no doubt that Chipangano was in Mutare during Mugabe's  birthday
    celebrations  in  February  2012.   He  described  Chipangano  as   the
    beginning of the spread of structures of violence by  non-state  actors
    supported by ZANU-PF and given logistical  support  by  state  security
    agents.  He called for the  disbanding  and  arresting  of  members  of
    Chipangano and a need to put pressure on the police  through  publicity
    so that they take action against the gang.

73.  South West Radio Africa reported on 12th September 2012 that a gang  of
    ZANU-PF thugs known as "Top Six" had been "reactivated" in the town  of
    Chinhoyi, Mashonaland West.  The secretary general of the  MDC-T  Youth
    Assembly described the gang as "a replica of the Chipangano  gang  that
    has terrorised Harare" and said that MDC-T wants  to  ensure  that  all
    perpetrators are arrested.  The Zimbabwean described Chipangano as  the
    ZANU-PF youth gang that  has  terrorised  residents  of  Mbare,  in  an
    article published on 15th April  2012,  which  had  reportedly  started
    campaigning for the party.  The gang were described as  operating  with
    impunity and with the  support  of  ZANU-PF  officials  and  as  having
    regularly forced local residents, vendors and passersby to attend ZANU-
    PF rallies on open ground in the area.  In a  recent  incident,  people
    with no identity documents were told to reveal  their  details  to  the
    group on the promise  that  Chipangano  would  approach  the  Registrar
    General for help in registering them to vote.  There was an element  of
    fear because anyone who refused to reveal their identity was accused of
    being a supporter of the MDC formations.  According to a source from  a
    community radio station, Chipangano had gained so much power that  even
    the police were afraid to intervene.  South West Radio Africa  reported
    MDC-T Bulawayo provincial  chairperson,  Gordon  Moyo  and  the  policy
    coordinator of the MDC Ncube faction, Qhubani Moyo as agreeing  that  a
    few people in government had monopolised wealth and political space  in
    Zimbabwe,  resulting  in  social,  economic  and  political   conflict.
    Despite the formation of the Inclusive Government,  Zimbabwe  continued
    to witness politically motivated violence, with Chipangano  terrorising
    residents in Mbare, Highfields and other surrounding suburbs in Harare.
     Amnesty International's Annual Report on Zimbabwe for 2012  also  made
    mention of Chipangano, described as a gang linked  to  ZANU-PF  and  as
    having committed human rights abuses with impunity  in  their  base  in
    Mbare and in other parts of Harare.  On 23rd July  2012,  they  invaded
    the parliament building and disrupted a public hearing on the  Zimbabwe
    Human Rights Commission bill, beating several people  including  an  MP
    and a journalist.

74.  Morgan Tsvangirai was reported as saying  that  the  police  commanders
    were forcing  their  subordinates  to  support  ZANU-PF,  in  a  report
    published on 21st June 2012 by Radio Vop Zimbabwe.  On 1st  July  2012,
    the same source reported that the mines and mining development minister
    had pledged to give gold, platinum and diamond mines  to  the  military
    and police,  apparently  to  safeguard  the  country's  minerals.   The
    outgoing US ambassador was reported on 24th  July  2012,  by  Voice  of
    America, to fear that  Zimbabwe's  next  elections  could  be  violent,
    judging by recent trends.  There were  disturbing  signs  of  potential
    violence that could be  problematic  in  an  election  environment,  he
    stated at his last media briefing in Harare.

75.  Morgan Tsvangirai vowed to take the fight between Harare  City  Council
    and Chipangano, as reported by Zimbabwe News Online on 22nd June  2012,
    having been briefed by mayors who told him of the failure by the police
    to protect their council properties from invasions by  ZANU-PF  aligned
    groups.  The Zimbabwean reported a statement issued by the  MDC  Harare
    provincial spokesperson in which Chipangano was said to have made Mbare
    and surrounding suburbs no-go areas for MDC activists and  other  peace
    loving people.  Chipangano was described by the spokesperson  as  being
    owned and financed by some politicians in ZANU-PF.

76.  The disruption of training for  enumerators,  as  part  of  the  census
    process supposed to take place from 17th August 2012, was reported by S
    W Radio Africa on 8th August 2012.  For the second day  running,  armed
    riot police descended on Harare  Girls  High  School  and  ordered  all
    enumerators undergoing training there to disperse.  There were  similar
    reports from all over Zimbabwe.  The radio station reported  that  this
    was a clear attempt to derail the census.

77.  In mid August 2012, Freedom  House  urged  SADC  leaders  during  their
    summit in Mozambique to demonstrate strong commitment to free and  fair
    elections in Zimbabwe by demanding that elections not be held until the
    Global Political Agreement was fully implemented.  A  senior  programme
    officer for Africa at Freedom House was reported as saying that without
    significant  reform,  Zimbabwe  had  little  hope  for  free  and  fair
    elections and was on a path to see a repeat of the  electoral  violence
    seen in 2008.  As a guarantor of the GPA, SADC had a responsibility  to
    the people of Zimbabwe to ensure that the GPA is fully implemented.  On
    17th August 2012, Voice of America reported that  Zimbabwe's  political
    impasse was high on the SADC agenda.  At the end  of  that  month,  The
    Zimbabwe Independent, a business weekly newspaper,  similarly  reported
    Freedom House as urging SADC leaders to be firm on resolving Zimbabwe's
    political crisis by ensuring full  implementation  of  the  GPA  before
    elections.

78.  More recently, on  7th  October  2012,  The  Standard  reported  Morgan
    Tsvangirai as saying that he would soon convene  an  emergency  council
    meeting to decide whether or not to stay in the  Inclusive  Government.
    He said it would be morally wrong for him to end up as President at the
    expense of the  people  and  called  Mugabe  a  hypocrite,  who  denied
    violence by day and promoted it by night.


                                   PART 3

            OTHER DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE ADDUCED BY THE RESPONDENT

79.  The respondent's  bundle  of  evidence  consisted  of  several  witness
    statements and country evidence largely  dating  from  June  to  August
    2012.  This included the COI Report published on 14th July that year, a
    summary of events in July and August 2012 in bulletins  from  the  COIS
    and an Operational Guidance Note published on 10th  August  2012.   The
    bundle also included reports from the Zimbabwe Peace  Project  ("ZPP"),
    published in June,  July  and  August  2012,  monitoring  human  rights
    violations in Zimbabwe, compiled from reports from ZPP community  based
    human rights monitors who observe, monitor and record  cases  of  human
    rights violations in the constituencies  in  which  they  reside.   ZPP
    deploys a total of 420 community based peace monitors, two for each  of
    the 210 electoral constituencies in Zimbabwe.  The monitors  reside  in
    the constituencies they monitor, compile reports which are handed  over
    to  ZPP  provincial  coordinators,  based  in  the  ten  administrative
    provinces of  the  country.   Upon  receipt  and  verification  of  the
    reports, the provincial coordinators compile  reports  which  are  then
    consolidated at ZPP's national office.


80.  The ZPP Monthly Monitor reports contained an assessment of  politically
    motivated human rights violations in Zimbabwe, for each of  the  months
    of  June,  July  and  August,  2012,  including  a  bar  chart  showing
    violations in each of these months in the years 2008 to 2012 inclusive.

81.  For June 2012,  politically  motivated  human  rights  violations  were
    described as having continued on a downward trend.  An analysis of  the
    violations trends during the month of June over  the  past  five  years
    revealed that the month has always had high numbers of such violations,
    compared to other months.   It  was  in  June  2008  that  the  country
    witnessed horrific politically motivated human  rights  abuses,  during
    the presidential run-off election campaign.  In June that  year,  3,758
    violations were recorded.  The number remained high in June  2009  when
    1,558 cases were recorded.  In June 2010, the number had fallen to  913
    cases, only to increase in June 2011 to 1,114, the author of the report
    noting that this coincided with  the  ZANU-PF  anti-sanctions  petition
    campaign moving across the country.  The cases recorded  in  June  2012
    fell substantially to 42 but cases of  politically  motivated  violence
    remained high and the atmosphere volatile in Midlands,  Manicaland  and
    Masvingo provinces,  with  a  significant  rise  in  Mashonaland  West.
    Incidents of the politicisation of food aid remained very low, although
    the situation on the ground suggested that  people's  rights  would  be
    violated as they sought food aid as a result of the  drought  affecting
    the southern parts  of  the  country  in  particular.   For  Harare  in
    particular, a total of fourteen violations were recorded for June 2012.
     Chipangano features in the  short  commentary,  members  of  the  gang
    having chased away ZEFA employees installing a transformer at a service
    station being built  near  Matapi  Police  Station.  Those  responsible
    alleged that the owner was affiliated to the MDC-T.  A  female  ZANU-PF
    supporter was allegedly assaulted by two soldiers for wearing a ZANU-PF
    t-shirt near the Zengeza 4 Service Station.

82.  The ZPP Monthly Monitor  Report  for  July  2012  shows,  similarly,  a
    decrease in the number of politically motivated human rights violations
    from the figure recorded in June, from 421  cases  to  375  cases.   An
    analysis of violations over the past five years shows that July has had
    a high number of violations since 2008, when 1,125 cases were  recorded
    in the aftermath of the presidential  run-off.   The  violations  trend
    continued upward in 2009, 1,335 cases being recorded in July that year,
    before falling to 884 cases in 2010 and rising slightly to 910 cases in
    July 2011.  The executive summary refers to a worrying  development  in
    the re-emergence of terror bases across the country, manned by  ZANU-PF
    militias, this trend being observed in Mashonaland  West,  Central  and
    East provinces and Masvingo.

83. In Mbare in  Harare,  about  fifteen  ZANU-PF  youths  suspected  to  be
    members of the Chipangano gang harassed and displaced  a  female  dance
    group owner from her  house,  on  12th  July,  having  accused  her  of
    performing with her group  at  Harare  Residents'  Trust,  believed  to
    support the MDC-T.  The report describes the major sources of  conflict
    throughout the country's ten provinces as being inter  and  intra-party
    conflict between ZANU-PF and the MDC-T.  While MDC-T supporters  remain
    the major victim of politically motivated human rights violations,  the
    number of ZANU-PF supporters who have fallen  victim  to  violence  has
    increased significantly, to 20% of victims in recorded  cases  for  the
    month.  Fourteen violations are recorded for  Harare.   Violations  are
    described as still continuing  in  Mbare  Township,  victims  sometimes
    reporting to the police, who do not arrest  the  perpetrators  who  are
    mostly members of Chipangano.

84.  The report for August 2012 showed an increase  in  recorded  cases,  up
    from 375 in July to 462.  The increase is attributed to  the  political
    impasse in the constitution making exercise.   The  COPAC  led  process
    stalled, raising tension  and  deepening  polarisation.   The  two  MDC
    formations endorsed the COPAC draft, whereas ZANU-PF  rejected  it  and
    insisted on forcing its own amendments into the  draft.   The  national
    census programme fell into disarray as soldiers and  members  of  state
    security  agencies  invaded  enumerator  training  centres  across  the
    country.  Reports from across Zimbabwe suggested that their motive  was
    not political but material as enumerators received a "hefty allowance",
    described as the incentive for soldiers and others "to seek  to  muscle
    in on the programme".

85.  An analysis of trends in violations over the  past  five  years  showed
    that the month of August had fewer cases  of  human  rights  violations
    since 2008,  when  964  cases  were  recorded,  two  months  after  the
    presidential run-off.  The downward trend continued in 2009,  when  527
    cases were recorded but numbers increased in 2010  to  848  cases,  and
    then declined the following year, with 720 incidents recorded in August
    2011.  August 2012 showed a further fall.   The  Joint  Monitoring  and
    Implementation Committee (JOMIC) increased its presence and  visibility
    in the Harare Province, especially in the  volatile  Highfield  suburb,
    where its vehicles were always on patrol.  The increased visibility  of
    the body led to a freer atmosphere and is described as a positive  note
    in the report.  However, Harare Province also witnessed clashes between
    touts, ranks marshals and  commuter  omnibus  operators  over  charges,
    linked to the Chipangano gang, or to Mandimbandimba, allegedly  aligned
    to ZANU-PF.  ZPP was not able  to  immediately  establish  all  related
    incidents but, according to media reports,  the  touts  were  demanding
    US$2 per trip from over 6,000 commuter omnibuses operating  in  Harare.
    A total of sixteen cases were recorded in Harare for the month.

86.  In  the  COIS  bulletin  for  August  2012  (at  paragraph  2.03),  the
    completion of the census process was noted, as reported in  The  Herald
    on 28th August 2012.  The census came to an end the day beforehand  and
    finance minister Tendai Biti told journalists  that  at  least  98%  of
    Zimbabwe was covered by the previous Sunday, the mopping  up  programme
    being completed on 27th August.  He described  the  process  as  having
    been done using UN principles and SADC guidelines.  Preliminary results
    from the census were hoped to be available by the end of the year.  The
    government released US$8,000,000 to the Zimbabwe Statistical Agency, so
    that enumerators could be paid.

87.  Many of the sources for the reports and other material  in  the  bundle
    were similar to those relied upon by the appellants  in  their  country
    evidence, including the BBC, South West  Radio  Africa  and  newspapers
    published in  Zimbabwe,  notably  The  Herald,  The  Standard  and  The
    Telegraph and The Zimbabwean.  The material was by and large  concerned
    with recent events, in the summer and autumn months of 2012.  BBC News,
    ABC News and South West Radio Africa all reported in the third week  of
    September 2012 that President Mugabe had set out plans for a referendum
    in November  and  elections  in  March  2013,  proposals  denounced  as
    unrealistic by the opposition.  The Second All Stakeholders' Conference
    was reported as having been delayed by COPAC from October 2012.   South
    West Radio Africa reported on 28th September  that  Mugabe,  Tsvangirai
    and Deputy Prime Minister Mutambara agreed in  Harare  that  the  COPAC
    draft would be the only document used  during  the  conference.   COPAC
    agreed to allow civil society to participate.  NewsDay reported the MDC-
    T as rejecting calls that the  elections  be  held  under  the  current
    Lancaster House Constitution, insisting that the COPAC led draft should
    be completed.

88.  On 8th September 2012, NewsDay reported that Kombi operators in  Harare
    had  threatened  to  approach  President  Mugabe  if  police   remained
    reluctant to confront what were described as ZANU-PF  youths  demanding
    cab rank fees in Harare as the war for control  of  lucrative  commuter
    omnibus  ranks  escalated.   The  drivers  had  complained  that  those
    demanding money from them claimed to be  ZANU-PF  youths  who  insisted
    that nothing would happen to them as the party was in  power.   One  of
    the drivers said that they had vowed that they would not pay  and  that
    the police failed to act while the youths blocked  roads  and  harassed
    Kombi crews.  In the same article, a police spokesperson  was  reported
    as saying that all stakeholders have now been engaged to try to get  to
    the bottom of the problem.

89.  South West Radio Africa  reported  on  11th  September  2012  that  the
    Zimbabwe National Army had deployed military police to restore order at
    the Charge Office commuter omnibus rank in Harare.  Some of its members
    had embarked  on  revenge  attacks  on  touts  and  rank  marshals  who
    assaulted two uniformed members of the army  the  Thursday  beforehand.
    On the Monday following, twenty soldiers attacked touts, rank  marshals
    and also  innocent  bystanders.   Soldiers  in  civilian  clothes  then
    carried  out  "another  mop-up  operation",  stationing  themselves  at
    strategic points at the rank on Tuesday morning.  The soldiers  carried
    out surveillance on touts demanding protection fees from rank  marshals
    and drivers.  The  radio  station's  correspondent  reported  that  the
    soldiers were saying that they wanted  to  get  rid  of  all  extortion
    business as it had brought anarchy to the streets of Harare.   Although
    the disturbances  took  place  very  close  to  Harare  Central  Police
    Station,  the  police  did  not  intervene.   There  was   calm   after
    disturbances  in  the  morning  and  the  soldiers  then  returned   at
    lunchtime.  The military police then intervened to  stop  the  violence
    escalating although tension  remained  in  the  area.   It  was  widely
    believed that the gang that assaulted people  were  Mandimbandimba,  an
    "offshoot of the notorious Mbare based outfit, Chipangano".   The  gang
    was described as controlling most flea markets, council owned flats and
    other bus ranks across Harare and as being synonymous with violence and
    intimidation and as having led attacks against perceived  opponents  of
    ZANU-PF for years.  In an earlier report by the same radio  station  on
    7th September 2012, the director of  Harare  Residents'  Trust  told  a
    correspondent that the gang was originally let  loose  by  top  ZANU-PF
    officials to ensure the party's grip on power.  The party no longer had
    control as the gang had become financially  independent.   ZANU-PF  was
    reported as having tried to distance itself from  the  attacks  on  the
    minibus or Kombi drivers, telling the state controlled Herald newspaper
    that the gangs were not aligned to the party.

90.  Early September 2012 also saw a report in The  Herald  that  JOMIC  had
    hailed the three political parties  in  the  Inclusive  Government  for
    increasing levels of tolerance of each other and reported  a  reduction
    of violence in Masvingo Province.  NewsDay reported an  article  by  Mr
    Antony Reeler on 30th August 2012 that the peace agreement in  Zimbabwe
    remained dysfunctional and that civil society groups  had  continuously
    pointed out that an obsession with the Constitution  missed  a  central
    issue:  constitutions  do  not  guarantee  reforms,  reforms  guarantee
    constitutions.  There remained a lack of reform  and  an  impasse,  the
    very latest date for the elections to be completed being November 2013.

91.  An opinion piece in The Herald published on  14th  August  2012  called
    for Zimbabweans across the political divide to rally  behind  President
    Mugabe's call for people  to  desist  from  violent  campaigns  and  to
    concentrate on working for  the  development  of  the  country.   Prime
    Minister Tsvangirai was reported as calling for the police  to  respect
    the rule of law as  the  country  prepared  for  a  referendum  on  the
    Constitution and the elections, in a piece published  by  allafrica.com
    in mid August.  The Zimbabwe Election Support Network was  reported  in
    The Standard on 16th September 2012 as noting that the ZEC had not been
    able to implement electoral provisions and lacked the independence  and
    neutrality to bring the political parties in Zimbabwe to  book.   There
    had been an inability to speedily  deal  with  electoral  disputes  and
    election related violence.  The expense of holding the outstanding  by-
    elections was relied upon by President Mugabe as justifying "harmonised
    elections", to be held in the last week of March 2013, as  reported  in
    The Herald on 27th September 2012.  An urgent application was  made  by
    him and by the government and the commander-in-chief  of  the  Zimbabwe
    Defence Forces seeking an extension of the deadline to  proclaim  dates
    for the by-elections in  three  vacant  constituencies,  the  extension
    being granted by the High Court in Zimbabwe.

92.  The Zimbabwean reported on  26th  September  2012  that  the  Electoral
    Amendment  Bill,  although  having  completed   its   passage   through
    parliament, had not been gazetted as an Act.   Parliament  was  due  to
    resume on 9th October 2012.

93.  The Standard reported on 1st October 2012 that there  were  fears  that
    security chiefs in Zimbabwe were  meeting  behind  the  back  of  Prime
    Minister Tsvangirai.  President Mugabe had not called National Security
    Council meetings for almost five months.  Sources  told  the  newspaper
    that security chiefs continued to  meet  with  President  Mugabe  on  a
    regular basis.  A constitutional expert at the University  of  Zimbabwe
    said that the failure to hold National Security Council meetings was  a
    cause for concern, particularly as the country moved towards elections.
     The Herald reported that the political  parties  had  said  they  were
    ready for harmonised elections, so long as reforms and the road map set
    out in the Global Political  Agreement  were  in  place,  in  a  report
    published on 28th September 2012.

94.  South West  Radio  Africa  reported  on  13th  September  2012  on  the
    "citywide crackdown" launched by the police in Harare on Mandimbandiba,
    who posed as touts and rank marshals at bus ranks across the  city  and
    used intimidation to force minibus drivers  to  hand  over  "protection
    fees".  The police launched what was described as a major blitz against
    all suspected touts, rank marshals and anyone linked to the gang.   The
    operation went wider, the police raiding  some  premises  where  people
    believed to be part of the gang operated and some  were  identified  by
    ZANU-PF regalia they wore.  The report noted that it  was  likely  that
    some innocent people had been caught up,  echoing  concerns  raised  by
    ZPP.  Residents in Harare were reported as wondering why the police had
    clamped down on the gang, many believing that it was a sign of  ZANU-PF
    infighting.

95.  The stance of the  Zimbabwean  Army,  in  the  light  of  a  threat  by
    generals to ensure that President Mugabe retains power even if he loses
    the forthcoming presidential elections, was considered in a  report  by
    Nehanda Radio on 9th July 2012.  The Secretary of Defence, a member  of
    the MDC-T, described a claim by the Defence Forces Chief of Staff  that
    the military would not recognise any leader who had not participated in
    the war of liberation as personal comments, shared by  a  few  generals
    who had openly declared their allegiance.  The minister was reported as
    saying that  many  members  of  the  armed  forces  who  spoke  to  him
    disassociated themselves from these statements.  The Chief of Staff and
    a few other elite officers had benefited hugely from Mugabe's patronage
    but at the level of colonel and brigadier and below, support  dwindled.
    The "top brass" in the security forces were described as  unsettled  by
    the likelihood of President  Mugabe  and  ZANU-PF  losing  the  general
    elections, in an  article  entitled  "Security  chiefs  panic"  in  The
    Zimbabwean on 18th July 2012.  South Africa and SADC were  reported  as
    making it increasingly clear that they would not brook another  ZANU-PF
    "stolen election victory", according to a well-informed source.   ZANU-
    PF had been crippled by factionalism and senior officers were  reported
    as making attempts to endear themselves to the  MDC.   Members  of  the
    armed forces speaking  to  the  MDC's  national  spokesperson,  Douglas
    Mwonzora, had said that they were fed up with the partisan attitude  of
    a few "securocrats" and were willing to  serve  under  any  government,
    including an MDC government.

96.  The Africa Review  reported  agreement  between  President  Mugabe  and
    Prime  Minister  Tsvangirai  on  a  number  of  measures  to  speed  up
    preparations for the elections, in an article published on 2nd  October
    2012.  This was shortly after President  Mugabe's  application  to  the
    High  Court  regarding  the  deadline  for  holding  by-elections   and
    proposals to hold harmonised elections in 2013.

97.  On 4th October 2012, the Mail  and  Guardian  reported  that  ZANU-PF's
    gangs, including Chipangano, were "spinning out of control".   A  local
    councillor told a reporter that members of the youth  gangs,  including
    "Al-Shabaab", aligned to ZANU-PF, were taking root in urban  areas  and
    taking  control   of   poor   townships.    ZANU-PF's   secretary   for
    administration recently  ordered  Amos  Midzi,  party  chairperson  for
    Harare, to end Chipangano's reign of terror, saying that its activities
    were damaging the image of the party.  The cartel that had  taken  over
    taxi ranks, pushing out the police  and  city  council  officials,  was
    described as part of a wider network that controlled much  of  township
    life, from allocated market stalls to deciding who occupies flats.































                                 APPENDIX C

                         TRANSCRIPT OF ORAL EVIDENCE




IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


     Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

     Tuesday, 2nd October 2012

                                   BEFORE:
                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CAMPBELL

                               - - - - - - - -

BETWEEN:

                                     CM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

MR MARK HENDERSON (instructed by Turpin & Miller) appeared on behalf of the
Appellant.

MR COLIN THOMANN (instructed by the Treasury Solicitors) appeared on behalf
of the Respondent.

                              - - - - - - - - -
                        Transcribed by Harry Counsell
                               Court Reporters
                                Cliffords Inn
                                Fetter Lane,
                               London EC4A 3LD
                             Tel: 020 7269 0370
                               - - - - - - - -


                   TRANSCRIPT OF EVIDENCE OF DEWA MAVHINGA


                        - - - - - - - -DEWA MAVHINGA
                    Examination in chief by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: Could you state your full name, please?
A.        My name is Dewa Mavhinga.
Q.        And the address at which you are presently living?
A.        No 2.  Whitehall Road, Cambridge City, 5HLT.
Q.        Thank you.  I think that you have a part C paginated bundle
      there.  Is the bundle you have a bundle with your witness statement
      in?
A.        Yes.
Q.        I think that it is page 27.
A.        Yes.
Q.        That is your statement, is it?
A.        Correct.
Q.        Are you familiar with the contents of that statement?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And is what you said that in that statement true?
A.        Yes.
Q.        Do you have a date when you signed it?  It is the last page of
      the statement, page 34.  Can I check?  Were you asked to sign the
      statement?
A.        I checked this by email and confirmed by email that it was a
      correct statement.
Q.        So you have not actually signed it yes?
A.        Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Which day did you confirm that it was correct?
MR HENDERSON: Can I lead on this?
THE PRESIDENT: Yes.
MR HENDERSON: Did you approve that statement by email on 26th September?
A.        Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: I have inserted that at the back of the statement so I have
      an up-to-date picture.
MR HENDERSON: Right.  I just have a couple of additional questions for you.
       Firstly, you referred at paragraph 11 of your statement to the draft
      Constitution is apparently subject to political negotiation.  Can you
      just tell us what the latest is on that in terms of what is happening
      COPAC process?
A.        That is correct.  There is negotiation in terms of proceeding to
      a second all stakeholders' conference to discuss the contents of the
      draft Constitution, where initially civil society groups excluded and
      where ZANU PF, from the ruling party, had submitted a number of
      reforms, so now it appears that there could be agreement and there
      could be a second stakeholders' conference early next month and
      thereafter a referendum on the Constitution.
THE PRESIDENT:        So the process that is presently envisaged is
      possibly a second stakeholders' conference next month, which means
      November - or are you doing this as of September - and then a
      referendum after the second stakeholders' conference?
A.        Yes, discussions of that and perhaps by the end of October there
      should be a second all stakeholders' conference and, possibly, in
      November a national referendum on the Constitution.
Q.        Do these developments and the possibility that a draft
      Constitution will be agreed affect your prognosis of what is likely to
      happen in the forthcoming elections?
A.        Not at all.  What is happening with the Constitution is that it
      is a political negotiation in a compromise document that does not
      address the fundamental aspects of transforming the society in
      Zimbabwe in terms of the infrastructure of violence and the security
      forces, which are the major issues for us in Zimbabwe.
Q.        Now, the Home Office have referred to the role of the Zimbabwe
      electoral commission and I think that ...
THE PRESIDENT: This is the second question that you are going to ask?
MR HENDERSON: Yes.  And you mention the electoral commission at paragraph
      10 of your statement.  You refer to the current chairman of the
      commission being an improvement.  Who actually is the former chairman?


THE PRESIDENT: I think that we had this, did we not?    Was it (name given)
      in 2010?
A.        No.
THE PRESIDENT: Then we know the answer.
MR HENDERSON: Very well.   What role is the current chairman actually
      currently performing?
A.        A minimal role in terms of overseeing the work of the electoral
      commission.
Q.        And why is that?
A.        I believe you have an article that speaks to that.
Q.        Just hold on one second.
THE PRESIDENT: This is another?
MR HENDERSON: Yes.  You have referred us to this, but just sort of
      summarise what the problem is with the chairman?
A.        The chairman is not full, he is an acting chairperson of the
      commission, who is from the previous commissions that had been
      responsible for disputed elections in Zimbabwe.
Q.        I am sorry, who is the acting chair?
A.        The deputy chairperson of the commission is Ms Joyce Kazembe, who
      has been with the electoral commission for the last 15 years, so the
      improvement in terms of Justice Simpson Mutambanengwe as the chair
      person, he is not effective because he is not substantively getting
      out there.
Q.        And why is he not actually being the chair, what is wrong with
      him?
A.        There have been reports, credible reports, about his physical
      function, his health condition, as well as he is initially based in
      Nambia where he has to travel to Zimbabwe, but primarily it is due to
      his health that he is unable to effectively discharge the duties of
      chairperson of the commission.
THE PRESIDENT:     This document you have just handed up, is this dated 6th
      March 2012?
MR HENDERSON: I am instructed that it is.
THE PRESIDENT: And that is a time, is it, 06.43?
MR HENDERSON: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Does that relate to the report in the Zimbabwean or the date
      that someone downloaded it?
MR HENDERSON: The date on which it was downloaded is right at the bottom of
      the page.  That is today.  We see that at the bottom right-hand
      corner.
THE PRESIDENT: I see.  But the report itself dates ...
MR HENDERSON: I understand that it dates from 6th March.  I have been told
      that that is right.
THE PRESIDENT: OK.  Those are your two supplementaries.
MR HENDERSON: I am sorry, I have a couple more brief questions.  Some of
      them are arising from the sort of ...
THE PRESIDENT: That could have been dealt with in the witness statement.
MR HENDERSON: Some of them could not be, sir, because they are arising from
      late evidence any by the Secretary of State ...
THE PRESIDENT: What are your other two topics?
MR HENDERSON: I am just finishing on this topic.  What is the affiliation
      of the acting chair, political affiliation?
A.        ZANU PF, from the ruling party.
Q.        What is the current position in relation to the Electoral
      Amendment Act?
A.        We have from 2011 an Electoral Amendment Bill that passed through
      Parliament but has not been signed into law by the President, so it is
      before the President at the moment.
Q.        I will just check.  There were initially moves to allow the
      diaspora to vote, which ZANU PF opposed?
A.        That is correct.
Q.        The Bill now before Mugabe, does that include the right of the
      diaspora to vote or not?
A.        It excludes the right of the diaspora to vote.
Q.        The Secretary of State has drawn attention in the latest
      submissions to their point that the MDC ... it is said that the MDC
      might pull out of elections.  You have indicated that elections have
      to be held next year.  Have the MDC adopted any position that they may
      pull out of the elections that are required by law next year?
A.        No.
Q.        In material served this morning, the Secretary of State has
      produced an article.  This is page 8 of the updating bundle that Mr
      Thomann has just given you.  It is an article that starts at page 9.
      "Police in Harare have launched a city-wide crackdown on a gang linked
      to the notorious  Chipangano group arresting more than 300 people
      since Wednesday".  Then it says that the operation has targeted
      suspected members of the Mandimbandimba.  What is that?
A.        Mandimbandimba is a name that refers to touts who frequent the
      city, mainly young men.
Q.        This is a crackdown on touts.  You referred in your statement to
      a range of activities being carried out by ZANU PF militia in Harare
      including requiring people to attend ZANU PF meetings.  Is there any
      crackdown on those sorts of activities?
A.        No.  The article is referring specifically to a crackdown on the
      Mandimbandimba touts.
Q.        Can you just tell us briefly how this current sort of dispute
      between the touts and the police and the army started?
A.        Well, we understand that it was initiated following an alleged
      beating of soldiers in uniform by the touts and then a revenge attack
      by the soldiers in uniform a few days later in which the police then
      joined in, so it was basically a revenge attack that saw the police
      joining in.
Q.        Obviously, one of the issues is that evidence put in by the
      Secretary of State that the police have reformed and you have said in
      your statement that you do not consider that the police have reformed.
       Does the conduct of the police over the last few days in relation to
      this dispute lead you to believe that they have reformed?
A.        Not at all.  In fact, it would confirm that the police have not
      reformed as they are indiscriminately beating up people in response to
      these fights between soldiers and the Mandimbandimba group and not at
      all applying or maintaining law and order.  What is happening is that
      there is an indiscriminate random beating of members of the public.
MR HENDERSON: Those are all my supplementary questions, sir, other than the
      fact that you see at paragraph 27 that you explain how you obtained a
      secret video of a forced meeting in Harare this year or how Crisis
      obtained it.  Would this be a convenient moment to show it?
THE PRESIDENT: Yes.
                    (Problems with playing video)
MR HENDERSON: I wonder if Mr Thomann wants to start and then we can maybe
      show this at the end.
THE PRESIDENT: You have not had sneak preview.
MR THOMANN: I have seen it.
THE PRESIDENT: Then you are better informed than we are.  Can you just
      remind me for my note the date of the events shown in this thing?
MR HENDERSON: I will have to ask.  Mr Mavhinga, at paragraph 27, the video
      that you provided us with, which you refer to at paragraph 27, do you
      happen to know the date upon which the video was actually taken rather
      than obtained by Crisis or delivered to Crisis?
A.        I believe it was in March or April of this year, 2012.  It is
      dated.
Q.        It is dated on the video?
A.        Yes.
THE PRESIDENT:   We will have to leave it there and let's move on.
                       Cross-examination by MR THOMANN
MR THOMANN: Mr Mavhinga, is it right that one of the things that your
      coalition of organisations does is monitoring human rights abuses?
A.        Yes, that is correct.
Q.        Can you help me with information relating to Zimbabwe?  Are you
      aware of any reports of adverse repercussions for people returning
      from the UK since April 2011?
A.        No, and we have not been monitoring that particular aspect.
THE PRESIDENT:      So the answer is in two parts: I am not aware of any
      adverse information but you do not maintain monitoring of that
      particular problem?
A.        That is correct.
MR THOMANN: You provided us with your views on the situation in Mbare and
      high density suburbs, are you aware of information as to human rights
      abuses in the low and medium density suburbs?
A.        Yes.  In our view, generally, the medium density suburbs and the
      high density suburbs are more or less the same in terms of
      demographics and in terms of human rights abuses occurrences.
Q.        How would you describe the differences in terms of human rights
      security between a high and a low density suburb?
A.        Well, in terms of the numbers of people and political activities,
      they are much higher in high density suburbs than in lower density
      suburbs.
Q.        One of the suburbs that we are interested in today is Hatfield,
      how would you characterise Hatfield?
A.        Hatfield is a medium density suburb that is bordering the peri-
      urban and high density areas of Epworth at the edge of Harare.
Q.        Are you aware of any reports of abuse of persons in Hatfield?
A.        Not at the moment.
Q.        Would you take the view that, compared, for example, with Mbare,
      Hatfield would be a more secure area?
A.        Not necessarily given its proximity to Epworth.
THE PRESIDENT: Not necessarily more secure, but if you have not had any
      reports of abuse from Hatfield and you have from Mbare, does that help
      you answer the question?
A.        I would be unable to say categorically that Hatfield is more
      secure than Mbare or Epworth.
MR THOMANN: As regards the high density areas, the focus of much of the
      information that the tribunal has is on Mbare, could you help us on
      whether there are any distinctions between Mbare and other high
      density suburbs around Harare?
A.        Perhaps an additional aspect for Mbare is that it is a
      residential area with huge numbers of people staying there and it is
      also a transport hub for the capital and, perhaps, the nation in terms
      of people travelling there and doing informal business in that area,
      which would mean that even those that live in other high density
      suburbs would on a daily basis travel to Mbare to engage in informal
      businesses like buying and selling ...
Q.        In terms of reports that you monitor of human rights abuses, how
      would you say those differ between Mbare and other high density
      suburbs?
A.        I am sorry, come again.
Q.        In terms of the number and frequency of human rights abuses that
      you monitor, how would you say Mbare compares to other high density
      suburbs?
A.        In terms of reporting, there have been more reports, public
      reports, of abuses in Mbare than in other high density suburbs given
      the numbers of people travelling to do business there and those that
      relate to attack on individuals doing informal businesses.
Q.        What, if anything, would you say the significance is of
      Chipangano being based in Mbare? Would that make a difference to the
      human rights position between Mbare and other high density suburbs?
A.        It would contribute but Chipangano I know is also operating in
      other high density suburbs across the city.
THE PRESIDENT:     I am told, by the way, that our equipment does not
      recognise your CD.  Anyway, think about it.
MR THOMANN: Are you aware of reports of actual infringements by Chipangano
      outside Mbare?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And how frequent are those compared to Mbare?
A.        I cannot say offhand whether they are more frequent than in Mbare
      because the reports have related to other high density suburbs, for
      example, in Budiriro, for example in Epworth and Glen View; we have
      had reports on Chipangano activities in those areas.
THE PRESIDENT: Just for my note, if I can interject at this stage, this
      group, when did evidence of its existence become known to you?
A.        In terms of ZANU PF ...
Q.        No, the Chipangano.
A.        I am trying to explain that ZANU PF youth used militia activities
      because this name emerged perhaps over the course of the last three
      years, but in terms of their activities, in terms of the existence of
      the group of ZANU PF aligned supporters who commit these various
      abuses, it has been ongoing for some time, but ...
Q.        I am asking specifically about this group with this name.  We
      have a vast amount of information about what has been going on in
      Zimbabwe for some years, but this group emerged about three years ago.
       When did you first become aware of this group's activities and
      existence?
A.        I believe in 2009 ... yes, I believe in 2009.
Q.        And has there been any change in the scale of its activities
      since 2009?
A.        It would appear that now is much more organised, much more
      widespread in terms of the reports.  Initially, it was only in Mbare
      that we had reports of these activities, but now even in other cities
      across the country we have had reports of Chipangano related
      activities in Marondera in Bindura and other groups that appeared
      affiliated to it, even in Kwekwe, so it appears the activities are
      increasing and the level of organisation.
MR THOMANN:   You said that this is a group that has been around for some
      time.
A.        Yes.
Q.        And in terms of its current activities, would you accept that
      there has been a degree of a backlash against it?
A.        No, I would not.  I would want to distinguish perhaps if there is
      reference to the  Mandimbandimba.  Because, if you look at Chipangano
      as distinct from the touts, then there has not been any backlash,
      there is a measure or degree of impunity for their activities.  We
      have not had any records of investigations or police arrests or
      convictions in terms of some of the crimes and abuses that they have
      committed.
Q.        Have you had records of ZANU PF which was distancing themselves
      from this group?
A.        Yes, there have been reports of ZANU PF officials distancing
      themselves from these reports, but these reports are contradicted by
      conduct on the ground.  We also had reports of senior ZANU PF
      officials working hand in hand with this group and the failure or the
      unwillingness by the police to take action on Chipangano.  That also
      testifies to the links with senior ZANU PF officials.
Q.         Do you have a copy of the appellant's singular bundle?    I
      think that it may have been one of the lever-arch files you have been
      given.  If you look at page 33 of that bundle, do you find a report in
      the Zimbabwean?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And that has a description of Chipangano in the first paragraph.
      "It is a terror group that is owned, managed and financed by some
      rogue elements within ... party", the reference being ZANU PF.  Then
      the pronouncement is that "Chipangano has made Mbare and surrounding
      suburbs no-go areas for MDC activists and peace-loving people of
      Harare".  Would you accept that the rogue element is an accurate
      description?
MR HENDERSON: Sir, can you just read the next sentence?
MR THOMANN: Yes, of course.  "Chipangano is a renegade unholy ..."  Is that
      the sentence?
MR HENDERSON: Yes.
MR THOMANN: "Chipangano is a renegade unholy and ruthless rag-tag terror
      group who is owned and financed by some politicians in ZANU PF."  Then
      the next sentence, too?
THE PRESIDENT: The witness can read it.  The question is what?
MR THOMANN: Do you accept the description as linked to rogue elements in
      ZANU PF?
A.        No.  In fact, the challenge is that there has been an attempt to
      disown for the purposes of publicity and propaganda, which is
      something that ZANU PF use very well [SSHD unable to confirm], when,
      in fact, in terms of the benefits of the terror activities of the
      party, these are benefiting senior members.  What I would accept that
      is that perhaps there would be a level of in-fighting between
      individuals who seek to control [SSHD unable to confirm] this
      instrument of violence and then for individuals to benefit from it,
      but that it is a rogue element, I would not accept.
Q.       If I have this right, the quotations are in the smaller case in
      the middle of this piece and that is a quotation prescribed to Didymus
      Mutasa, is it?
A.        Yes.
Q.        Who is ZANU PF's secretary of administration.
A.        Yes.
Q.        If you look thorough to page 81 of the bundle, there is an
      article, a briefing by your organisation, which is dated 3rd April
      2012.  It is describing Chipangano "as an infamous name for the ZANU
      PF aligned youth militia based in Harare's ... suburb of Mbare".  I am
      interested in the second column three lines from the end, from the
      bottom, "In the MDC Parties it appears that only the victims are
      speaking out.  Even as they speak, the voices do not bring any
      confidence to ordinary residents of Mbare.  The Mps are equally
      petrified of Chipangano".  Then "Chipangano is reported to be behind a
      state of violence in many parts of Harare beyond Mbare.  In mid-March
      2012 the group discussed it in an MDC team rally in Sunningdale
      bearing many and causing serious injuries.  The same grouping was
      behind the spate of violence in Chitungwiza in late 2011.  I am in no
      doubt that Chipangano was in Mutare during President Mugabe's birthday
      celebrations in the eastern border town at the end of February 2012".


MR HENDERSON: Again, could you just read to the end?
MR THOMANN: Of course.  "As many residents reported instances of violence
      with many being forced marched to  Sakubva stadium for the festival of
      Mugabe's birthday".
                    Are those the sort of events that you were describing,
      these sorts of incidents?
A.        Yes, this will be part of the activities carried out by ZANU PF.
Q.        Are you aware of any reports of incidents in the lower and medium
      density suburbs of Harare?
A.        No, not at the moment.
Q.        You were taken a moment ago to the article at page 8 of the
      supplemental bundle.  You have already been taken to the headline at
      page 8, which is police launch crackdown on Chipangano linked gang.
      Your evidence a moment ago was, was it not, that you considered this
      to be a separate entity that was being cracked down upon, the
      Mandimbandimba  touts?
A.        That is correct, yes.
Q.        So your view is, is it not, that Chipangano is not implicated in
      this particular activity?
A.        Well, this group is associated or linked to Chipangano.
Q.        That is what the police says.
A.        Yes.
Q.        So you would agree with that, you agree that  Mandimbandimba are
      linked to Chipangano?
A.        But not necessarily Chipangano itself not at the core of the
      militia.
Q.        Linked but not the same as?
A.        Correct.
Q.        And then the piece finishes with a citation.  I think that it is
      a citation by a person called Muchenwa.  Is that somebody you have
      heard of?
A.        No.
Q.        Let me ask you then, simply, your opinion in relation to the
      citation, which is quoted as "People are wondering why this is
      happening, because they have been doing this for years.  Many believe
      that it is a sign of ZANU PF in-fighting with one faction vying for
      Chipangano's heads".  The question for you is, if this is a group that
      is linked to Chipangano and the police are cracking down on it, does
      that in any way alter your views on the degree of protection that can
      be expected from the police?
A.        Not at all.  Firstly, what is happening here is that the use of
      the words "cracking down" would imply that there is a measure of law
      and order in this, but it is not the case, because what is done is
      random beatings of individuals believed to be members of
      Mandimbandimba and this is really in response to an initial beating of
      soldiers, so it is just a revenge attack.  If the police are really
      cracking down, then what would have to happen is that they would
      arrest without beating up individuals and then they would press
      charges as the case maybe, but this is not happening.  I would not
      accept that the police have improved in terms of ending impunity or
      restoring the rule of law.
THE PRESIDENT:     I think a few moments ago you were asked whether you
      knew who Muchenwa was, it looks as if, if you go to the previous page
      9, paragraph 4, Simon Muchenwa is South West Radio Africa's
      correspondent in Harare.  Does that ring a bell?
A.         Not at all, no.
Q.        The South West Radio Africa ...
A.        Yes, I know it and the writer of the article, Alex Bell, I know
      him very well, yes.
Q.        And your views of their reliability as a journalistic source is
      what?
A.        Credible, yes.
MR THOMANN: Can we then look at another bundle, which is the Debbie Goodier
      bundle?
MR HENDERSON: That is the other lever-arch file in front of him.
MR THOMANN: Could we start at tab 21 of that?  Do you find there a report
      in a publication called "News Day"?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And it mentions Kombi operators approaching President ....
A.        Let me just find it.
Q.        It is tab 21.
THE PRESIDENT: That was probably the same bundle as I had the last one in,
      but maybe ...
MR THOMANN: I was on the respondent's bundle previously, this is Debbie
      Goodier's bundle.
THE PRESIDENT: But she is a respondent.
MR THOMANN: The previous bundle was the appellant's bundle.
THE PRESIDENT: It must be labelled wrongly.
MR THOMANN: Did the tribunal follow me at all?
THE PRESIDENT: Yes, I did.  The last document that I was looking at was
      South West Radio which I have as part of the tab that you handed up
      this morning which I have called tab 67 in this bundle.
MR THOMANN: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Did I put it in the wrong place?
MR THOMANN: No.  The tribunal has the right bundle.  It is two different
      bundles for the witness.
THE PRESIDENT: I see.
MR THOMANN: Have you got to tab 21?
A.        Yes.
Q.        News Day: Kombi operators.  First of all, are you aware of an
      incident between Kombi operators and the touting group?  Are you aware
      of the ongoing tension between Kombi operators and the touting group
      in Harare?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And you mentioned an intervention by the armed forces.
A.        Yes.
Q.        In terms of the operators approaching President Mugabe, what do
      you consider to be the significance of that?
A.        Well, I would not put much significance on that in terms of them
      having support to stop the ongoing activities of the ZANU PF aligned
      groups.
Q.        And then, if you look at the last two paragraphs of that report,
      it mentions the police spokesperson, Inspector James Sabau, saying
      that he will now engage all stakeholders to try to get to the bottom
      of the problem.  He had met the operators today and yesterday and "we
      will meet the touts to try and address the problem".  What do you
      consider the significance of that to be?
A.        Well, I believe that it could be political grandstanding, because
      what you have here is a straightforward criminal matter, because,
      where there is extortion or where the touts are forcing Kombi drivers
      to pay something, the police should simply arrest the individuals
      implicated and not have to go to President Mugabe for intervention, so
      this actually confirms that, really, there is no rule of law, because
      it does not to take the President to intervene for simple criminal
      matters to be processed or to be addressed.
Q.        So you do not think that this is part of a pattern of civic
      stakeholders and the police standing up to this group?
A.        No, I do not see it that way.
Q.        Could you turn, please, to tab 30 of the same bundle?  You should
      find there a report again from South West Radio Africa, which is
      headlined "Harare gripped with fear, soldiers embark on revenge
      attacks".
A.        Yes.
Q.        What is mentioned there is a "report on September 11th of the
      Zimbabwe National Army being deployed, deploying its military police
      to restore order and peace at the charge office commuter omnibus rank
      in Harare".  Can you first of all confirm where that charge office
      commuter omnibus rank is in Harare?
A.        It is in the centre of the capital, it is in the city centre.
Q.        And can you confirm whether you are aware of that incident?
A.        Yes.
Q.        Do you accept that that is a different group to the overall
      police operation, there being the army and the military police
      involved?
A.        I am not sure I understand your question, sorry.
Q.        We looked a moment ago at what was called a police crackdown
      arresting 300 people.
THE PRESIDENT: So you are referring back to the ...
MR THOMANN: The previous report.  Do you accept that that is a different
      group involved here, being the army?
A.        No, this is basically the same area and incident.
Q.        The same area, but the previous report was something attributed
      to a police inspector, this is a newspaper report about army
      activities.
MR HENDERSON: Sir, I understood that Mr Thomann was actually referring to
      the report before last which was the police crack down of 300 ...
MR THOMANN: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Quite.  I think that the question is, are the army and
      police different?
A.        Yes.
MR THOMANN: Are there two forces involved here or one in your view?
A.        I am sorry, in what sense, I am failing to get the question.
Q.        The reference in this article is to the army and the military
      police operating a crackdown on this day and the previous article we
      looked at in the supplemental bundle referred to a police crackdown.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Which was described as a city-wide crackdown on gangs linked to
      the Chipangano group.
A.        That is correct, yes.
Q.        Is your recollection that this is the same incident or that these
      are two separate incidents?
A.        It is the same incident triggered by the same set of events.
Q.        You say that it is triggered by the same set of events, but do
      you accept that it is two different responses to it?
A.        I believe that it is the continuation of the same response by
      members of the army and the police, because what had triggered this
      event was the beating up of soldiers and in that case, usually, the
      ... and then other soldiers have responded by beating up the touts and
      then the police joined in, so it is basically the same series of
      events.
Q.        We get quite a lot of that story reflected in the substantive
      article, you will see that the original problem took place opposite
      the central police station, but no police intervened.  It said then
      that the soldiers came back and soldiers continued with the assaults
      and told the touts to beat up their own colleagues ...  It seemed to
      be something starting, as you said,  an attack upon soldiers, but then
      do you see the middle of that second page, there is a paragraph that
      says, "He said the soldiers had vowed to continue"?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And then it looks as if the journalist - in the following
      paragraph - "This time the military police quickly intervened and
      stopped the violence escalating".  Are there three lots of people
      here, military police, soldiers and police or is it two lots, military
      and police, or is it one lot, the police?
A.        Well, there is the police and then we have soldiers, but from
      soldiers they also have within their group the military police.
Q.        Yes, like the RMP in the UK, yes.
A.        Yes.  So these are the groups.
Q.        Military police are a sub-head of soldiers.
A.        Yes, correct.
THE PRESIDENT: I am not quite sure what you get out of that piece, but that
      is one of the questions that you want to know, is it?
MR THOMANN: The tribunal will wish to note that there is a reference to the
      originating incident at tab 32, but I do not propose and I do not need
      to ask ...
THE PRESIDENT: I have been through this quite quickly.  However, you are
      not putting this forward as an example of good impartial law and order
      keeping, are you?
MR THOMANN:      I certainly am not.
THE PRESIDENT: I am rather relieved to hear that.
MR THOMANN: Moving beyond Harare to Karoi and Kariba in Mashonaland West,
      what can you tell us about the human rights position there?
A.        Broadly, Mashonaland West is one of the violence hotspots what is
      possibly being perceived as a ZANU PF stronghold and also being the
      President's home province, so from that point of view we have had
      reports of violence and in some cases involving members of the
      security forces.
Q.        Are you aware of Karoi and Kariba being particular hot spot areas
      of difficulty?
A.        Yes.  Karoi and Maringa Kariba, yes.
Q.        In terms of the security situation, how would that compare to
      living in a low or medium density suburb in Harare?
A.        It would be difficult to make a general comparison, because some
      of the areas are rural areas with a different set of challenges than
      urban areas, where you have traditional chiefs or headmen who control
      movement in and out of the areas, but also with urban areas you have
      got the militia groups, like Chipangano, playing a similar role, so it
      is difficult to have a clear comparison of the security level, but the
      bottom line being that the security levels are quite low, owing to a
      failure by state security agents to maintain law and order or to
      perform their constitutional duties.
Q.        If we move to the political developments, you said in your
      previous statement to the tribunal that you feared then a violent
      election in 2011.
A.        Yes, that is correct.
Q.        What do you think is the significance of that not having
      happened?
A.        Well, myself and many others were of the view that we would have
      elections and violent ones at that in 2011, given the pronouncements,
      particularly by ZANU PF.  We had drawn from a resolution ... a
      Congress, a resolution that they would insist on elections but perhaps
      we underestimated the desire for them to regroup and to consider their
      benefit from the inclusive government in terms of economic benefits
      and financial benefits, particularly from the diamond fields in the
      east of the country, in Marange.
Q.        What do you think was the contribution of civic groups, like
      yourselves, in putting pressure on halting an early election not
      happening?
A.        Well, I believe there was a significant contribution by certain
      civic groups, particularly in exposing the challenges of the
      environment and also in persuading the Southern African Development
      Community to push for conditions to be in place in order for credible
      elections.
Q.        You mention in paragraph 7 of your statement a group around
      General Mujuru.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Broadly, what is your assessment of that particular group's
      approach to a possible transfer of power?
A.        The challenge that is there ... my analysis is that following the
      mysterious death of General Mujuru, in August 2011, it appears that
      there has been a holding back by this group in terms of seeking to
      engage around transfer of power or the succession of President Mugabe,
      because of the widespread suspicion that General Mujuru was murdered
      for his position which was to say that there should be peaceful
      transfer of power or that President Mugabe should step aside.
Q.        When you describe a willingness to negotiate, that was to
      negotiate a peaceful transfer of power.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Is it your view that that group is still to be found within ZANU
      PF?
A.        Yes, but the death of the late General Mujuru significantly
      impacted on the capacity to seek to reach out to progressive actors
      saying that they were hoping for democratic change or other plans.
      Death was felt to have occurred because he was reaching out to the MDC
      [SSHD unable to confirm].
Q.        You mentioned a COPAC process earlier in the draft Constitution.
A.        Yes.
Q.        And you will be aware of the change of position by ZANU PF in mid-
      September, the draft to be put to the all stakeholders' meeting.
A.        Perhaps I would qualify that.  It is not necessarily a change of
      position, but ZANU PF insisted on a raft of amendments to the draft.
      That it demanded should be considered.  And that there should be a
      report on the outreach meetings that we carried out to gather the
      views of the people on the Constitution.  So what is there now is that
      ZANU PF is insisting that on condition that their amendments will be
      tabled at the second all stakeholders' conference they would be
      willing to go along, when, in fact, initially, the agreement among all
      the political parties was that only one document would go to the
      second all stakeholders's conference, which is a draft Constitution
      without ZANU PF amendments.
Q.        I have somehow get a record of that.  Is this an accurate summary
      of what you have just told us?  Prior to September 2012, ZANU PF were
      asking for a range of amendments to the COPAC draft, now they are
      prepared for those amendments to be put to a second stakeholders'
      conference and that is the change?
A.        Let me come again.  The change is that prior to September 2012,
      ZANU PF had put amendments that it had demanded should be discussed by
      the political parties before second stakeholders' conference.
Q.        And now they are allowing those amendments to be discussed by the
      second stakeholders' conference?
A.        Yes, but the initial agreement had been that no other amendments
      would be taken to the second all stakeholders' conference.
Q.        I appreciate that.  The question was about ZANU PF change of
      position and I was asking you what the change of position was.
A.        OK.
Q.        What do you attribute this change of position to?
A.        I believe that it is part of the delaying tactics by ZANU PF,
      given that the constitutional requirements for elections, the current
      term of Parliament and the President expires in June 2013, by which
      time we must have elections as a country and, therefore, to take the
      amendments which they previously agreed was ZANU PF's senior party
      representatives in COPAC, so COPAC is also made up of ZANU PF, so for
      them to have a separate list of amendments that effectively re-writes
      the draft Constitution and insists that they should be discussed at
      the second all stakeholders' conference would only achieve the effect
      of delaying the entire process or derailing the process as we approach
      elections, leaving the real risk that Zimbabwe would again go to
      elections in the absence of credible reforms.
Q.        We may have been proceeding too quickly on this.  Could you look
      at tab 8 of the respondent's bundle?   That is the Debbie Goodier's
      bundle.
THE PRESIDENT: Can we call it the "Rebuttal Bundle"?
MR THOMANN: Yes.  You should find South West Radio Africa report headed
      "Principals agreed to let COPAC deal with Constitution".
A.        Yes.
Q.        Can I ask you to turn the page and just read to yourselves the
      first four paragraphs?  (Pause)
A.        Yes.
Q.        Do you accept that that is an accurate summary of the
      developments in September?
A.        Perhaps ...  just to qualify that this process is proceeding at
      two levels, the COPAC process.  There is the Constitution of Select
      Committee of Parliament COPAC process, that is in charge of the draft
      Constitution in terms of the Government's views.  Then there are the
      principals in Zimbabwe, the political leadership comprising President
      Mugabe, Prime Minister Tsvangirai and Deputy Prime Minister
      Mutambara..  Then there is the second all stakeholders' conference
      which is supposed to look at these processes.  These processes are
      going on in parallel.  They are not necessarily in line.  So the
      challenge that is there is that COPAC had agreed ... as I said
      previously, ZANU PF have got senior representatives in COPAC and yet
      after they had reached an agreement as political parties in Parliament
      in charge of this process, ZANU PF as a political party then disowned
      that agreement and came up with this amendment, so ZANU PF is now
      coming outside of COPAC when it has got COPAC representatives.  So
      this is the challenge, that ZANU PF in addition to what it has agreed
      within COPAC it has also disowned and insisted on amendments that must
      be addressed not by COPAC but by the second all stakeholders'
      conference, but, ultimately, it would still be up to the political
      leadership led by President Mugabe to decide on the contents.
Q.        You have described it as a parallel process, would it be more
      accurate to say a sequential process in that COPAC comes up with a
      draft, it goes to the stakeholders' conference and as a third stage it
      goes back to the principals?
A.        No.  The confusion there is that there is an attempt to have a
      people driven process in terms of the global political agreement, so,
      on paper, it is supposed to be sequential, where COPAC goes to the
      second all stakeholders' conference and then thereafter to Parliament
      for discussion, and then thereafter to a national referendum and then,
      if accepted, it is then into law.  But on the ground now what we are
      having is that the political negotiations are taking an upper hand in
      terms of the process and COPAC, even though it is ZANU PF in it, has
      not threatened the process.  ZANU PF has disowned the initial
      agreement that they have made with their representatives and they are
      insisting that the draft that is there is not reflective of their
      views as a party.  Therefore, they now want to go to the second all
      stakeholders' conference, not within COPAC, but with their own set of
      amendments which they are insisting should carry the day.  The major
      differences, really, are around the issue of executive powers, around
      the issues of amending the powers of the attorney-general in terms of
      prosecution and the human rights and the impunity and the terms of
      office and other things.
Q.        If following that it is correct that those amendments were
      dismissed by the MDC and President Mugabe agreed that the COPAC draft,
      the original draft, without the amendments, should go to the
      stakeholders' conference ....
A.        I am afraid I would have to disagree because that was not the
      agreement.
Q.        Well, it says here, "On Wednesday, Robert Mugabe, Prime Minister
      Tsvangirai and Deputy Prime Minister Mutambara met in Harare and
      agreed that the COPAC draft would be the only document used during the
      forthcoming second all stakeholders' conference".  So do you accept
      that?
A.        My understanding is that there are three documents that are
      supposed to go to the second all stakeholders' conference and one of
      the documents, which is the national outreach report, containing the
      views of the people, is actually subject to a Supreme Court
      application to force COPAC to produce that report of the views of the
      people so that, even as we speak, there is a Supreme Court case that
      is pending, that it has to decide on whether or not that document has
      to be submitted, because one ZANU PF official applied for that to be
      presented.
THE PRESIDENT:      All right.  Can we try to get some clarity on this,
      please?  It seems that this Radio report, although it is published on
      the internet, reports what you have just been shown, that fourth
      paragraph, and it appears that this report dates from 20th September,
      although it was printed out later.  Now, do you accept that that
      report is accurate in so far as it goes or do you think that it is
      wrong?
A.        I believe that this portion is not correct, in my view.
Q.        So it is not true that Mugabe and Mutambara and Tsvangirai have
      agreed that the only draft for the second stakeholders' conference
      will be the COPAC draft?
A.        Yes, my understanding is that ZANU PF amendments will be tabled
      and, in addition to that, another document, the outreach report, is
      also supposed to be tabled.
Q.        And are you aware of any press reporting which supports what you
      have just told us?  Where do you get your information from?
A.        There are a number of press reports relating to the court
      challenge from last week.  I believe they are available on the
      internet.  To the effect that the matter is not finalised before the
      Supreme Court.
Q.        The Supreme Court may be looking at something, I do not know, and
      it may be that what is said here is not comprehensive of all the
      processes.  I am just trying to start off to see whether that
      statement in itself is or is not an accurate of a recent announcement
      last week or the week before about this process.  I am just trying to
      go to that.  Do you follow?
A.        Yes.  My understanding is that the ZANU PF separate amendments as
      a document and the national outreach report, as a separate document,
      in addition to the COPAC drafts, are the three documents that will be
      presented to the second all stakeholders' conference.  That is my
      understanding.
Q.        OK.  That is your understanding and, if your understanding is
      right, then this report is wrong, because this report says that the
      only document will be the COPAC draft, so the question that I then ask
      is, do you base your understanding on recent press reports?
A.        Yes.
Q.        About the same announcement?
A.        Yes, about the negotiations relating to the second all
      stakeholders' conference, because this is something that is being
      negotiated even as we speak in terms of ...
Q.        I appreciate that it is a moving ball, but ...  I think that you
      have made it plain that you do not agree that that is an accurate
      statement?
A.        No.
MR THOMANN: If you look at tab 3 of the same bundle, you will find a report
      that says that COPAC delays second all stakeholders' conference.
A.        Yes.
Q.        If you turn the page, just under the second ring binder, there is
      the citation by Maddock  Chivasa, spokesperson for the National
      Constitutional Assembly, who dismisses the whole process as a
      pointless exercise and now needs to be concluded.  He said that the
      outcome would not represent the views of the people of civic society
      organisations.  Then in the next two paragraphs he says that the same
      political parties that drafted the COPAC draft will also decide what
      to include after the second all stakeholders' conference.  They should
      just complete their draft of the Constitution, bring it to a
      referendum and let Zimbabweans vote on it.  And then he added that
      ZANU PF might still bring their own version of the charter to the
      conference and have their delegates make a contribution based on the
      amendments that they want.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Is that the concern that you were referring to a moment ago or
      are you referring to  separate information that you are aware of?
A.        No, this is not the concern that I was referring to.
Q.        Hypothetically, if ZANU PF had made a climb down in the middle of
      September that permitted the COPAC process to continue, what would you
      say the significance of that was in terms of the outlook for an
      ordered election?
A.        I would not put much significance into that so-called climb down,
      given that at the end of the day the real issues are not about a new
      Constitution for Zimbabwe.  The issues would relate to how to end
      violence, to dismantle the infrastructure of violence and to end
      impunity and this is unlikely to be achieved because there is a new
      document.  It is about the conduct, it is about state institutions
      that are partisan and politicised and supportive of ZANU PF.  Those
      are the bigger questions of the day and these are not necessarily
      addressed in the draft Constitution, because it is a compromised
      document that is subject to political negotiation by the political
      parties.
Q.        Do you consider a willingness by ZANU PF to give way on an issue
      like this as a sign that it is flexible or more flexible in terms of
      reaching agreement on the road map to elections?
A.        No.  I believe that ZANU PF ... if there is any perception that
      ZANU PF has climbed down, it is probably part of a bigger political
      game plan for ZANU PF, because, in any case, if you look at the
      contents of the draft document, they do not go far enough to ensure
      the necessary amendments that would create an environment conducive to
      the holding of free and fair elections in Zimbabwe, so for ZANU PF it
      would be a win-win either way, whether there is a draft Constitution
      that goes to referendum, because the contents are already watered
      down, so they may want to maximise on the concessions from the other
      political players, but, certainly, for reforms the Constitution is not
      enough to deliver non-violent free and fair elections in Zimbabwe.
Q.        You say that it would not go far enough.  Is it your view that
      the new Constitution would go some way towards ensuring greater
      democratic space?
A.        Perhaps on paper, but the bigger issues have to do with the
      existing institutions that are unwilling to implement reforms on the
      ground, in fact, what we have now, the Lancaster House Constitution
      that we have at the moment, can also deliver a measure of democratic
      elections if it is applied to its letter and spirit, but that is not
      happening on the ground.
Q.        You mentioned earlier that it is your view that the MDC would not
      refuse to participate in an election that was not free and fair.  Do
      you recall?
A.        I am sorry.
Q.        Do you recall in response to a question by Mr Henderson at the
      outset that you mentioned that it was your view that the MDC would
      participate in an election even if it were not free and fair?
A.        I believe that, given the political impasse that is there in
      Zimbabwe and when the appropriate time comes for elections, in terms
      of the (unintelligible) which would be around June 20 2013, the MDC
      would not pull out of elections or at least they have not indicated
      anything that would hint that they would pull out of elections.
Q.        Again, assuming that it is accurate that the MDC on this occasion
      dug their heels in and insisted that the agreed COPAC draft went to
      the stakeholders' conference, would that change your views on that?
      What significance would that have on your views of ...
A.        What significance would ...
Q.        What significance would MDC digging their heels in on the COPAC
      draft and ZANU PF giving way have on your views of MDC's readiness to
      insist upon other democratic changes?
A.        Not much significance, because for ZANU PF the big game in town
      is not the Constitution or referendum but elections and retaining
      political power or state power, so for them the Constitution is not
      the big game, as long as there are the mechanisms to ensure that they
      have their way.  In 2008, in March, we had reasonably acceptable
      conditions in terms of on the paper, regulations for free and fair
      elections, but the game changer was the violence and the intimidation
      from ZANU PF when they changed to the security forces for support to
      cause violence with impunity, so these are the big questions that need
      to be addressed and not certainly what you read on paper.
Q.        Would you accept that a conducive environment is important for
      elections to take place?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And is it your view that part of that is the messages sent out by
      the political parties?
A.        Yes.
Q.        Could you look at tab 44 of the bundle?  That is again the
      rebuttal bundle.  If I can then ask you about the Herald.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Can you first of all confirm what the nature of the Herald is?
      Is it an independent or a state-owned newspaper?
A.        The Herald is s state-owned newspaper.
Q.        And what significance does that have in terms of the independence
      of the articles in it?
A.        Predominantly the Herald publishes views aligned to ZANU PF and,
      effectively, acts as a propaganda mouthpiece for ZANU PF.
Q.        We see the headline there in the article is "Zimbabwe heeds
      President's anti-violence call".
A.        Yes.
Q.        And then the editorial commences, "Zimbabweans across the
      political divide must rally behind President Mugabe's call for people
      to desist from violent campaigns and concentrate on working for the
      development of the country.  Our country has seen enough violence and
      we urge Zimbabweans to close ranks and work towards uplifting the
      Motherland".
A.        Yes.
Q.        What in your view is the significance of that type of message and
      article appearing in the Herald?
A.        Well, if you look at the context, the editorial is probably from
      ZANU PF, given that this was on 14th August, two days before the SADC
      Summit in Mozambique, so this was the time for ZANU PF to speak to
      SADC to give the message that they are for peace, when, in fact, the
      conduct on the ground is contrary.  For me and colleagues in the civic
      society movement we are more interested in action on the ground by the
      police, ensuring that there is law and order and ending impunity.
      President Mugabe is saying this about anti-violence but perpetrators
      of violence from 2008 have not been brought to book or they have not
      been held accountable, so for us that action to hold accountable those
      who commit violence would be stronger in terms of words than this
      speech before the SADC Summit, which is meant to be really an exercise
      of propaganda, as President Mugabe is going to Mozambique to meet
      other heads of state and also to try to influence them to be soft on
      Zimbabwe, so that they accept, you know, messages coming from ZANU PF,
      because this is in the media.
Q.        Leaving aside your concerns as to the background of this article,
      do you consider it to have any significance for the political culture
      to have this sort of article in the Herald?
A.        Not really, not really, because people would be reading between
      the lines.  Like I said, what would have a significant impact on the
      political culture is action to say that those who commit violence
      would be held accountable.  In terms of the political agreement, the
      global political agreement, signed by the political parties on 15th
      September 2008, they committed to apply the laws of the country
      impartially and to ensure that those that commit violence are held
      accountable, but nothing has happened, so the people of Zimbabwe know
      that nothing is happening, so, when empty words are uttered, as in
      this case, they would also read between the lines and know that this
      is really not what they mean, because these are people in power, who
      can push for law and order to be implemented but it is not happening.
Q.        Do you know whether Mugabe has ever issued a similar statement in
      recent years?
A.        Yes.  In 2009 on a number of occasions Mugabe has said these
      things and called for non-violence, but we have challenged him to say
      that there is need for appropriate action and not just to say that
      there should be no violence when the police are looking the other way,
      when violence is committed.
Q.        The opening paragraph refers to a call by President Mugabe.  Do
      you remember what the occasion was for that call?
A.        There have been a number of occasions, but the one that was
      perhaps the most prominent one was the National Healing occasion where
      leaders from the three main political parties came together, under the
      auspices of the organ for national healing and reconciliation and
      unity and cohesion to jointly call for peace in the country, and the
      other occasion was on the national heroes day in the second week of
      August 2012.  So these calls have been made but without the necessary
      action to back them up.
MR THOMANN: Mr Mavhinga, I have no further questions.  Thank you very much.


THE PRESIDENT: Is there any re-examination?
MR HENDERSON: Yes, I have just a couple of questions.
                       Re-examination by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: You were asked about the links or otherwise between the
      Chipangano militia and ZANU PF.  Who is the leader of the Chipangano
      militia?
A.        The Chipangano militia group is led by the provincial Harare
      province youth chairperson of ZANU PF.
Q.        You spoke about the sort of daily reports about the COPAC
      process, would it be frank to say that this is a confusing situation
      at present?
A.        It is, yes, given that it is subject to political negotiations
      that are ongoing, yes.
Q.        And I think that you said that the political negotiations are
      continuing at several different levels.
A.        Yes, correct.
Q.        And you referred to applications, I think, to release particular
      drafts.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Is that because people have not actually seen some of these
      drafts which are being discussed?
A.        That is correct, yes, and they had been in agreement that the
      drafts and the material gathered from the outreach process would be
      made available to the public at some point.
Q.        Finally, you referred to the role of civil society in making
      representations in 2011.  Can I just take you to your witness
      statement where you deal with the role of SADC from paragraph 19?  You
      continue to be involved in the negotiations with SADC since 2011?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And you set out there what has happened.  Since making this
      statement, has your view changed about SADC's ability or inability to
      influence what will happen in the elections next year?
A.        No, it has not changed.
MR HENDERSON: I have nothing further, sir.

                          Questions by the TRIBUNAL
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.  Can I ask you about paragraph 29 of your
      statement, please?  You are talking about someone returning from the
      UK to Zimbabwe with no family to support him and going to a high
      density or peri-urban area, but I think that you told us a little
      earlier in your evidence that you did not record or you did not
      monitor what happened to people who were returning from the UK to
      Zimbabwe.  That is right, is it not?
A.        Yes.  As an organisation we were not monitoring that, but ...
Q.        So is your statement based upon information or is that guesswork
      or hypothesis?
A.        It is based upon information that we gathered and also ...
Q.        OK, based upon information.  From where did you get the
      information?
A.        From part of the business that we have been doing in the general
      course of our duties.  I will just check.  And also at a personal
      level I live in the UK, in Cambridge, but from time to time I travel
      to Zimbabwe and I ...
Q.        I imagine that you are not looking for work in the low-density
      areas when you are doing that - is that right?
A.        Yes, but I am talking about contact or the observation of the
      activities of ZANU PF groups across the country or in Harare.
Q.        Is it based on personal observations; is that what you are
      telling me?
A.        Part of it, yes, but part of it on information, yes.
Q.        So when did you last, personally, observe what you are telling us
      about in paragraph 29?
A.        Well, I was last in Zimbabwe in July and I did observe that.
Q.        July of this year?
A.        July of this year, yes.
Q.        And what did you observe then?
A.        In particular the requirement for testing their knowledge or
      presentation of ZANU PF cards.
Q.        How did you observe that?
A.        When visiting Houghton Park, a suburb that is adjacent to Mbare,
      I came across one such group that required people to present cards and
      also to join a ZANU PF meeting..
Q.        All right.  This could potentially be of some interest and
      importance, so can I just make sure that I have got it down.  When
      visiting Houghton Park and that is next to Mbare, when visiting that
      area, which is a high density suburb - is it?
A.        It is a medium density suburb, but there is really not much
      difference between medium and high density.
Q.        I think that I have got that.  And you saw what?
A.        On this occasion there was a meeting of the ZANU PF group, where
      everyone, really, was required to attend, but it was convened by the
      ZANU PF group.
Q.        And you came in when you saw the meeting or you saw people being
      required to go to the meeting?
A.        People being required to go to the meeting.
Q.        How were they being required to go?
A.        Basically, being shepherded to say everyone - this is a shopping
      centre where there are a few shops, so everyone within the vicinity
      would be directed to the meeting, whether or not there is another
      route that you are taking, you are specifically directed to the venue
      of the meeting.
Q.        Yes.  What about cards?  Did you say something about cards?
A.        Yes, there is also a requirement ... I did not witness the aspect
      of presenting ZANU PF cards, but the requirement to attend a ZANU PF
      meeting, a planning meeting, but I know that from other observations
      people also would be required to present cards, including what is
      captured on the video.
THE PRESIDENT:      Which, sadly, it does not seem to be compatible with
      our machine, though one lives in hope that we might find some way of
      playing it.
MR HENDERSON: We can ...
THE PRESIDENT: Before we deal with the technical stuff, let us complete
      this.  I do not think that we are going to get much further than this
      witness.  I do not know whether that is bad news for your scheduling.
      I think that that will do from us.  Have my questions prompted any
      response from someone?
MR THOMANN: I have got some supplementals arising out of it.

                   Further cross-examination by MR THOMANN
MR THOMANN: Were you required to attend this meeting?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And to produce a membership card?
A.        Not on this occasion, no.
THE PRESIDENT: I think that the witness said that he did not really see the
      requirement for producing a membership card, but he knows that from
      other information, including the video that we cannot see.
MR THOMANN: You have mentioned the incident in the video.  Is it right that
      those are the two occasions that you are aware of that being required?
       You have not mentioned any others in your statement.
A.        Going back to the beginning of the inclusive government in 2008,
      in my previous work with Human Rights Watch, we did record a number of
      occasions where people were required  ... where buses or public
      transportation was just directed to ZANU PF meetings and where people
      were asked questions on ZANU PF, on their knowledge of party slogans
      to find out whether or not they had been attending these nightly
      vigils that were called by ZANU PF.  So, perhaps, for this year those
      two occasions, yes, but, if we are to go further back to 2009, then
      there are many more incidents where we did record ...
THE PRESIDENT: I am pretty sure we do not need to ask you about 2009.
A.        OK.
THE PRESIDENT: I think that we are particularly interested in this moment
      in your evidence is 2011 and 2012.  If you have any more information
      about this activity during those periods, that would be of interest.
A.        OK.
MR THOMANN: The statements in your witness statement, the observations
      about what is currently happening in Harere, the militia activity, is
      that based just on your observation or is it also based on the work of
      your organisation and others doing similar work?
A.        Observations on the militia activity?
Q.        Yes, your opinion on the current level of militia activity.
A.        That is based on the work that my organisation is doing and other
      organisations.
MR HENDERSON:    The only point is I wanted to go to paragraph 29.
THE PRESIDENT:  That is really all that I put into play, so I think that is
      the limit of the ....
MR HENDERSON: Yes, that was the only other point.

                   Further re-examination by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: On paragraph 29, you refer to somebody returning from this
      country with no family to support them would end up in a high density
      or peri-urban area.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Why would somebody with no family or no other independent support
      end up in a high density or peri-urban area?
A.        Well, clearly, there will be nowhere else to go because of the
      intransigent  arrangements in the low density areas in Zimbabwe, where
      no one is permitted to sleep on the streets.
Q.        I think that you refer to that at paragraph 31.
A.        Yes.  In terms of informal means of getting income or places
      where they could build shacks, that would be in the peri-urban areas
      and not in the low density suburbs where there is surveillance and
      they cannot build shacks. [SSHD unable to confirm]
MR HENDERSON: I have nothing further, sir.
          (Discussion followed and then hearing adjourned until the
                      following morning at  10 o'clock)
[END     It is not recorded that the video was shown during which Mr
      Mahvinga stated 'It is January 2012 in Buririo and the representative
      of the ZANU PF local structures in that suburb is doing the speaking.]





IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


     Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

     Wednesday, 3rd October 2012
BEFORE:

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P ETER LANE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CAMPBELL

                               - - - - - - - -

BETWEEN:

     CM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -


MR MARK HENDERSON (instructed by Turpin & Miller) appeared on behalf of the
Appellant.

MR COLIN THOMANN (instructed by the Treasury Solicitors) appeared on behalf
of the Respondent.


                              - - - - - - - - -

                        Transcribed by Harry Counsell
                               Court Reporters
                                Cliffords Inn
                                Fetter Lane,
                               London EC4A 3LD
                             Tel: 020 7269 0370
                               - - - - - - - -
                           TRANSCRIPT OF EVIDENCE
                               - - - - - - - -
                               MARK GRIFFITHS
                     Examination in chief by MR THOMANN
MR THOMANN: Could you give the tribunal your name and title, please?
A.        Sure.  My name is Mark Griffiths, I am the assistant director in
      the UK Border Agency responsible for country returns, operation and
      strategy, responsible for returns to Africa and the Middle East.  My
      role in relation to the witness statement of Anne Scruton, which is
      one of the exhibits here is that I am her line manager and,
      unfortunately, she is unable to participate today.
S her line manager how much day-to-day contact do you have with Ms Scruton?
A.        Anne will be more aware of the details of the returns processes
      to Zimbabwe, I am aware of the overview and I do participate in our
      regular conference calls managing the enforced returns process.
Q.        Do you have a copy of her witness statement in front you?
A.        I do.
Q.        Have you had a chance to read that?
A.        I have, yes.
Q.        There is one matter that I will ask you about.  Is the content of
      that consistent with your understanding of the position?
A.        It is, yes.
Q.        In paragraph 6, four lines from the end, it mentions that there
      have been 22 returns.
A.        Yes.  That figure should, in fact, read 23.  I believe that it a
      typographical mistake.
THE PRESIDENT: That is a typo as opposed to ...  So delete 22 and put 23?
A.        Yes.
MR THOMANN: Other than that you said that your understanding is effectively
      the same?
A.        That is right.
MR THOMANN: I have no further questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Just whilst we are on the topic and before it slips my
      memory, we see that the enforced returns or returns of failed asylum
      seekers started 6th April 2011.  Have they now been suspended after
      the Court of Appeal or are they continuing?
A.        No, they continue.  Our last enforced return was in July, I
      believe.  I will clarify that.
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.

                      Cross-examination by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: Mr Griffiths, is it your understanding of the criteria for
      selecting returnees used internally by the Home Office which was
      communicated in the letter exhibited to the witness statement?
A.        Yes, the factor for return, that is right; the factors that are
      considered when we decide whether to remove somebody to Zimbabwe.
Q.        I just want to ask you a couple of questions about paragraph 8 of
      Ms Scruton's statement.  This says that all arrivals are observed by
      the migration delivery officer in Harare.  Is that right?
A.        That is right.  Or a representative of that migrations delivery
      office.
Q.        The witness statement said by the migrations delivery office, but
      you think that it might not be by the migrations delivery officer?
A.        In all but four of the enforced returns, it has been by the
      migrations delivery officer or a representative of the migrations
      delivery officer in those four enforced returns.
Q.        Who is the representative?
A.        It will be a member of embassy staff.  It will either be our
      British consul based in Harare or it will be the immigration liaison
      officer, also based in Harare.
Q.        From where did they observe the returned?
A.        Physically on arrival.  The returnee is observed approaching the
      immigration desk, accompanied by escorts.  A migrations delivery
      officer makes contact with the lead escorts of the group and asks if
      there are any issues on the flight that are relevant.  He then
      withdraws and allows the subject to pass through immigration control.
Q.        How does the migrations delivery officer get air side?
A.        He has an air side pass.
Q.        And how does the make contact with the escorts?
A.        He has their contact details by mobile phone.  It is quite
      apparent when the flight embarks that the escorts will be visible, he
      may know them already, but it is apparent.
Q.        So the Zimbabwean authorities will be aware that this is a
      returnee who the migrations delivery officer is observing?
A.        Possibly, yes.
Q.        Has there been any discussion with the Zimbabwean authorities
      about this process?
A.        I could not answer that question.  What, with the migrations
      delivery officer?
Q.        Yes, with the migrations delivery officer going air side to sort
      of make contact with escorts who are sending back the asylum seekers.
A.        I would imagine there will be local discussions about what he is
      doing at the airport, but I could not answer that question
      specifically.
Q.        Do you know if any thought has been given to whether or not this
      has any relevance to the risk that the failed asylum seekers may face
      through attention being drawn to them in this way?
A.        I do not believe so.  I understand that it is done in a very
      managed and careful way.
Q.        What do you mean by "managed and careful way"?
A.        Tactful, not wishing to draw any adverse attention to the group.
Q.        You say a "tactful way", how is it tactful?
A.        Most of the observation is taking place from a distance, so,
      aside from the initial contact with the lead escort, then the
      migrations delivery officer observes the passenger's transit through
      the airport, which usually takes between 40 and 60 minutes.
Q.        When you say observed from a distance, what is the distance?
A.        Can I just refer to my notes while answering?
Q.        Yes.
A.        Are you aware of the migrations delivery officer's response to
      your supplementary questions before I attended this hearing today?
Q.       No.  I am sorry, there has been a response from the migrations
      delivery office to our questions.  We put questions in writing.
MR THOMANN: The email response from the migrations delivery officer was not
      passed on.
MR HENDERSON: Could we see that?
MR THOMANN: I will have to check, but I do not see why not.
MR HENDERSON: We will see that before we do any further cross-examination.


                    (Pause)
MR THOMANN: I am seeing this for the first time, but I can tell that this
      email is incomplete, the second part of it.
                    (Pause)
                    I have had a read of that, the exchanges and the
      preparation is probably, in my view, legally privileged, but I cannot
      see, having read it, that there is anything in that exchange which the
      respondent would object to Mr Henderson seeing.  There are email
      exchanges before it and after it which deal with how the witness
      evidence should be presented ...
THE PRESIDENT: LLLP.  Is there any sensitivity in the actual email
      addresses or the identity of any of the personnel corresponding?
MR THOMANN: The problem is ... but what I can do, if we are given a
      moment's break, is copy the content and provide it to Mr Henderson if
      that will assist.
THE PRESIDENT: I rather think that Mr Henderson would quite like to know,
      if he's asking questions blind and there is something that might guide
      him.  Is there any way that you can read out any of the pertinent
      answers or are they too lengthy to do that?
MR HENDERSON: Even if it involves a short break, I would rather see it.
THE PRESIDENT: Yes, sometimes seeing things given from diplomatic sources
      creates one or two problems.
MR HENDERSON: Mr Thomann is saying that there is not a problem with the ...
MR THOMANN: I would probably need formal instructions which I can take if
      we are given a moment.
THE PRESIDENT: Yes.   (Discussion re provision of document)

                             (Short Adjournment)
MR THOMANN: The tribunal will see that I have blanked out the address and
      time at the top of it, because that was the easiest way of arranging a
      redaction.  My understanding is that it was sent at 10.27 yesterday
      and it formed part of a chain of emails we prepared for the witness
      evidence which is why the others have not been provided.  There is a
      prospect that that it would have been provided to me.  These things
      are usually provided to me by my instructing solicitor.  What I should
      have said earlier is that I do not recall having seen it in my in-box
      yesterday.
MR HENDERSON: This is the answers to the questions that we posed in
      writing, so I have no further cross-examination.
THE PRESIDENT: I see.  Can you give us a moment to read this then?  (Pause)
        Thank you very much for coming.  It looks as if much of the
      information has now been provided, so we do not have any questions for
      you.  We appreciate your presence today.  You can now be released.
                             (Witness withdrew)
             (Discussion re email replies and other documents )
THE PRESIDENT: We now go back to W77.
                                     W77
                    Examination in chief by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: Can you just confirm your name?
A.        W77
Q.        And there is one preliminary point.  The tribunal granted you
      anonymity after you gave evidence in October 2010.  Would you ask to
      retain that status?
A.        Yes, for the safety and security of our staff and  programme in
      Harare.
THE PRESIDENT: What did we do last time?  Did we assign a number?
MR HENDERSON: Yes, W77.
THE PRESIDENT: You appreciate that what we did we anonymised you as a
      witness with a summary of your evidence attached as an appendix to the
      judgment.  That is presumably something that like that we are probably
      thinking of doing this time.
A.        That is absolutely fine by me.
THE PRESIDENT:   We will direct that you be known in the published report
      of these proceedings as W77.
MR HENDERSON: Do you have part C bundle there, the report from you?
A.        Yes.
Q.        At page 1.  Do you recognise this report?
A.        Yes, I wrote it.
Q.        I have just a couple of supplementary questions and I indicated
      to the tribunal yesterday that you had done part of the work in your
      report before you actually went on annual leave and you are just back.
       Would you just tell the tribunal what the current position in
      relation to the COPAC process?
A.        Yes, it has been quite a process, I think.  The latest position
      is that ZANU PF having objected to the finalised draft to the three
      political parties, having put in 266 amendments, have changed their
      tactics and is now allowing that draft to go through.  There are some
      questions to be raised still about what is the status of those
      amendments and will they be discussed in the second stakeholders'
      conference, the date of which has been put back to towards the end of
      this month.
THE PRESIDENT: Whilst I am on the topic, do you know when the second
      stakeholders' conference is precisely?
A.        No, because it was going to be around this time, the 4th or 5th,
      and I think that it was put back ... well, theoretically, to about
      27th/28th.
Q.        Of October?
A.        Yes.  But that is not certain, like many other things.  There is
      also a court hearing to try to get COPAC itself to release the reports
      from the hearings that they undertook throughout the country over the
      last year and that is still a secret document though widely leaked.
Q.        Who are the claimants in those proceedings?
A.        ZANU PF.   At the present time we have the possibility of three
      separate documents, but only one of which is actually a draft
      Constitution.  The other aspect is that there is no saying what will
      actually happen in the second stakeholders' conference and some are
      fearful; - in the MDC and the civic society, indeed - that there will
      be use of militia to disrupt the proceedings, as happened in the
      previous COPAC hearings, and that those ZANU PF amendments, loosely
      known as the Kariba Draft, may well be up for discussion and that
      might be part of the final submission  but nobody is completely clear
      about that.
MR HENDERSON: You obviously have seen Mr Mahvinga's statement and your
      heard his oral evidence yesterday, for the sake of saving time, can I
      just ask you whether or not you agree with his analysis of the effect
      or lack of effect of the COPAC draft being passed in terms of the
      prognosis for the elections?
A.        The COPAC strategies are geared far more towards elections than
      getting the Constitution entirely geared to their taste, because, I
      mean, the Constitution could involve free and fair elections.
      Essentially, I agree with Dewa Mahvinga's view points on COPAC not
      being the main thrust that winning the election is the main thrust.
Q.        It would appear from the reports that we are getting from what
      you say, in your report and your current evidence, that ZANU PF may
      have chopped and changed their position recently.
A.        Yes.  I would take the view that ZANU PF is quite a canny body of
      politicians and militia people who are quite prepared to be flexible
      on short-term tactical manoeuvres in order to maintain what you might
      call their inflexible long-term strategy of maintaining power and
      access to resources at all costs.
Q.        Just taking these points very briefly, and again it might help
      you by reference to Mr Mahvinga's evidence, you heard Mr Mahvinga's
      evidence on the current state of the Zimbabwe electoral commission
      yesterday.  Do you agree or disagree with that?
A.        I agree and I would also put in the strong point that Joyce
      Kazembe, the acting chief, has a very long history of working with the
      Zimbabwe electoral commission with all its inability to run a free and
      fair election structure.  (Inaudible) It is quite a militarised body,
      although there are some good people on it.  The back-up office staff,
      as is common in many Zimbabwean institutions, military people or ex-
      military people.
Q.        Do you mean by that the secretariat?
A.        The secretariat, yes.
Q.        Just moving to the Electoral Amendments Act, which we were told
      yesterday is currently before Mugabe but he has not yet signed it.
A.        That is true.  He should have done it within two weeks of getting
      the Bill, but there is a feeling that maybe they are hanging on to see
      if it is in line with the impending Constitution (inaudible) .
Q.        You said in your report that ZANU PF would not let through with
      that legislative process any provision allowing the diaspora the right
      to vote.  What has happened with the proposal to allow the diaspora
      the right to vote?
A.        There was a proposal in the draft Constitution for the diaspora
      to vote.  They were not counted in the census.  As part of the
      Electoral Amendment Act going through, the MDC  came to the conclusion
      that the diaspora would not indeed be allowed to vote, citing some
      financial reasons, but we also think highly ideological reasons from
      the viewpoint of ZANU PF, given that they think that the diaspora is
      MDC or certainly not pro ZANU PF.
Q.        Again, do you agree or disagree with the evidence that Mr
      Mahvinga gave about whether the MDC were likely to pull out of
      elections if ZANU PF used their 2008 antics?
A.        I think that on this occasion it is extremely unlikely, because
      there was a lot of flack last time and there were accusations that
      they had not defended their supporters sufficiently, although that is
      possibly ...   The likelihood is that Tsvangirai is so much wanting
      SADC to take steps that, unfortunately, have not really happened, but
      he is still hanging on in there, if you like, but it is very unlikely
      that he will be trying to go against SADC.  SADC would be very
      displeased if he pulled out of the election.
Q.        Just turning briefly to the second issue that you dealt with in
      your report from paragraph 23, what developments have there been in
      urban areas, firstly just to confirm what is your opinion there based
      on?
A.        The opinion there is based on a couple of things in terms of
      conversations that I have had recently, one with Dr Joann McGregor,
      who has written extensively, although not yet published, on the whole
      way that the militia phenomenon known as Chipangano in Mbare and
      neighbouring areas has been taking over all sorts of aspects of rent
      control, market stall control, hassling people at bus stations, and
      how this spread into other urban areas, which I think is in certain
      points of this particular piece.  I also had a reasonably long
      conversation with Mike Davies who was the ex-chair of the combined
      Harare residents' association.  We had long discussions about the
      emerging gang violence in urban areas, particularly in Greater Harare
      .
Q.        You also make references in this section of your report to the
      views of your local partners.
A.        Sure.
Q.        What do you mean by "local partners"?
A.        These are the four national reference group members.  I am chair
      of the Zimbabwe Europe Network and we have a Zimbabwe International
      Reference Group comprising major human rights organisations, the NGO
      coordinating body, the Zimbabwe conference and trade unions, and they
      were on a delegation to watch the European (inaudible)  and they come
      fairly regularly, and that is also part of the kind of background
      knowledge of what is happening in the  urban areas where they mostly
      operate.
Q.        You indicate in your report that there has been a rise in ...
THE PRESIDENT: Mr Henderson, I do not want to ... I think that you said
      five minutes, you have now gone to ten and it is coming up to 15.  You
      are here to ask one or two supplementaries.
MR HENDERSON: I am sorry, my recollection was that yesterday you said that
      I could have 15 minutes in evidence in chief.  I am almost at the end.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, that is your little warning sign.
MR HENDERSON: You say in your report that there is currently a marked rise
      in militia violence including Chipangano.  Can I take you to the
      statement of Jestina Mukoko at page 24, who is the executive director
      of the Zimbabwe Peace Project.  I believe that you have read this
      statement.
A.        I have.
Q.        Do you agree with what is said there?
A.        I have worked closely with Jestina in the past.  Yes.
Q.        I think there were questions yesterday about what is Chipangano,
      what is the militia.  How would you describe Chipangano?
A.        I think that it is an aspect of the informal nature of state
      violence.  ZANU PF merges into Chipangano and other gangs.  But also
      there is a certain criminal element, but it is mostly politicised
      criminal violence being used through informal organs of the state with
      a certain amount of plausible deniability to SADC that they are
      actually ZANU PF.
Q.        Do you agree or disagree with Mr Mhavinga's analysis of the
      actions of the police and army in the last couple of weeks?
A.        Yes.
MR HENDERSON: Thank you.
                       Cross-examination by MR THOMANN
MR THOMANN: Can I ask you first of all about the position overall in Harare
      and one source there you refer to in footnote 38 of your evidence is
      the Zimbabwe Peace Project monitoring.
A.        Yes.  (Inaudible)
Q.        Do you accept that that is generally an authoritative source of
      trends in violence?
A.        Largely speaking, yes, but one of the problems is that their
      verification system is very good on what they can verify, however they
      do not necessarily pick up all incidents.  As the statement from
      Jestina Mukoko says, they have to have their monitors anonymous, so it
      is only when violations are reported, and that can be difficult in
      urban areas, because the numbers of people and just general
      (inaudible) .
Q.        Would you accept that the general trends upwards or downwards you
      would expect to be reflected in the Peace Project reports?
A.        The general trends have changed quite a lot over the last two
      years.
THE PRESIDENT: I think that the question is would the ZPP monitor reflect
      the trends even if it cannot reflect everything whichever happens?
A.        That would be correct, yes.
MR THOMANN: Could we have a look at those?  You will find in the
      respondent's bundle.  You will find the first at page 419.
THE PRESIDENT: That is tab 7 in mine.
MR THOMANN: It is the bundle with the fewest tabs.  It should have ten
      tabs.
THE PRESIDENT: I think that that first bundle you opened, we are calling
      the rebuttal bundle, but I think that the one that you have now been
      handed goes by the title of the respondent's bundle.
MR THOMANN: If you would look at page 419 of that, the very start of tab 7,
      you will find there the June 2012 Monthly Monitor Report.
A.        Sure.
Q.        Is that the report that you cite and rely upon in your footnote?
A.        I have cited several of these Monthly Monitor Reports.
THE PRESIDENT: 38 cites June 2012.
A.        Yes, OK.
MR THOMANN: What I would like you to have a look at is the entry for Harare
      on page 423. You will find there a table.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Would you accept that the overall number there recorded is 14
      violations?  I think that you are on a different page, but I am happy
      to be on your page if you wish.
THE PRESIDENT: It is page 5.  I think that your attention was being
      directed to the left-hand column number 3, Harare, and 14.
MR THOMANN: What would you say is the significance of the difference
      between the violations recorded for Harare and for other regions in
      the table, if you move upwards, for example, Manicaland 37, Midlands
      64?
A.        There are two possible explanations, one is that the Harare
      violations have decreased and the other is that people are unable
      actually to get hold of the number of violations that have taken
      place.  Either of these are possible.
Q.        What do you think it says in terms of the difference in security
      between those regions?
A.        I think that what is suggested is that violence moves around from
      province to province and place to place, depending on the requirements
      of the militia, the ZANU PF etc.  The trends can be up and they can be
      downwards.  There have obviously been periods where they have been
      quieter, notably around 2009, but I think that you need to look at the
      kind of longer term trends and how that ties in to things like
      electoral cycle, SADC summits and things of that nature.  There is a
      lot of externally driven causes for the rise and fall in violence, it
      is hard to predict.   The other aspect, I suppose, is that, if
      intimidation appears to be working, then sometimes violence might not
      be necessary, but it is all (inaudible) .
Q.        Do you accept that in relation to Harare, it describes a single
      incident only of the Chipangano gang chasing away a Ready(?)  S.A
      employee?
A.        Yes, this one with the three assaults.
Q.        You mentioned trends a moment ago.  Page 421, the one you were on
      a moment ago, still in the June report.  Would you have a look at
      figure one?
A.        Yes.
Q.        They are trends for PMV.  That is politically motivated violence,
      is it?
A.        It is.
Q.        And what do you say is the significance there of the June
      reductions from 3,758 in 2008 to 42 in 2012?
A.        The June 2008 figures are abnormally high.  This is when there
      was a rampage in violence.  That figure is an extremely high figure.
      There does seem to have been a reduction in 2010.  They went up again
      in 2011.  It has gone down again in 2012.  If we have a June election
      in 2013, my estimate will be that it will be much higher, but at the
      moment it is low - but bearing in mind what I also said about the
      reporting problem.
THE PRESIDENT: Yes.  Well, I have got a note that one obviously has to be
      cautious about imagining that any one organisation can capture every
      incident in every part of Zimbabwe all of the time, but I think that
      the line that has been put to you is that, does this at least show us
      the trends, because, presumably, those problems about recording
      everything are a constant and there you have got a snapshot of June
      records with whatever deficiencies records may have, 2008 to 2012.
MR THOMANN: If one compares the figure with 2011, what do you consider that
      says, if anything, about the trends in violations between last year
      and this year in June?
A.        Well, the trend as shown by ZPP appear to be downward and I think
      that that is indisputable.  They are possibly the more conservative of
      some of the organisations trying to collect cases of violations,
      because they do very much rely on this verification.  It is often
      thought that people who are reporting political violence, like Amnesty
      International and Human Rights Watch, they are often accused of double
      counting things.  There is no great evidence for this, but, largely
      speaking, Amnesty, Sokwanele and other organisations, have reported
      higher figures in the past than ZPP for the reasons that I outlined.
Q.        If we move to July 2012, page 411, that I the previous tab, you
      should find the ZPP Monthly Monitor for July 2012.  Could you again
      turn to the politically motivated violence figure at figure 1 on page
      413?
A.        Yes.
Q.        You should find there a figure of 375 violations.
A.        Yes.
Q.        And again could you compare that to, for example, 2011's figure?
      What do you think the significance there is?
A.        Well, it obviously has decreased according to the ZPP method of
      counting, given that it (inaudible) .
Q.        If you look at the final indent below that figure, you should
      find a 12th July incident.
A.        Yes.
Q.        "About 15 ZANU PF youths suspected to be members of the notorious
      Chipangano gang harassed and displaced a female dance group owner from
      her house in Mbare accusing her of performing with the dance group at
      ... The trust is accused of supporting MDC".
A.        Right.
Q.        Do you accept that that again does pick up a Chipangano
      violation?
A.        It does pick up one of the Chipangano violations, certainly.
Q.        Do you accept that that in this report it does not pick up any
      others?
A.        No, (inaudible) which ZPP do pick up those violations, that is
      all that (inaudible) certainly.
THE PRESIDENT: This is PMV, politically motivated violence.
A.        Yes.
Q.        So someone is making a distinction between crime, extortion and
      politics?
A.        They may well make that distinction.  (Inaudible) where they
      might set the boundaries for political and criminal violence.
Q.        But this is what it is telling its readers it is analysing?
A.        Yes.  I suspect the point there is that it is certainly not a
      criminal activity in terms of extorting money or anything, but it is
      at least something political.  If Harare residents' trust is deemed by
      Chipangano to be supporting to the MDC.
Q.        Quite .
A.        (Inaudible)
MR THOMANN: There is another entry for Harare on page 417.  Again, what do
      you think is the significance of the overall figure there for Harare
      of 14?
A.        Well, it is a very low figure.  Obviously, as it says here, a
      slight decrease in the PMV.
Q.        Again, in the last indent box next to it, it speaks of
      politically motivated violations still continue in Mbare township and
      sometimes victims report to police who are not arresting the
      perpetrators who are mostly members of Chipangano.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Do you accept that that it does not record any incident of
      violations by Chipangano outside Mbare?
A.        Well, it does appear to be that.
Q.        What do you think is the significance of that?
A.        People are scared to report Chipangano and that the police, they
      know, will not take any action whatsoever nor (inaudible) except that
      one incident that we were talking about yesterday.
Q.        You accept that it says that the violations continue in the Mbare
      township.
A.        Yes, certainly.
Q.        And your response to that is that there may be violations
      elsewhere but they may not be being reported?
A.        There may be violations throughout greater Harare and indeed
      other townships but they are not being reported.
THE PRESIDENT: Is there any reason why they would report in Mbare but not
      elsewhere?
A.        Well, Chipangano's base is in Mbare.
Q.        One would have thought that they might have been able to
      influence more coded silence or a marker or something where they are
      based.
A.        There is something of that, obviously, but ...
Q.        I just wanted to know whether you had any information that you
      could throw light on.
A.        No, not really.
Q.        So it is supposition to some extent?
A.        Yes.
A.        Supposition but widely believed and widely reported, but not
      necessarily verifiable.  That is the element here.
MR THOMANN: If we look at the third report, that is the August 2012 report,
      you should find at tab 5, again figure one is the starting point that
      I would like to ask you about and that is the trends for politically
      motivated violations.
A.        405?
Q.        Yes.  How do you interpret the reduction in 2010 and 2011 figures
      and the 2012 figure?
A.        I can only repeat what I said before, really.
Q.        Could you look at the last indent on that page?
A.        Yes.
Q.        It mentions a positive note.  That is when it refers to the joint
      monitoring and implementation committee.  Could you explain to us who
      that creature is?
A.        It is part of the global political agreement whereby the three
      parties will set up a monitoring committee to which people could be
      brought for human rights violations and that there would be some
      action taken.  SADC has tried on occasions to help this committee but
      not with any great success.  It is rare that JOMIC is seen on the
      streets, as it might be, so it is quite a difference, but, if it is
      just highlighted there can be other areas. [SSHD's notes say
      'Highfield' not 'highlighted']
Q.        You have described questions that you have as to the
      effectiveness of JOMIC in your statement.  What do you think is the
      significance of patrols actually being on the streets of Harare by
      August 2012?
A.        I would not be surprised if this is not something to do with the
      SADC summit to some extent, I think, taking place in that particular
      month.  It may be that they became suddenly more active as far as
      their numbers ...   I do not really know, actually, because when I was
      writing my report I had not yet seen this.
Q.        You also mentioned the increasing visibility of the body had led
      to a freer atmosphere.  Are you able to comment on that?
A.        (Inaudible) .
Q.        Can I ask you to look at the Harare entry again, please?  It is
      at 408.  Again, you will see the overall figure, 16.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Would you accept that that shows a relatively stable picture?
A.        Yes, within the limitations that I have described.
Q.        Now, I do not propose to ask you about the table next to it,
      because what you should see there is that by error somebody appears to
      have copied the Masvingo entry into the Harare column.
A.        Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: So we delete the comment alongside "Mahvinga", because that
      is just a repeat?
MR THOMANN: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: This comes out, I see, about a month after the events; 14th
      September is the publication date of this document.
A.        Yes.
MR THOMANN: I have not found an October one.
THE PRESIDENT: Presumably, it will come next week or the week after.  I
      have only taken that from 403, which says that August was published on
      14th September and 14th, 17th, 24th, well ...
MR THOMANN: You mentioned Chipangano and the tribunal was interested
      yesterday in how long this group has been on the scene for.  Can you
      help with that at all?
A.        I think that it is about five years.  But they always put a
      shadowy militia group in front of it, so who had heard of it and who
      had not at certain points is unclear, but, to my knowledge, in
      general, it was morphed from other ZANU PF militia gangs, anyway.
Q.        Do you accept the types of activities described by it, pressure
      on market holders, pressure to pay affiliation, are not recent ones,
      they have been tactics which have been in place for some time?
A.        Yes.  I think that the point about Chipangano is (a) it is very
      heavily linked into the Harare youth ZANU PF and through that to the
      senior military people [SSHD unable to confirm]. What has happened is
      it has become more systematised, but also in time militia have been
      using different places (inaudible) there is still some of that going
      on.  This appears to be about control of people, control of resources
      on a fairly systematic basis in order to recapture in a sense the
      urban areas from the MDC, because the MDC took control of nearly every
      county and there is (inaudible) pattern of trying to unseat these
      people to undermine the MDC Council, so this is one aspect of that
      whole overall strategy to drive out MDC (inaudible) in those areas and
      to undermine their power or the split ...
Q.        Would you accept that the type of activities that were described
      yesterday and that you have described are not properly described as
      systemic?  They do not appear to have a pattern or a system to them.
A.        Well, as far as I can see there is a fairly common pattern of
      extortion from those wanting allegiance to ZANU PF, a pattern of
      violence, a pattern of intimidation and creating no-go areas in Mbare
      for MDC Councils.  It seems to me that there is a strong pattern of
      asserting local control which the MDC have not been able to launch a
      major response.
Q.        The reason that I ask you is that you say in paragraph 19 of your
      statement, three lines down, "ZANU PF's capacity and willingness to
      use violence do [not] appear to have abated, although intimidation and
      some violence rather than systemic violence are the current
      characteristics".
A.        Yes, this is the more informal (inaudible) practice that I was
      talking of.  (Inaudible) .
Q.        Do you recall that there was evidence of Chipangano activities
      the last time this tribunal convened?
A.       I cannot recall.
THE PRESIDENT: I have looked through our summary of your evidence which
      does not claim to perfection and I did not see the name and, although
      I would not claim to have any capacity to remember all these names
      over two years, speaking only personally, it did not ring a bell as I
      was reading  it up to this one.
MR THOMANN: Can I give you a chance to read what we had about Chipangano
      last time around which is found in volume 2?
THE PRESIDENT: Volume 2 of last times evidence or of this evidence today?
MR THOMANN: No, last time's evidence.  Page 111.
                    (Copies handed)
Q.       Having refreshed your memory of that, how do you say that the
      tactics have changed between the tactics that are referred to here?
A.       Well, the group have various arms, they are now better organised,
      as far as I understand much better at collecting revenues and it is a
      much more coherent pattern of a multiple strategy for control,
      ideological and intimidatory tactics, a closer relationship as far as
      I understand it with the senior ZANU PF people and also the fact that
      they have found how lucrative it is.  Some of them are extremely well
      off now, so there is no reason for them not to become better organised
      and to ensure that they continue their activities.  That is what I
      mean by a more systematic approach.
Q.        When it says in the first paragraph "ZANU PF Mbare youths,
      popularly known as Chipangano, are closing down all markets belonging
      to opposition supporters in the area of Mbare", do you accept that as
      a summary of the position in August 2010?
A.        I would be surprised that they actually closed down all the
      markets at that time.  It may well be the case ... it is quite
      possible.  I don't know, to be honest.
THE PRESIDENT: Who is the informant, the Zimbabwe Mail?  Is there any help
      you can give us for that?
A.        The Zimbabwe Mail is, I think, different from the Sunday Mail,
      which is definitely a ZANU PF paper.  I think that it is one of those
      independent but not very widely-read newspapers.
Q.        But certainly not linked to ... well, it probably would not be
      linked to ZANU PF, would it?
A.        No, I believe it is independent.
MR THOMANN: You described one of the times that you say that ZANU PF, in
      your view, is gearing up for old election tactics is what happened in
      the recent census.
A.        Yes.
Q.        I think that you deal with that at paragraph 4 of your report.
      There you say in the lasts three lines, "A census process has begun
      although interrupted by military activities including demands to be
      employed as enumerators - this is seen a further intimidation of the
      population, meaning figures are unlikely to be accurate".
A.        But the census (inaudible) .
Q.        Yes, but before that military personnel wanting to be involved as
      enumerators, do you accept that a potential motivation there is to be
      paid as an enumerator?
A.        Yes.  I certainly accept that that is true, but it could be a
      reason for disruption of the results.
Q.        Can you help us at all with the sort of financial awards that
      enumerators would expect?
A.        That would be in double figures.  I don't know the figures.  It
      is a long time since I got that one.
THE PRESIDENT:     I am sorry, I am a bit behind, just remind me, which
      paragraph we are on?
MR THOMANN: Paragraph 4 of the report, the last four lines.  Could you turn
      to the respondent's bundle?  That is again the bundle with the fewest
      tabs.  If you look at tab 1, I would like you to have a look at page 6
      on that, they should find there there are sections dealing with the
      census.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Could you first of all read to yourself 201?
A.        (Pause) Yes.
Q.        Do you accept what is stated there as the chronology of how the
      census took place?
A.        Yes.
Q.        What do you know the significance is of the outcome of teachers
      continuing to be employed as census operators and the army being
      restricted to being self-enumerators and providing protection?
A.        To be honest, this was after I finished my report, so I did not
      go into the census in any great detail and how that finished off, but,
      certainly, the acting finance minister,  Gordon Moyo, respects civil
      society.  It seems to suggest here that they are certainly going to
      try to employ teachers as  the enumerators, but I do not have the
      information as to how substantial that was.  The census did take
      place.
THE PRESIDENT: It did take place, yes.  This may be an unfair question
      given what was said just now, do you have any information as to how
      the census was viewed on completion?
A.        I have some knowledge of what happened during the process.
      People are highly suspicious that involvement of the army, whether it
      is as enumerators or accompanying others, was viewed with great
      suspicion.  Not everybody felt able to register.  There was a certain
      degree of fear and mistrust attached to the census.
MR THOMANN:    What do you think the significance is of the quote by
      Minister Biti, the MDC Finance Minister,  at 2.03 in the middle of
      that paragraph, where he says that he would like to advise that the
      process will end today and he was happy to say that the process was
      using UN principles and SADC guidelines?
A.        Biti has always been an optimist but presumably it is reasonably
      correct from his viewpoint.  The viewpoint I was expressing certainly
      came from civil society people in the early part of that programme and
      from certain news reports.
Q.        If you turn the page, we find a reference to disturbances in the
      second paragraph down.
A.        Yes.
Q.        "... population centre was marked by disturbances when ...
      thousands of prospective enumerators wishing to take part in the
      process jostled at various centres countrywide to take part in the
      process".  Do you accept that that is the type of disturbance that was
      recorded rather than army disturbances during the census being carried
      out.
A.        There was also an incident that I think that I mentioned in my
      report of the police raided a school while the census is going on.  I
      think there was violence certainly at the start and at the time I was
      doing my report that is due to (inaudible) .
THE PRESIDENT: Whilst we are on that page, do you see under the last
      quotation at 2.03, at least 30,000 enumerators mostly drawn from the
      education sector took part in the exercise and the source for that is
      the Herald, 28th August.
A.        Yes.
MR THOMANN: You mentioned a school incident.  Are you able to help us
      whether that was an incident that took part at the start during the
      training of enumerators or whether it took part during the census?
A.        During the census, as I recall.
Q.        I know that it is in the appellant's singular bundle.  It is not
      one of the ones that I have flagged up.  113, I think.  It is page 28.
        The entry for 8th August 2012.  I think that it is the first four
      lines there that you were referring today.  It says, "Today for the
      second day running ... girls' school ... enumerators undergoing
      training".
A.        Yes.
Q.        "Similar reports are coming in from the rest of the country ..."


A.        Yes.
Q.         Do you accept that this is again an incident before the census
      took place?
A.        Well, yes, obviously.
Q.        Are you aware of any reports of violence or disruption during the
      actual census?
A.        That I have not seen, no.
Q.        What do you think the significance of that is in terms of the
      role of the army in the census?
A.        It appears that they were told not to disrupt the census if that
      is indeed the case that there was less violence and fewer instances of
      violence as the census actually got underway.
Q.        Does that change in any way your view on whether ZANU PF is
      gearing up for an election using old tactics?
A.        No, I do not think that the census is a particularly strong part
      of the evidence regarding ZANU PF being ready to use violence whenever
      necessary.  As I said before, the tactics change but the long-term
      strategy is to maintain power.
MR THOMANN:  What do you think the significance is of the administrators
      standing up to the army's demands to take part and be enumerators?
A.        Very brave.
Q.        Security sector reform I want to talk to you about next.  Would
      you accept that the army, the pattern of the army, does not represent
      any uniform picture of support for either political party?
A.        There appears to be low level soldiers who in the past were
      disenchanted with their pay, not being paid (inaudible) ...  The
      picture changed to some extent after they were paid.  Most of the
      overt or pro-MDC soldiers or police or whatever have been chased out
      or put into what you might call non-combative roles in the security
      forces.  The top ranks of generals are ZANU PF.  There are some
      distinctions between the low level and the senior level and some
      feeling that the medium level are dissatisfied with the way that some
      of their superiors act and are looking at possible other options, but
      the senior staff are strongly ZANU PF and will not salute Tsvangirai
      as he has no liberation credentials.
Q.        You have included various articles in your footnote 36.  One
      document that you may have at the end of the Mahvinga evidence is the
      bundle that I handed to the tribunal yesterday.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Could I ask you to turn to page 60?  Do you find an article
      headlined "Zimbabwe Army Generals have no support"?   You will see
      that you have cited at footnote 30 an article with that title.
A.        Right.
Q.        You have cited an article called "Generals  have no support"
      dated 9th July, the same date.
A.        Yes.
Q.        But you have cited a Daily News version.  Now, that appears no
      longer to be readily available, which is why the Mahandra radio
      report, with the same title of the same date, is in the bundle.  Could
      you first of all comment on Mahandra Radio as a source of information?
A.        Well, it tries to promote debate on Zimbabwean issues, it is
      reasonably independent, it reports what it says.  It is taking part in
      the general debate about where the security service positions
      themselves.  There is quite a big debate about that, so I have tried
      to reflect that in my report from different angles.
Q.       Yes, you will find there various quotes from  Giles Mutsekwa's
      article, the secretary for defence in Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai
      MDC.  What I would like you to read is the last two paragraphs of
      that.
A.        (Pause)   Yes.
Q.        Is that in your view a reflection of the evidence that you gave a
      moment ago of the army support at the higher echelons of ZANU PF not
      being reflected at grassroots level?
A.        I did not say all grassroots, I said some.
Q.        Yes.
A.        This seems to be particularly about feeling what certain military
      leaders have said that they will not salute Tsvangirai... and he is a
      security threat.  They said that at a meeting that some of our
      partners were at in Sandton at Johannesburg.  This is being seen in
      certain circles as a plot.  You would certainly have a few in the
      military at lower level who would be interested in  taking part in a
      coup, equally I think that it would be very foolish... (inaudible) in
      favour of letting MDC win.  As I said, there is a debate going on
      about how best the Generals position themselves in [context of a]
      history of ZANU PF in-fighting and vying for power.  Also reflecting
      itself in terms of an alternative policy position being sought.  There
      is a sense in which army people who are generally intelligent may be
      testing the wind, maybe looking for alternative possibilities, but
      more or less that is a backstop position if everything goes wrong,
      because the totality of the army is of massive support for ZANU PF .
      Given the fact that there has been a militarisation of most of the
      state institutions, retired military people are running a large number
      of the institutions, then there is no reason for them to want to
      salute Tsvangirai.  But my experience and view is that of the
      institutions that they will support ZANU PF.
Q.        You say that there is broad support or the totality is one of
      support, if you look over the page at page 306, which is a
      continuation of this article, we are still in a quotation by the MDC
      defence minister and what is said here in the fourth paragraph down
      is, "In the last elections heard in 2008 a number of constituencies
      with large military garrisons voted against Mugabe".
A.        Yes.
Q.        What do you think the significance of that is?
THE PRESIDENT: I am sorry, you say in the quotation?
MR THOMANN: I think that we are still in the quotation.
THE PRESIDENT: The quotation closed, did it not, at the bottom of the
      previous page?
A.        He is not the defence minister he is responsible for defence in
      Morgan Tsvangirai's office.
MR THOMANN: Do contradict me if you wish, I read that as still being the
      account of the defence minister, it may not be, because it continues
      the next paragraph down, "she said that the Generals were saying ..."


THE PRESIDENT:  That is Priscilla Misihairabwi-Mushonga.
MR THOMANN:  Whether or not it is a citation, do you accept that a number
      of constituencies with large military garrisons voted for the MDC?
A.        Yes a number and since then, of course, they have been paid
      better.  (Inaudible).
Q.        As I was going though this, I was drawn to the sub-paragraph just
      above that.  I think  that this is meant still to be what Muchange is
      saying rather than the journalist, but whoever: "The chief of staff
      and a few other elite officers have benefited hugely from Mugabe's
      patronage, whereas at the level of colonel and brigadier and below,
      the support dwindles according to Mutsekwa".
A.        That is not a quote from Muchange.
Q.        No,  It is according to Mutsekwa.  Do you agree with that?
A.        It is certainly true that the top ranks have gained more than the
      middle and lower.
Q.        I have got that from your evidence, but level of colonel and
      brigadier.
A.        Being an optimistic, I have to say Mutsekwa is an extreme
      optimist and has said that the diamond revenue would come through the
      fiscus and other things would happen and a number of things that never
      happened would take place [SSHD unable to confirm].  It is not like
      that he is a key expert.
MR THOMANN: Another article that he mentioned in that footnote 30 is one
      called "Security chiefs panic".
A.        Yes.  This is in footnote 36.
Q.        Footnote 36.  Can you recall what that article contained?
THE PRESIDENT:  I have a query.  This is July 2011 or 2012 or, perhaps, we
      will find out by looking at it.  2012 it looks like.  I just made a
      marginal note to ask you.  Now we have got the details we can get it.
MR THOMANN: Sir, do you remember reading that out or citing it?
A.        Yes, I do.  I put it in because I wanted to show the debate going
      on about the role of the security forces.  The main thrust of my
      report that was in there anyway is about ZANU PF and the military
      trying to maintain complete control for the next elections and
      thereafter.
THE PRESIDENT: Do you accept that, if what is said in that article is
      accurate, security chiefs are forming a plan B for the time when they
      are no longer in control?
A.        I do not read it quite that way.  I think that what there has
      been is what happens a lot in Zimbabwe that all sorts of people have
      different conversations and fly kites to see which way the wind is
      blowing, etc.  The Wikileak stuff about backstabbing about Chwenga,
      who is the Zimbabwe defence force's commander, are all symptomatic of
      some of this in-fighting, seeking to see where the wind is blowing.  I
      think that, if you bear in mind things like what happened to Charles
      Taylor, who got immunity, promises may not mean a right lot, General
      Malone is too aware that officers may not (inaudible) political
      formation comes into power, if it ever did (inaudible) .  They will
      also be aware of the efforts of Mujuru, who is closely associated with
      Mukoni and  elements in MDC, but in many people's estimations they
      attempt to put the frighteners on anybody who was seriously
      entertaining, allowing them the Solomon Mjuru assassination as an
      attempt to put the frighteners on anyone seriously entertaining
      allowing MDC negotiation. [SSHD unable to confirm]
Q.        That was August 2011, was it not?
A.        That was August 2011, yes.  The circumstances since then are very
      unclear situations as to what actually happened.  There are all sorts
      of ...
THE PRESIDENT:      I think that we have the data on that.  Thank you for
      reminding us.
MR THOMANN: Do you accept that the efforts described here postdate that
      moment?
A.        They do, yes.  It is certainly true (inaudible) that there were a
      lot of army officers (inaudible) etc.
THE PRESIDENT: Looking at the last two documents that we have just been
      looking at, if, taken at face value would suggest, that at least below
      the top general level there are senior officers who are looking both
      ways and looking at other strategies, what is your overall comment
      upon what weight we should give to this?
A.        As I say, a lot of it is testing the water, to see what
      alternatives there actually are, whereas at the same time continuing
      their major thrust of this strategy to keep ZANU PF in power.
Q.        But were you getting reports like this in 2009 and 2010, for
      example?
A.        Not to my knowledge, actually, no.  One thing is that, of course,
      SADC has had large number of officers and people have tried in the
      past to use SADC army that surrounds it to see what people are
      actually thinking.  Conversations with senior army people are not
      something I am able to undertake.
MR THOMANN: Let's move on to the police.  You do accept that there is a
      difference in the makeup of the police between urban and rural areas?
A.        There has been a large process of weeding people out who have
      been unreliable.  Police throughout (inaudible) rural areas
      (inaudible)
Q.        Do you accept that the rank and file are not selected, though,
      for political allegiance?
A.        They are not selected on political allegiance but it is assumed
      they would have it.
Q.        Taking the situation in Harare, where the police would have day-
      to-day contact with the population, what significance do you think it
      is that the population ... it has on that, that the majority of the
      population in Harare are MDC supporters?
A.        I am sorry.
Q.        What impact do you think that it has on individual officers on
      the beat in Harare that their day-to-day dealings are with the
      population which is in the majority of MDC supporters?
A.        They get on with their duties, but to some extent are one of the
      most corrupt institutions in Zimbabwe.  Their main day-to-day
      interactions with the population should not be shaking them up and
      down for money, also protecting ZANU PF demonstrations or turning a
      blind eye to violence and extortion [SSHD unable to confirm].  That on
      the local population (Inaudible) .
Q.        Would you accept there would be a difference by reason of that
      day-to-day exposure between the attitude and makeup of the police in
      Harare compared with rural areas?
A.        They would not be so much involved in day-to-day violence and the
      activities I have described, but there may well be bussed in to help
      in a particular situation.  They would expect them to be loyal to the
      regime.
Q.        If I can move on to political developments, you have said that
      you consider one of the key developments to be the impending deadline
      for elections.  That is paragraph 2.  This is the version that you
      sent before you went on your annual vacation.
A.        That is right.
Q.        What is your up-to-date view on how likely elections are and when
      they are likely to be?
A.        The impression I got yesterday was that the court had granted an
      extension to the deadline to ZANU PF - of President Mugabe rather - to
      have to call elections by the end of March 2013 - to call an election
      by that date.
THE PRESIDENT: This may be an odd message and in which case tell me I am
      getting the wrong end of the stick.  My reading on elections was that
      there were court proceedings about a group of by-elections which were
      due to be heard which were in court and someone had asked for an
      extension for the date when the writs must be moved for those by-
      elections.
A.        Yes.  That is now March 2013.
Q.        So that answer was, in fact, related to the litigation about the
      by-elections.
A.        Yes.  There are 32 by-elections.
Q.        Yes, they are sometimes called a mini-general election.
A.        That is right, yes.  There has a call that those be harmonised
      with the forthcoming general election.
Q.        Because at one stage those writs were due to be moved by 1st
      October, were they not?
A.        That is right, the date has slipped.
Q.        And then they went back to court and the judge has now said that
      you do not have to move the writs until March.
A.        Yes, that is the judgment from yesterday.
Q.        I see.
A.        (Inaudible) .
THE PRESIDENT:      No, I mean, before I took a note down, I wanted to see
      what I was taking a note about, but, actually, it sounds like my
      question might not have been quite so stupid as I thought it might
      have been, after all.
MR THOMANN: What do you think that ZANU PF's objective is in terms of
      elections, would they like to have them sooner or later?
A.        ZANU PF have historically always wanted to have early elections,
      they are concerned about Mugabe's health, they are concerned about the
      in-fighting that might occur if he dies before elections [SSHD unable
      to confirm] and so they have always sought to bring these as early as
      possible despite the fact that there would be no money in the budget
      actually to have them.  Firstly, the MDC would wait as long as
      possible  they would like the conditions to be in place for free and
      fair elections, which is still not   (Inaudible) .
Q.        What, if any, significance do you think that ZANU PF's objective
      of having elections early would have on their willingness to
      compromise with regard to the circumstances in which that election
      takes place?
A.        I think that they would prefer to have elections under the
      current Constitution, but it is not the be all and end all of their
      argument or their strategy.
Q.        Do you accept that ZANU PF's objective of having early elections
      is a matter which may drive ZANU PF to be more flexible than it would
      otherwise be?
A.        No, I do not think so.  Let me start again.  I think that
      (inaudible) situation, but their ultimate strategy remains the same.
      I am sorry I keep saying that but ...
Q.        You were asked earlier in chief about the Constitution and the
      COPAC process and you mentioned that COPAC is an organisation made up
      of the three parties.
A.        Yes.  (Inaudible) .
Q.        Would you have a look at tab 7 of the respondent's rebuttal
      evidence?  You find there an article by South West Radio Africa.
A.        I have it.
Q.        What is your observation on the reliability of that as a source?


A.        They are reasonably credible.  They report what they can.  They
      are independent of most ... (inaudible) .
Q.        You should find an article headed "COPAC in U-turn over civic
      participation" in this paper.
A.        Yes, that is right.
Q.        If you turn the page, could you read to yourself paragraphs 3 and
      4 ...
THE PRESIDENT: Is that from the Parliamentary Select Committee?
A.        Yes.  (Pause) Yes.
MR THOMANN: What do you think the significance is of the proposal to permit
      participation by civic society?
A.        As far as I am aware, there has been some major debate between
      COPAC and the civil society.  There have been a number of different
      meetings to try to ensure that the views of civil society are
      reflected at the stakeholders' conference.   It was going to be a
      massive thing that civil society makes the point that civil society is
      made up of very pertinent bodies, who debated the Constitution, and
      they represented a significant constituency, essentially the lawyers,
      etc,  so it would be unfeasible for civil society not to be there to
      have a voice given that COPAC is largely a Parliamentary process.
      Civil society are involved in some of the (inaudible) and given the
      draft Constitution will be released at that particular stakeholders'
      conference the civil society ...   I think that COPAC more or less
      accepted that.
Q.        Do you read that as a positive sign in terms of the political
      space that there is currently?
A.        It is obviously better if civil society is inside rather than
      outside.
THE PRESIDENT: Do we read this that previously the arrangements for the
      stakeholders' conference were set up not to include them and now it
      has been accepted that they should be included?
A.        That is right.
MR THOMANN: The final paragraph of the article says, "He added that COPAC
      also decided to allow, diplomats,  local and international media, the
      judiciary and other interested stakeholders to observe the process.
      This has eased fears of violent disruption".
A.        There are two paragraphs you have missed out there.
THE PRESIDENT: Yes, read those as well.
MR THOMANN: Read all of it to yourself or should I read it out to you?
THE PRESIDENT: I am sure you can read it for yourself.
A.        (Pause) Yes, I think there were a lot of suspicions about ...  I
      am sorry I was reading the wrong bit here, was I not?  If Shishagia
      [?] think that it is a concern that ...  Certainly the MDC elements in
      it would be concerned to avoid disruption.  They are very concerned
      that ZANU PF and Chipangano or whoever they might use to disrupt the
      process that the whole debate that has been going on about the Kariba
      drafts that ZANU PF have been trying to run  versus the first draft
      Constitution, all of these will create a very confused situation, so
      inviting outside people in is certainly a good tactic, whether it will
      work is another matter or whether people will come.  I assume that
      most of the diplomats would go.
Q.        I think that you told us at the start of your evidence that this
      has now been put back from October 4th, tomorrow, this weekend, to
      some time at the end of the month.
A.        That is right, that was my latest information.  It might change.
Q.        Quite.
MR THOMANN: You may remember I asked Mr Mahvinga yesterday what he thought
      the significance was of the ZANU PF change of position on the
      documents that the COPAC will be working from; what is your view of
      the significance of that change?
A.        I, largely, as I do on most things agree with (particularly) Dewa
      Mahvinga ... I think that ... the change he point to [had] various
      aspects one of which was the fact that there was the SADC meeting,
      (inaudible) changed tactics that different ZANU PF factions had
      different views on how best to approach this Constitution process and
      that the key issue would be what might happen at the second
      stakeholders' conference and whether items, like security reform and
      electoral reform, were going to seriously be considered.
Q.        Do you consider this to be an occasion where the MDC put down its
      foot and prevailed?
A.         Not really, no.
Q.        Why do you say that?
A.        I think that it is more to do with the divisions inside ZANU PF
      and the desire to give SDAC - kind of toss them a bone, if you like,
      and say that, look, we can be flexible if we want to be, and then go
      back to their ways.  It is not the first time that this kind of
      concessions are made, but then clawed back.
Q.        When you mention there are divisions inside ZANU PF, what sort of
      factions are you talking about?
A.        There are a number.  The two major factions are the one led by
      the late Mujuru, whose wife (inaudible).  There is the Mujuru faction.
       Then there is the Mnangagwa faction which is reportedly more hard
      line and at the moment seems to be more favoured by Mugabe although he
      hasn't formally named a successor.  The other factions - well,
      different people come and go, so getting information on it is quite
      difficult even though we have certain lines to certain people.  Sidney
      Sekeramayi is a contender.  Certainly, Kasukwere has made quite a
      lengthy ...
THE PRESIDENT: I am sorry, I have to try to get some of this down.  Can you
      just take the names a little bit slower.  Sidney?
A.        Sekeramayi.
Q.        And?
A.        Saviour Kasukwere.  He is largely in charge of the indigenisation
      aspect, so he is pretty hardline, believed to have the ear of Mugabe.
      The other thing to be taken into consideration is the fact that
      Jonathan Moyo has been the chameleon.  He seems to be able to
      influence the President.  For instance, it was thought that Moyo was
      the one telling Mugabe that his position would be compromised under
      the draft Constitution, hence the 266 amendments that appeared.  Since
      then, obviously, there has been a difference of opinion within those
      factions as to how best to approach this COPAC Constitution process.
MR THOMANN: What would you describe the position of the Mujuru faction as?
A.        At the moment I would say that they are not in favour.  They are
      the ones who are deemed to have been talking to the MDC on a number of
      occasions.  There were even rumours that someone had a deal but that
      was never proved.  I think that they have rowed back from those kind
      of conversations but they are a little out of favour, I believe.
THE PRESIDENT: Away from Mugabe or ...
A.        Mugabe, yes.  There is possibly a patriarchal element there, too,
      towards Joyce Mjuru a woman.
MR THOMANN: When you say there were rumours of a deal, what sort of deal do
      you mean?
A.        There were rumours that Tsvangirai would do a deal with the Mjuru
      faction but then of course there were rumours of a deal with
      Mnangagwa.  None of this can be taken as anything other than rumour
      but the deal would probably involve some significant immunity
      [Appellants unable to confirm].  It was never proved, it was rumours
      going around.  Sometimes these rumours are started quite deliberately
      to discredit other factions.
Q.        You mentioned the Electoral Amendment Bill and the progress of
      it.
A.        An Act now.
Q.        Yes.  Can you help us at all how that will assist in terms of
      free and fair elections?
A.        I do not have precise information, but it (inaudible) It has
      elements of free and fair elections in it.
Q.        Could you have a look at tab 64 of the rebuttal bundle?  That is
      an article in the Herald. "The Zimbabwe Electoral Amendment Bill
      passed".
A.        Yes.
Q.        Then a few paragraphs down, it says "Some of the amendments
      brought by the Bill include the introduction of a polling based
      voters' roll.  The Bill will also ... with Zimbabwe Electoral
      Commission to announce an evidential election results within five days
      of polling.  The new Bill also established an electoral court to
      speedily deal with any electoral disputes and polling station based
      voters' rolls would be introduced, although ...  Patrick Chinaza
      agreed to postpone their introduction.   Police officers will no
      longer be allowed polling booths inside polling stations while the
      visually impaired would be allowed to bring any person of their choice
      to assist them in voting in the presence of a polling officer".
A.        Yes.
Q.        What is your view on the significance of those changes for the
      prospect of a fair election?
A.        If brought in and if the atmosphere was correct, it would
      obviously at least provide the possibility of a much freer and fairer
      election system.  The problem is, of course, that those limitations
      are not necessarily going to be implemented with the security
      situation.  To some extent in 2008 there was the ability to vote
      reasonably freely, it is what happened afterwards that was the
      problem.  The 2005 elections were not on the actual day of the
      election completely violent, which is the characteristic of how
      elections.
Q.        Was there then a requirement for the result to be declared within
      five days?
A.        No, which is why it took a month.  (Inaudible)  It took them a
      month to release those results.
Q.        What impact do you think that that will have on the prospect of
      post-polling violence?
A.        It should in theory, at least, dissipate the kind of anxieties,
      the ability of militia to gather their troops to ... it should in
      theory, at least, reduce the violence, but this also depends on the
      context that I have described, intimidation and violence beforehand
      ...
Q.        You were asked about the electoral commission earlier and is it
      right that your views of Mutambanengwe and Kazembe reflect those of Mr
      Mahvinga yesterday?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And you mentioned that there were a number of good people in the
      electoral commission.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Who did you have in mind?
A.        The University of Zimbabwe law lecturer called Jeff Boulter, who
      is a good legal expert I don't personally know many of the others.
Q.         He is a commissioner, though, is he not?
A.        Yes.
Q.        Do you have views on the other five commissioners?
A.        I know that mostly they have some kind of connection with the
      military.
Q.        In terms of the current head remaining in place, the acting head,
      what do you think his significance will be if there is a dispute as to
      ...
A.        It is a she, Joyce Kazembe.
Q.        My apologies, the actual head, not the acting one.
A.        Simpson Mutambanengwe?
Q.        Yes.
A.        He is a well-known lawyer who has practised in Namibia in the
      Supreme Court there.
THE PRESIDENT: He is a judge in Namibia, is he not?
A.        Yes.
Q.        Is he still a judge?
A.        He is a judge.  He has been in very poor health.  In fact, he has
      been in poor health since he was actually made the chair of the
      commission, so his impact has not been great, so this has not been
      helpful to having a free and fair election because of Kezembe and
      problems involving the electoral commission.
MR THOMANN: Do you accept that he does remain in place, though?
A.        He is a titular head, I would say.
Q.        Are you aware of any report that he has resigned?
A.        I have not heard that.
Q.        Do you accept that the overall makeup of the electoral commission
      is an improvement on that in 2008?
A.        It is a cosmetic change.
Q.        What about the commissioner personalities that you have
      mentioned, do you think that that is an improvement?
A.        I am sorry, personalities of who?
Q.       The personality of the eight commissioners, do you think that
      constitution is an improvement from 2008?
A.        Not particularly.
Q.        Why do you say not?
A.        Well, they are not independent.  Their ability to reflect what is
      going on has never been very high except in terms of those who have
      turned a blind eye to violent elections that there are elections free
      and fair.  They have not been able to bring in a new voters roll and
      the current one is a shambles.  There are people on it who are 140
      years old.  One element would be how ... is to deal with this
      extremely corrupt system they have inherited which is largely speaking
      why they have not been able to change anything up to this particular
      election ... The Bill is still not passed, we still do not know what
      is happening while it is  President Mugabe.  Up to now they had been
      unable to really change the way that ...
THE PRESIDENT: Is there any connection with this incomplete process of
      electoral legislative reform and the judicial decision to defer the
      mini-general elections?
A.        That is an interesting point.  I would be interested to hear what
      civil society and legal people in Zimbabwe thought on that one.
Q.        Do we know who the claimants are?  I thought the claimants were
      ZANU PF.
A.        Yes.
Q.        So they were asking for an adjournment in this particular case?
A.        Yes, we think so as to harmonise the elections with the mini-by
      elections, the mini-elections.
Q.        With the main election?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And there have been no by-elections since 2008?
A.        No, the agreement of the global political agreement was that
      there would be no by-elections.  There was some kind of feeling that
      they might just bring Mps in from the same party, but that did not
      happen either, so there has been quite a gap.
Q.        So as Mps resign or die or something ...
A.        And deaths in general, others taking their place so ...
Q.        Numbers go down.  But no by-elections was a term of the agreement
      itself?
A.        That is right, yes.
MR THOMANN: What do you think the significance of the electoral
      commission's role was in the process which has led to elections not
      being called to date?
A.        That I do not know.
Q.        Are you able to help us at all with the Human Rights Commission
      bill that you mention in your report?
A.        Yes.
Q.        I think that it is only mentioned.  Can you help us with what
      that will involve?
A.        It does bring a Human Rights Commission, but with severely
      limited powers.  It is likely that no human rights abuses committed
      before 2009 will be eligible for investigation.  It has not really
      started work and as far as I know it does not have any money.
Q.        Moving on to regional engagement, what is your assessment of the
      current engagement of South Africa?
A.        South Africa or SADC?
Q.        South Africa to begin with.
A.        South Africa is a chief player in this.  It is Zimbabwe's
      neighbour, it suffers from the  Zimbabwe crisis.  At the same time a
      lot of events in South Africa are having to take up President Zuma's
      time, like the diamond mines.  Those sorts of things.  They are fitful
      on the Zimbabwe issue. They have tried to visit on a number of
      occasions and it has been postponed by  ZANU PF.  They have a
      committee that visits them regularly (inaudible) a respected member of
      the African National Party  (Inaudible) and has made some encouraging
      noises.  It has always been implementation, so even while they have
      made significantly more noises about the need for a new (inaudible)
      and free and fair elections and the need for a number of key reforms,
      they have not really been able to facilitate that beyond what was done
      in the global political agreement.  There is a feeling, of course,
      that the old liberation movement of solidarity still persists.  A
      highly critical report by the  South African Generals ordered by Mbeke
      about 2008 violence that has never been released about the conduct of
      the Zimbabwe Armed Forces has been sat on for two or three years now.
      The relationship is a tricky one because there are elements in the ANC
      who would support lots of what ZANU PF do and would use that to
      reflect back on what they perceive is a corrupt South Africa.  South
      Africa have to play a very careful card.  They do not like to be seen
      as this kind of regional hegemon telling everyone else in the region
      what to do, for obvious political reasons.  I think that the picture
      is quite focused on South Africa and its ability through SDAC to
      affect what is going on.  There is a great deal in Southern Africa of
      reliance on sovereignty and non -interference as a kind of key
      organising principle for different nation states, so, even if you have
      a regional body, there is very strong feeling that it is interfering
      with individual states' affairs.  This has happened.
Q.        You mentioned SDAC's potential role in the change of position in
      your evidence and the change of position in September on the documents
      to be put to COPAC.  What do you think the significance of that ...
A.        I am sorry, what is it?
Q.       This was your evidence earlier.  You mentioned that one of the
      factors that could have driven that change of position might have been
      that there was a SADC meeting in the future.  What do you think the
      significance is of ZANU PF's readiness to change their position on the
      eve of a SADC meeting?
A.        Well, it is part of the pattern that occurs on occasions like
      this.  There were a number of initiatives before the SADC Heads of
      State meetings in 2009 and 2010 in terms of promises to free up the
      media airways,  promises to suspend or amend or even repeal the two
      key pieces of repressive legislation, i.e. POSA, but after SADC had
      the state meeting nothing really changed.  So I can see that this is
      part of a kind of PR pattern, if you like.
Q.        Would you accept that the position as regards South Africa's
      engagement process remains broadly as it was the last time we met at
      this tribunal?
A.        Yes.  I think that looking at it on a long-term basis that Zuma
      has a great interest, but that does not necessarily translate into all
      aspects of South African policy.  But, as I said before, it is fitful.
Q.        Moving on to the SADC, you mentioned concerns about SADC
      observers in your statement.
A.        Yes.
Q.        What is your current assessment of the likelihood that there
      would be SADC or AU observers?
A.        By insistence it may well come.  They would be invited and come.
      But they would only come for a limited space of time.  They would not
      deal with issues wider than the actual conduct of an election.  Quite
      specifically, I think Dewa Mahvinga referred to some of the meetings
      that they had with SADC.  He said that certain items they could not
      deal with because it was interference with another nation's affairs,
      things like security sector reform, the conduct of the armed forces.
      These are areas that they will not go to, but these are the key areas.
Q.        I think that he mentioned in his statement the requirement to
      confine the army to barracks during the election process.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Are you surprised that that was not something that was
      countenanced by SADC?
A.        No.
Q.        Do you consider it likely that there would be additional funding
      for observers?
A.        If they can find the money, but observers were expected in
      Angola, so I think they quite specifically told the delegation of
      civil society people that they really did not have much in the coffers
      to mount a full-scale observation level and monitoring.
Q.        What do you think the prospects are of external funding being
      found?
A.        There may be some through UNDP, which has happened in the past.
      I think that western governments - you know what we call the
      fishmongers group of western donors are unlikely to fund and there
      would have to be certain conditions in place but they have not yet put
      any in place.  They would perhaps have a proposal, but this is some
      way down the line.
Q.        In paragraph 4 of your witness statement, you mention a number of
      potential tactics.
A.        Yes.
Q.        You believe that ZANU PF is gearing up for elections and you
      mention "disenfranchisement through voter roll chicanery,
      gerrymandering of constituencies and manipulation of polling
      stations".
A.        Yes.  (Inaudible) .
Q.        Then you say "With no movement on security sector governance,
      there are concerns that retrenched soldiers are still on the payroll,
      busy organising structures of violence.  Legislation to establish a
      Human Rights Commission passed through Parliament but its provisions
      on impunity for abuses until recently attracted much civil society
      criticism.  A census process has begun ..." Then there are lines that
      we looked at earlier.
A.        Yes.
Q.        In terms of the potential of tools available to ZANU PF, what do
      you consider the risks would be if violence were resorted to?
A.        ZANU PF has always used tactics of violence sometimes being used,
      sometimes being threatened, always being implicit.
Q.        What do you think the prospects would be of an election
      resembling 2008 being recognised by SADC?
A.        I think that that would be quite difficult, so the tactics might
      be lower scale violence,  intimidation, and remember what happened in
      2008 when SADC recognised the election repeated very frequently,
      especially in the rural areas, especially in those areas that
      historically ZANU PF like Mashonaland and Manicaland, Operation.
Q.        Looking at the position in Harare, do you accept that the
      international spotlight would be on Harare to an extent that it would
      not be, for example, in Mazvingo or in rural Maniciland?
A.        Yes.
Q.        What impact do you consider that that would have on any
      considerations of the likelihood of violence?
A.        It would not necessarily affect it, but, again, ZANU PF have to
      think of the best ways of getting that vote to their side and that
      will not just something that happens over the days of elections, it
      will be a longer term process.  Elections are not stolen in a few
      days, they are stolen in six months.
Q.        What impact, if any, do you consider it will have on ZANU PF's
      choice of tactics that support in Harare is broadly MDC?
A.        It has changed, because at one time they decided more or less, I
      think, that they were not going to win in major urban centres and
      there obviously has been this attempt to reach out to the cities
      through a number of different tactics, like people withdrawing city
      constituencies, so they have large pieces of commercial farms, peri-
      urban areas, settlers that are forced to support ZANU PF or do support
      them, anyway, so there has been, both formally and informally, and
      this is something that  Joanne McGregor's report, which when it is
      published you will be able to see,  looks at quite substantially, the
      use of both formal and informal state mechanisms to recapture the
      cities for ZANU PF.  How successful that will be is another matter.
      Chipangano is just merely one aspect of reasserting control in the
      cities and urban area.  JUDGE LANE: Have constituency boundaries been
      redrawn so that the new elections when they come next year will be
      fought on those new boundaries?
A.        Not yet.  This is previous.
JUDGE LANE: I am sorry, I did not quite hear that.  They have already
      redrawn the boundaries, so the 2008 elections were fought on the sort
      of redrawn boundaries that you have just described.
A.        Yes, that is right.
THE PRESIDENT: So that is not a change since 2008?
A.        No, but it is a previous tactic no change but a tactic they will
      try to use again [SSHD unable to confirm], no doubt, if they can.
JUDGE LANE: But from what we all know not very successfully in 2008.
A.        No, indeed, but they are of course aware that that was not very
      successful.
MR THOMANN: What would the role of the electoral commission be if there
      were suggestions that boundaries would need to be redrawn?
A.        They would, in theory, at least be expected to be the body that
      would draw up those constituencies and there will be the expectation,
      no doubt, that the census would be useful for that, but this is
      looking like a longer term process than one related to the 2013
      election.
Q.        The last thing you deal with is the humanitarian position in
      Zimbabwe.  You mentioned particularly food shortages in your
      statement.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Are you familiar with the World Food Programme"?
A.        I may well have done.  I do not work at all in the humanitarian
      sector, so ...
Q.        Your area of expertise is not dealing with the humanitarian
      position.  Are you more interested in political development?
A.        I am more a human rights ... my institution .
Q.        You may or may not have seen C.O.I.S information on the World
      Food Programme.  Are you aware of any World Food Programme
      initiatives?
A.        No, I am not.
MR THOMANN: Thank you, that is all.
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much.  It is ten to, Mr Henderson.  Do you
      know roughly how long you might be?
MR HENDERSON: Maybe about 15 minutes.
THE PRESIDENT: Shall we go to five-past and see what happens?
A.        I would prefer to do that.
THE PRESIDENT: I think that we would prefer to facilitate that, if you are
      comfortable at the moment?
A.        Yes.
Q.        You have been giving evidence since 11 o'clock, you do not need a
      break?
A.        No, I am fine.
                       Re-examination by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: Have you got the short bundle with your report in it?
A.        Yes.
Q.        You were taken to a number of the ZPP monthly reports.
A.        Yes.
Q.        I had already taken you to the witness statement from them this
      morning, but if I could just turn to a statement that I had not taken
      you to and that is the statement of Tony Reeler.
A.        Yes.
Q.         That starts at page 15 of the bundle.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Can identify a couple of points in particular and get your view
      on them?  Firstly, paragraph 29, on page 22, one of the most
      significant recent developments has been an appreciable rise in ZANU
      PF militia activity in urban areas and over the last nine months, for
      example ...
THE PRESIDENT: I am sure he can read it.  This is arising from cross-
      examination, is it?
MR HENDERSON: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Let's have the question.
MR HENDERSON: Do you agree or disagree with that?
A.        Yes, I do.
Q.        And just moving back he deals ... well, at paragraph 24 he refers
      to the peak rise in both rural and urban areas, etc.  Then from
      paragraph 25 he explains the basis and the role of the ZPP monthly
      reports.
A.        Yes.
Q.        And indicates that they do not give a true reflection of what is
      going on on the ground, especially in urban areas.  Then he goes on to
      explain that they do not seek to collate human rights violations like
      the old Human Rights Forum reports.
A.        Yes.
Q.        They tend to monitor political process.
THE PRESIDENT: It is a lot of preamble, Mr Henderson, can you get your
      question out?
MR HENDERSON: What I want to ask the witness about - and I am summarising
      rather than reading it ...
THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think that this is a slightly odd way of re-
      examining and ...
MR HENDERSON: It arises out of Mr Thomann's cross-examination.
THE PRESIDENT: It is a slightly odd technique you are adopting, but ask
      your question.
MR HENDERSON: Are you familiar with what Mr Reeler says about the ZPP
      reports, if I could look at the conclusion ...
THE PRESIDENT: You can ask that question.  Are you familiar with what Mr
      Reeler says about the ZPP reports?
A.        Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: So he is, so you do not need to read it out.
MR HENDERSON: And do you agree with his analysis and his conclusion and, in
      particular, at the end of paragraph 28 that these are examples rather
      than a national picture?
A.        Yes, I think Jestina Mukoko, who is the director of ZPP, would
      probably accept this herself, that it is an incomplete picture, based
      on their particular factors of verification and reporting of their
      monitors.
Q.        And she indicated that that should be a rise in violence ...
THE PRESIDENT: Mr Henderson, focus on the questions, please.
MR HENDERSON: Can you just go back to page 17 of the Home Office's very
      small bundle? It is a clip of press cuttings.
THE PRESIDENT: Page 18?
MR HENDERSON: Page 17, but the report begins at page 16.
THE PRESIDENT: "Generals had no support".
MR HENDERSON: This is, as you said, reporting the views of the Secretary of
      Defence for the MDC, who was saying that the army chiefs' statements
      were designed to unsettle ...  It is the last paragraph on the first
      page.
A.        Yes.
Q.        You gave evidence that there were a range of political views, no
      doubt, in the army.  You were not taken to the last two paragraphs of
      the report.  Could you just read those, the bottom two paragraphs on
      page 18 and tell me whether you agree with those?
A.        (Pause) Yes, that was more or less my analysis.
Q.        You said that there is a vast amount of commentary and different
      people suggesting different things.  Are you aware of any commentator
      who you would regard as serious who would say that one can expect some
      lower ranks of the army to revolt if they are required to play a role
      again in the election violence?
A.        Not in what I have read.
Q.        The Electoral Bill, juts to confirm, it is currently before
      Mugabe.
A.        Awaiting signing.
Q.        It has not been signed?
A.        It has not been signed.  It should be signed within two weeks of
      receiving it.
Q.        Do you know when he received it?
A.        I do not know the precise date.  I think the two weeks have gone.
Q.        Finally, we have seen the reports that civil society are now to
      be let in to the stakeholders' conference.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Would you just turn to page 16 of part C , the bundle with your
      report?  This is Mr Reeler's statement dated 25th September.   He says
      at paragraph 6 that the next stage of the COPAC process currently is a
      very confused situation.  Information that we have just received
      suggests that this could be held next month but completely in-house
      with all representatives of civil society excluded.  The exclusion of
      civil society representatives was also a recent development.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Would you agree with Mr Reeler that it is a very confused
      situation?
A.        Yes.
Q.        My final question, would you just turn over the page to paragraph
      9, and read paragraph 9 and tell me whether or not you agree with
      that?
A.       It is certainly true that a large part of the civil society have
      seen it as a compromise document but it is a further document basis of
      a people driven Constitution.
Q.        And just to clarify, that was the compromise document originally
      drawn up in the inter-parte negotiations in COPAC, so there are not
      any further compromises that were made as a result of the demands that
      ZANU PF have recently made?
A.        No.
MR HENDERSON: I have nothing further, sir.
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.
                          Questions by the Tribunal
JUDGE LANE: The first question is just a small question that arises from
      something in Mr Reeler's reports.  Paragraph 24 is talking about
      groups that operate in urban areas.  Chipangano we have heard a lot
      about that.  Just to clarify, Al-Shabab in the Midlands, that has a
      resonance which ...
A.        It is an interestingly provocative name.  They changed that from
      (inaudible) .
Q.        Do you know anything about that group?
A.        Well, Chipangano was always affixed with the word shadowy then Al-
      Shabab even more so.
Q.        But you would not take it to be Al-Shabab in the sense as its
      name is understood in Somalia?
A.        No.
Q.        My other question was concerning the position of the Generals and
      you were telling us earlier by reference to a number of articles,
      including the one "The security chiefs panic", that the Generals were
      testing the waters as to what might be the position if ZANU PF did not
      win the election, in which case they would no doubt be looking to
      safeguard their positions in a new state of affairs.  In so far as
      Generals are doing that, and I accept the position is (inaudible), but
      in so far as they are doing that, would that not point towards there
      being a reluctance on their part to engage in electoral violence to
      drive a ZANU PF victory on the basis that, if it failed, they would be
      in a very difficult position vis--vis seeking before the
      international community to be exculpated from their prior misdeeds?
A.        It is certainly a reasonable reading.  I would not take it any
      further than to say that this is in a sense testing the water, if
      their preferred tactic fails, if the strategy, rather, of being
      prepared to use violence does not work, and I cannot see why that
      would not work, because ...
Q.        You have got to be sure that it is going to work, have you not?
      You have to be sure that your violence or that ZANU PF is going to
      deliver a ZANU PF victory.  If you try it and it does not work, then
      you are left with a difficult position personally, are you not?
A.        That is undoubtedly true.  What happened, when they did not use
      violence in 2008, in the first round of voting, was that it was not
      successful, so the second round was accompanied by mass violence, so I
      would think that the lesson they would draw from that - or I am very
      sure they would draw from that - is that violence works.
Q.        But you also told us earlier that you think they would be lower
      key this time because, if they had an election as violent as 2008 in
      2013 that would not play at all well with the region.
A.        It is a complex situation.  They used violence and it won the
      election, but the violence was so extreme that the region won't accept
      it.  They have to make a calculation on what kind of violence, what
      kind of softening up of the electorate, what kind of intimidation will
      work before this next election.  It seems that the structures are
      there ready to be used but how they will be used and in what areas and
      what form that will take is as yet uncertain.
THE PRESIDENT: I have recorded your evidence previously this morning that
      it is unlikely that it will be the same form of violence and the same
      intensity of violence.
A.        Sure.
Q.        There may be intimidation and there may be other tactics used but
      not a mere repeat of what happened in the re-run elections of 2008,
      the second round.
A.        Yes, I think that you will probably see a fair bit of rounding up
      of villagers to attend what we call all-night vigils/purges to declare
      allegiance to ZANU PF,  tightening up the judicial chiefs' control
      over the population, selected use of violence.  These will be tactics
      used both in the rural areas and in urban areas, as I have already
      described.
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much.
MR HENDERSON: Could I ask a question arising out of that?
THE PRESIDENT: What is it?  What is the question and I will tell you
      whether you can ask it or not?  What is the question?
MR HENDERSON: It is a question arising out of the ...
THE PRESIDENT: Yes, but what is the question?
MR HENDERSON: I want to ask the witness about the gist that we were given
      yesterday on a point that is relevant to the questions that the
      tribunal just asked.
THE PRESIDENT: It does not sound like it arises out of that.  Well, one
      more.
                   Further re-examination by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: You have just indicated that ZANU PF would prefer to use
      intimidation and lower level of violence so they do not have to then
      deal with as much criticism from the international community.  A gist
      we were given yesterday indicated that ZANU PF would use just enough
      violence, as much as violence as they needed to, to win the elections
      but not more. Would you agree or disagree with that?
A.        I think there are elements of control and elements of lack of
      control.  What happened in 2008 was both formal and informal violence
      unleashed.  ZANU PF can control the formal violence from the state
      rather better than the militia.  The militia is ill-disciplined, they
      tend to be on drink or drugs.  They can take place  fairly quickly.
      The danger is always that, while they have a strategy of violence or
      controlled violence, it may boil up and you may get quite irrational
      violence, if you want to put it that way.
THE PRESIDENT: Right.  Thank you very much.  You are free to go now.
                             (Witness withdrew)
                                (Discussion)
                        (Adjourned for a Short Time)
                                (Discussion)
                                   MR IVES
                          Questions by the Tribunal
THE PRESIDENT: That is your statement?
A.        It is.
Q.        You are happy with it, are you?
A.        I am, yes.
Q.        And you can adopt it?
A.        Yes.
Q.        No one wants to ask you any questions apart from the question
      that I am about to ask you.  I am going to ask you this question.  If
      you think that in answering it you may need to reflect upon it, take a
      pause and do not just rush at it, OK.  As you know, we in the tribunal
      have been engaged for some weeks in the process of some further
      information, originally ordered I think by the Court of Appeal, and
      one of the documents that the appellant has received I think yesterday
      evening is the document that is now before you.  In its full context
      it was a document that I think under tab 148.  I want to ask you, that
      is, we are told, an FCO paper by which do we understand to mean that
      that was a paper that the FCO produced for its own purposes and is it
      based by an official at the FCO on information currently available to
      him or her?
A.        Yes, it was an analysis paper produced for internal use by the
      FCO by an official on the basis of information that they had gained at
      that time.
Q.        I recall - we have not got the confidential version of that paper
      - it is March 2011.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Is it the first part of March or ...
A.        To my recollection, it was early March, but I cannot recall
      without seeing the original.
MR THOMANN:     I am told that it is likely to have been before 11th
      because that was the disclosure ...
THE PRESIDENT: Before yes, I think that it is 4th March 2011.  Thank you
      very much.  You may go.
                             (Witness withdrew)
                                (Discussion)
                                 CM, Called
THE PRESIDENT: It is important that you speak slowly and clearly, please,
      so we can hear you.  It is important that we do.  We start from the
      position that you have made, I think, two witness statements quite
      recently for this appeal.
A.        Yes.
Q.        You have seen those witness statements, have you?
A.        I have seen them.
Q.        You are happy with them.  They represent what you want to tell
      us?
A.        I am quite happy.
Q.        Very good.  It is likely that what will happen next is that you
      will be asked questions from the gentleman on my left.
                    Examination in chief by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: You say in the statement that you just made today and the
      final paragraph that you would not want to attend those ZANU PF
      meetings as you do not support ZANU PF. Would you actually attend
      them?
A.        I would because if I do not I will fear that I would be
      victimised at any time if I don't, so attending does not mean that I
      am attending wholeheartedly, it is just for fear for my life.
MR HENDERSON: I have nothing further, sir.
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.
                       Cross-examination by MR THOMANN
MR THOMANN: You say at present your house in Hatfield still remains
      unoccupied is that right?
A.        It is correct, yes.
Q.        And you say that it is located in [name of road]?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And you may have heard if you were here yesterday that there was
      a debate as to the difference between the  low and medium and high
      density suburbs.  Do you recall that you initially described Hatfield
      as a low density suburb?
A.        Originally, but that was an error.  It is a medium density.
Q.        Can you explain why you made that error?
A.        Well, I think at the time I was under a bit of stress and I was
      just answering everything very quickly and I do not know whether it
      was or not whatever I was saying at that time, but I realised it was
      an error.
Q.        Was part of the error that the residential area around  [name of
      road], in fact, has the character of a low density area; the buildings
      are spaced out?  Was part of the error that the area is actually low
      density that you live in?
A.        It was an error when I said it was low density.  It is medium
      density.
THE PRESIDENT: And that includes [name of road] itself?
A.       Yes.
Q.        That is also medium density?
A.        Yes, it is medium density.
Q.        I should say - and you ought to be aware - that with the wonders
      of modern technology that we have had a quick look at Hatfield on
      Google satellite in order to try to get a sense of the location.  When
      I briefly did it, I did not see [name of road] come up.  Is it near
      any main thoroughfares [name of road]?
A.        Near main what, sorry?
Q.        Is it near any particular main through road through the Hatfield
      area?
A.        No, it is not.
THE PRESIDENT:       I see.
MR THOMANN: How would you describe the house?
A.        It is a three-bedroomed house, lounge and dining, bathroom and
      toilet.
Q.        Does it have a garden around it?
A.        A small garden, yes.
Q.        And are those the types of houses that are on [name of road]
A.        Yes, those are the type of houses.
Q.        What would you describe as the difference between that sort of
      area and a township like Mbare?
A.        Like?
Q.       One of the townships.
A.        OK.  In a township, you have a dining room and a kitchen and
      probably two bedrooms and the toilets sometimes they are not inside,
      they are outside.
Q.        You have attached to your witness statement a report.  It is page
      41 of the bundle of your specific evidence.  Mr CM, is that an article
      you have seen before?
A.        I know that it was with my statement.
Q.        Have you had the chance to read it before?
A.        I have not had chance.
Q.        Would you like a chance now to have a look at it?
A.        (Pause) I have seen this before.
Q.        If you turn the page, page 42, in context, the article refers to
      someone involved in illegal settlements and the quote that I am
      interested in is in the second paragraph down starting "Obviously".
A.        Yes.
Q.        It says there, "Obviously, they ... airport and the nearby medium
      density suburb of Hatfield".  I think that the article has been
      provided in support of your case that Hatfield is a medium rather than
      a low density suburb, is that right?
A.        That is correct.
Q.        Would you accept that read in context that quote indicates that
      it is a desirable place to live?
A.        I am not understanding you.
Q.        Do you accept that a reading of this quotation is that persons
      are to be envied if they live in or near Hatfield?
A.        They live near Hatfield.
Q.        Do you accept that ...
A.        They are near Hatfield, yes.
Q.        Do you accept that Hatfield is a desirable place to live in the
      Harare context?
A.        It is.
Q.        Can you explain why?
A.        Because the houses that are there already are desirable places to
      be, but the shanty places where they are building now it is not
      desirable.
Q.        Now, you have mentioned that you were interested in relocating to
      Karoi near Kariba, is that right?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And is it right that that is Mashonaland West?
A.        Yes, it is.
Q.        Can you confirm why you would be interested to locate there given
      the answer that you gave to Mr Henderson a moment ago?
A.        I would not want to go back to Hatfield because of fear, because
      these people are exactly the same people who are the ZANU PF people,
      so, if I go there, I know quite a lot of these people, you know, these
      are people who will be looking for me.
Q.        You remember that in your previous appeals you were not believed
      as regards people looking for you in Hatfield.
A.        In the previous ...
Q.        In the previous stages of this case, do you remember that you
      were not believed as regards people looking for you in Hatfield?
A.        They have always been.
Q.        Do you have any new information on that?
A.        Not at the moment, but they have always been looking for me ever
      since I left.
Q.        That particular factor apart, there is no reason for you not to
      live in Hatfield?
A.        There is a reason for me not to live there.
Q.        Is the only reason that you have that people are looking for you?
A.        Yes - for fear of my life.
Q.        In terms of the work that you have done in the past, you have
      given evidence previously that you worked as a business manager for
      [S] Finance.
A.        That is when I was still working.
Q.        And you said that you worked after that with your son, D
A.        Yes, which never took off very well.  It collapsed.
Q.        When you say that it never took off very well ...
A.        It did not do very well.  We started and it never went too far.
Q.        What sort of work was it?
A.        It was like we were supplying, you know, consumables and
      furniture.  It did not go too far.
Q.        Why do you say it did not go too far?
A.        Because we didn't do very well.
Q.        Do you recall that previously you were not believed as regards
      your business being attacked in the previous stages of this appeal?
A.        Previously?
Q.       Do you recall that in previous stages of this appeal you were not
      believed on that aspect, your business being attacked?
A.        It was.
Q.        Do you have any new evidence on that?
A.        Not new, but the old.
Q.        When you say "old evidence", do you have anything apart from your
      own oral evidence?
A.        What I am trying to say is that when it was attacked it never
      went very far and nothing happened from that time.
Q.        Is there any reason why you would not be able to start another
      business idea with your son, D?
A.        D is in Masvingo now and starting any business would need money
      and I have not any money at all and with the economy in the country
      now I do not think that it would work out.
Q.        When you say that D is in Masvingo, is he working in Masvingo?
A.        No, he is not.  He is looking for a job there.
Q.        If you were back in Hatfield, would there be any reason why D
      could not join you back at the family home?
A.        Well, he has got his own wife and child, so he would not join me
      at all.  He is not working, I am not working, so it is impossible.
Q.        You have described all your children as MDC supporters.
A.        Yes, I do.
Q.        Are you aware of D having had any difficulties as a result of
      that?
A.        Well, when in Masvingo right now he has not had any difficulties,
      but when he was in Harare he used to.
Q.        What sort of difficulties do you mean?
A.        Because he was reluctant to go the ZANU PF meetings because he
      was an MDC supporter.
Q.        That is not something that you have mentioned in any of your
      witness statements, is it?
A.        I am sorry.
Q.        You have not mentioned that in your witness statements, have you?
A.        I am not too sure if it is there.  I don't think that it is
      there.
Q.        I will be corrected if it is there.  Can you explain why you have
      not mentioned that in your witness statements?
A.        I think that I overlooked it.
Q.        You knew, did you not, that an essential part of your case was
      going to be that you were going to be at risk in Harare, so would it
      not be something that you would mention if your son had had
      difficulties in Harare?  Why have you not mentioned that beforehand?
A.        I said I overlooked, I think.
Q.        Is not the answer that you are now trying to support your case
      with things that did not actually happen?
A.        No.
Q.        You have another child in the UK, is that right?
A.        Yes, I have, S.
Q.        How old is S?
A.        How old?
Q.        Yes.
A.        He is 23.
Q.        23.  Can you tell us where he lives?
A.        He is in Oxford.
Q.        In Oxford.  And what is he doing?
A.        Nothing.
THE PRESIDENT: Does he have a right to live here or ...
A.        No.
Q.        So he has an uncertain status?
A.        Yes.  He has not got the right to live here.
Q.        Has he had a negative decision about his future stay or ...
A.        Negative, yes.
MR THOMANN: If he were to return with you, is there any reason why he could
      not live with you in Harare?
A.        That house is not habitable at the present time, because it is
      dilapidated.
Q.        You mentioned it having a leaking roof at the moment.
A.        Yes, the tiles have been removed.
Q.        Now, if that were repaired, would there be any reason for you not
      to return?
A.        I do not see it being repaired because there is no money to
      repair the roof.  It costs a lot of money.
Q.        Now, one economic activity that you mentioned you were engaged in
      before you left Zimbabwe was looking for properties for your aunt.  Is
      your aunt still in Harare?
A.        No, she is here.
Q.        She is in the UK.  And what is she doing?
A.        She is doing care work.
THE PRESIDENT: She has a visa for that?
A.        Yes, she has.
MR THOMANN: And you mentioned previously that she supported you in Harare.
A.        Originally, yes.
Q.        Is there any reason why she could not support you now if you went
      back to Harare?
A.        Are you talking about my auntie?
Q.        Yes.
A.        No, my auntie is here.
Q.        Yes, is there any reason that she could not send remittances over
      to you in Harare?
A.        She did not support me when I was in Harare.
Q.        You mentioned that you looked for some properties for her?
A.        Yes, because they intended to buy a house in Harare which they
      did not buy.  That was before I left.  When they said can you look
      around to see if there are houses of a reasonable price, because they
      intended to buy a house but they did not buy a house.
Q.        Is there any reason why she could not tide you over with some
      funds when you return to Harare?
A.        Well, I do not think that she has any money, enough money to look
      after me while I am there, even at that time she was not earning
      enough money.
Q.        Presumably, she is on a careworker's salary at the moment.
A.        Yes.
Q.        And have you asked her whether money would be available?
A.        Whether?
Q.        Have you asked her whether she could support you?
A.        No, she could not.  She said so.
Q.        Have you asked her?
A.        Yes, I did.  I did talk to her some other time but she said she
      could not.
Q.        When you asked for support previously, what sort of support was
      it?
A.        Support from?
Q.        You have mentioned that you have asked your aunt for financial
      support.  When did you ask your aunt for financial support?
A.        I cannot remember.  I cannot remember that.
THE PRESIDENT: You cannot remember asking her or you cannot remember when
      you asked her?
A.        I cannot remember asking her.
MR THOMANN: For all we know she would be willing to support you.
A.        Sorry.
Q.        Is it not right that you do not know whether she would be able to
      support you or not?
A.        She would not be able to support me.
THE PRESIDENT: Why do you say that?
A.        Because in care work she is not earning enough money to do so.
Q.        That is your judgment, is it?  It is your judgment that she would
      not be able to support you?
A.        It is my judgment, yes.
MR THOMANN: May I suggest to you now then that there would be enough money
      from her to make a real difference to your start in Harare - do you
      accept that?
A.        I do.
Q.        You mentioned activity in Reading in the context of an MDC branch
      and previously you have provided us with minutes of meetings.  Those
      minutes, you may recall, did not record any activity or contributions
      by you to those meetings.  You have not provided us with any
      additional ones, is that right - any further minutes.
A.        No further minutes have been provided.
Q.        Do you accept that the minutes that you provided previously
      reflect your attendance but lack of contributions to those minutes?
A.        I do not know why you say lack of my contributions, I am not ...
Q.        Well, on the minutes you provided previously, there are not any
      contributions from you to the meeting that have been recorded?
MR HENDERSON: I am not sure that he understands.
MR THOMANN: The minutes that we looked at previously did not show you as
      saying anything at those meetings which the minute taker recorded.
A.        Yes, I do agree on that, I did not contribute, it did not show me
      contributing saying something, but ...
Q.        Do you accept that that is because you do not tend to say very
      much at those meetings?
A.        I did not say much.
Q.        You say that you would be of interest to the CIO in Harare when
      you returned.
A.        Yes.
Q.        Do you accept that if the CIO were aware of the minutes of your
      meetings in Reading that they would not find anything there that you
      have contributed?
A.        Yes, but the fact that I am a member of the MDC and, you know, we
      contribute funds to support our party at home, that would matter to
      them.
MR HENDERSON:      I have just been given, I think, by your legal
      representative a photograph.  Is that right?
MR HENDERSON: There are copies for the tribunal as well.  W83 was going to
      refer to this.  It is a printout from the MDC website.
THE PRESIDENT: This is a bit ...  Anyway.
MR HENDERSON: It is evidence that W83 was going to give.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, for God's sake it should be before us before this
      stage is reached in the proceedings.
MR THOMANN: Have you got a copy of that photograph?
A.        Not now.    (Handed)   I have got it.
Q.        Do you recognise yourself?
A.        Yes, I do.
Q.        Are you the gentleman on the far right?
A.        Yes, I am.
Q.        Do you accept that all that shows is that you attended a function
      in April 2011?
A.        I do agree.
MR THOMANN: Those are all my questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Mr Henderson.
                       Re-examination by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: Just in relation to your aunt, you said that she was a low-
      paid care worker. You obviously have some familiarity with how much
      she earns as a care worker if she said that she was low paid.  But on
      your understanding would she have enough money to repair your home in
      Harare?
A.        No, she would not.
Q.        Mr Thomann asked whether she might be able to tide you over.  I
      am not sure whether it is tied you over until what, but just to
      clarify in your statement you say that as a 60-year old man, you would
      not be able to compete for work.  Do you think that that situation
      would improve with time or not?
A.        It would never improve at all.
Q.        And, apart from the problems in actually living in your home in
      its dilapidated state, if you were to go back there now, would you be
      able to find the basics of life, like sort of having food to eat?
A.        It would be very, very difficult for me to find that.
MR HENDERSON: That is it.
                         Questions from the Tribunal
JUDGE LANE: How old is your aunt?
A.        She is nearly 60.  About 57, nearly 60.
Q.        She is younger than you?
A.        She should be, I think so.
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.  There are no further questions from us.  That
      completes your evidence.
                             (Witness withdrew)
                                (Discussion)
                             WITNESS 83, Called
                    Examination in chief by MR HENDERSON
MR HENDERSON: Could you confirm your name, please?
A.        My name is [W83].
Q.        And your current position?
A.        I am [representative] of MDC UK and Ireland.
Q.        And, if you could speak reasonably slowly, so that everyone can
      make a note of what you are saying ... You have made a witness
      statement in this case.  Can I ask you to confirm that that is your
      signature and you signed that statement yesterday and you are familiar
      with the contents?
A.        Yes.
Q.        And is what you said there true?
A.        Yes.
Q.        You have drawn attention to a photograph ... is this a printout
      from
your organisation the MDC UK and Ireland website?
A.        Yes, it is.
Q.        Is that an official website?
A.        Yes, it is.
Q.        And why did you draw attention to that picture in this case?
A.        It was to show that CM actually travelled to Leeds.  It was the
      day that I was elected as [...] of MDC UK and Ireland.  I also know
      that the people that are in the photograph are members of Reading.
Q.        I want to ask you about one further point.  You refer in your
      statement to the political temperature arising in paragraphs 17 and
      20, with the anticipated elections.  Do you have any recent example of
      that rising temperature?
A.        There are many examples.  On 29th September, some MDC
      representatives were going to the 13th anniversary of the MDC in
      Bulawayo.
Q.        I am sorry, I do not mean to interrupt you, but you have actually
      mentioned that in your witness statement.  Is there anything more
      recent that you would like to say?
A.        The Minister of Finance Offices were barricaded by ZANU PF war
      veterans.  The ZANU PF war veterans were demanding an increase in
      their pensions.  They were also saying that he is responsible for not
      supporting the land issue.  They specifically said that the Minister
      of Finance has not provided funding for them to have inputs.
Q.        To have?
A.        To have inputs for funding purposes.  The story is actually
      widely reported in the Herald, today's Herald.
Q.        What is the name of the Finance Minister?
A.        He is Tendai  Biti.
Q.        He is MDC?
A.        Yes, he is also the Secretary General of MDC.
Q.        And that is just in the last 24 hours.
A.        Yes.
Q.        These elections are required now by Zimbabwe law to be called in
      June.
THE PRESIDENT: Where are we travelling, Mr Henderson?  He is not your
      country guidance witness, is he?
MR HENDERSON: No, sir.
THE PRESIDENT: There might be a more ...
MR HENDERSON: I do not think that this is controversial.
THE PRESIDENT: You never know until it comes out, do you, and then I should
      have stopped you a long time before?
MR HENDERSON: The Home Office have put in press reports about your
      organisation, the MDC, opposing the elections being brought forward
      from when they were required to be held in June next year, so opposing
      earlier elections without reforms.  Why have the MDC opposed the
      elections being brought forward, earlier elections?
A.        The MDC's view is that there are not sufficient reforms,
      particularly in the security sector, but for practical purposes the
      MDC is actually ready for the elections.  I mean, the latest slogan
      for MDC is the MDC (unintelligible) for real transformation and it is
      actually a campaign slogan towards the elections.
Q.        It has been suggested that when the elections must be called in
      June the MDC might have pulled out if there was violence and not
      contest them.  Is that right?
  A.        That is not what is happening on the ground, because there are
  different political strategies, but in terms of actually the MDC are
  getting ready for those elections.  As the General Assembly, we have
  already started funding Members of Parliament in the constituencies.  The
  branches themselves ... Reading is also twinned to Mashonda(?)  East.
  They are actually mobilising resources for the funding of those elections
  in Zimbabwe.

MR HENDERSON: Those are all my questions.
                       Cross-examination by MR THOMANN
MR THOMANN: I have just one question for you.  That relates to your
      paragraph 20 of your statement.  What I am interested in is your
      opinion that there is a current likelihood that someone being returned
      would be stopped and asked what they were doing in the UK and whether
      they have any connection with the MDC.  You say that that is your
      opinion.  Do you have any evidence to support that?
A.        Well, I do not have any evidence to support that but it is based
      on contact that I have and I (unintelligible) and I also know very
      well how government works (unintelligible)
MR THOMANN: Thank you.  I have no further questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.
                             (Witness withdrew)
             (Discussion followed and the hearing was concluded)
                           -----------------------
[1] The respondent has clarified that some of the  documents  discovered  in
the course of the unlawful detention litigation were copied to  officers  of
UKBA (although she says there was no suggestion that  her  case  workers  or
legal team had  possession  or  sight  of  the  subsequently  disclosed  FCO
materials at the time of the  decision  to  refuse  asylum  or  resist  this
appeal).
[2] 2)Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-
(a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate to the importance
of the case, the complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and the
resources of the parties;
(b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in the
proceedings;
(c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are able to
participate fully in the proceedings;
(d) using any special expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and
(e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration of the
issues.


