

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Vigneswaran (abandonment: s 104(4B)) [2016] UKUT 00054 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Promulgated on               |
|10 December 2015                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                           NAGAMUTHTHU VIGNESWARAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Devlin, instructed by McGlashan Mackay Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Inaction is not giving notice for the purposes of s 104(4B).

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, came to the United  Kingdom  in
    2010 and was detained.  He then applied for asylum.   He  was  refused,
    and an appeal was unsuccessful.  He did not leave the  United  Kingdom,
    and failed to observe  reporting  conditions  in  the  period  from  14
    February 2012 to 24 January 2013 when he was encountered  by  officials
    and detained again.  He made further  submissions  in  support  of  his
    asylum claim which were refused in a  new  appealable  decision  on  11
    February 2014.  He appealed on asylum and human rights grounds and also
    on the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law.  His
    appeal was heard on 27 March 2014 by Judge Kempton, who  dismissed  it.
    He applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  renewal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman.  That decision, and the events
    subsequent to it, are encompassed in a decision by the Vice  President,
    made without a hearing, on 14 October 2014:
                           "DECISION AND REMITTAL

            1.  On 10 September 2014 I wrote to the parties as follows:-

              "On 17 June 2014 Judge Freeman granted permission  to  appeal
              in the following terms:


                  "Permission to appeal is granted.


                                   REASONS


               a) The First-tier application seems to have  been  in  time,
                  contrary to the view of the permission judge,  who  might
                  helpfully have dealt in more detail with  the  merits  in
                  the alternative.  However, as he pointed out, the hearing
                  judge had allowed the appellant's appeal under article  3
                  of the Human Rights  Convention,  on  the  basis  of  his
                  mental health needs in Sri Lanka: so it is hard  to  see,
                  and there is no explanation in the renewed grounds as  to
                  what humanitarian protection under article 15(b)  of  the
                  Qualifications Directive would have added,  in  terms  of
                  his status in this country: as even the grounds  concede,
                  this had not been argued before.   It  follows  that  the
                  only real issue is on asylum.
               b) Turning to the asylum grounds,
                  (3) and (4) The hearing judge recorded  at  paragraph  58
                  the appellant's claim  about  his  wife's  continuing  to
                  receive visits from the CID asking after him, which might
                  have brought him within category 7(d) of GJ  (post  civil
                  war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC);  but,
                  in her very long and otherwise careful decision, she  did
                  not deal with it on the facts.
                  (5) While corroboration is certainly not  required  as  a
                  matter of law in such cases, the judge found on the facts
                  of this one, at paragraph 49, that there was no  evidence
                  at all that the Sri Lankan authorities knew of  any  link
                  between this appellant and his brother, who, according to
                  what he said, was a bodyguard of the  son  of  the  Tamil
                  Tiger leader.  The answer given to that  in  the  renewed
                  grounds is that the judge should have found  [sic.  taken
                  judicial notice of the fact] that the  authorities  would
                  be able to check various types of record "with little  or
                  no effort on their part".  No authority is cited for this
                  proposition: if it were to have been put forward  on  the
                  facts, evidence needed to have been put before the  judge
                  as to the likelihood of their doing so in this case.
                  (6) The grounds however make no arguable link between the
                  appellant's activities in this country, such as the judge
                  found them to be, and the continuing visits to his  house
                  in Sri Lanka.
               c) It follows that permission to  appeal  is  given  on  the
                  point in paragraph (4) - (5) of the grounds only.  Unless
                  there is an objection within the  time  set  out  in  the
                  attached letter, the  appeal  will  be  allowed,  with  a
                  direction to Judge Kempton to continue and  conclude  the
                  hearing on that point."

                  I do not know what the judge envisaged by  his  reference
              to the "time  set  out  in  the  attached  letter";  but  the
              covering letter sent with  the  decision  mentioned  no  time
              limit.   Nevertheless,  both  parties  have   replied.    The
              Secretary of State agrees with the proposal in the  decision.
              The appellant's representative's letter makes no  mention  of
              that proposal and refers to "the forthcoming Hearing"  before
              the Upper Tribunal.


                  It appears that the appellant's representatives have  not
              understood the terms of the grant of  permission.   If  Judge
              Freeman's proposal takes effect, the proceedings  before  the
              Upper Tribunal will be  concluded  by  the  allowing  of  the
              appeal and its remittal:  the  presence  or  absence  of  any
              additional grounds of appeal can make no difference.  It will
              be for Judge Kempton to re-determine the appeal, and  if  she
              makes an error of law, the  appellant  can,  if  so  advised,
              appeal against her decision to the Upper  Tribunal.   If,  on
              the other  hand,  Judge  Freeman's  proposal  does  not  take
              effect, the appeal will be determined by the  Upper  Tribunal
              on the basis of the extant  grant  of  permission.   In  such
              circumstances there can be no further  appeal  to  the  Upper
              Tribunal: further recourse would be to the Inner House.


                  If no proposal to the contrary is received within 21 days
              of the date of this letter I will allow  the  appeal  to  the
              Upper Tribunal and remit the appeal to Judge Kempton for  her
              to determine it according to law."


         2.  No response has been received from either party.   The  appeal
           to this Tribunal is allowed.   I remit the appeal to the  First-
           tier Tribunal and direct that it be determined by Judge  Kempton
           according to law."

 3. What the Tribunal did not know  was  that,  presumably  acting  on  the
    positive parts of Judge Kempton's  decision,  the  Secretary  of  State
    granted 30 months leave to the appellant on 4 September 2014.  When the
    matter came back to Judge Kempton the Secretary of  State  argued  that
    the appeal had been abandoned by operation of s 104 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  After hearing  submissions  from  the
    parties Judge  Kempton  accepted  that  argument.   The  appellant  now
    appeals on the basis that in doing so she erred in law.

 4. Section 104 of the 2002 Act was, at the relevant date, as relevant,  as
    follows:-

       "104(1) An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period -
             (a) beginning when it is instituted, and
             (b)  ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn   or
               abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).
        (4)...
        (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is
             in the United Kingdom shall be  treated  as  abandoned  if  the
             appellant is granted leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom (subject to subsection (4B)).
        (4B) Subsection (4A) is shall not apply to an appeal in so  far  as
             it is brought on a ground specified in section 84(1)(a) or  (b)
             or  84(3)  (asylum  or  humanitarian  protection)   where   the
             appellant -
             (a) ...
             (b) gives notice, in accordance with Tribunal Procedure  Rules,
               that he wishes to pursue the appeal  in  so  far  as  it  is
               brought on that ground."

 5. The relevant Procedure Rules are those in s 17A of the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules:-

        "17A. (1) A party to an asylum case or an immigration  case  before
        the Upper Tribunal must notify the Upper Tribunal if they are aware
        that -
             (a)  the appellant has left the United Kingdom;
             (b) the appellant has been granted leave to enter or remain  in
               the United Kingdom;
             (c)  a deportation order has been made against  the  appellant;
             or
             (d) a document listed in paragraph 4(2) of Schedule  2  to  the
               Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  has
               been issued to the appellant.
        (2) Where an appeal is treated as  abandoned  pursuant  to  section
           104(4) or (4A) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
           2002  or  paragraph  4(2)  of  Schedule  2  to  the  Immigration
           (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  or  as   finally
           determined  pursuant  to  section  104(5)  of  the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the Upper  Tribunal  must  send
           the parties a notice informing them that  the  appeal  is  being
           treated as abandoned or finally determined.
        (3) Where an appeal would otherwise fall to be treated as abandoned
           pursuant to section 104(4A) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002,  but  the  appellant  wishes  to  pursue  their
           appeal, the appellant must send or deliver a notice, which  must
           comply with any  relevant  practice  directions,  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal and the respondent so that it is received within thirty
           days of the date on which the notice of the grant  of  leave  to
           enter or remain in the United Kingdom was sent to the appellant.
        (4) Where a notice of grant of leave to enter  to  remain  is  sent
           electronically  or  delivered  personally,  the  time  limit   n
           paragraph (3) is twenty eight days.
        (5) Notwithstanding rule 5(3)(a) (case management powers) and  rule
           7(2) (failure to comply with rules  etc.),  the  Upper  Tribunal
           must not extend the time limits in paragraph (3) and (4)."

 6. The practice direction sets out  a  form  of  notice.   Although  Judge
    Kempton was led by the parties  to  consider  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Rules as well, the position is that insofar  as  there  was  a  pending
    appeal, it was before the Upper Tribunal for the whole  of  the  period
    from 17 June to 14 October 2014, and the Upper Tribunal  Rules  applied
    to it during that period.  Neither party informed  the  Tribunal  about
    the grant of leave; and the appellant (who is not  said  to  have  been
    ignorant of the grant of leave) gave no notice that he wished to pursue
    his appeal on asylum grounds.

 7. It might be thought that in those circumstances  the  absence  of  such
    notice had the automatic effect that the appeal fell to be  treated  as
    abandoned, at latest on the expiring of the  time  for  giving  notice,
    probably some time in the first week of October 2014.  Any  proceedings
    thereafter, in either Tribunal, were made  without  jurisdiction.   But
    the appellant's position before the First-tier Tribunal was that it was
    unfair to apply the provisions of s 104 to him as he otherwise  had  no
    opportunity to argue his Refugee Convention claim before a judge and he
    had come to the Tribunal prepared to do so.  Before us Mr Devlin argued
    that "in the special circumstances of this case" the  failure  to  give
    the notice envisaged by s 104(4B) should  be  regarded  as  giving  the
    notice.

 8. The circumstances to which Mr Devlin referred amount to the  procedural
    history of the case and, in particular, the fact that after the  letter
    of 10 September 2014 the appellant had not raised any objection to  the
    matter continuing.  But, with respect, that is only a special case of a
    general category of cases  where  the  appellant  does  not  raise  any
    objection to the matter continuing.  It is, in our view, impossible  to
    regard the failure to give a notice as giving  a  notice  in  these  or
    (probably) any other circumstances.

 9. Besides, the procedure envisaged by s 104(4B) and the rules  does  not,
    as it has sometimes been put, impose any obligation on  the  appellant.
    On the  contrary,  it  gives  the  appellant  a  choice.   The  default
    position, if we may so express it,  is  that  the  grant  of  leave  is
    regarded as settling all outstanding matters between the appellant  and
    the government.  But if the appellant wishes to continue to attempt  to
    establish his status as a refugee,  he  can  do  so  by  following  the
    procedure in the rules.

10. Mr Devlin's submission, and the  submission  made  on  the  appellant's
    behalf to Judge Kempton, appears to  ignore  wholly  this  question  of
    choice.  Before us Mr Devlin suggested that the failure to  inform  the
    Tribunal about the grant of leave, and to give any  notice,  should  be
    treated as equivalent to the exercise of the choice.  But the  position
    is that it is perfectly clear from Judge Kempton's  determination  that
    the consequences of the grant,  the  terms  of  the  statute,  and  the
    requirements of the  rules,  took  the  appellant  and  his  solicitors
    entirely by surprise when they were drawn to their  attention.   It  is
    quite impossible to regard the appellant as having  made  the  relevant
    choice within 30 days after the  grant  of  leave.   Not  only  did  he
    actually give no notice: it is clear that nothing that he did or  could
    do at the relevant time could be interpreted as making  the  choice  in
    question.

11. It follows that Judge Kempton was correct to find that the  appeal  had
    been abandoned by  the  grant  of  leave.   The  remittal  to  her  was
    ineffective because on 14 October 2014  s  104(4A)  had  already  taken
    effect in the absence of a notice under sub-s (4B).  There was  and  is
    nothing else for the Tribunal at either level to determine.










                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 22 December 2015
