

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

      MA (Draft evaders - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT
                                                                       00059




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |                        |
|On 7 November 2006, 4 January 2007 and       |                     |
|2 March 2007                                 |                     |
|                                          |                        |

                                   Before

                     SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE JARVIS
                               MR R BAINES JP

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms V Quinn, Counsel
For the Respondent:   Mr J Parkinson (for the hearings on 7/11/06 and
4/01/07)
                 Mr Y Oguntolu (for hearing on 2/03/07)


1.      A person who is reasonably likely to  have  left  Eritrea  illegally
    will in general be at real risk on return if he or she is of draft age,
    even if the evidence shows that he or she has completed Active National
    Service, (consisting of 6 months in a training  centre  and  12  months
    military  service).   By  leaving  illegally  while  still  subject  to
    National Service, (which  liability  in  general  continues  until  the
    person ceases to be of draft age), that person is reasonably likely  to
    be regarded by the authorities of Eritrea as a deserter  and  subjected
    to punishment which is persecutory and amounts to serious harm and ill-
    treatment.

2.      Illegal exit continues to be a  key  factor  in  assessing  risk  on
    return.  A person who fails to  show  that  he  or  she  left  Eritrea
    illegally will not in general be at real risk, even if of draft age and
    whether  or  not  the  authorities  are  aware  that  he  or  she   has
    unsuccessfully claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.

3.      This Country Guidance supplements and amends  to  the  above  extent
    the Country Guidance in IN (Draft evaders - evidence of  risk)  Eritrea
    CG [2005] UKIAT  00106,  KA  (draft-related  risk  categories  updated)
    Eritrea CG  UKAIT  00165,  AH  (Failed  asylum  seekers  -  involuntary
    returns) Eritrea CG [2006] UKAIT  00078  and  WA  (Draft-related  risks
    updated - Muslim Women) Eritrea CG [2006] UKAIT 00079.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.      The Appellant, born on 1 November 1976, is  a  citizen  of  Eritrea.
    He appeals against the decisions of the Respondent  respectively  dated
    15 and 23 July  2005,  refusing  to  him  the  grant  of  asylum  under
    paragraph 336 of HC395 (as amended) and directing  his  removal  as  an
    illegal entrant from the United Kingdom.

2.      The brief immigration history of the Appellant is that he claims  to
    have entered the United Kingdom  clandestinely  (via  a  lorry)  on  24
    January 2005.   He claimed asylum and illegal entry papers were  served
    upon him, on the same day.

3.       The  Appellant's  appeal  against  those  decisions   came   before
    Immigration Judge Reid, who on 13 September 2005 dismissed  the  appeal
    on asylum and human rights grounds.

4.      The Appellant obtained an  order  for  the  reconsideration  of  the
    determination of Immigration Judge Reid, the  first  stage  hearing  of
    which, was heard before a panel comprising  Senior  Immigration  Judges
    Gleeson and Pinkerton on 14 August 2006, when the Tribunal found  that
    the Immigration Judge had made a material error  of  law  and  directed
    that the appeal be set down for a  full  second  stage  reconsideration
    hearing.  The Panel's reasons were as follows:

    "1.     The Appellant has been granted review of the  determination  of
         Immigration Judge  Reid,  who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision to refuse to grant him asylum and  to
         set  removal  directions  to  Eritrea,  his  country   of   origin.
         Reconsideration was granted because Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis
         considered  it  arguable  that  the  Immigration  Judge  fell  into
         material errors of law including failure to make findings or  clear
         findings as to  relevant  facts,  alternatively  that  she  reached
         findings which were not based on the  evidence.   Further,  it  was
         arguable that the Immigration Judge's finding of lack of real  risk
         of persecution or other serious harm as a  deserter  from  military
         service  was  predicated  on  a  fundamental  misreading   of   and
         misapplication of the background evidence and the  guidance  in  IN
         (Draft Evaders - Evidence of Risk) Eritrea CG [2005]  UKAIT  00106.
         Additionally, there was no consideration of or findings in relation
         to the risk on return to the Appellant as a  failed  asylum  seeker
         per se.


    2.      At the error of law hearing, Ms V Quinn of Counsel  (instructed
         by White Ryland Solicitors)  appeared  for  the  Appellant.   Mr  J
         Gulvin represented the Secretary of State.  An  allegation  in  the
         grounds for review upon  which  leave  was  given  in  relation  to
         alleged interpreter difficulties is not pursued.


    3.      The Appellant is still a relatively young man and  although  he
         has performed his primary  [National]  service,  remains  eligible.
         The Immigration Judge found that he had probably been  demobilised,
         but the objective evidence on demobilisation does not support  that
         finding.


    4.      The Immigration Judge's determination is based  exclusively  on
         the CIPU Country Report evidence but does  not  examine  the  other
         materials in the Appellant's  bundle.   After  examination  of  the
         background evidence (particularly pages 80, 20, 117, 137,  165  and
         201) of  the  Appellant's  bundle,  together  with  the  record  of
         proceedings in which the Immigration Judge was plainly referred  to
         a number of areas of background evidence (including some  of  those
         pages) which are not referred to in her  determination,  Mr  Gulvin
         conceded, and the Tribunal  agreed,  that  there  were  significant
         omissions in the fact-finding in relation to the  military  service
         evasion element of the Appellant's account.   This appeal therefore
         proceeds to second stage reconsideration by consent.


    5.      The appeal was therefore set down for full  reconsideration  by
         any Immigration Judge other than Mrs Reid."

         The Claim

5.      The Appellant's claim, at its most  extensive  as  revealed  in  his
    various accounts, can  be  summarised  as  follows.   He  was  born  in
    Ethiopia of Eritrean parentage and moved with his family to Eritrea  in
    1977.   The Appellant's mother and brothers joined the EPLF.

6.      On 20 October 1997 the Appellant was  ordered  to  do  his  military
    service and was taken to Sawa Military Training Camp.  He completed his
    training on 3 March 1998.

7.      As the Appellant had grown up in a Revolutionary School and spent  2
    years teaching 'fighters' in the Barka region,  he  was  exempted  from
    doing one  year's  national  service  as  he  had  already  served  his
    country.  He simply returned home.

8.      In April 1998 the Appellant received emergency  call-up  papers  and
    was informed  he  would  be  sent  abroad  to  study.   Initially,  the
    Appellant was sent to Hashferai.

9.      The border war broke out between Ethiopia and Eritrea  and  in  July
    1998 the Appellant was sent to a naval base to train para-commandos.

10.    In October 1998 the Appellant joined the  Naval  Training  Centre  in
    Dongolo.

11.    In August 2003 the Appellant graduated as a Naval  Officer  from  the
    Electrician Department with the rank of sub-lieutenant.  The  Appellant
    was working as an engineer on a ship.

12.    Following graduation the Appellant was sent to  Massawa  to  work  at
    the Naval Base as an electrician.  He was assigned  to  work  in  Gedem
    (near Massawa) at a new building.

13.    The Appellant produced photographs of himself in military uniform  as
    an addendum to his statement of 4 May 2005.

14.    At interview on 13 May 2005 the Appellant gave his  last  address  in
    his country  of  origin  as  "Navy  address:  Eritrean  Navy,  Massawa,
    Eritrea".  He confirmed that he had undergone military service from  20
    October 1997 to 3 March 1998. He had received emergency call up  papers
    in April 1998.

15.    In that latter regard, the Appellant explained that he did  not  join
    the Navy upon call up but three months later.   The Navy  was  not  his
    choice.

16.    In the Appellant's statement of 26 August 2005, he was clear that  he
    had never been discharged from the military.

17.    In the Appellant's subsequent  statement  of  7  September  2006  the
    Appellant explained that  he  was  initially  called  up  for  national
    service in October 1997 and was only required to  complete  six  months
    military training because he obtained an exemption on the grounds  that
    he had spent two  years  teaching  after  independence  in  1992.   The
    Appellant had been recalled for national service  in  April  1998  just
    before the war broke out in May 1998.

18.    At paragraph  4  of  his  September  2006  statement,  the  Appellant
    maintained that no one was discharged from national service unless they
    were invalided and that he had never heard of anyone  being  discharged
    or demobilised nor had he heard of any demobilisation programmes.   The
    Appellant attached a copy of his Naval Diploma to his statement.

19.    It was the Appellant's account, that whilst  at  the  Naval  base  in
    Massawa, he became a member  of  the  EPLD-DP  (now  EDP).   He  passed
    information about the conditions of the failed asylum seekers  who  had
    been returned to Eritrea from Malta and who  were  said  to  have  been
    detained on return.   Indeed, he passed information on to the EDP about
    the treatment of prisoners continually, until he left Eritrea.

20.   The Appellant claimed that his  problems  began  whilst  on  a  months
    leave in January 2004.   He had become engaged in  that  month  to  his
    girlfriend who was a member of the EPLD-DP.  In that  same  month,  the
    Appellant claimed to have been arrested following his fianc�e's arrest;
    she had apparently given the authorities the  Appellant's  name.    The
    Appellant  was  arrested  on  suspicion  of  being  involved  with  the
    opposition  although  the  authorities  did  not  apparently  know  the
    specific party with which the Appellant was involved.

21.    The Appellant was detained in Gedem where he  claimed  to  have  been
    ill treated.   The Appellant's account was that he became very  ill  in
    November 2004 and as a consequence was taken for treatment to the Gerar
    Hospital in Massawa.

22.    The Appellant claimed that on 26 November 2004  whilst  in  hospital,
    three people came in gowns and helped him escape.   The  guard  outside
    the Appellant's hospital room apparently did not see him escaping.

23.    The Appellant  was  taken  to  Amatere  where  he  remained  until  3
    December 2004.

24.    In the Appellant's statement of 4  May  2005,  he  described  how  an
    agent took him from his home to the Sudanese  border.   They  travelled
    into the Sudan by foot and camel. On arriving at Agetai on 12  December
    2004 they were caught by the Sudanese military.   They were accused  of
    being Christians and spies and escorted back to the Eritrean border.

25.    The Appellant stated that he then paid another  agent  who  took  him
    across the border.  This time they went to the village  of  Merafit  in
    Sudan, arriving there on 16 December 2004.   The Appellant claimed that
    he left Sudan on 21 January 2005 and went  to  an  unknown  country  by
    aeroplane. On 23 January 2005 he travelled to the United Kingdom  in  a
    lorry, arriving on 24 January 2005, and claiming  asylum  on  the  same
    day.

26.    The Appellant further claimed  that  since  arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom, he had been to a meeting of the  EDP  and  was  now  informing
    refugees in his area to go to meetings held in London.   The  Appellant
    maintained  that  if  returned  to  Eritrea,  he  feared  he  would  be
    imprisoned or killed because he ran away from the hospital and had left
    the Navy.

27.    In his Letter of Refusal dated 15 July 2005, the Secretary  of  State
    considered that the Appellant had never been involved with the EDP, was
    never arrested and detained and that the authorities in Eritrea had  no
    adverse interest in him.   It was thus not accepted that the  Appellant
    left Eritrea for the reasons that he claimed and it was considered that
    the Appellant had no reason to fear returning to the country.    As  to
    the Appellant's claim that he would be arrested or  killed  because  he
    was in the Navy when he left the country, the Secretary  of  State  had
    noted that an Amnesty International Report dated 19 May  2004  recorded
    as follows:

         "In November 1991 the new EPLF  Government  issued  regulations  to
         make national service  compulsory  for  all  citizens.   The  first
         intake of national service was in 1994 and it continued  in  staged
         phases since then.  Under the revised National Service  Regulations
         of 23 October 1995, national service is compulsory for all citizens
         aged between  eighteen  and  forty  years,  male  and  female.   It
         consists of six months of  military  training  (performed  at  Sawa
         Military Training Centre near  Tessenei  in  Western  Eritrea)  and
         twelve months of 'active military service and development tasks  in
         military forces' under Ministry of Defence authority.   It  extends
         to military reserve duties  up  to  the  age  of  50.   It  may  be
         continued under 'mobilisation  or  emergency  situation  directives
         given by the government' (Eritrea Country Report 5.59)."

         The Secretary of State taking this information into  consideration,
    believed that the  Appellant  had  completed  his  compulsory  military
    service considering that he was called up in October 1997.

28.     Moreover,  the  UNHCR  Handbook  on  Procedures  and  Criteria   for
    Determining  Refugee  Status  stated  that  fear  of   prosecution   or
    punishment for desertion or draft evasion did not in itself  constitute
    a well-founded fear of persecution.  In addition the Appellant had  not
    provided  any  evidence   to   suggest   that   he   would   suffer   a
    disproportionate punishment for desertion or draft evasion for  one  of
    the  reasons  stated  in  the  Refugee  Convention.   Consequently  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that the Appellant,  having  been  in
    the Navy when he left the country, had provided a reason for the  grant
    of leave in this country or for granting him international protection.

29.    The Secretary of State noted that since the  Appellant's  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom he had claimed to have been involved  with  the  EDP
    and attended one meeting and that he was currently  encouraging  people
    to attend another meeting in London.   Considering  the  Appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom since January 2005, the Secretary  of  State
    did not accept that the Appellant had become highly involved  with  the
    EDP, as he attended only one meeting.  It was not accepted that he  was
    ever involved with the  EDP  in  Eritrea  and  therefore  it  had  been
    concluded that if the Appellant was indeed involved with the EDP in the
    United Kingdom, that he had become involved  as  a  calculated  measure
    intended to create or substantially enhance his claim to asylum in  the
    United Kingdom.   Further in that regard, the documents  the  Appellant
    submitted alleged to be from the EDP, UK Branch, had  been  considered.
    The document did not confirm in any way that the Appellant was involved
    with the EDP in  Eritrea  or  that  he  was  of  any  interest  to  the
    authorities in Eritrea.  Therefore the document had not  been  accepted
    as independent corroboration of his claim.

         The Proceedings

30.   At the outset of the hearing before us on 7  November  2006  Ms  Quinn
    most helpfully informed us:

         "The issue is a narrow one.  It deals only  with  National  Service
         (NS) aspects of the appeal.  It is the Appellant's evidence that he
         was re-called up for NS in 1998 and that he remained  in  NS  until
         his departure - that he left Eritrea illegally  and  that  applying
         the Country Guidance decision in KA (Draft Related Risk  Categories
         Updated) CG UKAIT 00165, he is at risk as  a deserter or as someone
         of National Service age who has left Eritrea illegally.


         It is clear from the objective evidence that Military Service  (MS)
         and National Service (NS) are interchangeable but in  light  of  Dr
         Kibreab's evidence (his expert report of 30 October  2006  refers),
         we say the proper term is probably National Service (NS)".


    Mr Parkinson indicated that he understood the  overall  issue  in  this
    appeal to be limited to whether  demobilisation  was  taking  place  in
    Eritrea.


31.    For the avoidance of any  doubt,  Ms  Quinn  at  the  outset  of  the
    subsequent hearing before us on 4 January 2007  further  confirmed  her
    acceptance that the basis of the Tribunal's decision at first stage did
    not provide permission  to  revisit  the  Immigration  Judge's  adverse
    credibility findings as summarised in particular at paragraph 31 of her
    determination.

32.    Ms Quinn continued that the Appellant's original grounds  of  appeal,
    namely  those  in  support  of  the  application  for  an   order   for
    reconsideration, were  largely  predicated  on  alleged  interpretation
    difficulties on which the Appellant's representatives had not proceeded
    before the Tribunal at the first stage reconsideration hearing.

33.    It would be as well therefore for the sake of  completeness,  to  set
    out the positive and adverse credibility findings of Immigration  Judge
    Reid.

34.    The Immigration Judge had noted that much of the  Appellant's  bundle
    before her was focused on the risk to Christians in Eritrea  which  she
    considered to be unhelpful in this case.

35.    The Immigration Judge continued as follows:

    "30.   I have no reason to  doubt  the  family  history  given  by  the
         Appellant.  I have no reason to doubt that he did spend time in the
         military, as is usual in Eritrea, whether in a  voluntary  capacity
         or as a conscript.  I accept that he was in the naval branch of the
         military.  I have no reason to doubt that he  was  trained  by  the
         military as an electrician.    I  formed  the  view  the  Appellant
         worked for some time as an electrician in a so-called  'development
         task' after his military service.  I note  that  an  individual  is
         liable to be called up for military service duties until the age of
         fifty and that after military service many people  of  conscription
         age are sent to development tasks.   The Appellant had  spent  many
         years in the military or in Revolution School and it  may  well  be
         that the Appellant was one of those identified  for  demobilisation
         and referred to in the BBC News Report on 2 March 2004 mentioned in
         the CIPU at 5.52.


    31.     However, I reject the remainder of the Appellant's  story.    I
         do  not  believe  he  came  to  the  adverse   attention   of   the
         authorities.  I do not believe that he was detained or  ill-treated
         as he claimed.  I do not  believe  he  escaped  from  detention  in
         hospital.  I do not believe that he was or is active for  the  EDP.
         I formed the view that the Appellant left Eritrea for reasons other
         than being in need of international protection.


    32.     It is a possibility  that  the  Appellant  would  come  to  the
         attention of the authorities on return to  Eritrea  but  given  his
         service record and the history of his family I do not  believe  the
         Appellant would be seen as a draft  evader  or  as  a  deserter  on
         return to Eritrea.   I  have  already  given  my  reasons  for  not
         accepting the Appellant  has  any  political  affiliations  and  in
         particular to the EDP.


    33.     If detained the Appellant is likely to be  kept  in  unpleasant
         conditions but I do not believe that he is likely  to  be  detained
         for any lengthy period.  He has no health problems at  present.   I
         do not believe there is a real possibility or real risk  that  this
         Appellant's Article 3 rights would be breached on return or that he
         would face persecutory treatment".


36.    The Immigration Judge had earlier noted  in  her  determination  that
    the Appellant appeared to have made little or no  effort  to  ascertain
    the whereabouts of his fianc�e and was vague about her  activities  for
    the EDP.   The Immigration Judge noted with interest,  the  Appellant's
    claim  in  oral  evidence  that  he  passed  communications  from  some
    detainees to their families.  She found this to  be  inconsistent  with
    the objective evidence that the remaining Malta  detainees  were  being
    held incommunicado.  Moreover the Appellant in the interview  had  said
    that he passed information about the  treatment  of  detainees  to  EDP
    members and  had  made  no  mention  until  oral  evidence  of  passing
    information to the  families  of  the  detainees.   He  had  said  that
    relatives contacted him because they did not know about their  children
    and were desperate for information.  The Appellant  failed  however  to
    explain how the relatives knew to contact him.

37.    The Immigration Judge noted background material which indicated  that
    the EPLF-DP (EDP) operated only outside Eritrea.  She did not  find  it
    credible that the Appellant was involved with the EDP in Eritrea as  he
    claimed or  that  he  had  demonstrated  that  he  had  any  active  or
    continuing contact with the EDP in the United Kingdom.

38.    The Immigration Judge did not find it credible that  having  been  at
    Gedem where the Appellant claimed to have  been  in  contact  with  the
    Maltese prisoners and which led him into trouble with the  authorities,
    that he would have been sent back there by the authorities.

39.    The Immigration Judge did not find it credible  that  a  prisoner  in
    Eritrea would be admitted to hospital for a relatively minor  condition
    such as haemorrhoids when one considered  the  background  material  of
    conditions  in  prisons  in  that  country  and  the  lack  of  medical
    treatment.   Moreover, she found it very surprising  that  someone  who
    had allegedly been suffering so badly from haemorrhoids as to have been
    admitted to hospital from prison would  have  been  able  to  make  his
    escape from the hospital in Eritrea to Sudan over a period of nine days
    travelling on foot and by camel.  The Immigration Judge  placed  weight
    on the Appellant failing to disclose  at  an  earlier  stage  the  very
    important detail that one of the men that helped him  escape  from  the
    hospital was his superior in the EPLF-DP cell.   Moreover  it  was  not
    until the hearing that the Appellant also claimed that the  man  was  a
    superior colleague in the Navy.  The Immigration Judge did not find  it
    credible that if those were the facts, that in such circumstances,  the
    cell leader would have put himself at risk by personally assisting  the
    Appellant to escape.  The  Immigration  Judge  thus  found  lacking  in
    credibility that the Appellant  managed  to  walk  out  of  his  single
    hospital room past his guard without the latter noticing.

40.    The Immigration Judge noted that the Appellant failed to produce  any
    medical evidence to support his claim that he was  beaten  or  tortured
    during his claimed detention and no medical evidence to  show  what  he
    had been treated for in the United Kingdom.  The Immigration Judge  had
    noted with interest Amnesty International's view that the  families  of
    dissidents and army deserters were reported  to  have  been  'harassed,
    pressurised, threatened and interrogated', yet the Appellant  mentioned
    only that his mother was detained for three days at  a  police  station
    but  freed  when  the  Appellant's  brothers  requested  it  of  higher
    officials and  told  of  the  family's  history  of  fighting  to  free
    Eritrea.   The  Immigration  Judge  found  this  surprising  given  the
    reasons for the Appellant's claimed detention.

41.    The Immigration Judge noted that the Appellant had  been  in  contact
    with his parents in Eritrea and set that against the article  in  Gedem
    News dated 17 July 2005 and filed by the Appellant within  his  bundle,
    that stated that the Eritrean Government had launched a sweeping  round
    up of parents whose children were said to have  fled  the  country  and
    were considered draft evaders or deserters.   The  Appellant  had  also
    filed a report dated 29 July 2005 from VOA  News  that  reiterated  the
    Gedem information.  The inference drawn by the Immigration  Judge  from
    that evidence was that the Appellant was  actually  not  identified  or
    wanted as a deserter.

42.    On 7 November 2006 the  Tribunal  heard  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and that of Dr David Pool  who  described  himself  as  being
    attached to the Department of Politics at the School of Social Sciences
    at University of Manchester, and we began to hear the  evidence  of  Dr
    Gaim Kibreab, a Reader in Sociology (Associate Professor) and  Director
    of  Refugee  Studies,  currently   working   at   London   South   Bank
    University.

43.    The hearing resumed on 4 January 2007, when we  were  advised  by  Mr
    Parkinson that he was not challenging any  aspect  of  the  Appellant's
    military history as indeed such history was accepted by the Immigration
    Judge.  The oral evidence of Dr Kibreab was completed.

44.    Due to a lack of remaining time that day the Tribunal  directed  that
    each of the parties serve upon each other and upon the  Tribunal  their
    respective written submissions but each be at liberty to  amplify  them
    before us at the resumed hearing  on  2  March  2007.   As  before,  we
    prepared a further contemporaneous record of the  proceedings  that  we
    ensured was read by each of us so as to refresh our memories before the
    resumption of the concluding hearing on 2 March 2007.

         The Appellant's Oral Evidence

45.    At the outset of the hearing on 7 November 2006, we ascertained  that
    the Appellant and the interpreter understood one  another  and  we  are
    satisfied that no difficulties in interpretation arose  throughout  the
    course of the hearing.

46.    The Appellant adopted his statement of 7 September 2006  as  part  of
    his evidence in chief confirming that the content was true and  further
    that he  relied  on  his  earlier  statements  and  evidence  given  at
    interview.  The Appellant further described the  circumstances  of  his
    exit from Eritrea.

47.    When cross-examined, the Appellant  explained  that  he  was  in  the
    Eritrean Navy from 1998 to 2004 when he left Eritrea.    The  Appellant
    was not aware of any of his colleagues having been released from  their
    military service.

48.    The Appellant agreed that the draft/conscription happened every  year
    and that people were rounded up and conscripted into the Navy and  also
    the Air Force. Fewer people were allocated  in  comparison  with  other
    forces. The Appellant was unable to provide a  satisfactory  answer  to
    the question as to whether the number in the Navy increased every  year
    because people were rounded up, regardless of  the  numbers  allocated,
    explaining:

         "Where I was posted - it was to work  in  a  ship  and  there  were
         people who were clearly experienced - so  there  weren't  many  new
         people coming in.  I would only know of the place I  worked.  There
         were coastguard and infantry of the military who  were  conscripted
         in greater numbers when I was working on the ship".


49.      The Appellant maintained that in the six years he was in the  Navy,
     no one was demobilised to his  knowledge.   The  Appellant  maintained
     that so far as he was aware no soldier  had  been  released  from  the
     army.

           The Evidence of Dr Pool

50.      Dr Pool began his evidence by referring  to  his  report  dated  31
     October 2006.

51.      It was noteworthy that at the outset of his evidence, Dr  Pool  was
     referred to an extract from the United Nations  Development  Programme
     (UNDP) Eritrea Project Report Fact Sheet of April 2006  that  referred
     to 104,400 people being demobilised.




52.      Dr Pool told us:

         "Since preparing my Report I have  been  looking  into  statistics.
         Frankly I have come across a major problem in that if you speak  to
         Eritreans, they all say there has been no demobilisation.


         However, if you look at the Eritrean Press which I read on-line and
         the government website - which I have referred to in bold on page 2
         of my report [the official Government website www.shaebiya.org  and
         www.awate.com  ]  it  is  that  there  has  been  no  reporting  of
         demobilisation - which again surprised me as you would  think  that
         if demobilisation was effectively underway it  would  be  something
         the government would be quite proud of.


         As regards the 104,000 in the UNDP Project Fact Sheet - I have also
         discovered a similar figure in the document [copy World Bank Status
         of Projects in Execution for financial years 2006 and 2005].


         This  makes  me  even   more   curious   with   the   figures   for
         demobilisation.   2005 says 104,400 soldiers  demobilised.    After
         finding that, I looked at 2006 for the same  project  status  which
         stretches from 2002 to 2005.  A year later - you  would  think  the
         figure would have been increased or might be the  same  -  but  the
         figure is 65,000 that had been demobilised for the entire project.


         It is not an additional figure but a figure for the entire  project
         and goes on to state that the World Bank has  financed  it  because
         the target figure of 5,000 for payment  has  largely  achieved  its
         target on demobilisation.  This is a  World  Bank  Report.   It  is
         therefore difficult to reconcile these two reports  when  you  also
         compare that with the Eritreans I speak  to,  who  say,  like  this
         Appellant, there  has  been  no  demobilisation.   I  am  therefore
         increasingly mystified when you speak to Eritreans who all  say  no
         demobilisation has taken place."


53.    Dr Pool continued that Eritreans he  had  spoken  to  in  the  United
    Kingdom were generally educated middle class academic researchers.   He
    had also spoken to former EPLF fighters.  He continued:

         "For example, yesterday, I spoke with a  woman who  has  just  come
         back to England from Eritrea - she joined the EPLF as a fighter  as
         a teenager - worked in various areas - trained as a nurse - she  is
         currently a local administrator in the Northern Province of Eritrea
         - so she has long experience.   I asked her as  a  local  authority
         government official,  what  her  view  was  of  the  demobilisation
         process and she told me there has been no demobilisation.  I showed
         her the World Bank figures and she just could not understand them".

54.    Dr Pool had also taken  account  of  the  affidavits  of  Dr  Amanuel
    Gebremedhin who was the head of Mitias Demobilisation and Reintegration
    Programme (MDRP) - which was the first demobilisation  programme  after
    independence 1991-1993 and 1994.  This was the  demobilisation  of  the
    EDF fighters after the independence struggle.  Dr Pool continued:

         "Reading his affidavit he mentions 5,000  demobilised  as  a  pilot
         project of the World Bank - but then he goes on to say there was no
         proper demobilisation indeed - he mentions 65,000  supposed  to  be
         demobilised but in reality those demobilised  only  came  from  the
         reserve militia in the exercise 1993-1996 after the border wars  so
         he has got the same number - as mentioned in the  2006  World  Bank
         Report."

55.    Dr Pool was not sure whether in  terms  of  demobilisation  and  risk
    there was a distinction that could be drawn  between  those  called  up
    post-border war and those called up pre-border war.  He continued:

         "When one speaks of the 'demobilised' prior  to  the  war,  we  are
         talking about 48,000 to 54,000 people between  1992  and  1994  who
         were demobilised, given grants for setting up businesses  generally
         to  return  to  civilian  society  (those  who  you  can  say,  are
         demobilised -  classically  defined  -  part  of  the  project  for
         demobilisation).


         In 1998, these were the first called up - as they were the old EPLF
         fighters - some I know went to the front line - some were  recalled
         as officers - some as trainers for the new recruits.


         So these people were demobilised in all senses of the term but were
         not demobilised when the war started - they were called back  -  so
         that suggested distinction seems a bit blurred to me.


         Dr Gebremhedin  who  was  also  a  consultant  to  the  World  Bank
         subsequent to going to the United States argues, as it seems likely
         to me, that if we are talking about anybody being demobilised after
         the Ethiopian/Eritrean war - they are the batch of people who  were
         demobilised but in the early 1990s.  That makes some sense.


         Hard evidence is difficult, but quite  a  few  spent  it  in  bars-
         frivolously-rather  than  applied  it  for  the  purpose  given.  I
         conclude that these figures are difficult to discuss.


         There is no attempt in the 2006 Report, to explain why  the  figure
         comes down from the report of 2005.   The  obvious  source  of  the
         figures are the World Bank, whose major desire in these Reports  is
         not demobilisation per se but to reduce the size  of  the  army  to
         promote  economic  growth.   The  other  curious  thing  about  the
         2005/2006 Reports - apart from the number of soldiers claimed to be
         demobilised, is that the reports do not show much difference in the
         amount of money actually dispensed.


         My understanding from the World Bank Report of 2005 is  that  US$42
         million were dispensed for the 104,400 demobilised.  In  2006  when
         65,000 were shown to be demobilised, the figure is bigger."

56.    It was notable that Dr Pool continued:

         "I am mystified by these statistics.  I have looked a long time  to
         find some  statistics  on  demobilisation  and  this  is  the  only
         evidence that I have come up with".


57.    Dr. Pool continued that the UNDP Project  Report  was  based  on  the
    World Bank 2005 Report whereas the post-dated 2006 Report showed a much
    reduced figure.   He noted that Dr Amanuel Gebremedhin in his affidavit
    explained what he described as:

         "... the 65,000 in rather devious terms,  i.e.  that  the  Eritrean
         Government had been devious in taking two tranches  of  money  from
         the World Bank for demobilisation".


58.    Dr Pool continued:

         "It cannot be said that these groups have been demobilised.  I take
             it that they may
         have been given  a  civil  registration  card,  but  they  are  not
             demobilised.


         I therefore conclude that little reliance can be  placed  upon  the
             UNDP Report.


         I say the same proportion of the 48,000 post-border war demobilised
         soldiers, were brought back - I would not know how many.   It would
         make sense, as the regular army was comprised of new recruits after
         1991 and the core of the officers and soldiers  of  the  EPLF  were
         then taken into the regular army.


         My guess is that a high proportion of EPLF  fighters  pre-war  were
         recalled into the army.


         It seems to me to be  the  case  that  the  demobilisation  project
         simply has not got underway".

59.    Dr Pool told us that he was sceptical  of  the  World  Bank  Report's
    final figures.  He continued:

         "I think there has been some demobilisation - definitely the  first
         phase 5,000 pilot project ... I really just do not  know  what  has
         been going on  and  any  figures  about  demobilisation  should  be
         treated with a terrific pinch of salt".

60.    Dr Pool was referred to  the  September  2006  COI  Report  with  the
    heading "Demobilisation".  Dr Pool noted at paragraph 11.18  there  was
    quoted an extract from a War Resisters  International  Report  of  2004
    that made reference to former combatants already incorporated into  the
    government armed forces who were issued with demobilisation  cards  and
    asked to continue National Service until January 2005.

61.    The relevant extract included the following:

         "The World Bank,  principal  funder,  recognised  the  need  for  a
         special programme for combatants under the age of twenty five.  The
         UN Security Council called for Ethiopia and Eritrea  to  facilitate
         the sustainable reintegration of demobilised soldiers".

62.    Dr Pool explained  that  former  combatants  had  thus  already  been
    incorporated into the government armed forces notwithstanding that they
    were issued with  demobilisation  cards  and  were  in  fact  asked  to
    continue in national service.  He continued:

         "The Eritrean Government does not 'ask' there is no sense in  which
         they 'inquire' - so here a group of people, who  were  issued  with
         demobilisation cards, have not been demobilised - that is the clear
         indication from  the  War  Resisters  International  Global  Report
         2004."

63.    Dr Pool was then referred  to  paragraph  11.19  of  the  CIO  Report
    quoting from a US State Department Report of 2006 that:

         'The government has been slow to demobilise its military after  the
         most recent conflict (although it recently formulated an  ambitious
         demobilisation plan with the participation of the World  Bank).   A
         Pilot Demobilisation Programme  involving  five  thousand  soldiers
         began  in  November  2001  and  was  to  be  followed   immediately
         thereafter by a first phase  in  which  some  sixty  five  thousand
         soldiers were to be demobilised.  This was delayed repeatedly.   In
         2003 the government began to demobilise some of  those  slated  for
         the first phase.  The demobilisation programme  has  not  yet  been
         approved by the  World  Bank  and  funding  from  other  donors  is
         uncertain'.

64.    Dr Pool told us that the above extract created more confusion as  one
    would think that the US State Department would  be  "singing  from  the
    same hymn sheet as the UNDP". He was of the opinion that greater weight
    should be placed on the evidence from the US State Department Report as
    USAID was very close in practical terms to the UNDP.

65.    Dr Pool considered it interesting that the  State  Department  should
    use the past tense 'was' followed by 65,000 'were to  be'  demobilised,
    bearing in mind that this was written  in  June  2006  in  a  way  that
    suggested that demobilisation had not happened.  Dr Pool did not  think
    there was much of a distinction to be drawn in terms of risk on  return
    between those pre-border war and those post-border  war.    Those  pre-
    border were in practice demobilised between 1992 to 1994  but  Dr Pool
    maintained that:

         "... In reality many of them were recalled  in  1998.    Many  were
         queuing up to join - they had been fighting Ethiopia for many years
         - so when the war started again, there was the chance to  re-engage
         with the old enemy.  Many would therefore have volunteered."

66.    In this regard Dr Pool  referred  to  paragraph  11.21  of  the  Home
    Office OGN on Eritrea issued in October 2006.  There was  reference  to
    Awate.com reporting on 24 February 2006 as follows:

         ".. All demobilised soldiers and members of the National Service to
         get ready for reporting  to  Sawa...  Those  called  for  'National
         Service' include athletes and other youngsters  active  in  various
         sports who  are  being  given  permits  to  pursue  their  sporting
         activities.   Demobilised soldiers and National Service  Corps  who
         had been discharged for medical  reasons  ('Medical  Board  Cases')
         were also ordered to reregister".

67.     Dr  Pool  explained  that  Awate.com  was  a  site  independent   of
    opposition political parties but was  an  opposition  website  that  he
    found:

         "...to be one of the most reliable because it  is  rare  to  see  a
         website that corrects itself if subsequently proven to be wrong  on
         factual errors and it is a website upon which the Home Office often
         relies, indeed it is exemplified by the fact that it is  quoted  in
         this COI".


68.    Dr Pool believed that the UNDP drew its figures from the World Bank.

69.    When asked whether on the statistics that he had looked at,  that  Dr
    Pool  was  aware  of  any  reports  of  statistical  information  about
    demobilisation he responded:

         "The  target  figure  is  200,000.   In  terms  of  who  has   been
         demobilised -  there  are  no  other  statistics  available  to  my
         knowledge.  I went through UN  UNDP, World Bank etc".

70.    Dr Pool's attention was drawn to his report  (B11)  where  he  quoted
    from the World Bank  Mid-Term  Review  Mission  Report  (MTR)  of  July
    2005.   It was a passage that he  described  as  using  the  diplomatic
    language typical  of  World  Bank  reports  on  domestic  politics  and
    tensions between donors and governments generally.  Dr Pool  had  noted
    that the MTR Report stated clearly in paragraph 9 that  the  Government
    of Eritrea, "in the medium to long term remains strongly  committed  to
    further demobilising its armed forces, but that in the short term,  the
    pace and scope of immediate demobilisation cannot be defined".

71.     Dr Pool repeated that he found it  odd  that  the  2005  World  Bank
    Report would state that 104,000 were demobilised whilst the later  2006
    Report stated that it was 65,000.   As for the evidential basis of  the
    World Bank's information, Dr Pool considered that it was  the  Eritrean
    Government's figures:

         "... because the World Bank hands  out  money  but  the  government
         hands out any ID demobilisation card necessary to get that money".

72.    Dr Pool was referred to the  third  paragraph  of  his  report  (B12)
    under the sub-heading "Those Demobilised" in  referring  to  the  World
    Bank he stated as follows:

         "Paragraph 7 of Dr Amanuel's analysis is revelatory of the  tactics
         of the government  of  Eritrea  and  its  academic  background  and
         administration  record  is  supportive  of  the  accuracy  of   his
         analysis.  The World  Bank's  MTR  also  provides  support  of  his
         analysis with its comment in paragraph 8ii on 'limited transparency
         surrounding the  size  of  the  army'.   Given  the  problems  with
         transparency and the confused and murky  nature  of  demobilisation
         statistics, it would seem nigh on impossible  to  assert  that  the
         Appellant was demobilised in 2004, as the Immigration Judge did  in
         paragraph 30 of the determination"

73.    Dr Pool continued that one of the problems the World Bank had was  in
    defining the distinction between being in the military and/or having  a
    civilian role and this was a given fact that the whole  thrust  of  the
    World Bank MTR  was  about  demobilisation  and  the  reintegration  of
    soldiers.  He continued:

         "It  is  pretty  damning  for  them  to  comment  on  the  'limited
         transparency surrounding the size of the army' ".


74.    In the light of his comments as to  the  information  available  from
    the World Bank Dr Pool was asked as to the conclusion that he drew.  Dr
    Pool responded:

         "it is difficult to grasp - I mean to  believe.   If  we  take  the
         65,000 - have they been given some kind of card and  in  2007  will
         they be demobilised? - It does not appear from the phrasing of  the
         World Bank Reports that there has already been  the  demobilisation
         of 65,000 - if you take the account of the World Bank  Reports  and
         particularly of the 2006 US Report, in addition to  what  Eritreans
         have said to me - there has been  no  demobilisation.    These  are
         Eritreans with no axe to grind  and  will  not  grasp  the  general
         significance of why these figures are important".


75.    Further referring to Dr  Amanuel  Gebremedhin's  affidavit,  Dr  Pool
    considered that it was the lack of desire for genuine demobilisation on
    the part of the Eritrean Government that according  to  Dr  Gebremedhin
    caused him to resign.  Dr Pool continued:

         I do not know what their desire  is  but  there  are  quite  strong
         factors  in  not  demobilising  because  maintaining  soldiers   in
         government jobs on a soldier's pocket money is  a  massive  subsidy
         for the government so a teacher who stays in the army  is  seconded
         to the teaching profession  and  still  only  gets  the  conscripts
         pay...".

76.    Dr Pool continued:

         "When you think the State is the major employer, you  can  see  the
         way in which the pay is in terms of thousands of people still under
         the aegis of the Ministry of Defence.


         The major employer is the state. I do not think that was the reason
         to start mobilisation - that was the war. But  the  devastation  of
         the war, economically has produced an economic motive to   maintain
         mobilised soldiers".

77.     Dr Pool described this pattern as:

         "...  happening  across  the  board  with  government  jobs  on   a
         conscript's pay".

78.    Dr  Pool  told  us  that  apart  from  the  economic  motive  of  the
    government not to demobilise, the National Service Project  was  itself
    very political in the sense that after the  war  of  independence  from
    Ethiopia in 1991:


         "... the Eritrean Government wanted to  mould  Eritreans  like  the
         EPLF fighters namely; value  of   valour,  self-sacrifice,  courage
         that  was  needed  to  rebuild  the  economy.    There  were  other
         nationalist organisations that the EPLF defeated based in the Sudan
         - this had a particular ideology and  they  were  quite  strong  in
         passing their ideology onto the younger generation.


         So when the young people go to  National  Service  they  are  given
         (less the Marxist  aspect)  the  history  of  the  EPLF  and  their
         victories.  There is a kind  of  social  control  involved  in  the
         ethical direction that  is  being  used  in  a  military  sense  in
         Eritrea".

79.    Dr Pool continued that the border between Eritrea  and  Ethiopia  had
    been demarcated:

         "That is  the  government's  major  explanation  of  the  continued
         mobilisation and makes the best sense.  Many Eritreans still  think
         Ethiopia wants to get its coastline that was  ceded  in  the  peace
         negotiations between 1991 and 1993 and the Ethiopians are  critical
         of their government for ceding  the  port  to  Eritrea.   There  is
         always the sense this war could start again.   Just over  the  last
         two months we  have  seen  Ethiopians  and  Eritreans  backing  two
         competing sides in Somalia".

80.    Dr Pool was referred to a report within the  Respondent's  bundle  of
    Awate.com sub-headed "Government Rounds-up  Underage  Youth"  dated  23
    February 2006 that stated as follows:

         "... Round-ups started as students were in class which gave them no
         chance to say goodbye to  their  families  or  prepare  themselves.
         They were taken straight from their desks  to  the  waiting  buses.
         The sudden and harsh manner in which the round-up was conducted has
         stunned and angered the entire population of Keren. One source says
         URC who  was  contacted  by  Awate  said  similar  sentiments  were
         reported in other towns".


81.    Reference was also  made  to  a  further  extract  from  the  report,
namely:

         "Demobilised soldiers and  National  Service  Corps  who  had  been
         discharged for medical reasons ('Medical Board Cases'),  were  also
         ordered to re-register.   It is expected that this sweeping  round-
         up of young students, which has already started in the Northern Red
         Sea and Anceba regions, will be continued in  all  regions  of  the
         country.  One alarming aspect of this new  wage  of  round-ups,  is
         that it has affected young students under eighteen years of age".

82.    Dr Pool told us that it would appear from that report  that  soldiers
    already demobilised for medical reasons unfit for Military Service were
    also ordered to re-register.   He continued:

         "We have  been  looking  today  as  to  whether  demobilisation  is
         happening and if so to what extent if circumstances where they  re-
         register includes people to be medically unfit.


         Awate is generally reliable -  people  given  exemptions  from  the
         military, (for example to work for the US Embassy or the  UN),  are
         demobilised and you see reports they have been ordered  to  go  for
         several weeks' military training.  These kind of things  can  often
         be very obscure political  messages  to  us  but  less  obscure  to
         Eritreans".

83.    On the question of exit visas, Dr Pool told us  that  one  could  not
    obtain an exit visa without the  appropriate  documents  although  they
    were difficult to obtain  in  any  event.    He  did  not  wish  to  be
    definitive as to the difficulties in  obtaining  exit  visas.  We  were
    referred to a previous report of his (B10) in which he had stated:

         "Exit visas are very difficult to acquire and any Eritrean  leaving
         Eritrea illegally (that is without an exit visa) would be suspected
         of draft evasion, deserting their military unit  or  of  suspicious
         political behaviour".

84.    Dr Pool told us, with  reference  to  the  Proclamation  of  National
    Service No.82/1995 stated at  Article  A37,  the  penalties  for  those
    violating the provisions of National Service Proclamation (NSP) did not
    discriminate between the National Service and Reserve Army with  regard
    to  penalties  particularly  since  the  post-1998  circumstances   had
    resulted in so many remaining on what was defined  as  active  National
    Service.


85.     Dr  Pool  continued   that   there   were   reports   from   Amnesty
    International, that youths as young as 10 or 11 had not been given exit
    visas.  Human Rights Watch also made reference to difficulties.

86.    When asked to classify those who were more likely to obtain  an  exit
    visa, Dr Pool told us:

         "The Eritrean business women who work in textiles.  People involved
         in business who are quite well in with the government circles.


         Asmara is a very small society and the top business people know the
         government and know the way to get visas, senior military officers,
         government spokespeople.  Someone of 50 plus would be  more  likely
         than not to get an exit visa depending on his or her profile".  For
         ordinary people it is very difficult.

87.    Dr Pool was referred to the US State Department Report of March  2006
    and the following extract:

         "Men under the  age  of  fifty,  regardless  of  whether  they  had
         completed National Service; women aged eighteen  to  twenty  seven;
         members of Jehovah's Witnesses; and others who are  out  of  favour
         with or seen as critical of the government, were  routinely  denied
         exit visas.  In addition the government often refused to issue exit
         visas to adolescents and children as young as five  years  of  age,
         either on the  grounds  that  they  were  approaching  the  age  of
         eligibility for National Service or because their diasporal  parent
         had not paid the two per cent income tax required of  all  citizens
         residing abroad.  Some citizens were given exit  visas  only  after
         posting bonds of approximately $7,300 (100,000 Nakfa)".

88.    Dr Pool told  us  that  the  above  referred  passage  reflected  the
    situation as he understood it, although he was surprised  there  was  a
    denial of exit visas to even those aged five but that it underlined the
    difficulty to obtain exit visas.

89.    Dr Pool continued that Eritrea  was  a  closed  society  and  it  was
    difficult to know the extent that corruption took place.   It  was  not
    endemic in Eritrea, but given the general position  in  Eritrea,  there
    was a context in which corruption could flourish in the  area  of  exit
    visas. The border between Eritrea and  Ethiopia  was  very  porous  and
    UNHCR said that many crossed the border to avoid national service.

90.   In cross examination, Dr Pool was referred to  his  report  under  the
    sub-heading "Developments Since 1998" where he had stated (B8):

         "Although the war ended with Eritrea's  defeat  and  ...  peace  in
         2000, the disputed border  between  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea  remains
         unresolved and only limited demobilisation has taken place.   .....
         practices  consistent  with  Articles  21  of   the   NSP   Special
         Obligations which refer to military obligations under 'Mobilisation
         and Emergent Situation Directives given  by  the  government'  such
         directives have been in force since the  1998  war  with  Ethiopia.
         It should be noted that such obligations extend the upper age limit
         of the draft from forty to fifty and also include categories exempt
         from National Service, like former fighters of the EPLF  and  those
         who were members of the  Peasant  Militias  (the  reserve  military
         force of the EPLF)  during the liberation struggle".

91.    Dr Pool continued there did seem to be clear evidence that the  first
    (pilot) phase of the demobilisation project in  which  the  5,000  were
    mentioned had taken place, that was why he had used the word  'limited'
    in his report.

92.    It was Dr Pool's understanding with particular  regard  to  the  2006
    World Bank Report that they had dispensed something in the order of $46
    million. When asked if he had any idea as to  whether  the  World  Bank
    considered it had  got  value  for  money  for  this  amount,  Dr  Pool
    responded:

         "If you take their Medium-Term Report - their  comment  of  limited
         transparency - the size of the army - it  is  hard  to  distinguish
         between a military or a civilian programme -  therefore  the  World
         Bank people are a bit confused as to what on earth is going on.


         As far as I know they come in on missions - I do not think there is
         a permanent World Bank team in Eritrea but I could be corrected  on
         this.  By 'missions' I mean  meetings  with  those  involved  in  a
         demobilisation project.  As far as I can tell, the main  people  on
         the ground are US Embassy personnel and personnel  from  the  Royal
         Netherlands Embassy in Asmara."

93.    Dr Pool was reminded that within the World Bank 2006  Report  it  was
    stated that there had been wider progress  towards  demobilisation  and
    that the project had largely achieved its target.  It was noted that he
    had expressed confusion that the 2005 Report mentioned a  figure  close
    to 104,000 and in a later report 65,000.   It was put to him the answer
    might lie in the fact that the 2006 World Bank Report referred to  'the
    remaining 135,000 soldiers' that would arguably tie in with the  65,000
    referred to in the 2006 Report, bearing in mind that the objective  was
    for the demobilisation of 200,000 soldiers.

94.    Dr  Pool  responded,  that  reading  the  two  reports,  the  figures
    remained to him as inconsistent on demobilisation. He continued:

         "It also raises the question of what does demobilisation mean  when
         the World Bank says 'we do not know  the  distinction  between  the
         civil and the military", i.e, what on earth is going on here?"

95.    Dr Pool referred to the payment  of  a  reinsertion  benefit,  ("It's
    putting "reintegration" into something, but whether it actually happens
    is another matter"),  that  he  understood  gave  the  meaning  to  the
    Reports' reference to  the  "Transition  Safety  Net".   He  posed  the
    rhetorical question:

         "To what extent are there also people  who  have  not  really  been
         demobilised but have been given money and continue working for  the
         government and maybe this is just topping up?


         I find it hard to state in any definitive  fashion  that  we  would
         understand, of handing back a uniform and operating solely in civil
         society".


96.    Dr Pool referred to the COI Report at paragraph 5.64 that:

         "There are at least two categories of  release  from  the  military
         component of active National Service:


         i.       those transferred from Active National Service to civilian
             duties but who remain on active National Service in the  sense
             they do not return to civilian life; and


         ii.      those demobilised".

97.    Dr Pool continued:

         "The problem for the World Bank is differentiating between what  is
         'military' and what is 'civilian' in Eritrea.


         If you do not know the difference between the two, it must be  very
         hard to say someone had  stopped  being  a  'military'  person  and
         become a 'civilian' person...


         Added to which because so many are sent back to work for the  state
         on military salary - how many of these are there - they  cannot  be
         described as demobilised because their  employment  is  subject  to
         Military Defence Rules and Regulations and the government, so I can
         understand the  World  Bank  confusion  as  to  how  you  define  a
         distinction.


         It is a very odd situation in Eritrea as compared to what we in the
         western world will understand as 'demobilised'."


98.    Dr Pool told us it was difficult  to  estimate  how  many  people had
    been transferred from the army to the  civilian  sector  and  how  many
    remained in the Eritrean armed forces. The Eritrean Government did  not
    release figures.  What could be gleaned  from  the  World  Bank  was  a
    target demobilisation of two hundred thousand but he did not  know  the
    basis for that figure.

99.    It was Dr Pool's understanding  that  more  than  2,000  people  were
    conscripted every year.  He based this figure on an Eritrean Government
    statistic of those who graduated  from  secondary  school.   When  they
    finished secondary school in Sawa they went straight in to the army.

100. Dr Pool was referred to the World Bank's view that although  there  had
    been plans and projects for the demobilisation of the target of 200,000
    from  an  army  estimated  between  250,000  to  300,000  between   the
    Government of Eritrea, the World Bank, the  UNDP  and  donor  agencies,
    they had "so far not been implemented".   Dr Pool  had  stated  in  his
    report (B11) that:

        "The World Bank Mid-Term Review Mission (MTR)  Report  makes  clear
         that there has been little progress on demobilisation and that  the
         Eritrean  Government  is  largely  responsible.   There  has   been
         disagreement  between  donors  and  the  Eritrean   Government   on
         statistical detail.  In  MTR  8ii  and  footnote  the  'Development
         Partners are of the opinion that EDRP does not reduce the number of
         soldiers  in  the  country  but  rather   facilitates   change   of
         personnel.  According to the GoE and NCDRP  these  perceptions  are
         wrong'.  According to the footnote to this sentence,  the  Eritrean
         Government requested the removal of this statement  reflecting  the
         opinion of the Development Departments.  The  latter  are  the  EU,
         UNDP, USAID and the Netherlands represented  by  their  embassy  in
         Asmara".


101.  In that regard, Dr  Pool  was  asked  whether  this  meant  that  some
    soldiers clearly ceased to be  soldiers  if  they  were  replaced.   He
    responded:

        "The question is how you define 'soldiers', not carrying a  gun  in
         trenches  across  from  Ethiopian  troops  -  but  transferred   to
         civilian/military jobs.  The World Bank objective  is  of  reducing
         the size of the army and it  is  different  from  the  authorities'
         objective in reality.  How do you count  the  number  of  soldiers,
         when people are doing ostensibly civilian jobs, but in  the  employ
         of the Ministry of Defence and on military pay."

102. Dr Pool was referred to the MTR Report that appeared to make  it  clear
    that demobilisation has taken place and the government of Eritrea:

         " .. in the medium to  long  term  remains  strongly  committed  to
         further demobilising its armed forces, but that in the short  term,
         the pace and scope of immediate demobilisation cannot be defined".


103.  Mr Parkinson put it to Dr Pool  this  meant  that  demobilisation  had
    taken place and that the government of Eritrea in the  medium  to  long
    term was committed to 'further' demobilisation of its armed forces.

104.  Dr Pool agreed insofar as the 5,000 who were demobilised in the  pilot
    project were concerned.   He continued that it was "a  difficult  thing
    to get to grips  with  in  the  Eritrean  context".   Notably  Dr  Pool
    continued:

         "It is a fair  summary  but  I  have  no  way  of  telling  whether
         demobilisation is underway or not,  particularly,  because  of  the
         grey area in drawing a distinction between those who are  obviously
         undertaking military roles in the armed forces and  those  who  are
         undertaking civilian roles who are  still  in  the  employ  of  the
         military - reinforced by the impressive comment from Eritreans that
         there has been no demobilisation.  All that I  am  relatively  sure
         about is that the first phase pilot  project  involving  5,000  was
         successfully undertaken - otherwise - I have the same difficulty as
         expressed by the World Bank on this matter.


         My concerns are reinforced by my conversation  with  Eritreans  who
         say there is no demobilisation - what does that mean?


         I cannot say there is demobilisation or that there is  not".   (Our
             emphasis)

105. Since Dr Pool here appeared to  have  stated  that  he  could  not  say
    whether or not there was demobilisation in Eritrea, we  read  back  our
    note of his evidence to him.  He confirmed, for the avoidance of doubt,
    that it was a correct record of what he had just said.

106. Dr Pool was asked whether he knew  the  percentage  of  the  population
    called for conscription.  He responded:

         "To start off with, we do not know  the  size  of  the  population.
         There has never been a population survey - figures we  have  found,
         are based on the 1993 referendum and included in that were tens  of
         thousands in Ethiopia, in Sudan, in South  Africa,  even  Eritreans
         who were in  London  and  voted  in  the  referendum.    As  it  is
         problematic as  to  the  size  of  the  population,  how  does  one
         calculate the percentage who are conscripted?"


107.  Dr Pool was referred to his report (B12) in which  he  had  stated  as
follows:

         "If one accepts the figure of 65,000, the further question remained
         as to what categories were demobilised.  On the  previous  practice
         of the Eritrean Government, it is  very  unlikely  that  there  was
         randomness in the character of those demobilised.   It  would  seem
         the categories were three:


          . 'severely' and 'less severely disabled' (MTR p14 gives a  figure
            of fifteen thousand to the less severely);


          . women;


          . veteran fighters from the pre-1991 Liberation Struggle  who  had
            been demobilised in the 1990s and recalled in 1998, an undefined
            proportion of the forty eight thousand demobilised between  1993
            and 1995;


          . soldiers in the higher age grade listed in the NSP (thirty six -
            forty five and forty six - fifty).'


         All three of those interviewed in a  pilot  project  demobilisation
         queue by a reporter from the UN  Office  of  the  Co-ordination  of
         Humanitarian Affairs and published by the UN news  agency  IRIN  in
         April 2002 fall into these latter two categories."


108. Dr Pool continued:

         "This paragraph is, I admit, a bit speculative but it is based upon
         what Dr Gebremedhin said about the pilot batch  and  the  Eritrean
         Government in the first round in the early nineties  where  it  was
         systematic in the categories it demobilised  from  the  EPLF  after
         independence.  I therefore made an assumption that  to  the  extent
         that there was demobilisation, it was on something of a speculative
         basis, i.e. disabled would be in the first category.


         I am in a quandary in that we had Eritreans telling me there is  no
         demobilisation and the  other  reports  albeit  contradictory  that
         there is demobilisation whether 64,000 or 104,000 and I spent a lot
         of time trying to find an answer". (Our emphasis).


109.  Dr Pool continued that Eritrea was:

         "... like contemporary China, after 1991 the  government  separated
         assets built up during the Liberation struggle  -  military  assets
         went to the armed forces and civilian assets went to the party, the
         PFDJ.   The  civilian  assets  (insurance,  building  construction,
         etc.) are the crucial part of the economy.  There is  a  relatively
         limited private sector".


110.  Dr Pool continued that, eighty percent of  Eritreans  lived  in  rural
    areas  and  a  large  proportion  of  those  people  were  involved  in
    subsistence farming but that a lot of those were in the army.   It  was
    mainly the women doing the farming. The 12 month development work could
    be digging wells and bringing in the harvest.

111.   Dr Pool continued that most young people over  the  age  of  eighteen
    were conscripted into the army.  At the other end of the scale Dr  Pool
    reminded us that in his report he had  referred  to  "soldiers  in  the
    higher grade listed in the NSP".

112.  Dr Pool was asked whether  he  considered  it  possible  that  if  the
    Eritreans were demobilising 65,000 people over four years,  they  might
    for political reasons not make the public  aware  of  it  as  it  would
    suggest that it was weakening their country.   Dr  Pool  believed  that
    the Eritrean Government would be quite pleased to say they had achieved
    this project.  Mr Parkinson's cross-examination concluded as follows:

         "Q.    I ask you this, 65,000 of an army of say 300,000 is  a  very
             significant percentage?


         A.      It is about the army, but the Eritrean Government's concern
             as to the economic burden on the state  is  a  worry  for  all
             these people to go back to civilian jobs on civilian pay.


         Q.     Bearing in mind that Eritrea is one of the poorest countries
             in the world, would it not actually benefit  those  having  to
             feed all the households of these soldiers?


         A.      The government is seen by people in the army as  a  benefit
             and not just for economic reasons  so  that  what  happens  to
             restless youth if it goes back to the villages? Are they going
             to reintegrate in  the  countryside,  a  big  problem  in  the
             1990s.  Economic consequences of the war  with  Ethiopia  have
             had a negative effect.   Can the civilian section  absorb  all
             these people who are demobilised? These are factors other than
             rationality. Look at Zimbabwe"


113.  There was no re-examination.

114.  We asked Dr Pool if Dr Amanuel Gebremedhin was known to him.  Dr  Pool
    told us that Dr Gebremedhin was not personally known to him but that Dr
    Pool knew of him and that he had met  people  from  the  University  of
    Leeds, Department of African Studies, where Dr Amanuel  had  undertaken
    his PhD.

115.  We asked Dr Pool in relation  to  the  question  of  exit  visas  what
    conclusion he would draw as to how those who left Eritrea by plane from
    Asmara Airport have been able to leave the country.  He responded:

         "I guess I think they would have to show some official document  or
         documents.  They would have to show a current passport and an  exit
         visa.  I would think so.  Security is tight at the airport".


         The Evidence of Dr Kibreab

116.  Dr Kibreab is an academic specialising in the problems  of  population
    movements with  particular  emphasis  on  forced  migration  and  post-
    conflict reconstruction.  He has been conducting research  on  Eritrean
    refugees for over two decades.  He tells us in his report of 30 October
    2006 that during the last ten years he  has  been  studying  the  post-
    independence Eritrean situation looking at  issues  relating  to  civil
    society associations, governance, human rights,  forced  migration  and
    repatriation.

117.  Dr Kibreab is currently working at the London  South  Bank  University
    as an Associate Professor and Director of MSc Refugee Studies.

118.  Dr Kibreab was referred to his report of 13 October 2006  and  to  his
    quotation from the War Resisters International Global Report of 2004 as
    quoted in the COI Report of April 2006 that:

         "In March 2004,  former  combatants  already  incorporated  in  the
         government armed forces were issued with demobilisation  cards  and
         asked to continue National Service until January 2005...".


119. Dr Kibreab  told  us  that  there  were  two  factual  errors  in  this
    quotation.  Firstly, those who were issued with ID  cards  were  not  '
    former combatants that were  incorporated  into  the  government  armed
    forces', but rather members of the National Service who  were  assigned
    to work  in  the  Ministries,  Departments,  Regional  Administrations,
    Businesses of the ruling party, because of their possession  of  scarce
    technical skills or professions.  Those  who  received  ID  cards  also
    included some women who were over twenty-seven years  old.   Those  who
    were incorporated into the army were not issued with demobilisation  ID
    cards.


120. Dr Kibreab continued that for the Eritrean Government National  Service
    (NS) was not Military Service (MS) and even though  NS  operated  under
    the Ministry of Defence it  was  de-linked  in  their  perception  from
    military service and this was confirmed by  the  MTR  (Mid-Term  Review
    Mission)  'NS needs to be de-linked from the size of the army issue'.


121.   Dr  Kibreab  understood  that  when   the   government   issued   the
    demobilisation cards they were usually given to  people  who  possessed
    professional or technical skills who  were  assigned  to  work  in  the
    ministries and the enterprise securities forces,  the Peoples Party for
    Democracy and Justice, (PFDJ) and that from January 2000 some were also
    hired out in the private sector.

122.  He continued:

         "If you wish for example to have an economist and you have a  small
         enterprise of your own or a truck for which a driver  is  needed  -
         most people are in National Service and the civilian labour  market
         suffers from a shortage of such skills.


         So if you look for a skilled person,  a  business  person  makes  a
         written application to the Ministry of Defence stating the types of
         skills sought, and if the MD accepts  your  application  then  they
         send someone who is in the NS.  I  have  seen  several  letters  in
         which a woman who owned a truck  applied  for  a  truck  driver  by
         letter dated 18 May 2000.


         The MD has a salary scale of all types  of  qualifications  ranging
         from PhD holders to unskilled labourers and in that  letter  I  saw
         the MD telling the woman to pay the salary of the truck driver into
         the bank account of the Ministry of Defence.  That is  one  example
         of many".

123.  Dr Kibreab continued:

         "The interesting thing here is that after completion of six  months
         military training all participants participate in  different  forms
         of development activities - some are  assigned  to  work  with  the
         ministries within their departments, regional governments and those
         who are uneducated are usually assigned to the army but participate
         in  unskilled   activities,   for   example   labourers   in   road
         improvements.  Some are also  sent  to  the  private  sector.   The
         letter says it is not a normal job but a temporary one to  overcome
         a labour shortage and  the  person  concerned  remains  subject  to
         military discipline as a draftee".

124.  At the resumed hearing on 4 January 2007 we were provided with  copies
    of the  letter  concerned  and  a  certified  translation.   The  first
    document  dated  18 May  2000  is  headed  "Payment  of  Salaries  and
    Additional Payments to  those  Members  of  National  Service  who  are
    employed in Private Business".   It continues:

         "For those vehicle owners who need drivers  because  their  drivers
         were taken to National Service and now need to  employ  drivers  in
         National Service, they should know the following rate  of  salaries
         and that they are allowed to select and employ any person from  the
         Ministry of Defence Logistics Department, ensuring periodic  check-
         ups of the payment system.


         General


         1.       This assignment of the National Service Member  is  not  a
             permanent position:  its  nature  is  temporary  and  will  be
             considered only to cover the shortfall caused by the  lack  of
             experienced workers.


         Therefore the person assigned, owing to their nature, is  always  a
         member of the National Service  even  though  they  are  under  the
         immediate instruction of their employer".


125.  There follows a table  relating  to  the  basis  on  which  salary  is
    calculated and other related matters.

126.  The second document produced was a copy letter and  translation  dated
    17 February but with the year illegible.  It is not  addressed  to  any
    named person but purports to have been  issued  from  the  Ministry  of
    Defence, it is headed "Subject - Information concerning  those  already
    in receipt of National Service salaries re the National Service workers
    salary payments".

127.  The document then describes the basis upon  which  a  worker's  salary
    should be paid to the Ministry of Finance in which the employer  should
    show the deduction of  the  income  tax  and  surtax  and  transfer  it
    monthly.

128.  As regards the letter dated 18 May 2000 to which Dr  Kibreab's  report
    referred, he maintained that the recipient had given  him  a  copy  and
    that he had obtained the letter as a researcher as part of his research
    activities.   Dr Kibreab continued:

         "I got it from one of my informants in England.  I did not ask  how
         he  obtained  it.   When  these  people  are  assigned   to   civil
         activities, the Eritrean Government does not consider, even  though
         they are under military discipline, that they are  subject  to  NS,
         although they are under the Ministry of Defence.  For example  they
         have to go to their units every  month.   They  continue  to  serve
         their National Service so they have not been demobilised".

129.  Dr Kibreab was referred to the World Bank MTR and  paragraph  12  sub-
    headed "National Service" and the following extract:

         "Concerns remain that DS  (demobilised  soldiers)  are  subject  to
         National Service as well  as  potentially  being  returned  to  the
         military".

130. Dr  Kibreab  continued  that  it  thus  might  be  said  that  one  was
    demobilised from the army but remained in NS and members of the NS were
    most likely eligible to be  returned  to  the  army   and  as  such  it
    explained  the  confusion  in  the  statistics  (see  the  World   Bank
    Reports).

131.  Dr Kibreab insisted that individuals in Eritrea who were under NS  but
    then after six months assigned to developmental work  remained  subject
    to military discipline. If somebody for example in NS  was  building  a
    dam as part of their development work and they absconded they would  be
    considered to be deserters.

132.  When we asked Dr Kibreab whether he had  any  background  material  to
    support that view he could only respond that  he  was  researching  the
    matter and:

         "... internally speaking to people in this regard,  for  example  I
         was in field work in the  summer  in  Italy  with  Eritrean  asylum
         seekers".


133.  We informed Dr Kibreab, that  although  we  appreciated  that  he  was
    involved in research, we wished to know whether he was able to refer to
    any background material to support the view that he had expressed.

134.  He responded:

         "Looked at objectively, they were supposed to  be  in  MS  eighteen
         months but in May  2002  there  was  introduced  the  Warsi-Yakaaol
         Campaign (WYC Programme) for all the fighters that was contrary  to
         the terms of the NS  (MS)  Proclamation  that  limited  service  to
         eighteen months." (Our emphasis).


135. In this regard he referred us to his report (B21) that stated:


         "On 12 December 2000, the Eritrean and Ethiopian Governments signed
         a peace agreement in Algiers under  the  auspices  of  the  African
         Union and to some extent the United Nations, the Government of  the
         United States and the  European  Union.   In  the  immediate  post-
         Algiers Peace Agreement,  the  Eritrean  Government  established  a
         National  Commission  for  the  Demobilisation  and  Re-integration
         Programme (NCDRP) and a phased  demobilisation  programme  of  some
         200,000 combatants was formulated.  The first phase,  some  seventy
         thousand  soldiers  comprising  of  old  combatants  (Yakaaol)  and
         draftees of the National Service  and  the  Warsi-Yakaaol  Campaign
         referred to by the  government  as  WARSAI,  were  expected  to  be
         demobilised by the end of January 2003.  These  were  going  to  be
         mostly  women,  people  with  scarce  skills,  family   needs   and
         sicknesses.  In the second phase  sixty  thousand  combatants  were
         expected to be demobilised by  the  end  of  July  2003.    Due  to
         uncertainties  concerning  the  funding,  the  government  did  not
         specify  the  exact  time  when  the  remaining  seventy   thousand
         combatants would be demobilised.   The main funder of  the  planned
         disarmament demobilisation and reintegration (DDR)  was  the  World
         Bank.


         However,  none  of  these  phased  demobilisation  programmes  were
         implemented.   The only exception was the pilot scheme under  which
         about five  thousand  soldiers,  a  large  majority  of  whom  were
         disabled during the border war  and  few  members  of  the  YIKAALO
         (individuals who fought in the war of independence ) who  were  old
         and individuals with long-term illnesses  -  diabetics,  asthmatics
         etc.


         It was  under  desperate  circumstances  that  the  government  re-
         enlisted these individuals and when the peace agreement was signed,
         consequently some funds were made available, the government  wanted
         on  the  one  hand,  to  appear  to  be   doing   something   about
         demobilisation, on the other, to get rid  of  the  individuals  who
         were, de facto redundant due to injuries, old age and poor  health.
         Although theoretically the pilot scheme was implemented to  provide
         lessons  of  good  practice  for  the  large-scale   programme   of
         demobilisation, hitherto not only has no such demobilisation  taken
         place, but the  government  while  appearing  to  be  demobilising,
         seized the opportunity to  gain  access  to  a  limited  amount  of
         external funds.


         Not only did the Eritrean Government fail  to  demobilise  the  two
         hundred thousand soldiers agreed with the international donors, but
         as seen before, it also extended the obligation to perform national
         service indefinitely under the  new  label  known  as  YDC  in  May
         2002.   This was contrary to the  terms  of  the  National  Service
         Proclamation of 11/1991  and  its  Amendment  Proclamation  82/1995
         which limits the requirements of the service  to  eighteen  months.
         However, the Proclamation on National Service was overridden by the
         events that unfolded by the  border  war  and  by  the  President's
         decision to introduce  the  WYC  (Warsi-Yakaaol  Campaign)  in  May
         2002....


         As noted earlier, the WYC compels those who complete  the  eighteen
         months   requirement to remain enlisted indefinitely  and  to  work
         for the state and the firms of the ruling party,  PFDJ,  and  other
         development works without remuneration, save a pittance  of  pocket
         money".  (Our emphasis).

136.  Dr Kibreab explained that this was an extension in effect  to  perform
    National Service indefinitely.   He could not refer us to any objective
    independent report to support his contention save that the introduction
    of the WYC supported it "and other evidence".

137.  When we asked  Dr  Kibreab  what  he  meant  by  "other  evidence"  he
    referred to the deportees from Malta and Libya some of whom he  claimed
    had completed their eighteen months military service and no  exceptions
    were made in that they were treated in the same way as  those  who  had
    evaded military service.

138.  Notably Dr Kibreab continued in this regard:

         "Even though I have  no  written  documents,  a  relative  of  mine
         serving in the Eritrean Army for the  last  ten  years  was  caught
         crossing the Sudanese border and we do not  know  his  whereabouts.
         That happened seven months ago".


139.  Dr Kibreab was referred to the Proclamation  82/1995  and  Article  21
    under the sub-heading "Special Obligations" that stated as follows:

    "i.      During  the  mobilisation  of  war  period  anyone  in  Active
         National Service is under the obligation of remaining  even  beyond
         the prescribed period unless the concerned authority allows them to
         leave officially. (Our emphasis).


    ii.       The citizen registered to  perform  Active  National  Service
         upon changing his address upon entering into service, has the  duty
         to inform the Regional Administration in his area about his address
         presenting his Registration Card".


140. Dr Kibreab explained that the Article was:

         "... promulgated before war broke out and even then the  government
         had the prerogative to extend the length of NS. This was overridden
         by the border war and the WYC Campaign, - but anyway, it reinforced
         the government authority to extend beyond the NS."


141.  Dr Kibreab thus maintained that the ability to extend NS was found  in
    Article 21 and the subsequent WYC Campaign.

142.  Reference was made to an article, a copy  of  which  appeared  in  the
    Appellant's bundle, from the Middle East Times dated 23  February  2006
    under the sub-heading "Eritrea  Frees  Nearly  All  Detained  Local  UN
    Staff".  Within that report the following was stated:

         "Information Minister Ali Abdu said that no-one was  exempted  from
         the  National  Service,  pointing  out  that  it  is  a  continuous
         programme for the service of the nation.


         'Every Eritrean' means that those Eritreans who work for example in
         embassies, in international  organisations,  in  the  UN,  are  not
         immune from National Service.  Ali  said  'You  never  finish  your
         national service, meaning you cannot say there is  a  full-stop  to
         serving your country'."


143.  Dr Kibreab told us that that was exactly his understanding as  to  how
    the Eritrean Government saw its citizens' obligations  to  serve  their
    country.

144.  Dr Kibreab was referred to his report (B16)  at  paragraph  2.1  under
    the sub-heading "General Misperception of  the  National  Service"  the
    following was stated:

         "Many people wrongly assume that  the  first  six  months  draftees
         spent in Sawa receiving military  training  represents  a  military
         service.  The remaining twelve months draftees spend taking part in
         development activities is  also  wrongly  seen  as  constituting  a
         separate national obligation.  This confusion does not emanate from
         the  particular  experience  of  Eritrea  but   rather   from   the
         experiences of other  countries  that  had  a  policy  of  military
         service.


         What people do not realise is that in Eritrea, there is no military
         service.  There is only Hagerawi Agelglot (National Service)  which
         is much more ambitious and broader than  common  Military  Service.
         The Eritrean authorities never refer to  the  National  Service  as
         'Wotehaderawi  Agelglot'  (Military  Service).   This  concept   is
         totally absent in the government's discourse on a National Service,
         including in the terminologies of the two pieces of legislation  on
         the National Service.  Wotehaderawi Teealim (Military Training)  in
         the Eritrean context  is  completely  different  from  Wotehaderawi
         Agelglot (Military Service).

              National Service consists of six months military training (it
         is important not to confuse this with Military Service) and  twelve
         months development work.  The two aspects of the National Service -
         namely, the military training and  the  simultaneously  ideological
         indoctrination  at  Sawa  Military  Camp  and  the  twelve   months
         development work represent a continuum  rather  than  a  dichotomy.
         They are indivisible.  They are two sides of the same  coin  -  the
         coin being National Service". (Our emphasis).


145.  Dr Kibreab reaffirmed that NS comprised six months  military  training
    and twelve months development work and continued that the goals  of  NS
    were much broader than MS and the goals were:

         "... to inculcate the EPLF values on the younger generation.


         The President said this at the Youth Festival held at Sawa in  July
         2006  (B16)  that  'nationalism  and  patriotism  did  not  develop
         naturally.  They had to be fostered and nurtured' and he said  that
         the NS and its concomitants, the WYC, were indispensable mechanisms
         in the process of promoting and  nurturing  discipline,  patriotism
         and commitment to the project of national unity. ...


         During the six months military training, the kind of  training  and
         indoctrination received by the participants is identical.  They are
         subject to the same regime largely in training, political education
         and history of the EPLF etc.


         At  the  end  of  six  months,  they  are  allocated  in  different
         development activities  dependent  upon  their  qualifications  but
         whilst so allocated they still remained under  military  discipline
         and the Ministry of defence organises where they go.


         Once they are allocated at different ministries or even the private
         sector - they do not get paid - the Ministry  of  Defence  get  the
         payment, i.e. NS service pay is given to them".


146.  When cross-examined, Dr Kibreab confirmed that he was saying  that  NS
    continued without end "so far".  He maintained that this started in May
    1998 when the border war broke out, in that before the war all would be
    demobilised after eighteen months.   He continued:

         "The law requires  a  citizen  to  stay  in  National  Service  for
         eighteen  months  and  at  the  end  of  that  some  of  them   get
         reintegration assistance, not all of them, most of them  return  to
         their families.  That was the position between May 1994 and  6  May
         1998, the law on NS was followed but, when the border war broke out
         on  6  May  1998,  they  were  re-enlisted,  i.e.  those  who  were
         discharged and completed their obligation were re-enlisted and that
         also included those who  were  former  field  fighters  demobilised
         between 1992 to 1994.


         There is therefore no distinction between those who have  completed
         their NS pre-border war or post-border war.   All  are  subject  to
         further NS.


         Some, who have suffered injuries or who are  unwell  were  probably
         discharged as part of the pilot scheme.  Otherwise those up to  the
         age of fifty have not effectively been demobilised, including those
         not present in the army.  They remain in  NS  and  therefore  under
         military discipline.


         Eritrea, in spite of the government's  ambition,  is  a  very  weak
         state and the enforcement ability of the government is limited - so
         people escape their villages, flee to Ethiopia - so  it  cannot  be
         said they are otherwise actually servicing.  Whether  or  not  they
         choose to hide or escape they have not been demobilised.  On return
         they will be regarded as deserters - even if they fled the  country
         before being called up they will be regarded as draft evaders.


         When you arrive at Asmara Airport - there is  a  rigorous  security
         check.   If my mother returned she would face it.   If  someone  is
         within the age range  of  NS,  eighteen  -  fifty,  they  would  be
         subjected to questioning and depending on  the  questions,  such  a
         person could either be sent to Ad-Abeto - a  detention  centre,  or
         asked to go home and report in  three  or  four  days  and  in  the
         meantime they would check up on you.  Most  government  departments
         are now computerised.  I cannot say the extent of any database,  if
         any, at the airport.  The check is the age of men and  women.   The
         authorities tend to be more lenient to women over thirty  but  they
         still run a check but it is  less  rigorous.   I  know  through  my
         informants and what I have seen myself."


147.  Dr Kibreab told us that he was last in Eritrea in 2002.

148.  Dr Kibreab did not know how many people were re-conscripted after  the
    war broke out in 1998.  He continued:

         "They require secondary school students and relocate them  to  Sawa
         and ensure they complete their education in a military  camp  since
         2003 - the  reason  they  do  that  is  that  most  students  would
         otherwise disappear".


149.  Dr Kibreab explained the number of students relocated to  Sawa  varied
    and in particular the number of girls had reduced dramatically  because
    of rumours of sexual abuse and Muslims  take  their  daughters  to  the
    Sudan


150.  Dr Kibreab maintained that NS was so unpopular,  that  many  Eritreans
    tried to avoid it.  Accordingly  the  government  in  2005  had  issued
    directions that if a son or daughter  escaped,  the  parents  would  be
    under an obligation to pay a fine.  Parents were  required  to  account
    for their children's  whereabouts.   Parents  were  detained  and  only
    released on payment of a fine.

151.  He referred to  the  Appellant's  bundle  and  an  article  issued  by
    News.com sub-headed "Eritrea Reportedly Detains Relatives  of  Military
    Service Evaders" dated 29 July 2005. The article detailed the  author's
    (Joe De Capua's),  summary of interviews with Amnesty International. In
    that regard, Dr Kibreab further referred to Dr Pool's report (B9) under
    the sub-heading "The Transfer  of  Fines  to  Parents".    This  report
    stated:

         "A further index of the definition of draft evaders is the transfer
         of punishment and penalties for draft evasion  to  the  parents  of
         those who do not fulfil the provisions of the NSP.  Over  the  last
         the two years the penalties listed under Article 37 of the NSP have
         been imposed on parents in some parts of Eritrea.  There have  been
         reports by Eritrean Human and Democratic Rights  -  United  Kingdom
         (EHDR-UK) of arrests of parents in October  2005  in  the  Southern
         Province of Eritrea (Decamhare and its surrounding areas have  been
         mentioned specifically) of those whose children  left  the  country
         without exit visas.  EHDR-UK has  given  the  figure  of  over  two
         hundred detained on October 24 2005.   EHDR-UK is  a  London-based
         human rights monitoring group and has a  tendency  to  be  cautious
         rather than  inflammatory  in  reporting  human  rights  abuses  in
         Eritrea.


         Gedab News (an independent opposition website) I have found  to  be
         usually accurate with a record of correcting previous errors or mis-
         reporting (reported on July 21 2005 a large scale round-up in Debub
         (southern region/province) of parents of:


             . any person summoned since the 1995 NSP but did not report


           . any student who had completed eleventh grade between 2002  and
             2005 but had failed to report to Sawa for twelfth grade


           . any person who had left their National Service Unit and  whose
             whereabouts was not known


             . any person who had left the country without an exit visa


         Gedab News reported "bail" of ten  thousand  Naqfa  if  the  absent
         person was found in Eritrea and fifty thousand  if  found  outside.
         Personal information from the Anceba region in Northern Eritrea  is
         consistent with the Gedab figures for bails/fines  of  parents  and
         with a similar scale  of  parental  imprisonment  in  the  villages
         around Keren, the provincial  capital  of  Anceba.    Although  the
         figure attributed as bail and fines is higher than in  Article  37,
         the imprisonment of parents is consistent with the punishment  laid
         out for draft evasion.


               Article  37  would  list  penalties  for   those   violating
         provisions of  the  NSP  does  not  discriminate  between  National
         Service and reserve army with  regard  to  penalties,  particularly
         since  the  post-1998  circumstances  have  resulted  in  so   many
         remaining on what is defined  as  active  National  Service.   Exit
         visas are very  difficult  to  acquire  and  any  Eritrean  leaving
         Eritrea  illegally  (that  is,  without  an  exit  visa)  would  be
         suspected of draft evasion, deserting their  military  unit  or  of
         suspicious political behaviour".


152.  Dr Kibreab told us that the government was  "extremely  reluctant"  to
    provide data as to how  many  students  were  relocated  to  Sawa.   As
    regards people in secondary school in  Eritrea  he  did  not  have  the
    latest figures.  He explained however:


         "Year one to six is primary school, then there is junior then there
         is secondary school.  It is not a  requirement  of  law  to  attend
         school but those who are in cities attend school.  National Service
         interrupted the education system as many ran away  to  avoid  being
         conscripted.


         "It followed from May 1998 people conscripted remained on  National
         Service unless they had run away."


153. Dr Kibreab had no means of knowing how many people  in  the  year  were
    called to National Service, but knew the number was going down, "people
    leave no stone unturned to evade it".


154.  Dr Kibreab was reminded that the World  Bank  understood  that  65,000
    people were demobilised and reintegrated by 2005.   When  asked  if  he
    thought that information was correct, he told us that  at  the  end  of
    2004  the  government  promised  to  demobilise  65,000  soldiers   and
    subsequent to that, had begun issuing demobilisation  cards.  According
    to information, most of those issued  with  demobilisation  cards  were
    either professionals or possessed technical skills and were assigned in
    the civil sector of the country  while  remaining  in  NS  even  though
    removed from the army.  Dr Kibreab continued:

         "This is what the Eritrean Government refers  to  as  'demobilised'
         and I think these are the figures given to the World Bank."

155.  Dr Kibreab continued his evidence at the resumed hearing on 4  January
    2007.   Mr Parkinson referred him to his report (B20) and what appeared
    under paragraph 2.3.1 and the sub-heading "What of Students?"    Within
    that segment Dr Kibreab was reminded of the following extracts:

         "Any student who absconds before or after being transferred to  Mai
         Nefhi Institute is regarded as a draft evader.  This  is  not  only
         because the Mai Nefhi Institute is regarded as part of the realm of
         the army but also because the students are in waiting to be drafted
         into the National Service immediately  after  they  complete  their
         studies.   Students  at  the  Institute  are   also   required   to
         participate in development work during  the  summer  holidays.   In
         fact although I cannot  say  this  with  an  acceptable  degree  of
         certainty, I have been told by some people in government  that  the
         students who attend the Mai Nefhi Institute are considered as being
         members of the National Service.   This may  explain  the  rigorous
         control imposed on their freedom of movement and  residence.   They
         also receive military training. The Mai Nefhi  Institute  join  the
         National Service and whoever runs away or absconds during  the  six
         months military training or after, is considered as a deserter.


         Any student who hides  inside  the  country  or  departs  from  the
         country when approaching draft age is regarded as a  draft  evader.
         Although the so-called approaching draft age is  arbitrarily  used,
         it can go down to ten years. (Our emphasis).   The government  does
         not issue exit visas to children who are ten  and  over  ten  years
         old."


156.  Dr Kibreab was challenged as to what evidence he had  to  support  his
    contention that the government did not issue exit visas to children who
    are ten and over ten years old. He thought  that it was  in  the  State
    Department Report.

157.  Dr Kibreab claimed to have also met Eritrean parents who had tried  to
    take out their children before approaching draft eligibility  age.   He
    also thought the matter was mentioned in KA.


158.  At this stage of his evidence, Ms Quinn intervened to refer us to  the
    State Department Report of 8  March  2006  under  the  sub-heading  (d)
    "Freedom of Movement within the Country of Foreign  Travel,  Emigration
    and Repatriation" where the following was stated:

         "Citizens and foreign nationals were required  to  obtain  an  exit
         visa to depart  the  country.   There  were  numerous  cases  where
         foreign nationals were delayed in leaving for up to two  months  or
         initially denied permission to leave when they applied for an  exit
         visa.   Men under the age of fifty regardless of whether  they  had
         completed National Service; women aged eighteen  to  twenty  seven;
         members of Jehovah's Witness and others who are out of favour  with
         or seen as critical of the Government were  routinely  denied  exit
         visas.  In addition, the Government often  refused  to  issue  exit
         visas to adolescents and children as young as  five  years  of  age
         either on the  grounds  that  they  were  approaching  the  age  of
         eligibility for National Service or because their diasporal parents
         had not paid the two per cent income tax required of  all  citizens
         residing abroad.  Some citizens were given exit  visas  only  after
         posting bonds of approximately $7,300 (100,000 Nakfa)".


159.  We were also referred to paragraph 49 of KA:

    "49.   One further item of relevance to the situation as  regards  exit
         visas, military service-related matters, including the position  of
         women of draft age, is a US State  Department  Report  of  February
         2005 (covering 2004) Section 2d  on  Freedom  of  Movement  states:
         [there is then repeated a similar passage from the 2005  US  Report
         as above stated from the 2006 Report)."


160.  Dr Kibreab continued to maintain that everyone called up for  National
    Service remained  on  National  Service  indefinitely  "with  very  few
    exceptions".  In different forms - it is very complex".

161.  He was referred to his report (B22) and the following:

         "Thus, with the exception of the veteran  former  combatants,  i.e.
         those who joined the struggle before  1998  and  the  mentally  and
         physically infirm who  are  not  required  to  participate  in  the
         National Service and in the WYC the large majority of all  citizens
         between eighteen and fifty years are in the National Service". (Our
         emphasis).


162.  Mr Kibreab had no idea how many citizens there were  in  Eritrea  aged
    between eighteen to fifty.  He maintained  that  a  large  majority  of
    Eritreans tended to be young because of the war  effect,  mainly  under
    eighteen.  When asked as to what this large majority  between  eighteen
    to fifty on NS were actually doing, Dr Kibreab responded:


         "They are  doing  everything  we  do  here.   Teachers,  policemen,
         drivers, night watchmen, agriculture labourers   engineers  -  they
         are everything, but unlike others where people  wished  to  earn  a
         living - these people are under National Service  and  are  working
         for the Government even where it is in  the  private  sector,  i.e.
         their salaries go to the Ministry of defence.  This is as indicated
         in the letters. (Dr  Kibreab  was  referring  to  the  letters  and
         translations of 18 May 2000 and 17 February (year unknown))."


163.  Dr Kibreab maintained  that  a  friend  of  his  visiting  the  United
    Kingdom  ran  a  company  that  had  several  employees.    They   were
    economists, engineers and clerks and most of them were  of  eligibility
    age where the salary  was  paid  by  his  friend  to  the  Ministry  of
    Defence.  He also referred to being in touch with an English  lady  who
    had a similar account to give.

164.  Dr Kibreab was  reminded  that  in  his  report  (B23),  there  was  a
    reference to a quotation from the CIO Report of April 2006 that in turn
    quoted from the US  State  Department  January  2006  Report  that  the
    government's demobilisation programme had been repeatedly  delayed  and
    which further stated:

         "In 2003, the government began to demobilise some of  those  slated
         for the first phase".


165.  Dr Kibreab maintained that as far as he knew, no  demobilisation  took
    place in 2003.  Indeed the US State Department Report stated:


         "The programme has not yet been approved  by  the  World  Bank  and
         funding for it from other donors is uncertain".


166.  Dr Kibreab maintained that given the fact that the  Eritrean  national
    economy was on the brink of collapse,  the  government  was  unable  to
    implement its programme of  demobilisation  without  funding  from  the
    World Bank and other donors.

167.   When  challenged  as  to  how  these  matters  were  within  his  own
    knowledge,  Dr Kibreab  maintained  that  it  was  because  he  was  a
    researcher and constantly receiving information.  He continued:

         "I write about those things.  I have my own  way  of  checking  the
         reliability of this information and therefore I have no doubt about
         the veracity of this information.  It is corroborated by many other
         documents including the World Bank MTR July 05.   Even  though  the
         World Bank is a non-political organisation and very  sensitive  and
         therefore very reluctant to be critical  about  other  governments'
         positions - in this respect you can very easily see how  much  they
         are despairing."


168.  In this regard, Dr Kibreab referred to the MTR Report of July 2005  at
    paragraph 8 under the sub-heading "Validity of Assumptions  Today"  and
    the following passage:

                   "Has the  EDRP  process,  [Emergency  Demobilisation  and
         Reintegration Project], led to an actual  reduction  in  the  armed
         forces?  There are perceptions among Development Partners that  the
         continued mobilisation into the armed forces in Eritrea,  including
         through the National Service (NS), is to such an  extent  that  the
         combined armed forces are as large now as at  the  start  of  EDRP.
         This view unfortunately is fed by limited transparency  surrounding
         the size of the army and  the  number  of  NS  that  are  currently
         mobilised into the army.  Based on this, the  Development  Partners
         are of the opinion that EDRP does  not  actually  help  reduce  the
         number of soldiers in the country, but rather facilitates change of
         personnel." (Our emphasis).

169.  Dr Kibreab maintained that "change of personnel"  meant  in  his  view
    the  65,000  said  to  be  demobilised  that  he  maintained  were  not
    demobilised but instead were issued with  demobilisation  ID  cards  in
    that they were then assigned in different places - various jobs such as
    government departments - and told to  work  for  the  government  until
    further notice.  In  this  regard  he  referred  to  the  MTR  and  the
    continuation of paragraph 8 of their report:

         "The IDA mission requested  but  has  so  far  not  received,  more
         current information with regard to the size of  the  army  and  the
         number of NS  that are currently mobilised into the  armed  forces.
         As such, the IDA mission is not able to  verify  whether  the  EDRP
         process has indeed led to an actual reduction of the armed forces".
         (Our emphasis).


170.  Dr Kibreab continued:

         "It is quite clear that  for  the  World  Bank  to  speak  in  such
         scathing terms is unheard of."


171.  Dr Kibreab referred further to the MTR  under  the  heading  "National
    Service" at paragraph12 and the following extract:

         "Concerns remain that DS, [demobilised servicemen], are subject  to
         National Service as well  as  potentially  being  returned  to  the
         military". (Our emphasis).


172.  Dr Kibreab considered this to be:

         "A surprising comment for a  World  Bank  to  voice  such  concerns
         against a member state.  It shows their  frustration  that  nothing
         (i.e. actual demobilisation) is happening".


173.  Dr Kibreab continued, that  it  followed  that  when  the  World  Bank
    stated that they believed that 104,000 soldiers had  been  demobilised,
    he agreed with Dr Pool that 48,000 were demobilised  in  1993/1994  but
    these were people who fought in the War  of  Independence  over  thirty
    years, namely those seriously injured and advanced in age who joined in
    the struggle during the last eighteen months between 1989 and 1990  and
    parts of 1991.  Eritrea became independent in May 1991  and  they  were
    all demobilised .  This comprised approximately 48,000 people.

174.  Dr Kibreab continued that when one  talked  about  the  65,000,  these
    were those who had been issued with ID (Demobilisation) cards  but  had
    not  actually  been  demobilised  and  who  had  continued   their   NS
    arrangements.  Dr Kibreab told us:

         "I presume these are the people who are presented to the World Bank
         as being demobilised and that includes the five thousand  who  were
         also effectively demobilised in the pilot project as  mentioned  by
         Dr Pool.


         Remember this is  a  Third  World  Country  where  figures  can  be
         deflated or inflated."


175. When challenged by Mr Parkinson as to the basis of  his  evidence  that
    at least  60,000  of  the  65,000  were  not  demobilised,  Dr  Kibreab
    maintained that:


         "The evidence is in different places and one needs  to  piece  them
         together to make sense  of  it....The  World  Bank  does  not  even
         believe in this. It is clear from the MTR report that there has not
         been credible demobilisation - no meaningful demobilisation"


176.  We asked Dr Kibreab if there was any other  background  material  that
    supported what he said. He responded:

         "No I cannot. The reason is, the Government of Eritrea is reluctant
         to release evidence  to  the  World  Bank  which  funds  the  whole
         project. No one  else  would  be  in  a  position  to  obtain  such
         information from the government."


177.  When asked if he was indicating that the World Bank  were  aware  that
    the information that they were given was  wrong,  Dr  Kibreab  repeated
    that the World Bank had found that demobilisation was not  transparent.
    They had stopped payments.


178.  In this regard,  Dr  Kibreab  referred  us  to  the  2006  World  Bank
    Financial Year Project Status Report under the  sub-heading,  "Progress
    Towards Achieving Development Objectives" and the following passage:

         "Following the project restructuring the IDA credit has  ceased  to
         finance the demobilisation and reinsertion  components,  since  the
         project has largely achieved  its  targets  on  demobilisation  and
         reinsertion, by  demobilising  sixty  five  thousand  soldiers  and
         paying each demobilised solder a reinsertion benefit equivalent  to
         US$330.   The focus of the project's implementation has since  been
         entirely on the reintegration component and over  the  last  twelve
         months,  the  project  has  also  achieved  good  progress  towards
         achieving  the   targets   here.    The   improved   implementation
         performance should shortly start to yield  the  expected  impact  -
         assuming the border situation does not further  deteriorate".  (Our
         emphasis).


179.  It was suggested to Dr Kibreab, that the World Bank had not  "stopped"
    payments  but  were  satisfied  that  the  development  objectives  for
    demobilisation had been achieved.

180. Dr Kibreab responded, that one could look at it  "in  different  ways".
    He acknowledged that demobilisation cards had  been  issued  to  65,000
    soldiers and payments made to them but maintained that:

         "For the World Bank that is demobilisation - but effectively  these
         people have been held in a state of limbo".


181.  When asked if apart from the MTR report he could direct  the  Tribunal
    to any other materials that supported that view, Dr Kibreab responded:

         "If by objective you mean any other written material I do not  have
         such evidence this is common knowledge. I have collected data  from
         different sources including  individuals  issued  with  demob  card
         while still not demobilised but transferred to civilian work whilst
         still in NS".


182.  Dr Kibreab maintained that he had interviewed about 20 people in  high
    government positions and that he had spoken to a Director General in  a
    Government Department.  He had interviewed  about  35  Eritrean  asylum
    seekers in the United Kingdom and 50 in Italy.

183.  Dr Kibreab said that he had seen Dr  Gebremedhin's  report  "though  I
    don't remember it properly".

184.  When asked if Dr  Gebremedhin  could  be  regarded  as  an  expert  on
    Eritrea, his response was equivocal:


         "You could say so even though he has not  been  in  Eritrea  for  a
             while".


185.  Dr Kibreab was referred to Dr Gebremedhin's affidavit at (B3) and  the
    following passage:

         "Regarding the National Service it started in 1994 and  so  far  it
         has undergone a nineteenth round recently.   The new entrants for a
         round comprises on average twelve-fifteen thousand recruits.    The
         main aim was to bridge the generation  gap  of  skilled  labour  in
         Eritrea.  Six months military training and twelve months work  with
         different line ministries.  As a programme it is good but now it is
         slavery.   How can you keep more than twelve years as an individual
         without proper remuneration?  The irony is that in the  army  there
         is  regular  army  (elite  army)  who  gets  full  salary  and  are
         remobilised ex-combatant and National Service who get  one  hundred
         and fifty - four hundred Nakfa  (one  dollar  is  fourteen  Nakfa).
         Eritrea had more  than  three  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  armed
         soldiers and the regular army is estimated to be forty  thousand  -
         fifty five thousand.  A total working  force  is  estimated  to  be
         around seven hundred thousand and it is very hard to believe  fifty
         per cent of the working force to be contained in the army.


         The Government of Eritrea demobilised only the  ones  who  are  not
         medically fit and pregnant women.  The ones who were working in the
         line ministries were told officially they are demobilised in  March
         2004, but they were told that for two years they have to  work  for
         the institutions  they  are  working  for.   They  will  get  their
         certificate after two  years.   Members  of  National  Service  are
         absconding in hundreds and  are  going  to  neighbouring  countries
         (mainly Sudan and Ethiopia) and then to different  countries.   The
         Libyan Government has deported Eritreans  and  most  of  them  were
         members of the National Service.


         As a veteran combatant,  I  can  understand  the  limited  National
         Service can be replaced by new entrants and if there is a need  you
         can remobilise them.  My understanding is they are kept hostage  in
         the army (because there is a difference of payment and the ones who
         are highly paid have a stake  in  keeping  the  ones  who  are  not
         properly paid, in this  case  members  of  National  Service).   In
         Eritrea it is slavery not National Service and it  is  misnomer  to
         quote National Service.  For me it is  a  violation  of  the  basic
         human rights principle."


186.  When asked if he would agree with Dr  Gebremedhin  that  mobilisation,
    (NS call-up), had undergone the nineteenth round recently and that  new
    entrants for a round comprised on average 12,000 to 15,000 recruits, Dr
    Kibreab said that he knew nothing of figures.

187.  When asked whether his response  meant  that  he  recognised  that  Dr
    Gebremedhin would be likely to know the correct figures bearing in mind
    his expertise, Dr Kibreab disagreed.   He said it was a  state  secret
    and only the people managing Sawa Camp would know.

188.  Dr Kibreab pointed out the government would  not  even  release  these
    figures to the World Bank so it was  very  unlikely  that  an  Eritrean
    would have access to such information.

189.  Dr Kibreab told us that he was not saying that Dr Gebremedhin did  not
    have access to this information, but he thought it unlikely.

190. When asked if he was expressing those doubts, despite the fact that  Dr
    Gebremedhin was appointed by the Head of State and therefore at quite a
    high level, Dr Kibreab responded that he understood that Dr Gebremedhin
    had  left  Eritrea  to  study  in  Leeds  in  1994/1995.    Dr  Kibreab
    continued:

         "He was therefore not  involved  in  demobilisation  matters  after
         1994.   He was involved in the demobilisation of  ex-combatants  in
         the War  of  Independence  in  1993/1994.   Demobilisation  we  are
         talking about started in 2001."


191.   Upon  being  reminded  that  Dr  Gebremedhin  was  working  for   the
    government in 2001, Dr Kibreab responded:

         "No he was not.  He was working as  a  consultant.   He  personally
         told me - I even visited him in his office in Asmara in 2001 and he
         told me that and that he had lots of problems with  the  government
         and was no longer working for them."


192.  When asked if Dr Kibreab was maintaining that  Dr  Gebremedhin  was  a
    liar, he responded:

         "I am not saying that. I want to leave some room for doubt.   Maybe
         he was working for the government.... as he says or a consultant".


193.  Dr Kibreab continued:

         "I feel very uncomfortable about this.


         When I went to Asmara in  the  summer  of  2001  to  carry  out  my
         research, I met him in the city by chance and he asked me  to  come
         to his office and then we talked about the situation.  He  told  me
         he was unhappy about the way he was being treated.  I did  not  get
         the impression he was working for the government.  It was an office
         in a shabby building.


         I based my impression on what he told me  and  I  met  him  briefly
         twice in town and in his office.


         I have only had one subsequent contact with him in 2005 when he was
         in the US.  He was  a  Director  of  Demobilisation  in  the  early
         1990s.  In 1994 some disabled people were killed and as part of  my
         study I wanted to interview him.  I wrote to him  with  my  request
         and he never responded to me and I have had no further contact.


         He was Director of the Demobilisation Office for the  ex-combatants
         in 1993/94 and in that sense I regard him as  an  expert  for  that
         period."


194.  When  asked  if  his  response  meant  that  he  did  not  think  that
    Dr Gebremhedin was an expert on the 2003/4/5 demobilisation  exercise,
    his response was somewhat equivocal.  He told us:

         "What am I supposed to  say?   I  am  an  academic.   I  feel  very
         uncomfortable about passing judgment  on  someone's  expertise.   I
         have  seen  nothing  published  by   him   on   the   most   recent
         demobilisation".


195.  There was no re-examination.

196.  We referred Dr Kibreab to his report, (sub-paragraph 2.2 "Duration  of
    the National Service") that before May 1988 when the border  war  broke
    out, the duration of NS was limited to 18 months after which those  who
    completed it were invariably demobilised, but that after May 1998, such
    people were re-enlisted as well as  former  combatants  demobilised  in
    1993 and 1994. Further, that after the border war broke out, "those who
    complete their eighteen months are no longer demobilised".


197.  We asked Dr Kibreab as to whom in his  opinion  since  May  1998  fell
    into the category of being demobilised.

198.  Dr Kibreab responded  that  there  was  no  dispute  that  5,000  were
    demobilised in the pilot scheme  comprising  those  of  advanced  years
    and/or those who sustained serious injuries in the border wars and  the
    65,000 who were issued demobilisation ID cards were still "in  a  state
    of limbo", namely still in NS and therefore not demobilised.

199.  Dr Kibreab maintained no one else had  effectively  been  demobilised.
He continued:

         "Eritrea says it is in a state of war and anybody even  demobilised
         falls into the category of those on reserve.  So if a war broke out
         undoubtedly they would be called back.


         Forty eight thousand were demobilised over the period 93/94 -  when
         the war broke out - those physically capable of carrying guns  were
         remobilised and it is possible some of these  were  demobilised  in
         the category of five thousand and they were likely to be older than
         the rest."


200. When asked if there was a cut-off point to  NS,  Dr  Kibreab  explained
    that the law said it was eighteen months (the  1995  Proclamation)  but
    the reality was  different.    The  proviso  in  the  Proclamation  was
    overwritten by an interview of the Head of State in May 2002 (by  which
    we understood Dr Kibreab to be  referring  to  the  Middle  East  Times
    article)  and  subsequently  approved  by  the  Cabinet.    Dr  Kibreab
    maintained that at the present time the  categories  of  demobilisation
    were:

     . Former combatants, namely those who fought in the  thirty  year  war
       before 1991 and excluding those remobilised in 1998 or  assigned  to
       various positions in the Ministry of  Defence)  and  those  who  had
       assigned employment outside of the Ministry of Defence.  Even  those
       when the border war broke out were temporarily called back until the
       Peace Agreement was signed.


     . Five thousand demobilised in the pilot project in 2001.


     . Women over thirty five - forty with children,  although  Dr  Kibreab
       explained  the  latter  was  an  assumption  for  which  he  had  no
       particular basis to support it.


     . All those aged forty or over when National Service was  launched  in
       May 1994 would be immune unless the country was in a state of war.


     . People who were certified by  the  Military  Tribunal  as  medically
       unfit.  This category was the  one  referred  to  within  Dr  Pool's
       report that he subsequently informed us in the course  of  his  oral
       evidence was 'speculative'.

201. Dr Kibreab told us that illegal  departure  was  considered  a  serious
    offence.  So many people had  left  Eritrea  or  intended  to,  because
    conditions were so bad not least because of the open-ended  obligations
    to National Service.  As a consequence the  President  of  Eritrea  had
    issued an instruction to shoot on sight anyone fleeing the country.

202. At this point Dr Kibreab produced an extract  from  a  news  report  of
    Awate.com dated 26 November 2006 under the sub-heading "PFDJ  Rounds-up
    Eritreans in Sudan".  He referred us to a passage sub-headed  "Restrict
    Outflow of Eritrean Youth" which stated as follows:

         "By  special  order  of  President  Isaias  Afwerki,  the  Eritrean
         military was given  permission  to  'shoot-on-sight'  any  Eritrean
         caught attempting to flee or helping anyone who is fleeing.


         There  are  three  escape  routes  from  Eritrea:  via  Senafe,  to
         Ethiopia; via Tessenei to Sudan and  via  official  visits  in  the
         Middle East to Europe.


         There has been no change in the volume of the flow towards Ethiopia
         (about two hundred and fifty per month); and  until  about  a  week
         ago, with about forty five people  daily  escaping  to  the  Sudan.
         However, there has been a qualitative change with the escapees  now
         not just limited to the youth but a  broad  spectrum  of  Eritreans
         including four doctors who escaped in early October. The regime has
         responded to this not only with a  "shoot-on-sight"  order  but  by
         frequent round-ups.  On Saturday November 25 at  dawn,  the  regime
         raided Segeneitti and Dekemhare and rounded up all youth, including
         students with ID cards". (Our emphasis).


203. Dr Kibreab referred us to a further passage from  the  same  report  as
follows:

         "The regime has tried to limit the air-bound  flights  by  severely
         restricting  the  approval  of  exit  visas  to  those   considered
         trustworthy...


         Of the three routes, the one that seems to occupy the minds of  the
         PFDJ is the Tessenei route to Sudan, primarily due to its proximity
         to the military camp of Sawa.   According to a report  provided  by
         the Eritrean National Salvation Front, in August of this year,  the
         Eritrean regime shot to death eight Eritrean youths  on  the  claim
         that they were trying to escape to Sudan and left their bodies  for
         display and  warning  in  the  streets  of  Tessenei.   The  report
         identified three individuals:  Mr  Amanuel  Sulus  Ogbagabiel  from
         Agbela; Mr Adem Ajssen from Haikota; and Mr  Abdella  Mahmoud  from
         Gonge.


         In late October, a substantial number of Sawa conscripts escaped to
         Sudan leading the Eritrean  regime  to  conclude  this  was  highly
         organised  with  the  knowledge  and  co-operation  of  middle-rank
         officers.  Consequently it concluded that  one  more  demonstration
         was needed as  a  warning.   This  time  ten  "troublemakers"  were
         rounded up from Sawa, taken to Tessenei, lined against a  wall  and
         shot in the back by an execution squad.  People were told these too
         had tried to escape in the Sudan.


         The tactic of shooting prisoners in the back, to make it look  they
         were shot while escaping from the  law,  was  developed  by  scared
         commanders who worried that some day they might be held responsible
         for the lives of people they  are  shooting.   Military  Commanders
         worry that they might be incriminated  in  the  future  when  human
         remains might be exhumed for forensic  tests  as  had  happened  in
         Bosnia and other places.


         With the opening of the Sudanese border, the Eritrea regime expects
         more escape attempts and has taken some measures  to  reduce  this.
         The first order has been  to  demand  a  bail  bond  on  all  civil
         servants in the amount of one  hundred  thousand  Nakfa  (i.e.  ten
         years worth of salary for a typical public  servant).    The  civil
         servants now have an obligation to report  not  just  one  who  has
         escaped, but who is even thinking of escaping.  Another  move  that
         the regime has already instituted is to decentralise Sawa  military
         camp by creating 'mini Sawas' throughout the country, primarily  in
         the more remote Sahei area.  This move (modelled after its approach
         of dismantling  the  University  of  Asmara  and  creating  several
         colleges  throughout  Eritrea)   is   also   meant   to   eliminate
         concentration of a large group of youths in the country.  The third
         approach is to continuously rotate and free senior officials." (Our
         emphasis).


204. Dr Kibreab continued that it was clear from this report  that  everyone
    had to produce a bail bond of one hundred thousand Nakfa, that was  all
    adults working for the government, civilian NGOs in the private  sector
    and family members were required to surrender 100,000 Nakfa if a person
    departed.


205. Dr Kibreab further  explained  that  those  not  affected  by  National
    Service and who  were  considered  as  trustworthy  by  the  government
    comprised :

     . Ministers
      . Ex-ministers


      . Party activists


      . Eritrean expatriates, namely those who could be British citizens
        working in Eritrea but of Eritrean origin.


      . Elderly people over fifty who were forty or over in 1994 who wanted
        to go on Haj or visit relatives abroad


      . Government officials


      . Scholarship students (the government now restricted their movements
        as many did not return)


      . Government employees who attended conferences (although Dr Kibreab
        maintained this had recently stopped.


      . Relatives of those in power might arguably obtain exit visas as a
        result.

206.  Otherwise, no one under  fifty  for  whatever  reason  could  lawfully
    obtain an exit visa and would have to walk to  Ethiopia  or  the  Sudan
    which was risky and try to cross the border.

207. Dr Kibreab referred us  to  the  Amnesty  International  Report  of  21
    December 2006 that under the sub-heading "Eritrea:  Over  five  Hundred
    Parents of Conscripts Arrested" stated inter alia:

         "Resorting to collective punishment, the  Eritrean  Government  has
         arrested over five hundred relatives, mostly parents of  young  men
         and  women  who  have  either  deserted   the   army   or   avoided
         conscription.   Amnesty  International  strongly   condemns   these
         arbitrary detentions.  The organisation  calls  upon  the  Eritrean
         authorities to either immediately release the individuals or charge
         them with recognisable criminal offences  and  try  them  within  a
         reasonable time in full accordance with international standards  of
         a fair trial.


         The arrests have taken place in the region of Asmara,  the  capital
         city in a sweep that started on 6 December.  None of those arrested
         have been charged with a criminal offence or taken to court  within
         the forty eight hours stipulated by the Constitution and  the  laws
         of Eritrea.   The  authorities  have  stated  that  detainees  must
         either produce the missing  conscripts  or  pay  a  fine  of  fifty
         thousand Nakfa (approximate US$3125).   Relatives who fail to do so
         will be forced to serve six months in the army in  place  of  their
         missing family members.


         The principle of individual penal responsibilities, that no one may
         be penalised for an act for which they are not  personally  liable,
         is a fundamental principle of law  which  is  reflected  throughout
         international  human  rights  law.   These  arrests  violate   this
         principle and specifically the right to liberty and security of the
         person and the right not to be subjected  to  arbitrary  arrest  or
         detention contained in the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and
         Political Rights (ICCPR) and  the  African  Charter  on  Human  and
         Peoples Rights, to which Eritrea is a party.


         The arrests reflect an upsurge in the Eritrean Government's use  of
         arbitrary and punitive sanctions against civil  society,  religious
         groups and human rights defenders". (Our emphasis)


208. Later under the sub-heading "Background" the following is stated:

         "Thousands of young men and women  have  fled  Eritrea  and  sought
         asylum in the Sudan and other countries since  Eritrea's  war  with
         Ethiopia between 1998 and 2000, in an effort to avoid  conscription
         or after deserting the army.   National Service, compulsory for all
         men and women aged between eighteen and  forty  has  been  extended
         indefinitely from the original eighteen month  term  instituted  in
         1994.  It consists of military service and labour  on  army-related
         construction projects.   The right to  conscientious  objection  to
         military service is not recognised  by  the  Eritrean  authorities.
         There are  frequent  round-ups  to  catch  evaders  and  deserters.
         Indefinite arbitrary detention and torture or  other  ill-treatment
         are regularly used as punishments for evasion, desertion and  other
         military offences.


         International humanitarian  non-Governmental  Organisations  (NGOs)
         have faced increasing difficulties in carrying out their activities
         as a result of measures taken by the authorities.   In  2006  alone
         eleven organisations have been expelled from Eritrea and forced  to
         seek their work there." (Our emphasis).


209. Dr Kibreab continued that in such  circumstances  and  insofar  as  the
    Appellant in the instant appeal was concerned:

         "The political outcome is that he is likely to disappear, it may be
         death but  one  does  not  know.   People  detained  in  2001  have
         disappeared".


210. Dr Kibreab continued that a person whose  characteristics  were  simply
    of mobilisation age and who left illegally would face  the  same  risk.
    He continued:

         "This would apply to all aged 18 to 50 who left  Eritrea  illegally
         and are returned.  There would be the following consequences:


           . If over forty at the time of their departure, they would not be
             regarded as evaders - provided that their departure was  before
             1994 - but they would be accused of  having  left  the  country
             illegally which is a criminal offence.


           . If they had sought asylum in another country  -  that  is  also
             considered a serious offence because they had been disloyal and
             have exposed the weakness of the country to strangers.  It is a
             criminal offence called "disloyalty".   Washing "dirty linen in
             public" in Eritrea is recognised as a very serious matter.


           . Those  not  demobilised  can  be  regarded  in  such  cases  as
             deserters in the full military sense.  No charges are proffered
             in Eritrea outside of normal  civil  affairs.   They  would  be
             detained in an unknown place indefinitely and disappear".


211.  As regards the penalties in law for illegal exit  and  disloyalty,  Dr
    Kibreab referred to the first  law  on  NS  promulgated  in  1991.   He
    pointed out there were different levels according  to  their  law.  For
    example, deserting to live in another country carried  the  penalty  of
    five years imprisonment.   If one left the country whilst it was  in  a
    state of war as at present, then such a  person  would  be  subject  to
    Penal Law although in Eritrea Dr Kibreab maintained one was never taken
    to court rather it was a local Commander who dealt with the matter  and
    such a person would "inevitably end up in a metal container".

212.  Dr Kibreab told us that he had last been in Eritrea in 2002.   It  was
    possible he would go back but he would want  to  consider  the  present
    situation and  he  was  mindful  that  "telling  the  truth  about  the
    Government is not tolerated. I do not think I would risk it but  in  an
    emergency, for example the death of a relative, I might do so".

213.  We referred Dr Kibreab to the Awate.com article he had  produced  that
    referred to the demand of a bail bond on  all  civil  servants  in  the
    amount of one hundred thousand Nakfa.   We had noted  in  Dr  Kibreab's
    evidence, that this sum would amount to the sum  of  a  typical  public
    servant or represent ten years equivalent actual salary.   We asked  if
    he was aware of the percentage of the population  who  were  likely  to
    have such facilities to provide such a bond.   Dr Kibreab  in  response
    told us that people who  had  more  than  one  offspring  abroad  might
    qualify. Payment was likely to be achieved by remittances.

214.  Dr Kibreab was unable to refer us to any document  to  identify  those
    who he maintained were eligible for exit visas but he claimed that such
    a document existed because he  had  "seen  it  in  Eritrea  newspaper".
    However, Dr Kibreab was of the view:

         "... No one in their right  mind  would  apply  for  an  exit  visa
         because they are supposed to serve their country and not leave it."


215.   Dr  Kibreab  did  not  agree  with  the  reference  in  the   Amnesty
    International Report (above referred), that NS  consisted  of  Military
    Service "and labour on army-related construction projects".    He  felt
    it should be broader than that.  Dr Kibreab continued:

         "People work on all  other  forms  of  projects  including  in  the
         private sector in return  for  payment  by  the  employers  to  the
         Ministry of Defence. It has a military training component but it is
         much broader than military service.  There is a six month  military
         component which is  military  training.   The  goal  is  completely
         different - the goal is to  turn  citizens  to  commitment  to  the
         national cause - to unify the country".


216.  Dr Kibreab told us that anyone who left the country illegally even  if
    that included those  of  the  5,000  whom  he  accepted  to  have  been
    demobilised, would still be considered to have violated the  principles
    of legal departure although the kind  of  punishment  meted  out  would
    vary, but they would be likely to be detained  and  held  incommunicado
    unlawfully as that was a common practice.    He  continued  that  there
    were always exceptions.  In general anyone who fled the country to seek
    asylum or to work abroad would be at risk.

217.  At the close of Dr Kibreab's  evidence,  we  adjourned,  having  first
    made the directions to which we have above referred.

218.  Prior to  the  adjourned  hearing,  we  received  and  considered  the
    written submissions of the parties  and  the  subsequent  supplementary
    submissions of the Respondent  in  response  to  those  raised  by  the
    Appellant.  We also heard the parties' further amplification  of  those
    written submissions.  We reserved our determination.

         The Legal Framework

219.  The provisions of SI [2006] No.2525 "The Refugee or Person in Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006"  now  bring
    into United Kingdom domestic law the  Council  of  the  European  Union
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on 'minimum  standards'  for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or as person who otherwise need protection and  the
    content of the protection granted, normally referred to in  the  United
    Kingdom as the Qualification Directive.  Commensurate changes were made
    in the Immigration Rules by  means  of  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules also taking effect on 9 October 2006.

220. The determination we have  made  has  approached  the  issues  in  this
    appeal from the perspective of the 2006 Regulations and  in  particular
    has applied the definitions contained there, in  deciding  whether  the
    Appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  We have  also
    applied the amended Immigration Rules.   These  have  permitted  us  to
    consider whether the Appellant is in need of Humanitarian Protection as
    being at risk of serious harm, as defined  in  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules.  Finally, we have gone on to consider whether the  Appellant  is
    at risk of a violation of his human rights under the provisions of  the
    ECHR.

221.  The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The standard of proof  has
    been  defined  as  a  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood',   sometimes
    expressed as 'a reasonable chance' or  a  'serious  possibility'.   The
    question is answered by looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    assessed at the time  of  hearing  the  appeal.   We  regard  the  same
    standard as applying  in  essence  in  human  rights  appeals  although
    sometimes expressed as 'substantial grounds for believing'.    Although
    the 2006 Regulations make no express reference to the standard of proof
    in asylum appeals, there is no suggestion that the Regulations  or  the
    Directions were intended to introduce a change in either the burden  or
    standard of proof.  The amended Rules, however, deal expressly with the
    standard of proof in deciding whether  the  Appellant  is  in  need  of
    Humanitarian Protection.

222. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules defines a person  eligible  for
    Humanitarian Protection, as a person who does not qualify as a  refugee
    but in  respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned, if returned,  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.  It seems to us  that  this  replicates
    the standard of proof familiar in  the  former  jurisprudence  and,  by
    implication, applies the same standard in asylum cases.

223. Accordingly, where below we refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this  is  to
    be understood as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:

    i.       whether on return  there  is  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
        persecuted under the Geneva Convention;


    ii.      whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing
        the person would face a real risk of suffering serious harm  within
        the meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules; and


    iii.     whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing
        that the person would face a real risk of being exposed to  a  real
        risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.


224. In reaching our conclusions as to whether  the  Appellant  will  be  at
    real risk on return, we have been  further  mindful  that  the  amended
    Immigration Rules (Cm 6198) contain among other  provisions,  paragraph
    339K which deals with the approach to past  persecution  and  paragraph
    339O headed "Internal Relocation".

    Court of Appeal Case Law and Country Guidance

225. At this point, it is convenient  to  summarise  the  relevant  Tribunal
    country guidance on Eritrea and what the Court of Appeal has had to say
    on the issue.

226. In AH (Failed asylum seekers - involuntary returns) Eritrea  CG  [2006]
    UKAIT 00078, the head note states:

         "Neither involuntary returnees nor failed  asylum  seekers  are  as
         such at real risk on return to Eritrea.  Country  guidance  on  the
         issue in IN (Draft evaders - evidence of risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]
         UKIAT 00106 and KA (Draft related risk categories updated)  Eritrea
         CG [2005] UKIAT 00165 is confirmed.  NB: this  decision  should  be
         read with WA (Draft related risk updated - Muslim  Women  (Eritrea)
         CG [2006] UKAIT 00079."


227.  In IN (Draft evaders - evidence  of  risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
    00106, the Tribunal considered the treatment of military deserters  and
    draft evaders:

         "29.    There  is  a  general  consensus  in  the  evidence   those
         identified as deserters or draft evaders are at risk of severe ill-
         treatment in  Eritrea.   This  is  referred  to  in  the  US  State
         Department Report 2004 at A121-2 which records that the  government
         continued to authorise the  use  of  deadly  force  against  anyone
         resisting or  attempting  to  flee  during  military  searches  for
         deserters and draft evaders and that  there  were  substantial  but
         unconfirmed reports that hundreds of  draft  evaders  and  National
         Service escapees were being held in makeshift  prisons  around  the
         country.  It confirms  the  continued  detention  of  some  of  the
         Maltese deportees being held at secret  locations  without  contact
         with their families without formal charges and  refers  to  reports
         that some who tried to escape were killed by security forces.   The
         UNHCR report of January 2004 refers to the punishments used against
         deserters,  conscripts,  evaders  and  army  offenders   reportedly
         including methods such as tying of the hands and feet for  extended
         periods of time and prolonged sun  exposure  at  high  temperature.
         The CIPU Report April 2004 at paragraphs 5.6-5.72  draws  on  these
         sources, confirming the  risk  of  severe  ill-treatment  for  army
         deserters and draft evaders.


         44.    Bringing all these factors together, and applying the  lower
             standard of proof, the Tribunal is satisfied that  at  present
             there is a real  risk  of  those  who  have  sought  to  avoid
             military service or are perceived to have done so, are at risk
             of treatment  amounting  to  persecution  and  falling  within
             Article 3. we summarise our conclusions as follows:


             i.       On the basis of  the  evidence  presently  available,
                 there is a real risk of persecution and treatment contrary
                 to Article 3 for those who have sought or are regarded  as
                 having sought to avoid military service in Eritrea.


             ii.      There is no material distinction to be drawn  between
                 deserters and draft evaders.  The issue is simply  whether
                 the Eritrean authorities will regard a returnee as someone
                 who  has  sought  to  evade  military  service  or  as   a
                 deserter.  The fact that a returnee is of draft age is not
                 determinative.  The  issue  is  whether  on  the  facts  a
                 returnee of draft age would be perceived as having  sought
                 to evade the draft by his or her departure  from  Eritrea.
                  If someone falls within an exemption from the draft there
                 would be no perception of draft evasion.  If a  person  is
                 yet to reach the age for military service, he would not be
                 regarded as a draft evader: see paragraph 14  of  AT.   If
                 someone has been eligible for call-up over  a  significant
                 period but has not been called up, then again  there  will
                 normally be no basis for a finding that he or she will  be
                 regarded as a draft evader.  Those at risk on the  present
                 evidence are those suspected of having left to  avoid  the
                 draft.   Those  who  receive  call  up   papers   or   are
                 approaching or have recently passed draft age at the  time
                 they left Eritrea may, depending on their  own  particular
                 circumstances, on the present evidence be regarded by  the
                 authorities as draft evaders.


             iii.     NM  is  not  to  be  treated  as  authority  for  the
                 proposition that all returnees of draft age are at risk on
                 return.   In that case the Tribunal  found  on  the  facts
                 that the appellant would be regarded as a draft evader and
                 also  took  into  account  the  fact  that  there  was  an
                 additional element in the appellant's background, the fact
                 that her father had been a member of the ELF, which  might
                 put her at risk on return.


             iv.     There is  no  justification  on  the  latest  evidence
                 before the Tribunal for a  distinction  between  male  and
                 female  draft  evaders  or  deserters.  The  risk  applies
                 equally to both.


             v.      The issue of military service has  become  politicised
                 and actual or perceived evasion  of  military  service  is
                 regarded by the Eritrean authorities as an  expression  of
                 political  opinion.   The  evidence  also   supports   the
                 contention that  the  Eritrean  Government  uses  National
                 Service as a repressive measure against those perceived as
                 opponents of the government.


             vi.      The position  for  those  who  have  avoided  or  are
                 regarded as trying to avoid military service has  worsened
                 since the Tribunal heard NA.


             vii.    The evidence does not support a proposition that there
                 is a general risk for all returnees.   The  determinations
                 in SE and GY are confirmed in this  respect.   Insofar  as
                 they dealt  with  a  risk  arising  from  the  evasion  of
                 military service, they  had  been  superseded  by  further
                 evidence and on this issue should be read in the light  of
                 this determination."


228. In KA (Draft-related risk categories updated) Eritrea CG  [2005]  UKAIT
    00165, the Tribunal's determination contains a head note:

         "This  case,  which  updates  the  analysis  of   risk   categories
         undertaken in IN (Draft evaders -  evidence  or  risk)  Eritrea  CG
         [2005] UKIAT 00106, gives guidance on several issues.  It  confirms
         the previous Tribunal views that returnees  are  not  generally  at
         risk.  It reaffirms the view that those who would be  perceived  as
         draft evaders or deserters would be at risk.  As regard persons  of
         eligible draft age, this decision explains why it  is  thought  the
         Eritrean  authorities,  despite   regarding   such   persons   with
         suspicion, would only treat  adversely  those  who  are  unable  to
         explain their absence abroad by reference to  their  past  history.
         Reasons are given for slight modifications in certain parts of  the
         guidance given in IN.  The  summary  of  conclusions  is  given  at
         paragraph 113.   The decision is also reported for what it said  at
         paragraphs 7-15 about the  country  guidance  treatment  of  issues
         which go wider than the particular factual matrix of an appellant's
         appeal."


229. The Tribunal in KA indeed summarised  their  conclusions  at  paragraph
113 as follows:

         "a.     So far as previous Country Guideline cases on  Eritrea  are
             concerned,  IN  is  now  to  be   read   together   with   the
             modifications and updating contained  in  this  determination.
             Our guidance supersedes reported  cases  dealing  with  draft-
             related risk categories which have pre and post-dated IN.


         b.      The Tribunal confirms the view taken in IN that persons who
             would be perceived as draft evaders or deserters face  a  real
             risk of persecution as well as treatment contrary  to  Article
             3.


         c.       The Tribunal continues to take  the  view  that  returnees
             generally are not at real risk  of  persecution  or  treatment
             contrary to Article  3.   We  do  not  consider  it  has  been
             substantiated that failed asylum seekers would be regarded  by
             the Eritrean authorities as  traitors  and  ill-treated  as  a
             consequence.


         d.      The Tribunal continues also to reject the  contention  that
             persons of eligible draft age are by that reason alone at real
             risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3.


         e.       So far as men are concerned, the eligible draft age in the
             context of return now appears to have  extended  to  be  18-50
             rather  than  18-40.   So  far  as  women  are  concerned,  we
             consider, despite some reservations that we should continue to
             treat the eligible draft age category in the context of return
             as 18-40.   We do not  see  evidence  that  for  women  it  is
             extended beyond 40.   We  also  think  that  the  category  of
             females within the 18-40 age range who  while  potentially  at
             risk of serious harm does not extend to  Muslim  women  or  to
             women who are married  or  who  are  mothers  or  carers.   In
             addition women  will  still  not  fall  into  an  actual  risk
             category of their circumstance bring them within  any  of  the
             three sub-categories set out in (f).


         f.       Subject to  the  above,  persons  of  eligible  draft  age
             (defined in the context of return as being between  18-50  for
             men and 18-40  for  women)  are  currently  at  real  risk  of
             persecution as well as treatment contrary to Article 3 unless:


             i.        They can be considered to have left Eritrea  legally
                  regarding this sub-category, it must be borne in mind that
                  an appellant's assertion that he left illegally will raise
                  an issue that will need to be established to the  required
                  standard.  Also a person who generally  lacks  credibility
                  will not be assumed to  have  left  illegally.   We  think
                  those falling into the 'left  legally'  sub-category  will
                  often include persons who are considered to  have  already
                  done national service, persons who have got  an  exception
                  and persons who have been  eligible  for  call-up  over  a
                  significant  period  but  have   not   been   called   up.
                  Conversely those falling outside this set of category  and
                  so at risk will often include  persons  who  left  Eritrea
                  when they were approaching draft age (18) or had  recently
                  passed that age; [Our emphasis] or


             ii.       they have not been in Eritrea since the start of the
                  war with Ethiopia in 1998 (that being the  year  when  the
                  authorities increased dramatically  the  numbers  required
                  for call up and took the national service system in a much
                  more authoritarian direction) and are able  to  show  that
                  there was no draft-evasion motive  behind  their  absence.
                  This sub-category reflects our view that  the  authorities
                  would know that persons who left Eritrea before the  start
                  of the war would not have had draft evasion as a  possible
                  motive; or


             iii.      they have never been to Eritrea and are able to show
                  there was no draft-evasion motive  behind  their  absence.
                  If  they  have  not  yet   obtained   formal   nationality
                  documents, there is  no  reason  to  think  they  will  be
                  perceived as draft evaders.


                  g.       Nevertheless, even those of  draft  military  age
             who would not be considered  at  real  risk  of  serious  harm
             (because they come within i or ii or iii) would  still  be  at
             such a risk if they hold conscientious objections to  military
             service given that the issue here is a factual one of  whether
             a person would refuse to serve even knowing  that  the  likely
             consequence of refusal is ill-treatment, we think the  reasons
             of conscience would have to be unusually strong.

        h.       Otherwise, however, the Tribunal does  not  consider  that
             mere performance of military service gives rise to a real risk
             of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3.

        i.        We reiterate the point made in IN that the guidance given
             here is not intended to be applied abstractly: it remains that
             each case must be considered and assessed in the light of  the
             appellant's particular circumstances.  It may be, for example,
             that a person who is of eligible draft age, at least if he  or
             she is still relatively young, will not need to establish very
             much more.  However, we think that in all cases something more
             must be shown.  It will  be  quite  wrong,  for  example,  for
             someone who in fact has obtained an  exemption  from  military
             service, to succeed simply on the basis that he has shown that
             he was of eligible draft age.   A person who failed to give  a
             credible account of material  particulars  relating  to  their
             history and circumstances cannot easily show that they will be
             at risk solely because they are of eligible draft  age."  (Our
             emphasis).


230. For reasons to which we will later refer, we have  concluded  upon  our
     consideration of the current background material that  the  finding  of
     the Tribunal in KA that the "left legally" sub-category applies to  men
     who have already done their National Service (NS), is now to be read in
     the light of the fresh evidence to which we refer contained on  the  US
     State Department Report of March 2006 and repeated in  the  April  2006
     CIO Report for Eritrea.

231.  In WA the Tribunal prefaced its determination with this head note:

         "On the basis of evidence now available, Muslim women should not be
         excluded from being within the draft related at risk category.  The
         evidence indicates that Muslim women per se  are  not  exempt  from
         military service.  In some areas, however  local  protests  prevent
         their  call  up  and  in  others  the  draft  is  not  so  strictly
         implemented.   This  addition  (amending  paragraph  113   of   the
         determination) to the draft related risk categories  in  KA  (Draft
         related risk  categories  updated)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]  00165  are
         reaffirmed.  In particular it remains  the  case  that  in  general
         someone who has lived in Eritrea for a significant  period  without
         being called up would not fall  within  the  category  of  a  draft
         evader.  The evidence indicates that the administration of National
         Service is devolved to six regional  commands  and  the  degree  to
         which recruitment is carried out  varies  from  region  to  region.
         Considering risk on return a decision maker should  pay  regard  to
         any credible evidence relating to the particular region from whence
         an appellant comes and the degree to which recruitment is  enforced
         in that particular area.  NB: this decision should be read with  AH
         (Failed asylum seekers - involuntary  returns)  Eritrea  CG  [2006]
         UKAIT 00078."

232. N0thing the Tribunal have heard or seen in the instant  appeal  affects
    the finding of the Tribunal in WA  that  Afar  Muslim  women  from  the
    Dankalara region were not subject to forceful recruitment into NS.

233. In Ariaya and Sammy v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  48,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    identified what they described as "a  very  real  and  growing  concern
    about the treatment of those who, on return to Eritrea,  are  perceived
    by the authorities to be draft evaders or deserters" who  would  be  at
    real risk if they were  returned  to  Eritrea.   The  Court  considered
    relevant Tribunal decisions including Country Guidance decisions of the
    Tribunal in MA (Female draft evader) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00098,  SE
    (Deportation - Malta - 2002  General  Risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
    00295, and IN and KA  to  which  we  have  above  referred.  The  Court
    endorsed the conclusions of  the  Tribunal  in  KA.  At  paragraph  10,
    Richards LJ endorsed the risk categories identified in KA. His Lordship
    quoted from paragraph 113 (i) where the Tribunal held  that:

         "Persons  who  fail  to  give  a  credible  account   of   material
         particulars relating to  their  history  and  circumstances  cannot
         easily show that they would be at risk solely because they  are  of
         eligible draft age."


234. The significance of that point is worth emphasising. Persons  who  have
    been found by a judicial fact-finder not to be credible in any material
    respect may be hard-pressed  to  demonstrate  that  they  left  Eritrea
    illegally. If they did not exit illegally then the only alternative  is
    that they left with the permission of the Eritrean authorities  despite
    being of draft age. (see further paragraph 449 below).

         The Expert Reports

235. We need to make some comments about our approach to the  oral  evidence
    and reports of the two country experts and the affidavit of Dr  Amanuel
    Gebremedhin.

236. There are a number of  general  observations  that  we  would  wish  to
    make.  Our starting  point  is  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    Practice Directions where at paragraph  8A.4,  it  is  stated  that  an
    expert should assist the  Tribunal  by  providing  objective,  unbiased
    opinion on matters within his or her expertise and  should  not  assume
    the role of an advocate.

237.  Practice Direction 8A.5 reminds us that an expert should consider  all
    material facts, including those which might detract  from  his  or  her
    opinion. Paragraph 9A.6 points out that an expert should make it clear:

    a)      when a question of issue falls outside his  or  her  expertise;
         and


    b)     when the expert is not able to reach  a  definite  opinion,  for
         example because of insufficient information.


238. In appeals before the  AIT,  the  issue  relates  to  conditions  in  a
    specified country or region. The role of a country expert  is  thus  to
    assist the Tribunal giving expert evidence in a field where  specialist
    knowledge is required, in particular  in  providing  comprehensive  and
    balanced factual information relating to the issues that  the  Tribunal
    must resolve.

239. In that regard, it is important to  bear  in  mind,  that  the  AIT  is
    itself a specialist Tribunal that has its own level  of  expertise  and
    therefore it is for the Tribunal on the basis of the  totality  of  the
    material before it, including the opinion of  the  country  expert,  to
    conduct its own assessment and reach its own conclusions.

240. A competent expert's report is  always  entitled  to  respect  and  due
    consideration, but from the point of view  of  the  judicial  decision-
    maker, such reports may sometimes (if not often) amount in the  end  to
    just one among other items of evidence which have to be weighed in  the
    balance.

241 As held by the Tribunal in SK [2002] UKAIT 05613,  the  Tribunal  builds
    up its own expertise.  Naturally an expert's  report  can  assist,  but
    that does not mean that heavy reliance  is  or  should  necessarily  be
    placed upon such reports.  All will  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the
    report and the particular expert.   The Tribunal is accustomed to being
    served with reports of experts, many of whom have their own  points  of
    view which their reports seek to justify.    The  whole  point  of  the
    country reports is to bring  together  all  relevant  material.    From
    them, the Tribunal will reach its own conclusions about  the  situation
    in the country and they will see whether the facts found in relation to
    the individual before it establish, to the required  standard,  a  real
    risk.

         The Evidence of Dr Amanuel Gebremedhin

242. We begin with the affidavit (our copies unsigned  and  undated)  of  Dr
    Amanuel Gebremedhin. Dr Gebremedhin is  an  Eritrean  who  was  granted
    asylum in the United States in July 2003.    He  describes  himself  as
    currently working as an Emergency Programme Consultant for an  American
    NGO and as an adviser to the MDRP (programme by the World Bank  in  the
    Great Lakes).  Under the  sub-heading  "Background"  he  tells  us,  in
    summary, that he joined the Eritrean armed struggle in 1975 and  worked
    in the rank  and  file  of  the  EPLF,  the  current  ruling  party  in
    Eritrea.   During the armed struggle he was a  member  of  the  General
    Staff responsible for the  Communication  Department  (Signal)  of  the
    Army.  After the liberation of Eritrea he worked as a personal  aid  to
    the Ministry of Defence from May 1991 to December 1992.

243. Dr Gebremedhin tells us that in December 1992 he was  assigned  as  the
    Head of Demobilisation and Reintegration Programme  known  as  "Mitias"
    that he describes as designed to reintegrate newcomers back to  society
    in the local language (Tigriyna).  In the process, the  institution  he
    was heading demobilised and reintegrated 54,000 former  combatants  out
    of which 13,500 were female ex-combatants.

244. Dr Gebremedhin left Eritrea for the  United  Kingdom  to  continue  his
    higher studies and obtained an MA in Development Studies in 1997 and  a
    PhD in Sociology from the University of Leeds.

245. In 1998 the border war with Ethiopia started  and  he  returned  to  do
    field work in Eritrea.  The title of his thesis was "The  Challenge  of
    Reintegration and Reconstruction in Post Conflict Eritrea".  He  states
    that his book on that subject was published in 2004.

246. Dr Gebremedhin continues, that when the border war stopped in  December
    2000 the Government of Eritrea asked the World Bank and UNDP to support
    them in designing the demobilisation and  reintegration  programme  for
    200,000 former combatants.   Dr Amanuel points out:

        "In history, it is a rare opportunity to make right what  you  have
        wronged".

247.  Dr Gebremedhin explains  that  during  the  first  demobilisation  and
    reintegration programme, the main focus was to help  former  combatants
    economically  so  that  they  could  reintegrate  smoothly   into   the
    mainstream of society.   Dr Gebremedhin continues:

         "But this endeavour proved to be wrong for it did not take on board
         the social aspect the former combatants had passed through.   As  a
         result of participating in the long armed struggle their social way
         of  life  had  changed   and   without   addressing   this   issue,
         reintegrating former combatants back into society is futile to  say
         the least".


248. Dr  Gebremedhin  explains  that  twenty  experts  designed  the  second
    demobilisation and reintegration programme for Eritrea that was  funded
    by the World Bank and UNDP as from January 15 and ending on February 24
    (he does not specify the year) and that he was one of the  experts  who
    participated in the design of the second demobilisation programme.   He
    continues:

         "This gave me an opportunity to reflect and redress the  wrongs  of
         the  first  phase  exercise  of  demobilisation  and  reintegration
         programme conducted from 1993-1997 at least conceptually."

249. Dr Gebremedhin claims to have been appointed by the Head  of  State  to
    be  an  Executive  Secretary  to  the   National   Demobilisation   and
    Reintegration Commission on 6 May 2001.   Since he had worked  on  both
    exercises of demobilisation in Eritrea he tells us:

              "..  with  confidence  and  experience,  that  there  was  no
         political will to demobilise former  combatants  in  Eritrea.   For
         example when I submitted a proposal for how to go about  addressing
         the demobilisation  and  reintegration  problem,  it  was  rejected
         automatically  without  even  discussing  it   in   detail.     The
         demobilisation proposal I submitted  targets  combatants  who  were
         slated to be demobilised  in  phases  and  the  aim  was  to  start
         training them in different skills to  help  them  reintegrate  back
         into the society.  The response I got from higher  authorities  was
         'we are not going to demobilise before our border  is  demarcated'.
         My argument was yes, we can, for if the worst come,  it is easy  to
         remobilise and that is what had  been  done  when  the  border  war
         started and ex-combatants left their work on a  volunteer  base  to
         defend their country." (Our emphasis).


250. A further issue of contention that Dr Gebremhedin  describes  with  the
    higher authorities was as to the conduct of the  pilot  programme.   As
    Executive Secretary, Dr Gebremhedin wrote a proposal  describing  those
    who should be demobilised in the first pilot phase and that they should
    comprise all categories from the members of the front.   His  affidavit
    in this regard continues:

         "This can give a picture of  the  beneficiaries  and  can  help  in
         designing   a   reintegration   programme   geared   towards    the
         beneficiaries.  This was also  rejected  and  only  three  thousand
         women and some disabled combatants were demobilised  in  the  pilot
         phase.   This category cannot represent the beneficiary  group  and
         it  is  hard  to  design  intervention  programmes  based  on  this
         finding."


251.  Dr Gebremedhin tells us that 65,000 former  combatants  were  supposed
    to be demobilised and after postponement of the dates,  the  government
    claimed that they had demobilised that number.  Dr Gebremedhin  states,
    however:

         "In reality they had demobilised only from the reserve militia  and
         added names of the ones who were demobilised in the first exercise,
         1993-1996, to reach their target.  This is  public  knowledge  that
         the ones who got their benefit in  the  first  demobilisation  were
         paid again". (Our emphasis).


252. Dr Gebremedhin describes a third issue that created  problems  for  him
    with the higher authorities, namely that:

         ".. the President Office allocated $120 million for reinsertion out
         of the $200 million for reinsertion. I wrote a letter  saying  this
         would not  help  ex-combatants...   Differing  programmes  must  be
         designed that can help them develop skills so that it can help them
         reintegrate into the society when they are officially  demobilised.
         What we have learned from the  1993-1997  demobilisation  exercise,
         was that giving money to former combatants only ended  up  in  bars
         (pubs) and after finishing their money they were coming back to the
         offices of demobilisation and reintegration stationed in  differing
         provinces".


253. A fourth issue that Dr Gebremedhin says  led  to  his  resignation  was
what he described as:

         ".. the issue of psychosocial problems among former combatants.   I
         designed a survey to see the profile of former combatants.    Three
         thousand former combatants were selected from  all  units  randomly
         and a study was conducted from July to October 2001.  The  findings
         were alarming.  Thirteen per cent of the sample responded that they
         were  suffering  from  psychosocial-related  problems.    .....   I
         proposed to the higher authorities that we need to get prepared, by
         training  peer   and   community   counsellors   and   professional
         psychiatric nurses.  The response I got was this is claimed but not
         verified.  I tried to show the authorities what is looming but they
         gave me a deaf ear and after that it was too much to  take  it  and
         stay in an institution in which I cannot  make  any  difference.  I
         wrote a resignation letter and submitted it to the President Office
         and to my surprise my resignation paper was accepted and I left the
         office on 15 November 2001."


254. Dr Gebremedhin refers to an independent evaluation having been  carried
    out by the World Bank in July 2005 when  the  demobilisation  programme
    was suspended.  Dr Gebremhedin  continues  in  his  affidavit  in  this
    regard:

         "The main reason give for the public consumption was  that  it  was
         progressing slowly, but the real reason behind (it)  was  that  the
         ones who were demobilised were pregnant  women,  severely  disabled
         combatants.  In order to increase the number, former combatants who
         were  demobilised  in  1993/1997  were  recalled  and   given   new
         certificates and issued demobilisation money.  So in a real  sense,
         there was no demobilisation only (an) insignificant number from the
         core army was demobilised."


255. As regards National Service  it  started  in  1994  and  has  undergone
    nineteen rounds.   Dr Gebremedhin continues in his affidavit:

         "The new entrant for a round comprises  on  average  twelve-fifteen
         thousand recruits.  The main aim was to bridge the  generation  gap
         of skilled labour in Eritrea.  Six  months  military  training  and
         twelve months work with different line ministries. As  a  programme
         it is good but now it is slavery.   How  can  you  keep  more  than
         twelve years an individual without proper remuneration?  The  irony
         is, that in the army there is Regular Army (Elite  Army)  who  gets
         full salary and a remobilise(d) ex-combatant and  National  Service
         who get only one hundred fifty-four hundred Nafka  (one  dollar  is
         fourteen Nafka).   Eritrea had more than three  hundred  and  fifty
         thousand armed soldiers and the regular army  is  estimated  to  be
         forty thousand-fifty five thousand.  The  total  working  force  is
         estimated to be around seven hundred thousand and it is  very  hard
         to believe fifty per cent of the working force to be  contained  in
         the army."


256. Dr Gebremedhin concludes his affidavit by claiming that the  Government
    of Eritrea demobilised  only  those  who  are  not  medically  fit  and
    pregnant women.  He continues:

         "The ones  who  are  working  in  the  line  ministries  were  told
         officially they were demobilised in March 2004 but they  were  told
         that for two years they have to work for the institutions they  are
         working for.  They will get  their  certificate  after  two  years.
         Members of National Service are  absconding  in  hundreds  and  are
         going to neighbouring countries (mainly  Sudan  and  Ethiopia)  and
         then to different countries.  The Libyan  Government  had  deported
         Eritreans and most of them were members of National Service.   As a
         veteran combatant I can understand the limited National Service and
         can be replaced by new entrant and if  there  is  a  need  you  can
         remobilise them.  My understanding is they are kept hostage in  the
         army (because there is difference of payment and the ones  who  are
         highly paid have a stake in keeping the ones who are not  properly,
         in this case the members of the National Service).  In  Eritrea  it
         is slavery not National Service and  it  is  misnomer  to  call  it
         National Service.  For me it is a  violation  of  the  basic  human
         rights principle." (Our emphasis)


257.  We do not doubt Dr Gebremedhin's good faith, nor do  we  underestimate
    or undervalue the expressed opinion  of  someone  who  claims  to  have
    played an important  and  senior  role  in  the  early  phases  of  the
    demobilisation programme.  We have nonetheless concluded that the value
    of Dr Gebremhedin's evidence must be tempered by the following factors:


    1.      Neither the parties nor the Tribunal  had  the  opportunity  of
        testing the veracity and reliability of Dr  Gebremedhin's  evidence
        by way of oral evidence.


    2.      It cannot be said that Dr Gebremedhin's expressed  opinion  can
        be regarded as objective and unbiased.  He is someone who  resigned
        from the Eritrean Government and was surprised his recognition  was
        accepted.


    3.      Dr Gebremedhin's evidence clearly played a significant role  in
        the  evidence  upon  which  the  Appellant  relied  in   terms   of
        demobilisation in Eritrea.  Not only was his affidavit  within  the
        Appellant's bundle, but it is apparent when one looks at Ms Quinn's
        detailed initial skeleton argument, that significant  reliance  was
        placed upon his evidence as reflected at paragraphs  50  to  56  of
        Counsel's  skeleton   argument.    Notwithstanding   that   initial
        reliance, it was notable that within  Ms Quinn's  closing  written
        submissions she cast  significant  doubt  upon  the  value  of  his
        evidence.   She pointed out that Dr Gebremedhin's title  "Executive
        Secretary" did not convey any information regarding  his  seniority
        or importance.  Further, he had never been involved in the  call-up
        for National Service in that his role appeared to have been limited
        to demobilisation.   He did not state the basis for  his  assertion
        that only 12,000 to  15,000  people  were  called-up  for  National
        Service each year.  It was not  clear  how  he  would  obtain  this
        figure.  His assertion  was  not  corroborated  by  any  expert  or
        background evidence.


    4.      Our observations  in  this  regard  were  reinforced,  when  in
         Counsel's closing submissions before us, Ms Quinn took  issue  with
         the extent to which the Respondent in his written  submissions  had
         relied extensively on Dr  Gebremhedin's  evidence  that  12,000  to
         15,000 people were called up for National Service each  year.    Ms
         Quinn emphasised that Dr Gebremedhin left Eritrea in November  2001
         and that in 1998  there  were  47,000  soldiers  and  that  it  was
         apparent from the World Bank Report that  in  the  summer  of  2001
         there were three  hundred  thousand  soldiers.   It  followed,  she
         submitted, that between  1998  and  2001  the  number  of  soldiers
         increased by 253,000 over a three  year  period,  this  created  an
         annual average of just over 84,000.  Therefore, submitted Ms Quinn,
         Dr Gebremedhin simply could not be correct in stating call up  was
         12,000 to 15,000 per year.  Indeed she continued:


         "His evidence must be inaccurate when  viewed  against  statistical
         information  upon  which  the   Respondent   relies.   Dr   Amanuel
         (Gebremedhin) has been out of the country for a very long period of
         time".


258. For the avoidance of doubt, we asked Ms Quinn to  clarify  for  us  her
    approach to Dr Gebremedhin's affidavit and the reliance upon which  she
    would ask us to place upon it and she responded:

         "We no longer rely on Dr Amanuel (Gebremedhin's) report in  respect
         of that figure  as  it  is  clearly  inconsistent  with  the  other
         evidence.  As regards the rest of it I would ask you  to  recognise
         that its reliability must be tempered owing to the time that he has
         been out of the country."


259. Indeed not surprisingly Mr Oguntolu,  at  the  outset  of  his  closing
    submissions, sought to draw to our attention  that  Ms  Quinn  was  now
    essentially disavowing Dr Gebremedhin's  evidence.  The  Appellant  now
    apparently sought to depart from it.

260. Mr Oguntolu referred  us  to  his  supplementary  written  submissions,
    pointing  out  that  Dr  Gebremedhin  was  a  member  of  the  Eritrean
    government who clearly had inside knowledge  of  the  National  Service
    policy and procedures.   It was thus submitted that demobilisation  and
    the  draft  of  new  recruits  were  inextricably  linked,  given   the
    acceptance of a large standing army  and  additional  National  Service
    direct  labour  force.   It  was  submitted   that   on   any   logical
    construction, a need would arise to recruit, in order to  maintain  the
    number being reduced by planned demobilisation.

261.  The supplementary submissions reinforced by  Mr  Oguntolu  before  us,
    were that with regard to the value of  Dr  Gebremedhin's  evidence,  he
    was, of all the experts, "the only one to have been  a  member  of  the
    Eritrean Government at any time".

        This contention does not however, sit well with  the  fact  that  it
    was apparent to us that whereas Ms Quinn in her written submissions had
    appeared to rely upon that aspect of  Dr  Gebremedhin's  evidence  that
    approximately 400,000 people  were  either  in  the  army  or  national
    service out of a total work force of 700,000, (thus indicating  that  a
    very large percentage of the work force  was  either  in  the  army  or
    National Service), the Respondent in his submissions took issue with Dr
    Gebremedhin's estimate, maintaining that it was not consistent with the
    population statistics previously cited, that being a population between
    the ages of sixteen and sixty-five.

         The Evidence of Dr Gaim Kibreab

262. We now turn to the report and evidence of Dr Kibreab.  We  are  mindful
    that Dr Kibreab is, himself, an Eritrean.  Having regard to his CV, the
    core elements of his  report  and  oral  evidence  which  are  properly
    sourced, enabled us to develop a favourable impression of him, for  the
    most part, as a witness.  It must however be said that Dr  Kibreab  was
    occasionally  vague  and  speculative,  also,  separately    prone   to
    exaggeration on the issue  of  exit  visas  -  see  paragraph  354  for
    example, on his view that all returning failed asylum seekers  were  as
    such at real risk.  Nonetheless we have  concluded  in  considering  Dr
    Kibreab's  evidence  in  its  totality  and  subject   to   the   above
    qualification, that we can otherwise give considerable  weight  to  the
    opinions he has expressed in his  report  for  this  case  and  in  his
    evidence before us relating to the issues we have to decide.

263.  We do not agree with the Respondent's closing  submissions  contending
    that Dr Kibreab's comments were un-sourced and simply represented  his
    personal  opinion.   Indeed,  our  detailed  account  of  Dr Kibreab's
    evidence before us, both oral and documentary, amply  demonstrates  the
    extent to which the core elements of the views that he  expressed  were
    supported by  cross-referencing  to  independently  sourced  background
    material in addition to the other evidence that he produced, (e.g.  his
    claim that those who had completed their  Military  Training  and  were
    subsequently assigned work in the private sector to be still under  the
    direct employ of the Ministry  of  Defence  on  a  soldier's  pay,  was
    supported in part by the letters he produced - see  paragraphs  138  to
    145 of our determination), to relevant country guidance  case  law  and
    indeed largely dovetailed with the views  expressed  by  Dr Pool  both
    within his report and subsequent oral evidence before us.

    The Evidence of Dr David Pool

264.  Dr Pool, towards the end of his lengthy oral evidence,  came  up  with
    the somewhat startling observation that he could not say whether  there
    was "demobilisation or that there is not".

265.  For reasons that we shall describe later, we have concluded  that  the
    term "demobilisation", means different things to  different  people  in
    the context  of  Eritrea.   Dr Pool's  comment  therefore  is  not  as
    startling as it first appeared and does  not  mean  that  his  detailed
    observations should not be given significant weight.

266.  Overall, and with the exception of the report of  Dr  Gebremedhin,  we
    have concluded that both the  evidence  and  reports  of  Dr Pool  and
    Dr Kibreab respectively, were generally well-sourced  (notwithstanding
    the difficulties the experts shared not least with the World  Bank,  in
    obtaining  accurate  statistical   information   from   the   Ethiopian
    authorities), and as far as their evidence related  to  both  past  and
    recent events in Eritrea, were consistent with the other  reports  that
    were before the Tribunal.

    Our Assessment

267.  In common parlance the  word  "demobilisation"  means  that  a  person
    leaves military service and becomes a free agent,  but  that  does  not
    always appear to be what it is understood to mean in Eritrea, where the
    government releases individuals from military service but requires them
    to undertake compulsory employment either directly under  the  auspices
    of the Eritrean Ministry of Defence or in the  private  sector,  whilst
    still on military pay and with their salaries paid to  the  government.
    In light of our consideration of the evidence as a whole, we  are  able
    to appreciate Dr Pool's expressed difficulties  in  demonstrating,  in
    Western  terms,  whether  or  not  demobilisation   is   actually   and
    effectively taking place  in  Eritrea.   Indeed,  as  we  have  earlier
    recorded, Dr Pool at one stage in his evidence told us (see paragraphs
    114 and 116):
         "I find it hard to state in any definitive finding  about  what  we
         would call demobilisation in terms  of  men  in  jobs  but  not  on
         civilian salaries.


         It is a very odd situation in Eritrea as compared to what we in the
         western world will understand as 'demobilised'."

268.  Dr Pool told us that there were at least  two  categories  of  release
    from what he described as "the military component  of  Active  National
    Service", namely; those transferred from  Active  National  Service  to
    civilian duties but who remained on  active  National  service  in  the
    sense that they did not return to civilian  life  and  those  who  were
    demobilised.   Such  a  view  was  indeed  echoed  by  Dr Kibreab  who
    maintained that National Service (NS) was not Military Service (MS) and
    that even though NS operated under the Ministry of Defence it  was  de-
    linked from the National Army as indeed the World Bank  in  their  Mid-
    Term Review Mission report of July 2005 (the "MTR"),  described matters
    when it talked about NS needing "to be de-linked from the size  of  the
    army issue".

269.  In this latter regard the MTR reports could be seen in the context  of
    the fact that as both experts  opined,  the  World  Bank's  desire,  as
    apparent in their  reports,  was  not  demobilisation  per  se,  but  a
    reduction in the size of the Eritrean armed forces to promote  economic
    growth.

270. We have concluded, in light of the expert evidence and  the  background
    material, that one aspect of "demobilisation", (indeed not contradicted
    by the Respondent),  is that there was a demobilisation of  some  5,000
    individuals mainly comprising those of advanced years and/or those  who
    sustained serious injuries in the border war, within the pilot  project
    between 1993 and 1994.

271.  Our finding in this regard, is however tempered by  the  evidence,  to
    which indeed Dr  Kibreab referred, that a significant number of  those
    individuals, (that included the disabled as a consequence of the border
    war or who had fought in the war of independence, the elderly or  those
    suffering with long  term  illnesses),  were  subsequently  re-enlisted
    between May 1998 and just before  the  beginning  of  Ethiopia's  Third
    Offensive in May 2000.

272.  One can thus better understand what Dr  Pool  aptly  describes  as  "a
    conceptual distinction between military and national service" and as to
    its duration. For example, Article 13(1) of the  Eritrean  Proclamation
    of  1995  refers  to  those  unable  to  undertake  military  training,
    undertaking "18 months of National Service in any public or  Government
    Organs   under   the   directives   given   by    the    Ministry    of
    Defence...according to their capacity of profession". Further,  Article
    13(2) is unequivocal that after completing 18 months  service  citizens
    will "have the compulsory duty of serving according to  their  capacity
    until the expiry of 50 years of age  under  mobilisation  or  emergency
    situation directives given by the  Government".    [see  paragraph  283
    below]


    National Service

    Legislative Basis of National Service

273.  This can be found in the National Service  Proclamation  (Proclamation
    No 82/1995), ("the 1995 Proclamation").

274.  All Eritrean citizens between the ages of 18 and 40  are  required  to
    perform National Service (See Article 8 - Paragraph 278 below).

275.  The objectives of National  Service  are  set  out  in  Article  5  as
    follows:

                  "The Objectives of National Service will include:

             - the establishment of a strong Defence  Force  based  on  the
               people to ensure a free and sovereign Eritrea.

             - To preserve and  entrust  future  generations  the  courage,
               resoluteness heroic episode shown by our people in the  past
               thirty years;

             - create a new  generation  characterised  by  love  of  work,
               discipline,  ready  to  participate   and   serve   in   the
               reconstruction of the nation.

             - To  develop  and  enforce  the  economy  of  the  nation  by
               investing in development work  our  people  as  a  potential
               wealth.

             - To develop professional capacity  and  physical  fitness  by
               giving regular military training and continuous practice  to
               participants in Training Centers.


             - To foster national unity among our people by eliminating sub-
               national feelings".

276.  As Ms Quinn rightly contends in her written  closing  submissions,  it
    is thus clear  from  Article 5  of  the  1995  Proclamation  that  the
    objectives of National Service are considerably broader than simply the
    establishment of a military defence force.   In  this  regard  Dr Pool
    states in his  report  that  "military  service  is  an  instrument  of
    socialising a new generation  of  Eritreans  into  the  values  of  the
    EPLF".

277.  In oral evidence, Dr Pool told us that apart from the economic motive
    of the government not  to  demobilise,  the  National  Service  Project
    ("NSP") was itself very political in the sense that after  the  war  of
    independence from Ethiopia in 1991:

             "The Eritrean Government wanted to mould  Eritreans  like  the
        EPLF fighters namely the value of valour,  self-sacrifice,  courage
        that  was  needed  to  rebuild  the  economy.   There   are   other
        nationalist organisations that the EPLF defeated based in the Sudan
        - this had a particular ideology and  they  were  quite  strong  in
        passing their ideology on to the younger generation.

             So when the young go to National Service they  are  given  ...
        the history of the EPLF and their victories.  There is  a  kind  of
        social control involved in the ethical direction that is being used
        in a military sense in Eritrea".

278.  Dr Kibreab in his report had stated:

         "The aim of national service is not only to have a strong  national
         army with a large pool of reserves but also to create a  new  breed
         of patriotic citizens who reject ethnic, religious and region-based
         allegiances and identities in favour of national  Eritrean  secular
         identity.  Given the disparate religious and ethnic backgrounds  of
         the Eritrean people and the obsession of the  ruling  party  -  the
         People's Front for Democracy and Justice - the government with  the
         project of creating a homogenous and secular society, believe those
         who receive military training and political education at  Sawa  and
         later  participate  in   the   process   of   nation-building   and
         reconstruction  of  the  country's  war-torn  economic  social  and
         physical infrastructures would on the one hand, undergo fundamental
         change and transformation and on  the  other,  develop  a  powerful
         sense of patriotism and commitment to national unity".

279.  It  is  indeed  the  development  of  the  national  economy  that  is
    specifically stated within Article 5  of  the  proclamation  to  be  an
    objective of National Service.

280.  Articles 12 and 13 of the  1995  proclamation  detail  those  who  are
    exempt from National Service:

        "Article 12 - Citizens exempted from Active National Service

                   The citizens  mentioned  below  are  exempt  from  Active
National Service:

             (1)    the citizens who have performed National Service  before
                 the promulgation of this proclamation;

             (2)    all Fighters and Armed peasants who have proved to  have
                 spent all their time in the liberation struggle;

        Article 13 - Compulsion of National Service for citizens unable  to
                  undergo Military Training

                           (1)    Those  citizens  who  have  been  declared
                 unfit for military training by the Board  composed  of  the
                 Ministry of Regional  Administration  of  other  Government
                 Organs under  the  directives  given  by  the  Ministry  of
                 Defence will undertake 18 months of National Service in any
                 public and Government organ according to their capacity  of
                 profession.

                           (2)    After  completing  18  months  of  service
                 they will have the compulsory duty of serving according  to
                 their capacity until the expiry of 50 years  of  age  under
                 mobilisation or emergency situation directives given by the
                 Government.

                            (3)     Under   sub-Art.(1)   of   the   article
                 mentioned,  the  Ministry  of  Regional  Administration  by
                 virtue of the delegation given to it  by  the  Ministry  of
                 Defence may assign [such] persons  to  various  independent
                 organs or plans connected with  the  Ministry  of  Defence.
                 All programmes of service may (be) executed by the Ministry
                 of Administration".

281.  In this regard, we would reiterate our rejection of  the  Respondent's
    contention that Dr Kibreab's comments were un-sourced and  represented
    his personal opinion by  pointing  out  by  way  of  example,  that  Dr
    Kibreab's summary of the exempt categories from national service in his
    report, in particular that after 1995 all Eritreans except veterans  of
    the thirty years war of independence and the  physically  and  mentally
    infirm are required to take part  in  national  service  regardless  of
    family responsibility and gender, was indeed reflected by  Articles  12
    and 13 of the 1995 Proclamation.

282. The evidence demonstrates the importance that the Eritrean  authorities
    currently attach to mobilisation, (economic or  otherwise),  and  their
    ability to mobilise those not in "Active" National Service in the event
    of an "emergency situation directive." That is further  exemplified  by
    noting that amongst  the  categories  of  those  exempt  from  National
    Service under the previous National Service Proclamation 11/1991  ("the
    1991 Proclamation"), those  who  were  the  sole  breadwinners  in  the
    family, had their exemption removed when the Proclamation  was  amended
    in 1995.

The Nature of National Service

283. Article 8 of the 1995 Proclamation states:

             "Compulsory Active National Service


             Article 8 - Compulsory Active National Service


             Under this Proclamation all Eritrean citizens between the ages
        of eighteen to forty years have the compulsory duty  of  performing
        Active National Service.


             Active National Service consists of six months of training  in
        the National Service  training  Centre  and  twelve  months  active
        military service and development tasks in military  sources  for  a
        total of 18 months.  Those who are  unable  to  undertake  military
        training are included in those who are  given  eighteen  months  of
        national service".


284. As Ms Quinn has  submitted,  it  is  clear  from  Article  8  that  the
    development tasks are carried out as part of National Service.  Such  a
    view is consistent both with the expert evidence  of  Dr  Pool  and  Dr
    Kibreab  and  with  the  general  objective  evidence  that   we   have
    considered.


285. As part of their 18 months of Active  National  Service,  the  draftees
    receive  6 months military training in particular  at  Sawa.   As  both
    experts have pointed out, the remaining 12 months are spent taking part
    in  development  activities  and  it  is  not   a   separate   national
    obligation.

286. As we earlier remarked,  the  word  "demobilisation"  sometimes  has  a
    different meaning in Eritrea, from the commonly understood meaning  and
    in this regard Dr Kibreab explained in his report (paragraph 2.1) that
    the confusion to some extent arises in a failure to appreciate that the
    period of 18 months military service is not divisible and:

         "... does not emanate from the particular  experience  of  Eritrea
         but from the experiences of other countries that have a  policy  of
         military service."


287. Dr Kibreab further explains the confusion in this regard, by  pointing
    out that there is inter alia, a failure to understand  the  distinction
    between "NS" and "MS",  ("hagerawi  agelgolat")  and  "Members  of  the
    National Service" ("abalat hegerawi agelgot").


         "... NS ... is more ambitious and broader than ... (MS)  There  is
         only hagerawi agelgolat (national service) which is more  ambitious
         and broader than common military service.  The Eritrean authorities
         never refer to (NS), as (MS).  This concept is totally absent  from
         the government's  discourse  on  national  service,  including  the
         terminologies of the two pieces of legislation on national service.




         The national  service  (NS),  comprises  of  six  months  military
         training (it  is  important  not  to  confuse  this  with  military
         service)  and  twelve  months  development.   The  two  aspects  of
         national  service  -  namely  the   military   training   and   the
         simultaneous ideological indoctrination at Sawa Military  Camp  and
         twelve months development work represent a continuum rather than  a
         dichotomy. They are indivisible.   They are two sides of  the  same
         coin - the coin being the national service.


         After the six months military training recruits  are  assigned  to
         different  areas  of   national   reconstruction.    Recruits   are
         regimented into  different  units  and  participate  in  productive
         activities as groups  and/or  individuals  such  as  urban  housing
         development, construction of dams, roads, bridges, clinics,  health
         centres, hospitals, schools etc. They also work in state  and  PFDJ
         owned banks, hired out draftees  to  private  firms  in  which  the
         latter pay  the  salaries  of  the  draftees  to  the  Ministry  of
         Defence.  Recruits whether they are assigned to the defence forces,
         ministries, departments, PFDJ, firms, state farms or private  firms
         are paid uniform pocket money.  Each draftee or participant of  the
         NS collects his/her pocket money  every  month  from  their  ahadus
         (units) or from those who hire them.  When recruits are  hired  out
         to the private sector and the  voluntary  sector,  the  latter  are
         required to pay draftees' salaries  to  the  bank  account  of  the
         Ministry of Defence in  accordance  with  the  government's  salary
         scale based on the academic and professional qualifications of  the
         recruits concerned.  Regardless of whether draftees are assigned to
         serve in the army or in the civil sector, they  remain  members  of
         the National Service)".  (Our emphasis).


288. Dr Kibread's view which is in effect  that  after  "National  Service"
    draftees continue to be regarded as "Members of the  National  Service"
    until they are 50  years  of  age,  (see  Article  13(2)  of  the  1995
    Proclamation), is indeed further supported by the background  material.
    The Amnesty International Report  of  May  2004  described  development
    tasks in similar terms and  confirms  that  this  development  work  is
    minimally paid with 'pocket money'.


289. The US State  Department  Report  of  March  2006  further  states  as
    follows:


         "In addition some national service members were assigned to  return
         to their civilian jobs while normally kept in the military, because
         their skills  were  deemed  critical  to  the  functioning  of  the
         government or the economy.  These individuals continue  to  receive
         only their national service salary. The government require them  to
         forfeit to the government any money they earn above and beyond that
         salary.  Government employees generally were unable to leave  their
         jobs or take new employment." (Our emphasis).


290. In addition, Dr Pool told us in evidence that:


         "There are quite strong  factors  (on  the  part  of  the  Eritrean
         Government) in not demobilising .. nearly all demobilised  soldiers
         are in government jobs or on a soldier's pocket money and their pay
         is a massive subsidy for the government.


         When you think the State is the major employer, you can see the way
         in which the pay is in terms of thousands of  people  still  under
         the aegis of the Ministry of Defence.


         The economic consequences would have been dreadful for Eritrea  and
             has produced
         an economic motive for maintaining mobilised soldiers.


         ... (this is) happening across the board with government jobs on  a
             conscript's pay." (Our emphasis).

291.  Dr Pool continued, that one should combine  the  economic  motives  of
    the government not to demobilise, with the political ambitions  of  the
    National  Service  project  (NPS)  and  the  desire  of  the   Eritrean
    authorities after the war of independence from Ethiopia  in  1991,  "to
    mould Eritreans" with the values of the  EPLF  fighters  that  Dr Pool
    described as  "a  kind  of  social  control  involved  in  the  ethical
    direction that is being used in a military sense in Eritrea".

292. Article 21 of the 1995 Proclamation states as follows:

         "Special Obligation


         (1)   During a mobilisation or war period anyone in active National
             Service is under the obligation of remaining even  beyond  the
             prescribed period unless the concerned Authority allows him to
             leave officially.


         (2)   The citizen registered to  perform  Active  National  Service
             upon changing his address before entering into his service has
             the duty to inform the Regional  Administration  in  his  area
             about his address presenting his registration card."


293. Thus although at first glance Article 21 provides  for  the  indefinite
    extension of national service, the provision is tempered  by  the  fact
    that it solely applies to those on "Active National Service" at a  time
    of a "mobilisation or war period". The indefinite extension of National
    Service must however, also be seen in the context of the Warsai Yikaalo
    Campaign, (WYC), -see post.

294. However, in this regard, Dr Pool told us that the  demarcation  of  the
    border between Eritrea and Ethiopia was:


         "..  the  government's   major   explanation   of   the   continued
         mobilisation and makes the best sense.  Many Eritreans still  think
         Ethiopia wants to get the coastline that was  ceded  in  the  peace
         negotiations between 1991 and 1993 and the Ethiopians are  critical
         of their government for ceding  the  port  to  Eritrea.   There  is
         always the sense that this war could start again."


295. Further, in Dr Pool's report, he was clear that  since  1998  and  more
    usually since 2000, the Eritrean Government had  transferred  those  in
    the army to civilian positions and as such they remained "on a kind  of
    military active service in the sense they did not return to  employment
    as civilians but as if they (were)seconded  from  national  service  to
    civilian employment", (Our emphasis  and  see  also  our  reference  to
    "members of the National Service" above), and because such  individuals
    remained under the authority of the Ministry of Defence  and  continued
    to receive their military stipend rather than their civilian salary, it
    was easy to understand, the  problems  of  the  World  Bank  team,  "in
    differentiating between what is 'military' and what  is  'civilian'  in
    Eritrea".


296. We have found to be notable,  the  similarity  as  to  the  distinction
    drawn by Dr Pool and that of Dr Kibreab in terms of the  importance  to
    be attached to understanding the concept  of  "demobilisation"  in  the
    Eritrean sense. Dr Kibreab described its meaning, by way of example, in
    terms of individuals who might be issued with demobilisation cards  and
    who are either  professionals  or  possess  technical  skills  and  are
    assigned in the civil sector of the country while remaining in National
    Service even though removed from the Army, in explaining:

         "This   is   what   the   Eritrean   Government   refers   to    as
             'demobilized'..."


297.  There is clearly legal provision for indefinite national  service  and
    it is further supported by what has become known as the  Warsai-Yikaalo
    Campaign (WYC) that was initiated by the Head of State in May 2002  and
    subsequently approved by the Council of Ministers.   The effect of  the
    border war and the WYC on National  Service  is  that  the  latter  has
    become, as described by  Dr  Kibreab  in  his  report,  "an  open-ended
    obligation".

298. The WYC is referred to in the Amnesty International Report of May  2004
    as well as by Dr Kibreab and it requires draftees who have completed 18
    months National Service to carry  on  serving  their  country  and  its
    people until further notice.  As Dr Kibreab observes in his report:

         "Since the so-called 'further notice' has not  been  yet  announced
         the national service has effectively become an open-ended  national
         obligation."


299. In both Dr Pool's and Dr Kibreab's reports, there was reference to  the
    comments  of  the  Eritrean  Information  Minister,  Ali  Abdu,  in   a
    periodical entitled "The Middle East Times" indicating that  indefinite
    military service was  a  reality.    The  article  quotes  Mr Abdu  as
    stating:


         "You never finish your national service,  meaning  you  cannot  say
         there is a full stop to serving your country".


300. A copy of the article appears within the  Appellant's  bundle  and  was
    published on 23 February 2006.   Mr Abdu is further quoted as saying:


         "'Every Eritrean' means those Eritreans who  work  for  example  in
         Embassies, in international organisations, in the UN are not immune
         from national service."


301. There are obvious concerns as to the weight that may  be  given  to  an
    internet article from a journal about which nobody was able to offer us
    any information.  However, the article itself appears to be a  straight
    piece of reporting, including a quote  from  the  Eritrean  Information
    Minister which on the  whole  fits  well  into  the  overall  objective
    evidence.   We do not therefore see any reason to disbelieve  that  the
    Minister for Information said what is attributed to  him  and  that  at
    least on this occasion it reflects reality.

302. The open-ended nature of national service in Eritrea  is  reflected  in
    the Amnesty International Report of 19 May 2004 and in the Human Rights
    Watch Report of 18 January 2006. The latter report refers to the  fact
    that "the time for service is  repeatedly  prolonged"  and  the  former
    states  that  "national  service  has  been  extended  indefinitely  by
    administrative decision since the war with Ethiopia... and  Development
    Service was converted to Active Military Service".

303. Ms Quinn in her written submissions further drew our attention  to  the
    conclusions of the European Parliament  on  the  indefinite  nature  of
    national service.   This is sourced from the Resolution of the European
    Parliament on 15 November 2004 on human rights  violations  in  Eritrea
    where at Section C the following is stated:

        "Whereas national service for eighteen months is compulsory for men
        and women aged eighteen to forty  years  and  since  the  war  with
        Ethiopia in 1990-2000, national service has  become  full  military
        service and it has been extended indefinitely"


304. We are mindful that Dr Pool gave evidence before  the  Tribunal  in  IN
    (Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00106,  a
    decision promulgated on 24 May 2005.   The Tribunal noted his view that
    the government was determined to use  military  service  for  political
    purposes as well as national security purposes.

305. At paragraph 26 of their determination, the Tribunal also took  account
    of a further expert report from Dr Campbell of the School  of  Oriental
    and African Studies that dealt with military  conscription  in  Eritrea
    that the Tribunal regarded confirmed much that had already been covered
    in the background evidence.

306. It is notable that the extract from Dr  Campbell's  report  from  which
    the Tribunal in IN quoted reinforces much of the material to  which  we
    have earlier referred.   He is quoted as having stated as follows:

        'Following cessation of the border war in the summer  of  2000,  it
        was widely expected that the government  would  rapidly  demobilise
        its  armed  forces  to  pre-war  levels.   However,   despite   the
        availability  of  international  assistance  for  this   task,   no
        demobilisation  of  troops  has  occurred  to  date.   Instead  the
        government extended the length of service  for  an  additional  two
        years and it has been repeatedly prolonged". (Our emphasis).


307. We have thus concluded that there is legal  provision  in  Eritrea  for
    indefinite national service and  that  it  thus  represents  indefinite
    obligation.

308. Bearing in mind our understanding of what is a  dual  meaning  attached
    to the word "demobilisation" in the Eritrean sense, it is necessary for
    us to consider the Respondent's assertion that there has been extensive
    demobilisation based on the evidence from the World Bank and UNDP.

         World Bank Mid-Term Review  (July  2005)  and  Financial  Year  End
    Reports


309. Dr Pool, as we have earlier mentioned, told us towards  the  conclusion
    of his oral evidence that  he  found  it  difficult  to  reconcile  the
    anecdotal evidence, not least from Eritreans to  whom  he  spoke,  that
    there had been no demobilisation and the figure of  104,000  stated  to
    have been demobilised in the UNDP Project Sheets and a  similar  figure
    in the financial end of year reports of the World Bank 2005  and  2006.
    In particular, the 2005 MTR  stated  that  104,000  soldiers  had  been
    demobilised but the subsequent MTR 2006  report  of  the  same  project
    status showed a figure of 65,000  who  had  been  demobilised  for  the
    entire project.

310. It appears that the information contained in the UNDP Report was  drawn
    from the World Bank's Reports and the latter report gave no  indication
    as to how the figure of 104,000 was arrived  at  nor  the  period  over
    which these soldiers were allegedly demobilised.

311.  We would stress however, that it is important  to bear in  mind,  that
    the World Bank's EDRP is  not  as  Dr  Pool  told  us,  concerned  with
    demobilisation per se, but to reduce the size of the  army  to  promote
    economic growth in Eritrea.

312.  We would agree with Ms Quinn, who submitted that the  World  Bank  had
    recognised within  its  reports,  that  demobilised  soldiers  remained
    subject to national service and  were  potentially  returnable  to  the
    military.

313.  Paragraph 8(ii) of the MTR Report of 2005 is of particular  importance
    in this regard, in that it asks  itself  the  question  "has  the  EDRP
    process led to an actual reduction in the armed forces?"  It continues:

         "There are perceptions among Development Departments that continued
        mobilisation into the armed forces in  Eritrea,  including  through
        the National Service  (NS), is to such an extent that the  combined
        armed forces are as large now as at the start of EDRP.  This  view,
        unfortunately, is fed by limited transparency surrounding the  size
        of the army and the number of NS that are currently mobilised  into
        the army.  Based on this, the Development Departments  are  of  the
        opinion that EDRP does not actually help the number of soldiers  in
        the country but  rather  facilitates  change  of  personnel".  (Our
        underlining).


314.  It was in that context, that the report went on to suggest  that  "the
    National Service needs to be  de-linked  from  the  size  of  the  army
    issue." Notably the report continued by acknowledging that:

         "People are drafted into the NS in "rounds"  and  rounds  1  to  14
         participated in the border conflict and are in  principle  eligible
         for EDRP benefits whereas, rounds 15 - 18 are not eligible. The IDA
         Mission requested, but  has  so  far  not  received,  more  current
         information with regard to the size of the army and a number of  NS
         are currently mobilised into the armed forces.   As such,  the  IDA
         Mission is not able to verify whether the EDRP process  has  indeed
         led to an actual reduction in the armed forces."(Our emphasis).


315.  The report at paragraph 9 acknowledges that:

         "In the short term, the pace and scope of immediate  demobilisation
         cannot be defined". (Our emphasis).


316. At paragraph  12  of  their  report  under  the  sub-heading  "National
    Service", the report states as follows:

        "Under the 1997 Constitution, the Government continues to implement
        National Service - whereby able-bodied persons  undertake  military
        training as well as participate in civilian public  work.  Concerns
        remain that DS [demobilised servicemen]  are  subject  to  National
        Service as well as potentially being  returned  to  the  military".
        (Our emphasis).


317.  The report continues, with  what  it  describes  as  the  government's
    policy on National Service being "clearly outside the bounds  of  EDRP"
    and the Mission's conclusion is that "In a  limited  way  it  does  not
    affect the programme's demobilisation target: the programme could still
    achieve its objective of demobilising two  hundred  thousand  of  those
    mobilised for the border conflict, even if  a  large  number  of  young
    people are recruited into the armed forces through the NS".

318.  It is of interest that the Mission talks about its objective as  being
    demobilising 200,000 "of those mobilised for the border conflict", that
    indeed supports Ms Quinn's contention that the World Bank's EDRP is not
    concerned with National Service.   The  World  Bank  acknowledges  that
    National Service is beyond the bounds of the EDRP and  recognises  that
    demobilised soldiers, (DS), remain subject to National Service and  are
    potentially returned to the military.

319.  This evidence serves  to  reinforce  our  conclusion,  that  the  only
    evidence before us from NS in respect of demobilisation, in any form at
    all, relates to the demobilisation that took place after  the  War  for
    Independence and the 2001/2002 Pilot Project where  5,000  people  were
    demobilised, albeit that many of those were subsequently re-called.

320. In our view, the  evidence  of  the  World  Bank  to  some  significant
    extent, resolves Dr Pool's concerns, as to why the 2005 Report  should
    refer to 104,000 soldiers and the report of one year later to a reduced
    figure of 65,000 soldiers as having been demobilised.

321.   Both  Dr  Pool  and  Dr  Kibreab  gave  evidence  that  in  terms  of
    demobilisation and risk, there was no distinction that could  be  drawn
    between those called up post-border war and those  called  up  pre-war.
    Dr Pool explained that those "demobilised" prior to the war were 48,000
    to 54,000 people between 1992 and  1994,  who  were  given  grants  for
    setting up businesses generally to return to civilian society but  that
    in 1998 these were the first to be called up  as  they  were  old  EPLF
    fighters some of whom went to the front line, many of  whom  were  only
    too pleased to return voluntarily.  As  Dr  Pool  explained  (Paragraph
    76):

         "These people were demobilised in all senses of the term  but  were
         not demobilised when the war started - they were called back  -  so
         that suggested distinction seems a bit blurred to me".


322. Dr Pool was giving such evidence in  the  context  of  the  World  Bank
    Reports.  He pointed out that there was no attempt in the  2006  Report
    to explain why the figure of 65,000 came down from the report  of  2005
    (104,000). Dr Pool stressed that the World Bank's:

        "... major desire in these Reports is not demobilisation per se but
       to reduce the size of the army  to  promote  economic  growth.   The
       other curious thing about the 2005/2006 Reports  -  apart  from  the
       number of soldiers claimed to be demobilised, is that the reports do
       not show much difference in the amount of money actually dispensed".


323. Dr Pool continued that he was "mystified by  these  statistics".    For
    reasons that we have reflected in Dr Pool's evidence  earlier  in  this
    determination, he concluded that little reliance could be  placed  upon
    the UNDP Report.


324. Dr Pool was sceptical of the World Bank  Report's  final  figures.   He
    believed that the UNDP drew its figures from the World  Bank.   Notably
    Dr Pool was aware that the MTR Report (at paragraph 9) stated that  the
    Government of Eritrea was "in the medium  to  long  term  ...  strongly
    committed to further demobilising its armed forces,  but  that  in  the
    short term the pace and scope of  immediate  demobilisation  cannot  be
    defined".

325. Dr Pool stressed the need to appreciate  the  distinction  between  the
    World Bank's objectives as opposed to that of the Eritrean  Government.
    As for the  evidential  basis  of  the  World  Bank's  information,  he
    considered that it was the Eritrean Government's figures:

         ".... Because the World Bank hands out  money  but  the  government
         takes out any ID demobilisation card in order to get that money".


326.  Dr Pool laid greater stress on that section of the report,  under  the
    sub-heading "Those Demobilised", that he  considered  provided  support
    for his analysis with  its  comment  at  paragraph  8(ii)  on  "limited
    transparencies surrounding the size of the army".  He pointed out  that
    one of the problems the World Bank had was in defining the  distinction
    between being in the military and/or having a civilian role and it  was
    a given fact that the whole thrust of the  World  Bank  MTR  was  about
    demobilisation and the reintegration of soldiers.

327.  Dr Pool told us that it was:

         "pretty damning for them to comment on  the  'limited  transparency
         surrounding the size of the army'.


328.  Significantly Dr Pool continued by posing the question:


         "If we take the 65,000 - had they been given some kind of card  and
         in 2007 will they be demobilised?  - It does not  appear  from  the
         phrasing of the World Bank Reports that there has already been  the
         demobilisation of 65,000.  If you take the  account  of  the  World
         Bank Reports and particularly of the 2006 US Report, in addition to
         what Eritreans said to me - there has been no demobilisation." (Our
         emphasis)


329.  We are thus persuaded, that it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  place
    reliance upon the observations of the World Bank  in  their  report  at
    paragraph 9 the Eritrean Government in the medium to long term  remains
    strongly  committed  to  further   demobilising   its   armed   forces,
    particularly in view of the "limited transparency" of the government to
    which the report refers, mindful that the  report  itself  acknowledged
    that in the short term "the pace and scope of immediate demobilisation"
    could not be defined.

330.  We are further reinforced in that view by the evidence of the  experts
    that the World Bank have no one on the ground in Eritrea and  that  the
    Financial Year End Report, 2006 states that the World Bank  has  ceased
    to fund the demobilisation and reinsertion  components  notwithstanding
    that it states that a total of 65,000 soldiers have  been  demobilised.
    Such a figure would in any event conflict with the figure given in  the
    2005 Report of 104,000 soldiers  being  demobilised  and  as  Ms  Quinn
    rightly reminded us, it should be noted that the World  Bank  initially
    intended to demobilise 200,000 and thus its programme had clearly  been
    cut short.

331. We would agree with Ms Quinn, that the World Bank's evidence  addresses
    only the issue of demobilisation from the armed forces,  but  does  not
    address the issue of demobilisation from  National  Service.   National
    Service is beyond the remit of the EDRP.  We would  thus  place  little
    reliance on the UNDP Project Fact Sheet of April  2006  because  it  is
    apparent to us that it relies on its figure of 104,000  soldiers  being
    demobilised, upon the World Bank Reports.

332.  In turn, the efficacy of the World Bank's figures must be regarded  as
    questionable in view of their reliance upon the  information  that  not
    without some apparent difficulty, they have attempted to glean from the
    Eritrean  authorities  whom   they   criticise   for   their   "limited
    transparency".

333.  It is yet another example of the way in which we  can  now  understand
    Dr Pool's difficulties, in reconciling the evidence  within  the  World
    Bank Reports to other contrary evidence.   He told us that he had  been
    looking into the statistics but was hampered by the limited information
    one could obtain  from  the  Eritrean  Government  websites  and  other
    government sources.

334. The Home Office Operational Guidance Note (OGN) on  Eritrea  issued  in
    October 2006 refers to an Awate.com  report  of  24  February  2006  as
    follows:

         "All demobilised soldiers and members of the National Service (were
         ordered) to get ready for reporting to Sawa ...  Those  called  for
         "National Service" include athletes and other youngsters active  in
         various sports  who  were  being  given  permits  to  pursue  their
         sporting activities.  Demobilised  soldiers  and  National  Service
         Corps who have been discharged for medical reasons ('Medical  Board
         Cases') were also ordered to re-register".


335. What we find to be particularly striking about this  report,  in  terms
    of our findings, is the reference to "members of the National  Service"
    that fits into the distinctive category described by Dr Kibreab and the
    identification of a further grouping , namely those  who  were  in  the
    western sense of the word, actually demobilised,  e.g.   discharged  on
    medical grounds, but were now subject to re-call.

336.  Particular reports  emanating  from  Awate.  com.  to  which  we  have
    referred, appear to be reliable.  The website was described by Dr  Pool
    as independent of opposition political parties and although critical of
    the Eritrean Government, one that he found:

         "... to be one of the most reliable because it is  rare  to  see  a
         website that corrects itself if subsequently proven to be wrong  on
         factual errors and it is a website on which the Home  Office  often
         relies, indeed it is exemplified by the fact that it is  quoted  in
         this COI".


337.  We shall return to other reports emanating  from  Awati.com  later  in
    this determination.

Risk on Return

338.  We have already explained that the word "demobilisation" as  we  would
    understand it does not always carry the same meaning in  Eritrea.    We
    have explained our reasons for concluding that the government  releases
    individuals  from  NS  but  requires  them  to   undertake   compulsory
    employment either directly through the  Ministry  of  Defence  or  with
    designated employers within the private sector but  still  on  military
    pay.  Such individuals are demobilised in Eritrean terms  (for  certain
    purposes at least) but remain in NS.

339.  The question for such people, is whether their  risk  profile  is  any
    different on return from those who have undergone the  'demobilisation'
    process from military service. Such people are, it is  plain  from  the
    evidence, at real risk of being regarded as  deserters,  on  return  to
    Eritrea and seriously ill-treated.  We are mindful in this  regard  and
    by way of example, of the evidence of Dr  Kibreab  that  the  purported
    65,000 who were issued demobilisation ID cards were,  as  he  expressed
    it, 'still in a state of limbo', being still Members  of  the  National
    Service [NS] and therefore not fully or truly  demobilised.    It  must
    thus be considered as to whether those that we shall  describe  as  "on
    reserve", as members of the NS, are likely to be perceived as deserters
    if they were returned following an illegal exit from Eritrea.



          Illegal Exit

340.  There are two separate (albeit related) matters to consider:

          i.        whether those who leave Eritrea  illegally  will  be  at
    risk: and

    ii.       whether a  claimant  for  international  protection  must  be
         regarded as having left Eritrea illegally.

341.  The US State Department Report  of  March  2006  is  clear,  that  all
    Eritrean citizens and foreign nationals are required to obtain an  exit
    visa in order to leave the country.  The report states as follows:

         "Citizens and foreign nationals were required  to  obtain  an  exit
         visa to depart the  country.    There  were  numerous  cases  where
         foreign nationals were delayed in leaving for up to two  months  or
         initially denied permission to leave when they applied for an  exit
         visa.   Men under the age of fifty, regardless of whether they  had
         completed National Service; women aged eighteen  to  twenty  seven;
         members of Jehovah's Witnesses (see Section  2c);  and  others  who
         were out of favour with or seen as critical of the government  were
         routinely denied exit visas.  In  addition,  the  government  often
         refused to issue exit visas to adolescents and children as young as
         five years of age, either on the grounds that they were approaching
         the age of  eligibility  for  National  Service  or  because  their
         diasporal parents had not paid the 2 percent income tax required of
         all citizens residing abroad.  Some citizens were given exit  visas
         only after posting bonds of approximately $7,300 (100,000  nakfa)."
         (Our emphasis).


342. Awate.com in their report of 26 November 2006 claims that  the  sum  of
    100,000 Nakfa represents ten years'  worth  of  salary  for  a  typical
    public servant.


343.  Dr Pool told us that one could not obtain an  exit  visa  without  the
    appropriate documents, although they were difficult to  obtain  in  any
    event.

344.  He was of the view that those more  likely  to  obtain  an  exit  visa
    included:

         "The Eritrean border  workers  in  textiles.   People  involved  in
         business who were quite well in with the government circles.


         Asmara is a very small society and the top business people know the
         government and know the way to get visas, senior military officers,
         government spokespeople. Someone of 50 plus would  be  more  likely
         than not to get an exit visa depending on his or her profile."

345.  In referring to the passage in  the  US  State  Department  Report  of
    March 2006 to which we have above referred, Dr Pool  told  us  that  it
    reflected the situation as he understood it, although he was  surprised
    there was a denial of exit visas to even those aged five, but  that  it
    simply underlined the difficulty to obtain exit visas.

346.  It was noteworthy that when cross-examined, Dr Kibreab was  challenged
    as to  what  evidence  he  had  to  support  his  contention  that  the
    government did not issue exit visas to children aged ten and over.   As
    we recorded earlier in our determination, it was at this stage that  Ms
    Quinn helpfully intervened to refer us to the State  Department  Report
    passage above referred.

347.  We were  also  referred  to  the  Country  Guidance  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in KA (Draft-related risk categories updated) Eritrea CG UKAIT
    00165, where at paragraph 49, the Tribunal,  on  the  subject  of  exit
    visas, referred in like terms to the 2005 State Department Report  that
    was before them. (We would observe  that  it  is  yet  another  example
    showing that the Respondent's submission that Dr Kibreab's evidence was
    unsourced was wholly misconceived).

348.  As noted at paragraph 205 above, Dr Kibreab told  us  that  those  not
    affected by National Service  and  considered  as  trustworthy  by  the
    government, and thus unlikely to  have  difficulty  in  obtaining  exit
    visas, comprised Ministers;  ex-Ministers;  Party  Activists;  Eritrean
    expatriates; namely those who could  be  British  citizens  working  in
    Eritrea but of Eritrean origin; elderly  people  over  fifty  who  were
    forty or over in 1994, those who wanted to go on Haj or visit relatives
    abroad;   government   officials;   scholarship   students    (although
    Dr Kibreab's evidence was that the  government  now  restricted  their
    movements as many did not return); government  employees  who  attended
    conferences (although Dr Kibreab maintained this had recently stopped);
    and relatives of those in power who might arguably obtain exit visas as
    a result.

349.  Dr Kibreab maintained that otherwise no one under fifty years  of  age
    for whatever reason could lawfully obtain an exit visa and would in his
    view have to walk to Ethiopia or the Sudan which was a risk and try  to
    cross the border.

350.  Awate.com, in their report of 26 November 2006, a copy  of  which  was
    provided to us by Dr Kibreab, demonstrates that the Eritrean Government
    tried to limit the use of air travel to leave the country  by  severely
    restricting  the  approval  of   exit   visas   to   those   considered
    "trustworthy". The Awate.com internet report bore as its  main  heading
    "PFDJ Rounds Up Eritreans in Sudan".

351.  It is within that article  we  have  noted  the  following  disturbing
report:

         "By order of President Isaias Afwerki, the  Eritrean  military  was
         given  permission  to  'shoot  on  sight'  any   Eritrean   'caught
         attempting to flee or helping anyone who is fleeing'.


         There  are  three  escape  routes  from  Eritrea:  via  Senafe,  to
         Ethiopia; via Tessenei to Sudan; and via  official  visits  in  the
         Middle East to Europe.


         There has been no change in the volume of the flow towards Ethiopia
         (about two hundred and fifty per month); until  a  week  ago  about
         forty five people daily escaped into the Sudan.  However, there has
         been a qualitative change with the escapees now not just limited to
         the youth but a broad spectrum of Eritreans including four  doctors
         who escaped in early October.  The regime has responded to this not
         only with a 'shoot-on-sight' order but by frequent  round-ups.   On
         Saturday November 25 at dawn,  the  regime  raided  Segeneitti  and
         Dekemhare and rounded up  all  youth  including  students  with  ID
         cards.


         The regime has tried to limit the  air-bound  flights  by  severely
         restricting  the  approval  of  exit  visas  for  those  considered
         trustworthy. However, the recent flight of  a  'trusted'  employee,
         ERI-TV's  Mr  Temesqhen  Debessai,  one  of  Isiais  Afwerki's  few
         favourite journalists, followed by the escape of a few  others,  as
         reported by Asmarino Independent, seems to have sent shockwaves  in
         the system.  Consequently the regime  has  begun  interviewing  all
         employees trying to gauge who knew and who is a likely candidate to
         escape.


         Of these three routes, the one that seems to occupy  the  minds  of
         the PFDJ is the Tessenei  route  to  Sudan  primarily  due  to  its
         proximity to the military camp of  Sawa.   According  to  a  report
         provided by the Eritrean National Salvation Front [their  emphasis]
         in August of this year, the Eritrean regime  shot  to  death  eight
         Eritrean youths on the claim they were trying to  escape  to  Sudan
         and left their bodies for display and warning  in  the  streets  of
         Tessenei.  The report  identified  three  individuals:  Mr  Amanuel
         Soules Ogbagabrel from Habela; Mr Adem Haffen from Haikota; and  Mr
         Abdulla Mahmoud, from Gonge".


         In late October a substantial number of Sawa conscripts escaped  to
         Sudan leading the Eritrean regime to conclude that this was  highly
         organised and done with the knowledge and co-operation  of  middle-
         rank  officers.   Consequently   it   concluded   that   one   more
         demonstration was needed as a  warning.   This  time  ten  'trouble
         makers' were rounded up from Sawa, taken to Tessenei, lined against
         a wall, and shot in the back by an execution  squad.   People  were
         told that these too had tried to escape to Sudan.


         The tactic of shooting prisoners in the back to make it  look  like
         they were shot while escaping the  law,  was  developed  by  scared
         commanders who worried that someday they might be held  responsible
         for the lives of people they were  shooting.   Military  commanders
         warned that they worry that  they  might  be  incriminated  in  the
         future when human remains might be exhumed for  forensic  tests  as
         had happened in Bosnia and other places." (Our emphasis).


352.  We glean from this article in summary that:

          . The Eritrean  Government  has  placed  an  obligation  on  civil
            servants not only to report those who have escaped but those who
            they believe are thinking of escaping.


          . The President has given the  military  permission  to  shoot  on
            sight any Eritrean caught attempting to flee or  helping  anyone
            else to flee by special order.


          . Execution of that order is no better and tragically exemplified,
            than by the reports of Eritrean youths  having  been  shot  dead
            trying to escape in August and October 2006.


          . In relation to the ten Eritrean youths shot in the  back  by  an
            execution  squad  in  October  2006  as  a  warning   to   those
            considering fleeing to Sudan it is suggested in the report  that
            the tactic of shooting prisoners in the back is so as to make it
            look that they were shot while escaping  from  the  law  and  in
            order to provide a potential  defence  to  military  commanders,
            involved in such shooting, were human remains in the  future  to
            be exhumed for forensic tests.

353. As Ms Quinn rightly  submitted,  it  is  therefore  apparent  from  the
    evidence, that the Eritrean  Government  has  indeed  taken  "draconian
    steps to prevent its citizens leaving illegally".


354.  We are mindful that the written submissions of the Respondent in  this
    regard, take issue, in particular with Dr Kibreab's evidence,  that  it
    is virtually impossible to obtain an exit visa from Eritrea if  one  is
    over the age of ten or under the age fifty.   We would agree  that  for
    Dr Kibreab to suggest that it was virtually  impossible  to  obtain  an
    exit visa under any  other  circumstances  would  be  an  exaggeration,
    bearing in mind his evidence to us of those who might  arguably  obtain
    exit visas. (See paragraph  348 above)

355.  We are surprised by the Secretary of State's submission that  such  an
    important matter as the ability  of  Eritrean  citizens  to  leave  the
    country by legal means was not  something  that  he  anticipated  as  a
    likely major issue in the appeal.  Nonetheless, the Secretary of  State
    had since obtained evidence  from  the  Visa  section  of  the  British
    Embassy to which is  attached a  Table  of  Visa  Applications  at  the
    British Embassy in Asmara for 2006. The Respondent seeks to demonstrate
    that it shows:

         "A wide range of paid applications were made to the British Embassy
         for entry clearance to the United Kingdom.  A significant number of
         these are people who are between the ages of ten and fifty.   In my
         submission it is simply not credible that these people would  waste
         their money if they had not already obtained exit  visas  from  the
         authorities.   Furthermore, the UK is  only  one  of  a  number  of
         possible destinations Eritreans might seek  to  travel  to;  it  is
         clear from a Canadian Embassy document (attached) that they have  a
         facility for processing entry clearance applications from  Eritrea.
         If this evidence is taken in the round, it  would  clearly  suggest
         there are a significant number of Eritreans who are able to and can
         make applications to Eritrea.   The  position  of  Dr  Kibreab,  in
         particular, and others is not supported  by  the  evidence  of  the
         British Embassy and the wider presumptions  can  be  draw  from  it
         relating to the opportunities to seek entry clearance form  another
         country.  It would be wholly unlikely that the  only  country  that
         was approached for, and was granted, visas to enter was the UK.


         In short, there appear to  be  opportunities  to  gain  exit  visas
         without falling within the very restrictive categories outlined  by
         Dr Kibreab in his evidence.   In fact  Dr  Kibreab  stated  at  the
         hearing the Eritrean Government had granted visas for students  but
         had ceased because they did not come back. That is fundamentally at
         odds with the evidence of the British Embassy which shows a  number
         of student applications.   The  suggestion  that  no  migration  is
         allowed is furthermore inconsistent with  the  concept  of  Eritrea
         being a country that relies heavily for its  economic  survival  on
         remittances from abroad (a point  acknowledged  by  Dr  Kibreab  in
         cross-examination)."


356.  As regards the Table of Visa applications from the British Embassy  in
    Asmara for 2006, we have  noted  that  230  people  applied  for  entry
    clearance to  the  United  Kingdom,  of  which  150  applications  were
    granted.

357.  We note with approval Ms  Quinn's  submission,  that  it  is  not  the
    Appellant's case, that it is never possible for  anyone  to  obtain  an
    exit visa.  Indeed, Dr Kibreab, as we  have  already  identified,  gave
    examples of the categories of people who  would  probably  be  able  to
    secure exit visas.  However upon our consideration  of  the  background
    material, it is unlikely that a male of military service age  would  be
    able to obtain an exit visa unless he came within one of the categories
    described in paragraphs 205, 344 and  348  above.  In  this  regard,  a
    distinction should perhaps be made between scholarship students and the
    significant number of ordinary student applicants who would  likely  to
    be of draft age.  Indeed the US Statement  Department  Report  of  2006
    notes that males under the age  of  fifty  are  routinely  denied  exit
    visas,  regardless  of  whether  they  have  completed  their  National
    Service.

358.  The submissions of the Respondent make no  reference  to  the  special
    order of the President of Eritrea giving  permission  to  a  "shoot  on
    sight" any Eritrean attempting  to  flee  or  helping  anyone  who  was
    fleeing; nor to the background material  as  to  the  decision  of  the
    Eritrean Government to the posting of bonds  of  approximately  100,000
    nakfa (10 years salary). These we find to be indicative of a government
    seeking to prevent its citizens from leaving the country.

359. Ms Quinn  submitted  that  the  Respondent's  assertion  that  Eritrean
    citizens would not lodge applications for entry clearance without first
    having secured  an  exit  visa,  was  simply  speculation  without  any
    evidential foundation.

360.  There is no evidence as to how many of  those  Eritrean  citizens  who
    secure entry clearance for the United Kingdom actually  travel  abroad,
    or how they do it. However we consider it sensible to infer that  those
    who have gone to the trouble and expense of getting entry clearance  to
    the United Kingdom, would intend to use it.

361.  There are no figures as to how many that those Eritrean  citizens  who
    secure entry clearance to travel, for example, to the  United  Kingdom,
    leave Eritrea legally.  Many people, as is apparent from the background
    material, leave Eritrea illegally.

 362. In that regard, the Awate.com article of 26 November 2006 states that
    approximately  250  people  escape   to   Ethiopia   each   month   and
    approximately 45 people escape to Sudan each day. As Ms Quinn  submits,
    an individual who secured entry clearance could  nonetheless  illegally
    cross the border into Sudan/Ethiopia and then fly direct to the  United
    Kingdom.

363.  We are mindful of the assertion of the Respondent  that  Dr  Kibreab's
    evidence (that the Eritrean Government had granted visas  for  students
    but had ceased because they did not come  back)  was  fundamentally  at
    odds with the evidence of the British Embassy in Asmara that  indicated
    that student visas were being granted. We have borne in mind  that  the
    fact that  Eritrean  citizens  have  secured  student  visas  does  not
    necessarily mean that they have secured exit visas. Having  said  this,
    however, it is not readily apparent why a person who has  no  realistic
    expectation of securing an  exit  visa  would  go  to  the  trouble  of
    obtaining a visa to enter the United  Kingdom,  where  he  or  she  has
    secured or expects to secure the services of an  "agent"  (i.e.  people
    smuggler), who will provide the necessary false documentation to  leave
    Eritrea and/or  to  reach  a  port  in  the  United  Kingdom.  This  is
    particularly so, since given the  repressive  nature  of  the  Eritrean
    regime, a person who applies to the UK Embassy for a visa is likely  to
    be taking a risk that he or she will be detected by the authorities. In
    conclusion, therefore, whilst it is plainly the case that many of those
    who exit Eritrea do so illegally, the evidence regarding  visas  issued
    by the UK Embassy in Asmara, read with the evidence regarding the range
    of categories of persons whom Dr Kibreab considered would be allowed to
    leave legally, shows that it cannot simply be assumed that an  Eritrean
    claimant who has left Eritrea has done so illegally.

364. Dr Kibreab  told  us  that  the  Eritrean  Government  had  experienced
    problems with students not returning at the  end  of  their  course  of
    study. Such a view was indeed supported  by  an  Amnesty  International
    Report of May 2004, that described the experience of Eritrean  students
    studying in South Africa, that many of the 6,000 Eritreans studying  at
    South  African  Universities  on  a  special  World  Bank-funded  study
    programme, did  not  wish  to  return  home  afterwards  for  political
    reasons.  There had been organised demonstrations against the  Eritrean
    Government.  The Eritrean Embassy had pressed for  the  return  of  the
    students (who had  been  National  Service  conscripts)  and  two  were
    deported to Eritrea in  August  2003  and  forced  back  into  National
    Service.  Amnesty International called on the South African  Government
    not to deport any student from Eritrea who would be at  risk  of  human
    rights abuses on account of their opinions as the organisation believed
    many would be.

365. At page 8 of the 2006 State Department Report to which we have  earlier
    referred, it is reported that there were numerous cases  where  foreign
    nationals were delayed in leaving for up to  two  months  or  initially
    denied permission  to  leave  when  they  applied  for  an  exit  visa.
    Certainly men under the age of  50,  regardless  of  whether  they  had
    completed NS; women aged eighteen to twenty-seven; Jehovah's  Witnesses
    and others who were out of favour with  or  seen  as  critical  of  the
    government were routinely denied exit visas.  Further and as  Ms  Quinn
    reminded us, in determining  the  consequences  for  those  who  risked
    leaving the country illegally one had to be mindful of the  President's
    "shoot to kill "policy.

366.  We would agree with Ms  Quinn  who  submitted  that  if  such  was  an
    example of the draconian measures that the  Eritrean  Government  would
    undertake to stop illegal exit from Eritrea,  it  would  be  even  more
    likely, that the authorities would treat very harshly  those  presented
    on return who had exited illegally.

367.  We noted that this was precisely the conclusion of the Tribunal in  KA
    as to the risk to those of military service age.  One also  had  to  be
    mindful  of  the  requirement  of  a  bond  of  100,000   nakfa   which
    represented, on the evidence, ten years of a  civil  servant's  salary,
    that further exemplified the fact that for a wide range of people,  but
    not all applicants, (see paragraph 348), the fact that exit visas  were
    effectively denied to a wide swathe of the population.

368.  We have further considered the  contention  of  the  Respondent,  that
    suggested that the claim that Eritrea  did  not  allow  migration,  was
    inconsistent with the concept of Eritrea as being a country that relies
    heavily for its economic survival on remittances from abroad.  We would
    acknowledge that there is a large Eritrean diaspora.  Indeed,  the  CIO
    Report, at paragraph 31.10, notes  that  over  100,000  Eritreans  have
    lived in Sudan for up to 25 years.

369.  Dr Pool told  us  about  the  difficulties  in  determining  Eritrea's
    population.  He  drew  to  our  attention  that  at  the  time  of  the
    referendum in 1993 Eritreans were  living  in  Ethiopia,  Sudan,  Saudi
    Arabia and Europe.

370.  Dr Kibreab had touched on the same issue in his oral evidence;  indeed
    in the course of cross-examination on this  very  point,  he  explained
    that there were occasions when it was possible to raise the bond  money
    of 100,000 nakfa from relatives abroad.

371.  We are not persuaded by the Respondent's submissions that there is  no
    risk on return for an individual who has left  Eritrea  illegally.   We
    have already identified the ample evidence from the background material
    that supports our conclusions in this regard.   In  the  course  of  Dr
    Kibreab's evidence,  he  demonstrated  by  cross-sourcing  to  relevant
    background material, the way in which the Eritrean authorities  treated
    those who were caught seeking to exit Eritrea illegally.

372.  We find  that  given  the  evidence  as  to  the  treatment  of  those
    attempting to leave Eritrea illegally, the  risk  on  return  to  those
    found to have left  the  country  illegally,  can  but  only,  in  such
    circumstances, be heightened.

373.  In the course of his  evidence,  and  on  this  particular  issue,  Dr
    Kibreab demonstrated the basis upon which he concluded that the fate of
    returnees aged 18 to 50 who left Eritrea illegally and  were  returned,
    included the real  risk  of  their  disappearance  or  possibly  death,
    (bearing in mind not least by way of example), the  experience  of  the
    Maltese returnees in 2001.

374.  We have earlier set out his evidence as to  the  categories  of  those
    who will be at risk and their  likely  fate  on  return.  Within  those
    categories it is worth repeating that Dr  Kibreab  told  us  that  they
    included those that had:

         ".. sought asylum in another country - that is  also  considered  a
         serious offence because they had been disloyal and have exposed the
         weakness of the country to strangers.  It  is  a  criminal  offence
         called "disloyalty'.  Washing 'dirty linen in public' in Eritrea is
         recognised as a very serious matter".


375.  Dr Kibreab's observations in this regard are indeed reinforced by  the
    May 2004 Amnesty International Report  to  which  the  Tribunal  in  KA
    referred at paragraph 51.  Indeed the same report  was  noted  to  have
    been before the Tribunal  in  IN  the  Tribunal  in  KA  considered  it
    important to examine Amnesty International's summary  of  its  view  of
    current risk categories more closely.  They noted in a section  of  the
    report headed "Eritrean Asylum Seekers at Risk".  It stated inter  alia
    that Amnesty International considered amongst the categories of  people
    who they considered to be particularly at risk of  arbitrary  detention
    included:

         "Anyone suspected of disloyalty to the government - even the act of
         applying for  asylum  abroad  would  be  regarded  as  evidence  of
         disloyalty and reason to detain and torture a  person  returned  to
         Eritrea after rejection of asylum."

376.  Thus, although taken at face  value,  Dr  Kibreab's  comment  in  this
    regard could be taken to amount to  the  proposition  that  any  failed
    returning asylum seeker might be per se, at risk in Eritrea, regardless
    of whether he or she had shown that their departure  from  Eritrea  was
    illegal, that would not in our view be a proper  interpretation  of  Dr
    Kibreab's evidence in this regard.

377.  As paragraph 373 makes plain, his comments followed and must  be  read
    as being in the context of his views on what is  likely  to  happen  to
    those who exit illegally.  But, even if Dr Kibreab intended to  make  a
    more general assertion, the Tribunal is unable to accept  it.   If  the
    position really were that returning failed asylum seekers were as such,
    being persecuted in Eritrea, absent any other factors such as actual or
    perceived desertion, we would have expected that  to  be  reflected  to
    some extent at least, in the background evidence before us  and  it  is
    not.

378.  A person who  is  permitted  to  leave  Eritrea  by  the  authorities,
    despite being of draft age and not medically unfit, may well not be  at
    real risk on return even if he or she has made an asylum  claim  whilst
    abroad.  There are many reasons why this may be so including  the  wish
    on the part of the Eritrean authorities  to  embed  family  members  of
    their regime abroad in case trouble arises in Eritrea to infiltrate the
    diaspora community or as a means of encouraging foreign remittances  to
    Eritrea from those who are, in reality, well-disposed towards it.


379.  The Tribunal in KA looked at this issue of illegal  exit  specifically
    and at paragraph 113(f) of their determination had this to say:

         "... persons of eligible draft  age  (defined  in  the  context  of
         return as being between eighteen to fifty for men  and  eighteen  -
         forty for women) are currently at real risk of persecution as  well
         as treatment contrary to Article 3 unless:


             "(i)    they can be considered to have left Eritrea legally...


             (ii)     they have not been in Eritrea since the start of  the
                  war with Ethiopia in 1998...


             (iii)    they have never been to Eritrea and are able to  show
                  that  there  was  no  draft-evasion  motive  behind  their
                  absence."


380.  Further in KA the Tribunal continued at paragraph 113(i) to  state  as
    follows:

         "They can be considered to have left Eritrea illegally.   Regarding
         this sub-category, it must be borne in mind that if an  Appellant's
         assertion that he left illegally will raise an issue that will need
         to be established to the required standard.  A person who genuinely
         lacks credibility will not be assumed to have left  illegally.   We
         think that those falling into the 'left legally' sub-category  will
         often include persons who  are  considered  to  have  already  done
         National Service or to have got an exemption and persons  who  have
         been eligible for call-up over a significant period would not  have
         been called  up.   Conversely,  those  falling  outside  this  sub-
         category will often include persons who left Eritrea when they were
         approaching draft age or recently passed that age."


381.  The question arises, does the much fuller evidence  on  the  issue  of
    National Service (NS) and Military  Service  (MS)  in  Eritrea  require
    modification of the guidance given in KA?  We think it does.

382.  We have concluded upon our consideration  of  the  current  background
    material, that the finding  of  the  Tribunal  in  KA  that  the  'left
    legally' sub-category applies  to  men  who  have  already  done  their
    National Service, (a concept that we would now, in any event,  conclude
    takes no account of those who are regarded as "Members of the  National
    Service"), is now to be  read  in  the  light  of  the  fresh  evidence
    contained not least  in the US State Department Report of  March  2006,
    that clearly shows that  amongst  the  categories  of  those  routinely
    denied exit visas were "men, under the  age  of  fifty,  regardless  of
    whether they had completed National Service' (Our emphasis).

383.  That passage is in fact repeated in the  April  2006  CIO  Report  for
    Eritrea.  Neither of those documents were before the Tribunal in KA.

384. Mr Parkinson at  one  stage  in  the  hearing,  produced  before  us  a
    transcript of the recent decision of the Tribunal in WA (Draft  Related
    Risks Updated - Muslim  women  (Eritrea)  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00079.  Mr
    Parkinson explained that WA was:

         " .. not very material to this appeal.  There  is  only  one  minor
         reference to the degree of National Service conscription that is of
         any materiality and that appears at paragraph 67".

385. Subsequently he submitted in his written closing submissions, that  the
    decision demonstrated that conscription was not universally imposed, in
    that regions existed in Eritrea that exercised "a degree of  latitude".
    However, WA was concerned solely with the issue of women of draft  age.
     It is noteworthy that before us, Mr Parkinson was clear that  he  did
    not place significant reliance on WA in the context of the issues  with
    which we were seized in the instant appeal.

386.  It is, however, clear from WA  that  there  was  before  the  Tribunal
    background evidence that established that Afar Muslim  women  from  the
    Dankalra region were not subject to forceful recruitment into  National
    Service.  Nothing that we have heard or seen affects this finding.

          The "Giffa" (Round-up)

387.  Dr Kibreab told us in evidence he did not know how  many  people  were
    reconscripted after the war broke out in 1998 but he continued:

         "They conscript secondary school students and relocate them to Sawa
         and ensure they complete their military  education  in  a  military
         camp since 2003 - the reason they do that  is  that  most  students
         would otherwise disappear." (Our emphasis).


388. As we have already sought  to  demonstrate,  the  evidence  shows  that
    because of the Eritrean Government's concerns  in  that  regard,  there
    are:

       i)  Tight (although not absolutist) controls imposed on exit visas;
      ii)   A policy of collective  punishment  and;  penalties  for  draft
          evasion for the parents of those who do not fulfil the provisions
          of the NSP;
     iii)   The imposition of bail bonds to some citizens given exit  visas
          that equate in
            many cases to a civilian salary of some ten years.
      iv)  An obligation imposed on civil servants not only  to  report  on
          those who had
             escaped but those who are even thinking of escaping;
       v) The "shoot-on-sight" policy by  special  order  of  the  Eritrean
          President, in relation to any Eritrean caught attempting to  flee
          or helping anyone who is fleeing.


389.  The Respondent submits  that,  what  is  described  as  "a  consistent
    thread" in all three of  the  experts'  reports  is  that  the  aim  of
    National Service was to obtain skills and abilities "on the cheap".  It
    is thus contended there would be  no  point  in  taking  into  National
    Service, the illiterate and the  large  percentage  of  the  population
    involved  in  subsistence  agriculture,  bearing  in  mind   that   the
    usefulness of the Eritrean population to the Government of  Eritrea  in
    terms of its objectives has to be  considered  against  the  fact  that
    between some 70 to 86 per cent of the population are illiterate.    The
    Respondent thus argues that it appears that there are strong reasons to
    accept that only some 12-15 per cent of  the  population  are  actually
    called for NS.

390.  We mention this contention, because  it  forms  the  backdrop  of  the
    Respondent's submission that such action by the Government  of  Eritrea
    is not fundamentally incompatible with the round-ups or "giffa".


391.  It is argued that these could be  taking  place  to  ensure  that  the
    government recruits those citizens whose proven  ability  has  rendered
    them desirable for conscription and retention in National  Service  for
    the benefit of Eritrea.

392.  The Respondent seeks support for that contention in the COI Report  of
    September 2006 at 11.07 where it is stated that:

         "... The government has initiated targeted campaigns  to  apprehend
         female  students  who  had  completed  the  eleventh  grade  [their
         underlining] but opted to stay at  home  instead  of  reporting  to
         Sawa.  Last week [10 July onwards] the town of  Dekemhare  was  the
         target.  Similar campaigns are expected in Asmara and  other  major
         towns."


393.  Further in the same COI Report at 11.08 it is stated:

         "Awate.com ran reports on 24 February 2006  that  a  new  round  of
         giffa had been launched in the Anseaba region  which  included  the
         sweeping up of seventeen year olds from three high schools in Keren
         [their underlining] transporting them  to  Wia  (near  the  eastern
         coast)... Other high schools [their underlining]  in  the  Northern
         Red Sea region were similarly cleared a few days previously."


394.  In contradiction, the Respondent nonetheless acknowledges  that  there
    was evidence of an indiscriminate round up in 2004 (see also the COI at
    paragraph 11.06), and there was good evidence that it was  high  school
    attendees that were primarily targeted.

395.  We would, however, agree  with  Ms  Quinn  that  the  Respondent,  has
    selectively quoted from the background evidence, that when looked at in
    the round, demonstrates that the giffa is relatively indiscriminate.

396. We shall demonstrate the way in which the  background  material  before
    us reinforces  that  conclusion,  but  before  so  doing,  we  feel  it
    necessary to explain why evidence regarding the "giffa", has a  bearing
    on the issues before us. It is further evidence of the robust  approach
    of the Eritrean authorities, not only to those youths eligible for  the
    draft who seek to evade it, but also to those who have completed  their
    military training and having been transferred to "civilian" jobs  might
    be minded to leave the country in an effort to avoid the possibility of
    further recall.

397.  The evidence concerning the "giffa" is a pointer as  to  the  attitude
    of the Eritrean authorities in relation to those in that  category  who
    flee Eritrea illegally and as to  the  treatment  they  can  expect  on
    return, at the hands of the Eritrean authorities.  And in  that  regard
    as to the importance they attach to maintaining a large army.

398.  In evidence before us, Dr Pool  was  referred  to  a  report,  (indeed
    within the Respondent's bundle), of Awate. com  sub-headed  "Government
    Rounds-up Under Age Youth" dated  23  February  2006  which  stated  as
    follows:

         "... Round-ups started when students were in class which gave  them
         no chance to say goodbye to their families or  prepare  themselves.
         They were taken straight from their desks  to  the  waiting  buses.
         The sudden and harsh manner in which the rounding-up was  conducted
         has stunned and angered the entire population of Keren.  One source
         says URC  who  was  contacted  by  Awate.com  showed  that  similar
         sentiments were reported in other towns."


399.  A further passage within the same Awati.com report, demonstrates  that
    the round-up of young students is only but a part of the overall policy
    of the Eritrean Government to ensure, if necessary by force,  that  the
    armed forces of Eritrea are maintained at optimum levels.    Indeed,  a
    further extract from the same report continues:

         "Demobilised soldiers and  National  Service  Corps  who  had  been
         discharged for medical reasons ('Medical Board  Cases')  were  also
         ordered to re-register.  It is expected that this sweeping round-up
         of young students, which has already started in the north  and  Red
         Sea and Anceba regions, will be continued in  all  regions  of  the
         country. One alarming aspect of this new wave of round-ups, is that
         it has affected young students under eighteen years of  age."  (Our
         emphasis).


400. Our emphasis in relation to the above passage exposes  the  point  that
    the report talks of a "new wave of round-ups" as recently  as  February
    2006.  The Respondent is thus incorrect in appearing  to  suggest  that
    the only evidence of indiscriminate round-ups occurred in 2004.

401.  Further, in Dr Pool's report,  he  was  clear  that  the  "giffa"  was
    indiscriminate and continued:

         "The  'giffa'  (round-ups)  are  organised  in  villages  and  town
         quarters and targeted those who appeared to  be  of  eligible  age.
         They are  not  particularly  targeted  to  distinct  categories  as
         mentioned in my instructions  (i.e.  those  required  to  register,
         those who fail to attend final year schooling at Sawa or those  who
         fail to enlist). The Amnesty  International  Report  on  the  giffa
         accurately describes the process 'police search houses,  workplaces
         and streets and detain  suspected  draft  evaders  to  check  their
         identity documents and at military roadblocks on main  roads".   It
         is quite usual for buses and other forms of transport to be stopped
         and the identity cards of all passengers to be checked for age  and
         other documents checked for  military  status.   According  to  the
         Human Rights Office of the United Nations Mission  to  Eritrea  and
         Ethiopia (UNMEE) in its quarterly report for 2003-4  describes  the
         giffas: thus: 'Eritrean military  and  security  officials  conduct
         aggressive searches to enforce  compliance  with  National  Service
         obligations.   Military  and  security  officials   conduct   house
         searches, often during the night, in order to pick up  all  persons
         suspected of draft evasion'."


402.  Ms Quinn  further  referred  us  to  the  personal  account  of  Musse
    Habtemichael,  a  military  policeman   recorded   by   War   Resisters
    International that also indicates  the  indiscriminate  nature  of  the
    giffa:

         "Sometimes we also surrounded entire quarters and controlled  every
         house.  At first the quarter was surrounded.   Then  we  went  from
         house to house got all out on the street, everybody.  Everyone  was
         checked, if someone was student he/she had the student card and was
         allowed to leave ... If he/she had nothing to show, he/she would be
         brought to a military unit.  Some stayed with their  children.   We
         had to take them out of their  family  and  take  them  from  their
         children... Some were ill.  We took them too and  brought  them  to
         their division.   There they were put in prison.  Some of the  sick
         persons died."


403.  The US State Department Report of March 2006 indicates that the  giffa
    is indiscriminate:

    "Security forces detained, generally for less  than  three  days,  many
    persons during searches, for evaders of National Service even  if  they
    had valid papers showing that they had completed or [were] exempt  from
    National Service."


404.  Thus it is apparent that the giffa is conducted in a way that  targets
    a cross-section of Eritrean society, not any particular group.

          A "Closed Society"

405.  In her closing submissions before us, Ms Quinn drew our  attention  to
    the difficulties "for both sides to obtain  information  about  Eritrea
    because it really is a 'very closed society'."   We  would  agree.  The
    expert evidence, the expressed problems  of  the  World  Bank  in  that
    regard and the background material in  general  before  us,  echo  that
    difficulty.

406.  In that we are required to  reach  conclusions  as  to  real  risk  on
    return to Eritrea on the basis of a reasonable degree of likelihood, in
    relation to the  particular  circumstances  of  the  Appellant  in  the
    instant appeal as well as in relation to the wider issues that  we  are
    required to consider,  it  follows  that  the  paucity  of  information
    emanating from Eritrea is an important factor that we  must  take  into
    account in reaching our conclusions.

407.  In that regard, the US State Department Report  of  March  2006  under
    the  sub-heading  "Freedom  of  Speech  and  Press",  refers   to   the
    restrictions on press freedom.    The report tells us that:

         "The government controlled all media, including  three  newspapers,
         two magazines, one radio station and one television station.  There
         was no private media in the country, the law does not allow private
         ownership of broadcast media or foreign influence or  ownership  of
         media  and  the  government  also  banned  the  import  of  foreign
         publications.   The  government   had   to   approve   publications
         distributed by religious international organisations  before  their
         release, and the government continued  to  restrict  the  right  of
         religious media to comment  on  politics  or  government  policies.
         The  press  law  forbids  reprinting  of   articles   from   banned
         publications."


408.  The report cites an example  of  three  reporters  from  foreign  news
    organisations allowed by the government to operate in the country.  One
    of them was subsequently held by the government for nearly four  years,
    released for medical treatment and  then  detained  again  a  few  days
    later, and remained in  detention  without  charge  until  the  end  of
    1995.

409.  The report recalls that  the  Eritrean  Government  allowed  only  one
    domestic human rights NGO, "Citizens for Peace  in  Eritrea"  (CP),  to
    operate, but its  work  was  limited  to  advocacy  on  behalf  of  war
    victims.   The government did not  permit  international  human  rights
    organisations to operate in the  country.    All  NGO's  regardless  of
    their scope of work were required to  register  with  the  Ministry  of
    Labour and Human Welfare.  In May 2005 the government  issued  the  law
    that required all NGOs to register with the government  for  permission
    to continue operations in the country.  All international NGOs to  have
    $2 million (in US currency) in the local bank.   The report continues:

         "Many NGOs were unable to register  under  the  new  law  and  were
         required to leave the country.  As of years end there were  sixteen
         registered NGOs.


         During the year the government ordered a foreign  government's  aid
         agency to stop operating in the country."


410.  An internet report of "The Committee to Protect Journalists" of 2  May
    2006 in detailing what it  described  as  its  "The  10  Most  Censored
    Countries" identified Eritrea  within  that  list.    Their  summarised
    reasons for its inclusion were set out as follows:

         "Eritrea was the only  country  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  without  a
         single private media outlet.  More than four years after a  vicious
         crackdown shattered a fledgling independent press, the government's
         repressive policies have  left  the  tiny  Horn  of  Africa  nation
         largely hidden from international scrutiny and with almost no local
         access to independent information.  A privileged few have access to
         the Internet.    The  handful  of  foreign  correspondents  in  the
         capital,  Asmara,  are   subject   to   intensive   monitoring   by
         authorities."


411.  At least 15 journalists have been  jailed  or  otherwise  deprived  of
    their  liberty.  Most  are  held  incommunicado  in  secret   detention
    centres.  When CPJ sought information about the imprisoned  journalists
    in the fall of 2005, Information Minister, Ali Abdou, told Agence Franc-
    Presse, "It is up to us what, why, when, and where we do things."

412.  We pause there to note the reference to the Information  Minister  who
    was quoted in terms of the indefinite nature of National Service in the
    Middle East Times, to which we have above referred  and  the  reference
    within  the  report  as  to  the  Eritrean  authorities'  treatment  of
    perceived opponents of the regime including the  deprivation  of  their
    liberty, that can lead to their being  "held  incommunicado  in  secret
    detention centres", a matter reflected in Dr Kibreab's evidence  before
    us in terms of the fate of those whom he considered to be at real  risk
    if returned to Eritrea.

413.  We have  noted  further  reports  concerning  Eritrea's  detention  of
    foreign  journalists  exemplified  by  a  May  2006  Annual  Report  of
    Raporteurs Sans Frontieres (Reporters Without  Borders)  in  which  the
    following is stated:

         "Africa's youngest country is still the continent's largest  prison
         for journalists. Thirteen of  the  newspaper  editors  from  before
         2001, are being secretly held, somewhere in  the  country,  without
         ever going  before  a  court,  see  a  lawyer  or  speak  to  their
         families.  The government which controls the country with  an  iron
         fist, claims they are traitors to the country.   Ethiopian spies or
         deserters.  It is not known if they are still alive.


         In November, the disturbing episode of the two-day release  of  the
         founder of the Weekly Setit, Dawit Isaac, served as a  reminder  of
         the extent to which President Issaias Afewurki is pitiless  towards
         those he considers his opponents. The journalist was released on 19
         November and was able to phone his wife  and  friends  who  are  in
         exile in Sweden to tell then he will  be  joining  them.   But  the
         Eritrean Government, for unknown reasons, decided to throw him back
         in prison two days later, to general bewilderment."

414.  The US State Department Report of March 2006 refers to the  fact  that
    arbitrary arrest and detention are 'serious problems' and  notably  the
    Amnesty International Report of May 2004  describes  how  the  Eritrean
    Government does not accept any criticism and ignores the rule of law:

         "The government dismisses the  criticism  from  all  sides  of  its
         appalling human rights record. it ignores the principle of the rule
         of law and flagrantly contravenes the human  rights  safeguards  in
         Eritrea's  Constitution  and  law.    It   has   ratified   several
         international human rights treaties - although not the whole  range
         - but does not adhere to them in practice.  It allows no  criticism
         in the country  - critics and  human  rights  defenders  have  been
         detained or have fled  the  country.   The  government  refused  to
         engage in dialogue about human rights, either with its own citizens
         or with the international community."


415.  The Amnesty International Report of May 2004 observes:

         "Eritrea is a de facto one-party state, where  the  only  permitted
         party is the ruling People's Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ)
         the re-named former  Marxist/Leninist  Eritrean  People  Liberation
         Front (EPLF) which won independence from Ethiopia in 1991  after  a
         thirty year liberation war."

416.   We  would  agree  with  Ms   Quinn,   that   as   a   government   of
    Marxist/Leninist persuasion, both in theory and in  practice  it  seeks
    state control of the economy and is hostile to the private sector.

417.  In the Appellant's bundle, there is a report of a half-day  Conference
    chaired by an ex-Director of the United Nations  Association  organised
    by JCWI, the Eritrean Education  Trust,  the  Eritrean  Elders  Welfare
    Association, the Royal  African  Society  and  the  Centre  of  African
    Studies at the University of London.

418.   The  topic  was  "Refugees  and  African  Development:  the  Case  of
    Eritreans in the UK."  Among the 120 people who were reported  to  have
    attended, were representatives of organisations  such  as  the  Refugee
    Council,  the  Red  Cross,  the  United  Nations  Association,  Amnesty
    International and others.   It is  right  to  say  that  many  Eritrean
    community groups were also recorded as being present.

419.  The preamble to the Conference report  remarked  that  the  Conference
    "presented  an  opportunity  for  networking  between  the  grass-roots
    community organisations and larger organisation who worked with, and on
    behalf of, Eritrean refugees and asylum seekers."

420.  We make the above clear, in order to fairly  and  properly  place  the
    extract to which we are now going to refer in  its  proper  perspective
    and context.  One of the speakers  was  a  journalist,  Michela  Wrong,
    author of a recently published non-fiction book about Eritrea giving an
    account of conditions there.  She made her observations as a result  of
    her claimed extensive knowledge of the country's  present  history  and
    her recent trip to Eritrea.

421.  Ms Quinn in her closing written submissions refers  to  the  following
    extract of the comments of Michela Wrong:

         "Economic policy is firmly in the hands of the government, which is
         now openly hostile to the private  sector  and  shown  a  classical
         Marxist appetite for state control.   No new import  licences  have
         been issued to shopkeepers since the start  of  the  year  and  the
         government is planning to open up bureaux where 12 key  commodities
         will be on sale."


422.  We have already exemplified  the  clear  intentions  of  the  Eritrean
    Government to bring large sectors of  the  population  within  National
    Service as evidenced by their  decision  to  re-register  the  National
    Service Corps who have been discharged for  medical  reasons  ("Medical
    Board cases").

    The Eritrean Economy and National Service


423.  The Respondent, in his  closing  submissions  rightly  identified  the
    fact that Eritrea is one of the world's poorest countries.  It  has  an
    apparent population of 4.3 million of whom 80 per cent are employed  in
    or are dependent upon  the  subsistence  agriculture  sector  (see  the
    report of the International Monitory Fund (IMF)  and  the  Home  Office
    COI. Paragraph  2.01;  and  Hutchison's  Country  Facts  under  "Labour
    Force").

424.  The Respondent points out that subsistence agriculture is  in  essence
    whereby people grow food and rear animals for the principal purpose  of
    feeding themselves, occasionally generating a small surplus  for  sale.
    They refer  to  a  passage  from  the  IMF  Report  that  states,  "The
    authorities have produced an Interim Poverty Reduction  Strategy  paper
    and a National Food Security Strategy, which  together  set  out  plans
    aimed at increasing rural incomes [their  underlining)  and  increasing
    productivity."

425.  The Respondent points to the  US  Censors  Bureau  second  table  that
    states that the population  of  Eritrea  aged  between  15  and  19  is
    504,000.  The respondent thus  submits that the population likely to be
    called for service in any one year when they reach the age of  eighteen
    is 100,000, being one fifth  of  the  population  between  fifteen  and
    nineteen.


426.  As  is  apparent  from  what  we  have  already  found,  the  Eritrean
    Government  uses  National  Service  as  a  means  of  controlling  and
    exploiting the economic potential of those of its citizens who could be
    said to be in their prime.

427.  The Human Rights Watch report of 2006 states that:

         "Conscripts are often used for public work projects, such  as  road
         building.  There have been persistent reports they are also used as
         labourers on Party, military and officers' personal farms."


428.  The journalist Michela Wrong, to whom we earlier referred, notes  that
    even Eritrea's most skilled citizens are doing manual labour:

         "The results of  the  works  undertaken  by  those  doing  National
         Service are obvious and striking.  New dams have  been  built,  the
         causeways in the Sawa Massawa are being widened, many  towns  boast
         brand new  hospitals,  roads  have  been  improved.   However,  key
         national resource  -  Eritreans  best  and  brightest  -  is  going
         tragically to waste as graduates and skilled technicians do  manual
         work for free." (Our emphasis).


429.  It is necessary  for  us  to  further  consider  those  who  might  be
    characterised as "approaching draft age".  This is a matter  which  has
    exercised the Tribunal in IN, KA  and,  most  recently,  WA.   On  this
    question we are unable to give a definite view but it is likely  to  be
    on a sliding scale whereby anyone of say  fifteen  years  and  over  is
    highly likely to be  regarded  by  the  authorities  as  such,  whereas
    someone under the age of ten is highly unlikely to be so regarded.   On
    the contrary,  as  is  apparent  from  paragraphs  273-281  above,  the
    legislation on National Service contains no such exemption.

430.  The Respondent's assertion that if such a large number of  individuals
    were in National Service the agricultural sector would have  collapsed,
    first of all ignores the background material that establishes that  the
    agricultural sector has suffered as a  result  of  a  large  number  of
    individuals carrying out National Service.

431.  Indeed, in that regard, Ms Quinn has drawn our  attention  by  way  of
    example, to paragraph 2.03 of the COI Report that states:

         "Erratic   rainfall   and    the    delayed    demobilisation    of
         agriculturalists from the  Ministry  kept  cereal  production  well
         below normal, holding down growth in 2002-05."


432.  The  Respondent's  submission  in  this  regard  significantly  fails,
    secondly, to take account of the background material  that  establishes
    that the development tasks carried out  by  National  Service  draftees
    include work on state and PFDJ farms.   In that  regard  our  attention
    has been drawn to the Amnesty International Report of May 2004:

         "The development tasks mainly consist  of  labour  or  construction
         projects,  such  as  road,  dams,  farms,  clinics,   schools   and
         government or military buildings anywhere in the  country.  "  (Our
         emphasis).


433.  Further, Dr Kibreab stated in his report:

         "Recruits are regimented in  different  units  and  participate  in
         productive activities as groups and/or individuals, such  as  urban
         housing development, construction of dams, roads, bridges, clinics,
         health centres, hospitals, schools etc.  They also  work  in  State
         and PFDJ-owned banks,  commercial  farms  and  construction  sites.
         The Ministry of Defence also hirers out draftees to  private  firms
         in which the latter paid  the  salaries  of  the  draftees  to  the
         Ministry of Defence.  Recruits, whether they are  assigned  to  the
         defence force, ministries, departments, PFDJ firms, state farms  or
         private firms are paid uniform pocket money." (Our emphasis).

434.  The assertion that Dr Pool and Dr Kibreab's reports demonstrate,  that
    it is those of the highest educational level  with  specific  technical
    skills and qualifications who are retained by the government  on  a  NS
    basis (so as to enable their skills to be  utilised at  a  lower  cost,
    thus enabling the economy to benefit from lower labour costs),  ignores
    their evidence as to how NS draftees with scarce  skills/qualifications
    were hired out by  the  Ministry  of  Defence  to  the  civil  service,
    government departments and private firms.  However it is right  to  say
    that the evidence in this regard suggests that  some  with  skills  are
    utilised but some are not.

435.  Ms  Quinn  rightly  submits  that  neither  Dr  Pool  nor  Dr  Kibreab
    suggested that it was only those with scarce skills and  qualifications
    who are required to carry out National Service.

          Eritrean Population

436. We now turn to the Respondent's assertion that it is not  possible  for
    1.2 million individuals to be in NS.   They have based this  figure  on
    Eritrea having a population of 4.3 million and on there  being  405,000
    Eritreans aged between 15 and 19.  This information appears  to  derive
    from both the COI Report of September  2006  and  Hutchinson's  Country
    Facts on Eritrea that includes a US Census and  Bureau  data  reference
    updated on 24 August 2006.  We can only repeat the obvious difficulties
    with Eritrean population statistics  that  were  indeed  in  particular
    identified by Dr Pool in his evidence, although we are unpersuaded  by
    Ms Quinn's submission  that  these  figures  take  no  account  of  the
    estimated 70,000 to one 100,000 Eritreans said  to  be  killed  in  the
    border  war  between  1998  to  2000  and  indeed  identified  in   the
    Respondent's bundle of documents within the COI of 21 September 2006 at
    paragraph 3.07.  We take the view that if estimates such as these post-
    dated the year 2000 then surely it would be right  not  to  include  in
    such data the figures for those who had been killed.

437.  We are mindful that Dr Pool in his oral  evidence  before  us,  stated
    that there had never been  a  population  survey  and  that  population
    statistics were based on the 1993 referendum and  that  many  Eritreans
    lived elsewhere such as in Ethiopia, Sudan, Saudi Arabia and the United
    Kingdom and they voted in the referendum.

438.  The assertion of the Respondent that 80 per cent of the population  is
    employed in or dependent upon subsistence agriculture relies on the COI
    Report of September 2006 and Hutchinson's Country Facts (undated)  that
    from its chronology would appear to suggest that it  was  published  no
    later than 2000.

439.  Hutchison's Country Facts indeed state that in 1990, 85  per  cent  of
    the labour force worked in  the  agricultural  sector,  but  we  cannot
    ignore the fact this is a statistic now 17 years out  of  date  and  of
    course it pre-dates the introduction of NS in 1994.

440.  The Respondent makes reference to a COI  Report  that  refers  to  the
    devastation to  the  subsistence  agricultural  sector,  following  the
    Eritrean-Ethiopian war of 1998 to 2000, on which 80  per  cent  of  the
    population relied for food production provided by 62 per cent.

441.   Ms  Quinn  rightly  asserts,  that  as  the  Eritrean-Ethiopian   war
    devastated subsistence agriculture and food production, there must have
    been a significant  reduction  in  the  percentage  of  the  population
    involved in subsistence agriculture.

442.  The following point also needs to be made.   The  apparent  assumption
    on the part of the Respondent, that the numbers of those involved in NS
    is considerably less than that claimed  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    depends upon those involved in agriculture being generally exempt  from
    the requirements of NS.   We have not had our attention  drawn  to  any
    evidence that suggests this to be the case.


443.  The broad objectives of National Service are as set out in  Article  5
    of the 1995 Proclamation.  We would agree with Ms Quinn  who  submitted
    that:

         "An individual does not need to be educated and literate  in  order
         to be able to develop a  sense  of  patriotism  and  commitment  to
         national unity.  The Eritrean Head of State has consistently stated
         that nationalism and patriotism do not develop naturally  but  have
         to be fostered and nurtured.  Clearly  they  can  be  fostered  and
         nurtured    among    the    educated/literate    and    the    non-
         educated/illiterate."


          The Nature of Eritrean "Demobilisation" and the risk on return

444.  We have already explained the basis  of  our  finding  that  the  word
    "demobilisation" as we would  normally  understand  it,  means  that  a
    person leaves military service and becomes a free agent but  that  does
    not appear to be always what is understood in  Eritrea.   The  Eritrean
    authorities, in effect, ascribe a dual meaning to their  definition  of
    demobilisation.  In the  classic  sense,  those  for  example  severely
    disabled are demobilised in the sense  of  being  freed  to  return  to
    civilian life.  There were those 5,000 individuals who were demobilised
    within the pilot project between 1993 and 1994.  Dr Pool told  us  that
    those demobilised prior to the war comprising between 48,000 to  54,000
    people between 1992 and 1994 who  were  given  grants  for  setting  up
    businesses generally to return to civilian society.  Dr Pool told us in
    his report that "these people are demobilised  in  all  senses  of  the
    term..."  He went on to explain that many of them were called  back  as
    they were old EPLF fighters in 1998.  Dr Kibreab  indeed  identified  a
    further grouping of those, in the  classic  sense,  who  were  actually
    demobilised for example having  been  discharged  on  medical  grounds.
    Although again, as he pointed out, many were now  subject  to  re-call.
    We find that demobilisation is otherwise the term used to describe  the
    process whereby a person having completed the military training portion
    of his call-up continues to be subject to NS in  the  sense  identified
    earlier in this determination. (see especially paragraphs 283-308)

445. It  is  clear  that  a  person  of  military  service  age  or  who  is
    approaching military service age who leaves  Eritrea  illegally  before
    undertaking or  completing  Active  National  Service  (as  defined  in
    Article 8 of the 1995  Proclamation)  (see  paragraph  283  above),  is
    reasonably likely to be regarded  by  the  Eritrean  authorities  as  a
    deserter and punished accordingly.  The evidence of a "shoot  to  kill"
    policy in respect of deserters, the  imprisoning  of  parents  and  the
    process known as "the giffa", together with the more general  objective
    evidence regarding  the  oppressive  nature  of  the  Eritrean  regime,
    confirms that any such punishment is likely to be  both  extra-judicial
    and of such a severity as to amount to persecution,  serious  harm  and
    ill-treatment.

446.  What also emerges plainly from the  evidence,  is  that  a  person  of
    draft age, who has left illegally and who is not medically  unfit  will
    be similarly regarded even if he has completed Active National  Service
    and has been "demobilised" therefrom because, in the absence of special
    factors, he or she is still  regarded  as  being  subject  to  National
    Service.  The country guidance in IN, KA and AH is  therefore  modified
    so as to include this category of persons  amongst  those  who  are  in
    general at real risk.

447.  As stated in paragraphs 371 - 374 above,  we  do  not  find  that  all
    returning failed asylum seekers are as such at real risk.  That  is  so
    even if the returnee is of draft age  (or  approaching  it).    If  the
    position were otherwise, we should expect to see some evidence  in  the
    background materials.   Dr Pool did not advance  such  a  view  in  his
    evidence.  The only  specific  evidence  was  in  the  comments  of  Dr
    Kibreab, recorded in paragraph 374 above.  Although we have  found  him
    in general a witness whose testimony carries weight,  his  comments  on
    this issue are unrelated to any specific case history and struck us  as
    unacceptably vague.

448.  A person of or approaching draft age who fails to show that he or  she
    left Eritrea illegally is not reasonably likely  to  be  regarded  with
    serious hostility on return, even if the authorities are  or  would  be
    reasonably likely to be aware that that person had made an unsuccessful
    asylum claim abroad.

449.  A finding as to whether an Eritrean appellant has  shown  that  it  is
    reasonably likely he or she left the country  illegally,  is  therefore
    likely to remain crucial in deciding risk on  return  to  that  country
    (see paragraph 234 above).  In making such a  finding,  judicial  fact-
    finders will need to be aware  of  evidence  that  tends  to  show  the
    numbers of those exiting Eritrea illegally appear to  be  substantially
    higher than those who do so legally  and  that  distaste  for  what  is
    effectively open-ended service at the behest of the state lies behind a
    good deal of the current emigration from Eritrea.  Nevertheless,  where
    a person has come to  this  country  and  given  what  the  fact-finder
    concludes (according to the requisite  standard  of  proof)  to  be  an
    incredible account of his or her experiences, that person may well fail
    to show that he or she exited illegally.

          The Appeal of the Appellant

450.  We take as our starting point the  findings  of  fact  of  Immigration
    Judge Reid, but bear in mind that when considered at  the  first  stage
    reconsideration hearing by the Tribunal it was found  that  there  were
    significant omissions in the fact finding in relation to  the  military
    service evasion element of the Appellant's account.

451.  We had the benefit of hearing the Appellant give evidence.

452.  In common with the Immigration Judge and for like  reason  we  do  not
    consider  the  Appellant's  account  of  his  escape  from  Eritrea  is
    credible.

453.   It  was,  however,  significant  that,  in   cross-examination,   the
    Appellant was asked, and answered, as follows:

              "Q.    Did you have contact with the Eritrean authorities?
              A.      No - had I been stopped I would not have been able to
         leave.


              Q.      Did you ever apply for an exit visa?
              A.      No - it would not have been granted to me.


              Q.      Can you tell us why an exit visa would not have  been
         granted to you?
         A.      According to the Government Protocol, exit  visas  are  not
             allowed for a soldier."
454.  In our view and in light of our general conclusions as set out  above,
    this is important, because whatever other problems there  may  be  with
    the Appellant's credibility, the Respondent has not sought to  maintain
    a challenge to the Appellant's claim that he did  not  have  permission
    from the authorities to leave  Eritrea.    That  puts  him  in  a  very
    different position from many other Eritrean appellants found to be  not
    credible in material respects.

455.  As a person of draft age who exited illegally  (see  KA)  and  is  not
    medically unfit, the Appellant therefore must be regarded as  being  at
    real risk on return as a perceived deserter or evader of NS.

456.  We have thus concluded that by reason of political opinion,  perceived
    or  otherwise,  the  Appellant's  circumstances,  engage   the   Geneva
    Convention.   It follows we find that he is a person  whose  return  to
    Eritrea would violate Article 3 of the ECHR.

457.  We would add for the sake of completeness that we  do  not  find  that
    the provisions of section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 apply in this case.  The Appellant arrived in
    the United Kingdom on 24 January 2005 and claimed asylum  on  the  same
    day.  Further, it was not a matter raised by Mr Parkinson in the course
    of his written submissions or  by  his  colleague,  Mr Oguntolu,  when
    making further oral submissions before us.

          Decision

           The  original  Tribunal  made  a  material  error  of  law.   The
    following decision is substituted.

          The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).


    By reason of paragraph 339C(ii) of the Immigration Rules, the Appellant
    is not entitled to the grant of humanitarian protection.




Signed


                               Date
Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein
                                    ANNEX


Expert Evidence

Report prepared by Dr Giam Kibreab, 30 August 2006.

Report prepared by Dr David Pool, 30 August 2006.

Affidavit of Dr Amanuel Gebremedhin, undated - (circa 2006)

Reports submitted by Appellant relating to country situation Eritrea.

Amnesty International "Eritrea:- 'You have no right  to  ask'  -  Government
resists scrutiny on human rights" 19 May 2004.

BBC News "Quick Exit: BBC expelled from Eritrea" 10 September 2004.

Eritrea CIPU report, October 2004.
European Parliament: Motion for a Resolution.
"On Human rights violation in Eritrea"

Royal African Society lecture: "Refugees and African Development:  the  case
of Eritreans in the UK" 14 July 2005.

Voice of America News: Eritrea  reportedly  detains  relatives  of  Military
Service Evaders, 29 July 2005.

Human Rights Watch letter, 8 August 2005.

BBC News "Eritrea to expel UN peacekeepers" 7 December 2005.

Amnesty International, "Eritrea - Religious Persecution" 7 December 2005.

EUN threatens to pull out of Eritrea - Ethiopia border  dispute,  5  January
2006.

Home Office letter re removals to Eritrea, 10 January 2006.

Human Rights Watch Country Report, 19 January 2006.

Home Office letter re removals to Eritrea, 10 February 2006.

Reuters, "Eritrea detains 13 UN  staff,  33  or  more  in  hiding:  UN"  14,
February 2006.

Reuters, "Eritrea re-registering demobilised soldiers" 23 February 2006.

Middle East Times "Eritrea frees nearly all  detained  local  UN  staff"  23
February 2006.

US State Department Country Report, 8 March 2006.

Voice of America News, "Eritrea Orders Aid Groups  to  Stop  Activities"  23
March 2006.

International Press Institute, "2005 World Press Freedom  Review"  30  March
2006.

US State Department, "Supporting Human Rights and Democracy" 5 April 2006.

International Organisation for Migration  letter  reads  Voluntary  Assisted
Return Reintegration Programme (VARRP) to Eritrea, 5 April 2006

BBC News "Horn stalemate 'shocks' envoy" 7 April 2006.

Reuters "UN eyes scaling back its Ethiopia/Eritrea mission" 13 April 2006.

Swiss Refugee Council letter re Return of failed Eritrean asylum seekers  to
Eritrea, 20 April 2006.

Amnesty International letter, 21 April 2006.

COI Report, "Treatment of Returned Failed Asylum Seekers" 26 April 2006.

COI Report extract (para 6.84) 28 April 2006.

Reporters Sans Frontieres, "Eritrea - Annual report 2006" 3 May 2006.

Inter Press Service News Agency, 1 May 2006.

Committee to  Protect  Journalists  "10  Most  Censored  Countries  (Eritrea
Excerpt) 2 May 2006.

Annual Report of US Commission on International Freedom, 3 May 2006.

Human Rights Watch letter, 5 May 2006.

Eritrea Daily.net "Eritrea: A  Myth  of  Self-Reliance"  (Article  from  The
Economist) 9 May 2006.

News 24.com "Eritrea arrests UN staff" 11 May 2006.

Reuters: "Ethiopia says Eritrea has 10,000 armed men at border"  25  October
2006.

International Herald Tribune:  "UN  Chief  warns  that  Ethiopia  -  Eritrea
tensions could explode without attention" 30 October 2006.

Amnesty International report Public Statement "Eritrea Over 500  parents  of
conscripts arrested" 21 December 2006.

Documents submitted by Respondent relating to country situation, Eritrea

Eritrean Proclamation of National Service, 23 October 1995

The World Bank "Eritrea  -  Demobilisation  and  Reintegration  Programme  -
Project Appraisal" 22 June 2001.

The World Bank -  "Eritrea  -  Emergency  Demobilisation  and  Reintegration
Project, Volume 1" 22 April 2002.

The World Bank Technical Annex for a Proposed Credit  of  US$60  Million  to
the State of Eritrea - Emergency Demobilisation and  Reintegration  Project,
22 April 2002.

UNHCR - Position on return of rejected asylum seekers  to  Eritrea,  January
2004.

The World Bank - Aide-Memoire - Part II: Proposed Restructuring.
Eritrea: Emergency Demobilisation and  Reintegration  Programme  -  Mid-Term
Review Mission, July 14 - 15 2005.

USAID/Eritrea Annual Report, 15 June 2005.

Operations Policy and Country Services - Status of Projects in  Execution  -
FY05 and FY06 - Eritrea, 19 September 2005.

Letter from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, 1 February 2006

Awate.com - News Report "Eritrea calls up demobilised  troops"  23  February
2006.

US Department of State Report 2006 dated 8 March 2006.

UNDP Project Fact Sheet, April 2006.

USAID Report, 17 April 2006.

US Census Bureau Demographic Data for Eritrea, 24 August 2006.

Hutchinson Country Facts - Eritrea - undated.

COIS Report, Eritrea, 21 September 2006.

US Department of State Background Note, October 2006.

Operational Guidance Note Eritrea, 27 October 2006.

Table of Visa Applications at the British Embassy Asmara, 2006.

Canadian Embassy Visa Application Procedure, 5 December 2006.

Verification of email  from  Angel  Square  Presenting  Officers'  Unit,  11
January 2007.
