


|PD (Grounds - implied variation - section 86(3)) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT     |
|00058                                                                       |
|                                                                            |
|asylum and immigration Tribunal                                             |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|         |                          |                    |                  |
|Heard at: Field House               |                        Date of       |
|                                    |hearing: 28 May 2008                  |
|         |                          |                    |                  |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Senior Immigration Judge Gill                                               |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |PD                                                 |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |
|                                                                          |


   1) The jurisdiction of the Tribunal  is  in  all  cases  limited  to  the
      grounds of appeal, as varied before the Immigration  Judge,  plus  any
      grounds contained in  section  120  statements  and  Robinson  obvious
      points. The Tribunal is not empowered by section 86 of the 2002 Act to
      allow an appeal on some other  basis.  Grounds  of  appeal  cannot  be
      varied by implication.


   2) Paragraph (1) informs the approach that  the  Tribunal  must  take  on
      reconsideration  in  determining  whether  an  Immigration  Judge  has
      materially erred in law.

   3) The Respondent's failure to consider the eligibility of  an  appellant
      under the backlog policy,  announced  in  the  White  Paper  entitled:
      "Fairer, Faster and Firmer - A  Modern  Approach  to  Immigration  and
      Asylum" issued on 27 July 1998, does not raise  any  Robinson  obvious
      point.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs. J. Rothwell,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Oaks
                       Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms. R. Brown, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born  on  21  May  1965.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 10 June 1995 with entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor, and claimed asylum on  12  June  1995.   His  application  was
    refused by the Respondent on non-compliance grounds  (under  paragraphs
    336 and 340 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395, as
    amended) (the Immigration Rules), on 24 May 2000.  His appeal was heard
    before Mr A J Martin, a Special Adjudicator (the first Adjudicator)  on
    31 May 2001, and dismissed on 11 July  2001.   The  Appellant  did  not
    embark.  His representatives submitted further  representations  asking
    that his case be considered under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR).  These representations were refused for reasons given in
    a letter from the Respondent dated 20 February  2002.   His  subsequent
    appeal was heard on 5 December 2002 before Mr C  J  Deavin,  a  Special
    Adjudicator (the second Adjudicator),  and  dismissed  on  31  December
    2002.

2.    On 12 July 2005, new representatives made further  representations  on
    the Appellant's behalf, and sought to make a fresh asylum claim on  his
    behalf.  The Respondent did not accept the representations amounted  to
    a fresh claim and gave reasons for this decision in a  letter  dated  2
    October 2006.  The Appellant was also served  with  notice  of  further
    removal directions dated 12 September 2006.

3.    Oaks Solicitors, instructed as the Appellant's  representatives,  made
    representations against his proposed removal scheduled  for  4  October
    2006 and applied for Judicial Review.  The  Respondent,  in  a  consent
    order  dated  27  February  2007,   agreed   to   treat   the   further
    representations of 2 and 3 October 2006 and the grounds of the Judicial
    Review application  as  a  fresh  claim.   Those  representations  were
    rejected for reasons given in  a  letter  dated  24  April  2007.   The
    Respondent issued another notice of  decision  (a  decision  to  refuse
    leave to enter) addressed to  the  Appellant  on  18  May  2007.   This
    contains proposals for the Appellant's removal to Sri Lanka.

4.    The Appellant's appeal against the decision of 18 May 2007 was  lodged
    on 6 June 2007. It does not assert that the  Respondent's  decision  is
    not in accordance with the law, i.e., the grounds on which  the  appeal
    was brought did not include the  ground  in  section  84(1)(e)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act).   The
    appeal was heard on 4 July 2007 before Immigration Judge  Bart-Stewart,
    who dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds. On 16 August 2007, a Senior Immigration  Judge  refused
    to order reconsideration. By an  order  of  the  High  Court  dated  23
    November 2007, the Tribunal was ordered to reconsider its decision.

      Basis of Claim

5.    In summary, the Appellant  claimed  to  have  joined  the  Sri  Lankan
    police force on 1  August  1986.   He  claimed  to  have  had  frequent
    encounters with the Liberation Tigers of  Tamil  Eelam  (LTTE).   After
    each attack by the LTTE, he would arrest suspects and send them to  his
    headquarters.  He later discovered that some of the people  taken  into
    custody would disappear, and, when asked  about  their  whereabouts  by
    relatives, he would refer them to his headquarters, which often  denied
    that the individuals had been taken there  in  the  first  place.   The
    Appellant claimed that this caused  problems  with  the  relatives  and
    ordinary civilians as well as the LTTE.  He claimed that he voiced  his
    disapproval of these incidents to his superiors to no avail.  In  April
    1989, he was posted to Colombo and carried out undercover work  against
    the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) and the LTTE.   He  went  to  India
    with two other officers on a surveillance operation and became involved
    in fighting.  He rounded up more suspects, and they  also  disappeared.
    He wanted to desert his post because of this and because he  could  not
    carry out his functions properly.  He claimed to have  found  out  that
    the LTTE planned to assassinate him.  He discussed the  situation  with
    his uncle who advised him to leave Sri Lanka.

      The Immigration Judge's determination

6.    At paragraph 17 of the determination, the Immigration Judge said  that
    she took as her starting point the findings of  fact  of  the  previous
    Tribunals and  which  the  Respondent  accepted.   That  is,  that  the
    Appellant is a member of the Sri Lankan police force who was engaged in
    intelligence duties, which became known to the LTTE.  An  indeterminate
    number of people with whom he dealt disappeared  and,  because  of  his
    role in the security services, the Appellant's name was on an LTTE  hit
    list.  This was the state of affairs in 1995 and he  decided  to  leave
    the country and seek refuge in the United Kingdom.   In  assessing  the
    risk on return, the Immigration  Judge  referred  to  the  judgment  in
    Gedara [2006] EWHC  1690  (Admin)  in  which  the  Court,  inter  alia,
    accepted the Secretary of State's  submission  that,  as  a  matter  of
    established principle,  there  is  no  entitlement  to  refugee  status
    because of risks arising out of service in the security forces, whether
    against an external or internal enemy.  This principle applied  equally
    to the ECHR claim.   The  Immigration  Judge  noted  that  a  state  is
    entitled to require soldiers and police officers as representatives  of
    the organs of the state to face a heightened risk of harm from internal
    or external enemies in order that it  can  provide  due  and  practical
    protection to its citizens.  The  state  does  not  have  to  guarantee
    perfect safety and the real question is whether the protection  offered
    in Sri Lanka is practical and effective in the particular circumstances
    of the individual's claim.  The Immigration Judge had earlier noted the
    finding of the first Adjudicator that the Appellant's primary  fear  is
    of the LTTE, and not the  authorities.   The  Tribunal  accepted  this,
    saying that the Appellant would be liable to suffer a revenge  killing.
    The Immigration Judge noted that  the  first  Adjudicator  had  already
    found that there is no evidence of risk of persecution  as  a  deserter
    from the police force.  The Immigration Judge  then  said  that,  given
    these conclusions, she found that the Appellant had not shown  that  he
    was entitled to asylum.

7.    The Immigration Judge then turned to consider the Appellant's  Article
    2 and Article 3 claims.  She again referred to the judgment in  Gedara,
    noting that the Appellant as  a  former  security  officer  may  be  at
    heightened risk of harm, but that it does not follow that  this  places
    him  within  the  terms  of  the  ECHR.   She  noted  that  the  second
    Adjudicator had taken account of the substantial changes in  Sri  Lanka
    since the Appellant left, which included the ceasefire between the LTTE
    and the government, and the fact that it was seven  and  a  half  years
    since the Appellant had operated as a police officer in Sri Lanka.  The
    only fear that the Appellant had expressed  was  of  a  revenge  attack
    because of being on the LTTE hit list.   The  Immigration  Judge  noted
    that a further four years had moved on since the previous hearing.  The
    Appellant has now been in the United Kingdom  for  twelve  years.   She
    then turned to consider the expert evidence of Mr David Rampton,  whose
    expertise she accepted.  At paragraphs 26 and 27 of the  determination,
    the Immigration Judge said:-

         "26.     On the issue of desertion he said that police in  hundreds
             have abandoned posts and later resigned prompting  speculation
             that they were to be  charged  with  cowardice.   He  said  it
             remains  unclear  whether  the  appellant  would  face  formal
             charges though he might  be  disciplined.   He  considered  it
             highly unlikely that the JVP would represent a threat or  have
             an adverse interest in the appellant and he has little to fear
             from the JVP on return to Sri Lanka.  He  considers  what  the
             appellant says about being on the LTTE hit list.  He considers
             this presents a serious threat as the LTTE  is  and  has  been
             capable of ruthless elimination of opponents,  which  has  not
             receded.  He lists a number  of  individuals  assassinated  as
             anti   LTTE   activist   [sic],   supporters   and   suspected
             collaborators.  He considers that the  large  number  of  such
             assassinations indicates that the Sri Lankan  authorities  are
             incapable of protecting individuals who face  persecution  and
             harassment from the LTTE.   He  also  considers  the  risk  of
             asylum and detention at the airport.  This he accepts  usually
             applies to  failed  Tamil  asylum  seekers  but  considers  it
             plausible that the appellant will undergo the same  suspicions
             and experiences.


         27.      The country conditions described by  Mr.  Rampton  do  not
             differ from that in the extracts of the COIR relied on  by  Ms
             Jagaraja.  Whether these conditions pose a real risk  for  the
             appellant is the issue I must decide.  I accept Mr. Rampton as
             an expert on the political conditions in Sri Lanka however, he
             does not address the very pertinent issue of whether the  LTTE
             would have any reason to target the appellant 12  years  after
             he left the country nor help  as  to  the  numbers  of  former
             police officers who have been targeted  and  killed.   Of  the
             long list of people assassinated, he does not indicate whether
             any or how many are former intelligence  officers.   The  fact
             that a number of people have been killed in  a  conflict  does
             not assist in deciding the individual risk to  the  appellant.
             Mr. Rampton refers to hundreds  of  police  deserting  and  no
             doubt many of these are for reasons similar to the  appellant.
             There is no evidence before me that they have been hunted  and
             killed and I do not  consider  it  likely  that  the  LTTE  is
             concentrating on locating all those whom  they  considered  as
             past enemies.  Whatever view the LTTE had of the appellant, he
             ceased to be responsible for or  involved  in  the  arrest  of
             their members many years ago.  I  do  not  consider  that  the
             breakdown of the peace process would  be  likely  to  put  the
             appellant at any greater risk today than in 2002."

8.    The Immigration Judge then said, at paragraph 28,  that  she  did  not
    consider it likely that the Appellant would have difficulties with  the
    authorities, that he left on his  own  passport  with  a  visa  and  is
    Sinhalese and that there was no reason why he could not return there on
    his own properly issued passport.  She found that  there  was  no  real
    risk of the Appellant receiving treatment in breach of Articles 2 and 3
    of the ECHR.

9.    With regard to the Appellant's claim based on his  medical  condition,
    the Immigration Judge summarised the report of Dr. Gunam  Kanagaratnam,
    who  she  noted  described  himself  as  having   been   a   Consultant
    Psychiatrist until recently, when he chose to go down one  grade  after
    some ill health.  She noted that the diagnosis made by Dr. Kanagaratnam
    is that  the  Appellant  suffers  from  complex  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder with features of major depressive disorder, that he  is  being
    treated with antidepressants, that treatment should include an  anxiety
    management and  cognitive  therapy  and  that  there  are  no  clinical
    psychologists  in  the  Department  of  Health  in  Sri  Lanka  and  so
    psychotherapy is not available.  Dr. Kanagaratnam states that the  main
    treatment centres in psychiatry are in Colombo.  The Immigration  Judge
    noted that Dr. Kanagaratnam is concerned that, on return to Sri  Lanka,
    the Appellant would be detained and, due to intense interrogation,  his
    mental health could deteriorate and that, in  his  disturbed  state  of
    mind, the likelihood of suicide is high.  The  Immigration  Judge  then
    assessed the evidence at paragraphs 30 and 31, which state:-

         "30.     I find that the assertion  that  the  appellant  would  be
             detained and interrogated is mere speculation and  as  already
             found, consider his detention at the airport to  be  unlikely.
             The risk of suicide appears  to  related  to  this  event  and
             consequently I find the risk to also be unlikely.


         31.      There are a number of letters from the appellant's GP  and
             other medical professional [sic].   There  is  the  suggestion
             that the appellant may have taken an overdose  of  paracetamol
             but the hospital discharge notes  that  are  disclosed  merely
             record  that  his  friends  found  a  large  quantity  in  his
             possession not that he took  any.   The  notes  refer  to  the
             recent break up with his fianc�e because of his visa.  He  was
             found  to  have  moderate  depression  due   to   his   social
             circumstances.  Although he was referred to his GP for further
             follow up and probably going to his local CMH,  he  failed  to
             keep appointments that were given and ultimately his case  was
             closed.  A letter dated 30 August 2006 from  Vartouhi  Ohanian
             Consultant Clinical Psychologist at West Middlesex  University
             Hospital following a referral said that the appellant required
             to be seen by the Brief  Intervention  &  Counselling  Service
             rather than long-term psychological  services.   In  light  of
             these letters and reports,  I  attach  little  weight  to  the
             assessment of Dr Kanagaratnam that  the  appellant's  symptoms
             are complex and requires treatment not available to him in Sri
             Lanka.  The COIR report at 26.01 -  26.17  shows  that  whilst
             resources are stretched, it is inaccurate, as Dr  Kanagaratnam
             appears  to  suggest  mental  health  services  would  not  be
             available to the appellant."

10.   The Immigration Judge then went on to dismiss  the  Appellant's  claim
    for humanitarian protection, before turning to the Article 8  claim  at
    paragraph 33, which reads:-

         "33.     The appellant submits that his rights under Article  8  of
             the 1950 Convention are  engaged.   He  said  that  he  has  a
             private life with his friends and distant relatives, has a job
             and owns  a  property.   These  issues  have  been  previously
             adjudicated on.  His circumstances have not changed and I find
             any breach of his private life is  lawful  and  proportionate.
             The fact that he has been in the UK for 12  years  should  not
             come to his aid when it is his determined  attempts  to  avoid
             removal since 2001 that had let to him accumulating  at  least
             half of that period.  The claim that he has no family  in  Sri
             Lanka I find not of significance.  I do not find that  he  has
             established family life in the UK.  He has no close  relatives
             here and the medical records suggests [sic] he lives alone.  I
             accept that after 12 years he would have established a private
             life here however he had no close family when  he  came  here.
             He was able to learn the language and  obtain  employment  and
             property.  Such enterprise  will  be  of  assistance  when  he
             returns to his  home  country  as  a  resourceful  able-bodied
             single man.  It would not be unlawful nor disproportionate for
             the appellant to be removed to Sri Lanka.   I  find  that  the
             decision appealed against would not cause the  United  Kingdom
             to be in breach of its obligations under the 1950 Convention."


11.   Before the Immigration Judge, reliance was placed on the  Respondent's
    backlog policy announced by the Respondent in a  White  Paper  entitled
    "Fairer, Faster and Firmer -  A  Modern  Approach  to  Immigration  and
    Asylum" on 27 July 1998 (the White Paper), paragraphs 8.29 and 8.30  of
    which read:-

         "8.29    Such delay will not normally be a factor  at  all  in  the
             consideration of applications in the backlog dating from after
             1995.  Applications from before that date will  be  considered
             broadly in two groups.  In certain of the very  oldest  cases,
             where an asylum application was made before  the  coming  into
             force on 1 July 1993 of the Asylum and Immigration Appeals Act
             1993, delay in itself will normally be considered  so  serious
             as  to  justify,  as  a  matter  of  fairness,  the  grant  of
             indefinite leave to enter or remain.   This  will  not  apply,
             however, to applicants whose presence here is not conducive to
             the public good (for example, on the basis of their conviction
             for a serious criminal offence), nor to  any  application  for
             asylum made after the commencement of removal  or  deportation
             action against the applicant.  Such cases will continue to  be
             assessed on their merits without any presumptive weight  being
             given to the delay in reaching a decision.  Altogether in  the
             pre-1993 Act group there are estimated to be a total of around
             10,000 cases still outstanding.


         8.30     For applications made between 1 July 1993 and 31  December
             1995, estimated at about 20,000 cases, delay will not normally
             of itself justify the grant of leave to enter or remain  where
             asylum is refused, but in individual cases will be weighed  up
             with  other  considerations  and,  if   there   are   specific
             compassionate or other exceptional factors present  which  are
             linked to the delay or  which  compound  its  effects  on  the
             applicant's situation, a decision to grant  limited  leave  to
             enter or remain may then be justified.  The  sort  of  factors
             which might be relevant  here,  not  otherwise  by  themselves
             sufficient to justify leave to enter or remain, could  include
             such things as the presence of children attending school or  a
             continuing record of voluntary or other work by the  applicant
             in the local community."

12.   The Immigration Judge dealt with the backlog policy at  paragraph  18,
    which reads:-

         "18.     For unexplained reasons the respondent did not  get  round
             to considering his case in 2000.  By that time the  conditions
             in Sri Lanka were improved.  The appellant complains  that  he
             should have also benefited from a policy that  the  respondent
             had in place for clearing the 50,000 asylum  cases  that  were
             then blocking the system.  The respondents [sic] say  that  it
             is the appellant's fault as he failed to co-operate  and  send
             them information when requested.   I  find  this  a  fair  and
             reasonable  response.   In  his  representations   (p71)   the
             appellant suggests that it was  his  original  solicitors  who
             were responsible for the default however the respondents [sic]
             cannot be blamed for his  poor  representation.   He  did  not
             respond to 2 letters under the backlog policy.   I  have  been
             provided with a copy of the policy which applied in 1998.   It
             reads "for applications  made  between  1  July  1993  and  31
             December 1995, estimated at about 20000 cases, delay will  not
             normally of itself justify the grant  of  leave  to  enter  or
             remain where asylum is refused, but in individual  cases  will
             be weighed up with  other  considerations  and  if  there  are
             specific compassionate or other  exceptional  factors  present
             which are linked to delay or which compound it's [sic] effects
             on the applicants [sic] situation, a decision to grant limited
             leave to enter or remain may then be justified."  It  goes  on
             to indicate the type of factors that  may  be  relevant.   The
             appellant did not present any evidence to  the  respondent  to
             assist on deciding whether the policy that  in  any  event  is
             discretionary, should be exercised in his favour.  Further  as
             reminded in MM [2005] UKIAT 00163 (Serbia and Montenegro)  the
             applicant is not entitled to just sit back and  then  rely  on
             delay.  There is no  evidence  of  any  contact  made  by  the
             appellant or his representatives to progress  his  case  until
             after the  initial  refusal  of  his  asylum  claim  in  2000.
             Thereafter the appellants  [sic]  continued  presence  in  the
             United  Kingdom  has  been  because  of  his  pursuing   legal
             challenges to his removal.  He is of course entitled to do  so
             but I do  not  find  that  the  appellant  who  did  no  [sic]
             cooperate with the respondent, is entitled to benefit from any
             policy that may have been operative prior to the determination
             of his asylum claim.  There is no evidence he would  have  met
             the criteria to be granted any form of leave.  I find [sic] is
             not relevant to the issues before me.  I will return  to  this
             when considering his representations under Article 8."

13.   Unfortunately, however, the Immigration Judge did not  return  to  the
    backlog policy when considering the Article 8 claim at paragraph 33.

    The Grounds of Application

14.   The grounds of application contend that the  Immigration  Judge  erred
    in law as follows:-

     (a)    (Ground 1)


      (i)   by erring in her  assessment  of  the  expert  evidence  of  Mr.
             Rampton, in that, the Immigration Judge was  highly  selective
             in selecting the passages she quoted from the expert's report.




      (ii)  by erring in her assessment  of  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
             protection.  At the hearing, Mrs. Rothwell accepted that, if I
             concluded that the Immigration Judge did not materially err in
             law in her assessment of the risk on return, then  sufficiency
             of protection would not be relevant, and  accordingly,  Ground
             1(ii) would not be material to the outcome.


     (b)    (Ground 2) by failing to properly consider the medical evidence.
         Paragraph 7 of the grounds  asserts  that  the  Immigration  Judge
        erred in law at paragraph 30 of the determination  by  linking  the
        Appellant's mental suffering to the subjective  fears  of  risk  of
        arrest and detention on return and finding that they are  based  on
        mere  speculation.   At  the  hearing  before  me,  Mrs.   Rothwell
        submitted that this ground was relevant to the  Appellant's  asylum
        claim as  well  as  his  Article  3  claim  based  on  his  medical
        condition.


     (c)     (Ground  3)  by  making  flawed  findings  in  respect  of  the
        Respondent's failure to consider the Appellant's  claim  under  the
        backlog policy.  Paragraphs 9 and 10 of the  grounds  contend  that
        the Immigration Judge's finding that  the  Appellant  had  not  co-
        operated with the Respondent was inconsistent with the  finding  of
        the previous Adjudicator that the Appellant should  not  be  blamed
        because he had not received  the  alleged  questionnaire  from  the
        Respondent.  The grounds contend that it  is  a  known  fact  that,
        despite the stipulated discretionary factors, the Respondent did in
        practice exercise excessively generous discretion in granting leave
        to remain to most applicants under the policy.

    Submissions

15.   Before I heard submissions, I  raised  some  preliminary  points  with
    regard to Ground 3. It seemed to me that the issue as  to  whether  the
    backlog policy was relevant in this case depended solely on whether the
    Appellant's application was actually lodged with the Respondent between
    1 July 1993 and 31 December 1995  and,  if  so,  whether  it  had  been
    decided by the Respondent when the policy  was  announced  on  27  July
    1998.  It seemed to  me  that  the  argument  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to be considered under the policy, even if no application  had
    in fact been  lodged  (for  whatever  reason)  was  misconceived.   The
    Respondent's policy was intended to address  the  unfairness  that  may
    have  been  caused  due  to  administrative  delays  in  dealing   with
    applications that had actually been lodged.  If the Respondent had  not
    received an application from the Appellant, then it is not possible  to
    say whether the Appellant's application would have been  one  of  those
    that had fallen prey to the administrative  delays  and  had  not  been
    dealt with when the policy was announced.

16.   In this regard, Ms. Brown and Mrs.  Rothwell  agreed  that  the  first
    date on which the Appellant lodged an asylum claim with the  Respondent
    was 12 June 1995 and that a decision was made on that claim on  24  May
    2000.  The decision was to refuse the claim on non-compliance  grounds,
    under paragraphs 336 and 340 of the Immigration Rules.  On this  basis,
    Ms. Brown agreed that the policy was relevant, and that the Immigration
    Judge  was  incorrect  to  find  otherwise  at  paragraph  17  of   the
    determination.  Ms. Brown also agreed that there  was  nothing  in  the
    refusal letter dated 24 May 2000 which indicated  that  the  Respondent
    had considered the backlog policy.  At  paragraph  28  of  the  refusal
    letter  dated  28  October  2000,  the  Respondent  appeared  to   have
    considered whether a different policy had existed,  that  is,  that  of
    granting asylum or exceptional leave to remain  to  Sri  Lankan  asylum
    seekers.  The Respondent considered the  issue  of  delay,  seeking  to
    distinguish the Appellant's case from the cases of Shala v SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 233 and SSHD v Akaeke [2005] EWCA Civ 947.  Ms.  Brown  agreed
    that the refusal letter  dated  28  October  2006  indicates  that  the
    Respondent had considered the existence of a different policy.

17.   However, I then raised the question  as  to  whether  the  grounds  on
    which the appeal was brought included a ground  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law and,  if  not,  whether  an
    application had been made to the Immigration Judge to vary the  grounds
    of appeal to include that ground, or whether the Immigration Judge  had
    varied the grounds in the absence of an application.  In  this  regard,
    Mrs.  Rothwell  referred  me  to   the   Appellant's   representatives'
    representations in their letter dated 12 July 2005 at page  70  of  the
    Appellant's bundle, in which the Respondent was requested  to  consider
    the backlog policy in the Appellant's case.  The refusal  letter  dated
    28 October 2006 was issued in response of this letter.

18.   I questioned whether, once a decision was made in  his  case,  it  was
    for the Appellant to bring his appeal on the grounds of appeal on which
    he wished to rely.  In this  regard,  I  noted  that  the  "Grounds  of
    Appeal/Statement of Additional  Grounds"  attached  to  the  notice  of
    appeal does not  assert  that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law. I checked the Immigration  Judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings, copies of which I provided to the  parties,  the  relevant
    parts of which read:-

        (On the front page of the Record of Proceedings):


             "Article 8 reps - p73


             Backlog policy - applied as he applied June 95 and policy  was
             1998


             Refused at p76."


        (On the penultimate page of the Record of Proceedings):


             "Article 8


             Do not agree what he says about J par 16, 17, 28 &  33,  42  -
             domestic Article 8 case applies not N -  high  threshold  test
             does not apply.


             Backlog


             Concede argument he did not return questionnaire - likely he'd
             have got leave - not be an immigration offender  -  would  not
             have Article 8 application to make - should be used to  assess
             proportionality - Tozlukaya has policy applied  in  Article  8
             case - finding in 2001 he will be killed on return -"


19.   I noted that there was no application to vary the grounds  before  the
    Immigration Judge  and  that  Counsel  for  the  Appellant  before  the
    Immigration Judge (Ms S Jegarajah) made submissions with regard to  the
    policy in connection with the Article 8 claim.  There was nothing which
    suggests that she contended that the decision is not in accordance with
    the law as a result of the Respondent's failure to consider the policy.



20.   Mrs. Rothwell submitted that paragraph 17 of the  determination  shows
    that the Immigration Judge must have implicitly varied the  grounds  of
    appeal to include the ground that the decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

21.    I  then  heard  submissions  from  the  parties,  which  I  will  now
    summarise.

22.   On the Appellant's behalf, Mrs. Rothwell submitted that the report  of
    the expert was important in this case, because the  objective  evidence
    in general relates to Tamil Sri Lankan asylum seekers.   The  basis  of
    the Appellant's claim was unusual.  The Immigration Judge accepted  the
    expertise of Mr. Rampton.  She made two errors of law,  both  of  which
    were material.   Firstly,  the  Immigration  Judge  misapprehended  the
    evidence of the expert when she said that the expert does  not  address
    "the very pertinent issue of whether the LTTE would have any reason  to
    target the Appellant twelve years after he left the country,  nor  help
    as to the numbers of former police officers who have been targeted  and
    killed."  Secondly,  the  Immigration  Judge  also  misapprehended  the
    evidence of the expert when she said that, "Of the long list of  people
    assassinated, he does not indicate whether any or how many  are  former
    intelligence officers".  Mrs. Rothwell submitted that, given  that  Mr.
    Rampton was aware of the timing  of  the  Appellant's  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom and his claim for asylum in the United Kingdom,  it  was
    implicitly the case that he was aware  of  the  time  lapse  since  the
    events on which the Appellant based his asylum claim.  It is clear from
    page 4 of the report (page 38  of  the  Appellant's  bundle)  that  Mr.
    Rampton had seen the Appellant's statement, the Respondent's  documents
    and the previous  asylum  appeals  by  the  Appellant.   Mrs.  Rothwell
    submitted that the final sentence of paragraph 4.0  of  the  report  on
    pages 38 and 39 of the  Appellant's  bundle  make  it  clear  that  Mr.
    Rampton was concentrating on the dangers the Appellant  would  face  if
    returned to Sri Lanka.  At paragraph 4.3 of  the  report,  Mr.  Rampton
    said that the Appellant's claim that the LTTE  would  have  an  adverse
    interest in him because he is on a hit list does  represent  a  serious
    threat to the Appellant as  the  LTTE  "is  and  has  been  capable  of
    ruthless elimination of opponents" and (at the bottom of page 40 of the
    Appellant's bundle) that "the LTTE also  have  an  extremely  efficient
    intelligence network that extends well beyond the North and  East,  but
    is highly active in Colombo as well".  Mr. Rampton  went  on  to  state
    that the  Sri  Lankan  security  forces  are  incapable  of  protecting
    individuals who face persecution and harassment from the LTTE.  On page
    41 of the Appellant's bundle, Mr.  Rampton  said  that  "the  LTTE  has
    engaged in the ruthless  targeting  and  assassination  of  individuals
    known to be working for the intelligence forces, whether  that  be  the
    police or the army".  Mr. Rampton then went on to give the  example  of
    two high-ranking  army  officers  who  were  assassinated  in  2005  in
    Colombo,  allegedly  by  the  LTTE,  and  that  "Some  50  intelligence
    operatives of the Sri Lankan armed  forces  (were)  killed  in  similar
    circumstances".  Mr. Rampton  makes  the  point  that  these  incidents
    relate to a period of the ceasefire agreement when the environment  was
    more peaceful and have affected more personnel  than  senior  officers.
    Accordingly, Mr. Rampton considered that, in the current  context,  the
    risk to the Appellant would be heightened.

23.   Mrs. Rothwell submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  was  therefore
    incorrect to say that Mr. Rampton had not indicated whether any, or how
    many, of those people who were assassinated  were  former  intelligence
    officers.  Although it is correct that Mr. Rampton  had  not  indicated
    this in the long list of people on page 40 of the  Appellant's  bundle,
    he did go on to say, at page 41 of the Appellant's bundle,  that  "Some
    50 intelligence operatives of the Sri Lankan armed forces (were) killed
    in similar circumstances".  Accordingly, the Immigration Judge had made
    a mistake of fact as to the expert evidence before her.

24.   Accordingly,  Mrs.  Rothwell  submitted  that  the  remainder  of  the
    Immigration Judge's assessment of  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Rampton  was
    flawed.

25.   With regard to Ground 2, Mrs. Rothwell submitted that the  Immigration
    Judge looked at the medical evidence from the wrong perspective.  It is
    clear from page 104 of the Appellant's bundle that Dr. Kanagaratnam had
    seen the Appellant on four separate occasions, for a  total  period  of
    more than six hours.  On  page  111  of  the  Appellant's  bundle,  Dr.
    Kanagaratnam said that his questioning of the  Appellant  brought  back
    memories of working in the police service; on page 112, that it is  not
    uncommon for active servicemen to  suffer  from  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder when they sustain physical injuries,  witness  the  deaths  of
    their colleagues in close proximity and learn about the deaths of their
    close colleagues; and, on  page  113,  that,  in  the  event  of  being
    returned to Sri Lanka, the  Appellant  is  certain  that  he  would  be
    arrested and detained and that it is his knowledge that  the  detainees
    would be subject to extreme physical and psychological harassment.   On
    page 114 of the Appellant's bundle,  Dr.  Kanagaratnam  said  that  the
    Appellant remains extremely concerned by the stigma of  desertion  from
    duty.  At paragraph 30 of the determination, the Immigration Judge said
    that  the  assertion  that  the  Appellant  would   be   detained   and
    interrogated  is  mere  speculation,  that  she  considered  that   the
    Appellant's detention at the airport was unlikely and that, given  that
    the  risk  of  suicide  appears  to  be  related  to  that  event,  she
    consequently found the risk of  suicide  also  to  be  unlikely.   Mrs.
    Rothwell submitted that the issue was not whether there was a real risk
    of the Appellant being arrested and detained and interrogated, but  the
    Appellant's perception of whether he would be arrested and detained and
    interrogated.  Mrs. Rothwell submitted that the Appellant's  perception
    of the risk is what gives rise to the risk of suicide, and not  whether
    it is reasonably likely that he would  be  arrested  and  detained  and
    interrogated.   Given  the  Appellant's   perception,   Mrs.   Rothwell
    submitted that his subjective fear is such that the effect  on  him  of
    his  perception  would  reach  the  high  Article   3   threshold,   by
    precipitating a risk of suicide or giving rise to an increased risk.

26.   I asked whether the Appellant had made any previous suicide  attempts.
     Mrs. Rothwell referred me to pages  120,  121,  124  and  119  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  These indicate that the Appellant was found by his
    friends in  possession  of  a  large  quantity  of  paracetamol,  as  a
    consequence of which  he  was  taken  to  the  Accident  and  Emergency
    Department in West Middlesex University Hospital NHS Trust.  The  notes
    of the Accident and Emergency Department record that the Appellant  was
    not suicidal (page  124  of  the  Appellant's  bundle).   There  was  a
    subsequent letter from the Appellant's GP (page 119 of the  Appellant's
    bundle)  which  does  not  refer  to  the   risk   of   suicide.    Dr.
    Kanagaratnam's report refers to the future risk of suicide, but it does
    not mention any past attempts.  However, Mrs. Rothwell  submitted  that
    Dr. Kanagaratnam had seen the Appellant for six hours over a number  of
    occasions.  As early as March 2007, Dr. Kanagaratnam  referred  to  the
    Appellant's "intense suicidal ideation" (page 131  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle).  Accordingly, Mrs. Rothwell  submitted  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had erred in her assessment of the medical evidence,  by  placing
    too little weight on the medical report of Dr. Kanagaratnam.

27.   With regard to Ground 3, Mrs. Rothwell submitted that the  Immigration
    Judge had implicitly varied the grounds of appeal to include the ground
    that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.   If
    I was with her in this regard, she submitted that the appeal should  be
    allowed  to  the  extent   that   the   Appellant's   application   for
    consideration under the backlog policy was still outstanding before the
    Respondent.  In the event that I was against her,  she  submitted  that
    the Respondent's failure to consider the policy was still  relevant  in
    connection with the Article 8 claim in  two  respects.   In  the  first
    place,  although  not  argued  in  the  grounds  of  application,   the
    Immigration Judge had failed to consider the step-by-step approach  set
    out in the judgment of the House of Lords in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.
    Mrs. Rothwell submitted that, if the Immigration Judge  had  considered
    the step-by-step approach set out in Razgar, she would  have  concluded
    that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law under
    Article 8(2) because of the failure to consider whether  the  Appellant
    should be granted  leave  under  the  backlog  policy.   Secondly,  the
    Immigration Judge failed to consider the relevance of  the  failure  to
    consider the Appellant's eligibility  under  the  backlog  policy  when
    carrying out the balancing exercise under  Article  8(2)  in  order  to
    decide whether the  Appellant's  removal  prejudices  his  private  and
    family life in a manner sufficiently serious to warrant a breach  of  a
    fundamental right protected by Article 8.  The  Immigration  Judge  had
    made errors at paragraph 17 of the determination,  culminating  in  her
    finding that the backlog policy was not relevant.  At paragraph 17, she
    said she would return to this issue when  considering  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 claim, but failed to do so.  The errors made at paragraph  17
    of the determination include the fact that she overlooked  the  finding
    of the first Adjudicator  that  the  Appellant  had  not  received  the
    questionnaire.  By  failing  to  take  the  policy  into  account  when
    considering the balancing exercise under Article 8(2), the  Immigration
    Judge overlooked a material matter.

28.    In  response,  Ms.  Brown  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
    comments with regard to the report of Mr. Rampton, at paragraph  27  of
    the determination, were factually accurate.  The expert did not make it
    clear that he had considered the lapse of time  since  the  Appellant's
    departure from Sri Lanka when assessing whether  there  was  a  current
    risk from the LTTE.   In  any  event,  Ms.  Brown  submitted  that  the
    Immigration Judge was referring to whether the  expert  had  adequately
    explained the causal link between the events of twelve  years  ago  and
    the current risk.  At paragraph 4.3  on  page  40  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle, the expert had said that "the LTTE is and has been  capable  of
    ruthless  elimination  of  opponents".   In  the  sentence  immediately
    preceding this, Mr. Rampton referred to the Appellant's claim  that  he
    "is" on a hit list.  Ms. Brown submitted that it was not clear that the
    expert was aware that the accepted evidence was that the Appellant  was
    on a hit list at the time of his departure from Sri Lanka.   The  issue
    was whether that hit list would be maintained.   The  expert's  opinion
    that the LTTE is and has been capable of eliminating its opponents  was
    not the issue.  The issue was whether it  was  reasonably  likely  that
    they would maintain  an  adverse  interest  in  the  Appellant  in  his
    circumstances, given the lapse of time.

29.   Ms. Brown submitted that the Immigration Judge had not overlooked  any
    relevant evidence when she said that Mr. Rampton had failed to indicate
    whether any of  the  long  list  of  people  assassinated  were  former
    intelligence officers.  The key word, Ms. Brown submitted, was the word
    "former".  Ms. Brown submitted that Mr. Rampton did not explain whether
    any of  the  victims  mentioned  on  either  pages  40  or  41  of  the
    Appellant's bundle were former members of the intelligence services, or
    former members of the armed forces.  Mr. Rampton did  not  say  whether
    the people he referred to as having been assassinated were killed at  a
    time when they were still serving, or whether they were people who  had
    ended their service historically.  Mr. Rampton's report was  silent  on
    the question of whether the LTTE maintain an interest  in  individuals,
    notwithstanding the fact that they have left the services  of  the  Sri
    Lankan security forces and notwithstanding a lapse of time.  At page 41
    of the Appellant's bundle, Mr. Rampton said that  there  was  no  doubt
    that the Appellant would be at risk from the LTTE if he returned to Sri
    Lanka.  However, he failed to explain  the  evidential  foundation  for
    this opinion.

30.   Accordingly, Ground 1(ii) falls away.  In any event,  Ms.  Brown  drew
    my attention to the final sentence of paragraph 4.9  of  Mr.  Rampton's
    report (page 42 of the Appellant's bundle), where he said  that  it  is
    "nonetheless perfectly plausible" that the Appellant would "undergo the
    same  suspicions  and  experiences  suffered  by  other  failed  asylum
    seekers".  Ms. Brown submitted that "perfectly plausible" fell  a  long
    way short of demonstrating a real risk.

31.   With regard to Ground 2, Ms. Brown referred me  to  page  115  of  the
    Appellant's bundle, where Dr. Kanagaratnam said: "I am  concerned  that
    were [the Appellant] returned to Sri Lanka he  is  very  likely  to  be
    apprehended at the  airport  and  detained."   Accordingly,  Ms.  Brown
    submitted that this shows that Dr. Kanagaratnam had  assumed  that  the
    Appellant would  be  very  likely  to  be  detained,  in  reaching  his
    conclusion that if returned to Sri Lanka, the Appellant is at  risk  of
    increased deliberate self-harm with a substantial risk of suicide.  Ms.
    Brown submitted that Dr. Kanagaratnam's opinion was directly linked  to
    his  [Dr.  Kanagaratnam's]  concern  that  the   Appellant   would   be
    apprehended and detained at the airport.  His conclusions at  page  116
    of the Appellant's bundle flow directly from that concern.  At no point
    did Dr. Kanagaratnam refer to a subjective fear directly  impacting  on
    the risk of suicide regardless of whether the Appellant's fear is well-
    founded.  Ms. Brown submitted that this is exactly what the Immigration
    Judge  was  referring  to  at  paragraph  30.   At  paragraph  31,  the
    Immigration Judge considered other medical evidence  which  was  before
    her and decided to  place  little  weight  to  the  assessment  of  Dr.
    Kanagaratnam.  Ms. Brown submitted that she was fully  entitled  to  do
    so.  At page 131  of  the  Appellant's  bundle,  Dr.  Kanagaratnam  had
    referred to the Appellant's "history of  intense  suicidal  ideations".
    However, page 110  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  indicates  that,  when
    questioned by  Dr.  Kanagaratnam  about  his  suicidal  behaviour,  the
    Appellant reported having experienced "bouts  of  foreshortened  future
    without hope of a normal life" and had obtained  a  large  quantity  of
    paracetamol, which he had intended to  consume.   Ms.  Brown  submitted
    that this hardly supports the statement at page 116 that the  Appellant
    had a "intense history of suicidal ideations".  Accordingly, Ms.  Brown
    submitted that the Immigration  Judge  was  entitled  to  place  little
    weight on the report of Dr. Kanagaratnam.

32.   With regard to Ground 3, Ms. Brown submitted that the  fact  that  the
    Immigration Judge had indicated that the policy was  not  relevant  and
    that she would return to it when considering the Article 8 claim, shows
    that this was the extent of  the  arguments  relating  to  the  backlog
    policy before her.  Ms. Brown submitted that no  application  had  been
    made to vary the  grounds,  nor  had  reliance  been  placed  upon  any
    contention that the Respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law as a ground distinct from the Article 8 claim.

33.   Even if the Immigration Judge was incorrect to state that  the  policy
    was not a relevant factor in connection with the Article 8 claim,  this
    was not material because it is clear from the terms of the policy  that
    the Respondent did not consider that delay  would  normally  of  itself
    justify the grant of leave to enter or remain  where  asylum  had  been
    refused.  Paragraph 8.30 of the White Paper states that, if  there  are
    specific, compassionate or other exceptional factors present which were
    linked to the delay, or which compound its effect  on  the  applicant's
    situation, then a decision to grant limited leave to  enter  or  remain
    may then be justified.  Accordingly, Ms. Brown submitted that  this  is
    not one of those cases to which one could apply IA  (Mauritius)  [2006]
    UK AIT 00082 relying on Baig v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  1246,  Ms.  Brown
    submitted that there was little point in remitting the case back to the
    Secretary of State for consideration of the backlog  policy  if  it  is
    clear that the Appellant cannot come within the policy.  The  Appellant
    had to show specific compassionate or other exceptional  factors  which
    are  linked  to  the  delay  or  which  compound  its  effects  on  the
    Appellant's situation.  This is a high  test.   At  paragraph  18,  the
    Immigration Judge  had  said  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant would have met the criteria to be granted any form  of  leave
    under the backlog policy.  Ms. Brown submitted that this  was  correct,
    and that, even if the Immigration  Judge  had  considered  the  backlog
    policy in relation to Article 8, it would  not  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome.

34.   In response, Mrs. Rothwell submitted that Ms. Brown had  attempted  to
    re-write the Immigration Judge's reasoning with regard to the report of
    Mr. Rampton, at paragraph 27 of the determination. She  submitted  that
    it was obvious that Mr. Rampton was aware of the chronology of the case
    and that twelve years had elapsed since the Appellant's departure.   At
    paragraph 28 of the determination, the Immigration Judge failed to take
    into account the fact that the  Appellant  may  face  criminal  charges
    because of his desertion.  With regard  to  the  backlog  policy,  Mrs.
    Rothwell submitted that it was not open to the Tribunal  to  apply  the
    Respondent's policy itself, or  to  seek  to  include  or  exclude  the
    Appellant from the policy.  It cannot be said that the circumstances of
    this case were such that the  Appellant  could  not  benefit  from  the
    policy.  The letter at pages  73  and  74  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    referred to the trauma the Appellant had suffered as a  consequence  of
    his experiences in Sri Lanka.

35.   I reserved my decision.

      Assessment

      Ground 1:

36.   I do not agree with Mrs.  Rothwell  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
     misapprehended the evidence of Mr. Rampton or made any mistake of  fact
     in relation to it. I agree with Ms. Brown that, in the second and third
     sentences of paragraph 27 of the determination, the  Immigration  Judge
     was referring to the fact that Mr. Rampton had not explained the causal
     link between the Appellant's service as a police officer in  Sri  Lanka
     twelve years ago and  the  current  risk  from  the  LTTE.  The  second
     sentence  of  paragraph  27  of  the  determination  shows   that   the
     Immigration Judge had the issue of the current risk at the forefront of
     her mind before turning to assess the evidence of Mr. Rampton. She then
     said that he did not address "the very pertinent issue" of whether  the
     LTTE would have any reason to target the Appellant twelve  years  after
     he left the country. She was correct to consider that this was a  "very
     pertinent issue". Given the finding of the  previous  Adjudicator  that
     the Appellant was on a LTTE hit list when he left  Sri  Lanka  and  the
     fact that the Appellant's second appeal was  dismissed  by  the  second
     Adjudicator  because  he  (the  second  Adjudicator)  found  that   the
     Appellant would not be at real risk from being on  the  LTTE  hit  list
     when he left Sri Lanka, the question whether the LTTE  would  have  any
     reason to target the Appellant twelve years after he left Sri Lanka was
     indeed a "very pertinent issue".

37.   It is simply not enough to say that it was  implicit,  from  the  fact
     that Mr. Rampton knew of the date of the Appellant's departure from Sri
     Lanka and the date of his asylum claim in the United Kingdom,  that  he
     must have been aware of  the  fact  that  the  events  upon  which  the
     Appellant had based his claim took place twelve years ago. This  should
     have been made clear. In any event, even if he was implicitly aware  of
     the lapse of time, it was  still  necessary  for  him  to  explain  the
     evidential basis for his opinion as to the  causal  connection  between
     the current risk and the historic events. This is not apparent from his
     report. I agree with Ms. Brown that Mr. Rampton did not say,  at  pages
     40 and 41 of his report (or, indeed, elsewhere, as far as I  can  see),
     whether  the  individuals  he  listed  on  page  40  as   having   been
     assassinated by the LTTE or the individuals described or referred to at
     page 41 were still serving with the Sri Lankan security forces  at  the
     time of their deaths. I agree with Ms. Brown  that  this  is  precisely
     what the Immigration Judge meant by her use of the word "former" in the
     fourth sentence of paragraph 27 of the  determination.  I  reject  Mrs.
     Rothwell's submission that Ms. Brown effectively re-wrote paragraph  27
     of the determination. When the  paragraph  is  read  as  a  whole,  and
     bearing in mind, in particular, the second sentence of  the  paragraph,
     it is plain that she was concerned about the current  risk  given  that
     the Appellant is a former police officer who has  not  participated  in
     any security operations against the LTTE for some twelve years.

38.   Accordingly, I reject Mrs. Rothwell's contention that the  Immigration
     Judge misapprehended the report of Mr. Rampton. The  Immigration  Judge
     did not err in law in concluding that the Appellant had not shown  that
     it was reasonably likely that the LTTE maintains an adverse interest in
     him. Accordingly,  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of  protection  is  not
     material to the outcome.

39.   Ground 1 also raises the issue of risk on return as a deserter at  the
     hands of the Sri Lankan authorities. At paragraph 5  of  his  statement
     dated 26 June 2007 on page 3 of the Appellant's bundle,  the  Appellant
     said that, as he left the police force without first seeking permission
     and because he has  information  which  could  damage  the  Sri  Lankan
     government, his presence in Sri Lanka would be seen  as  a  threat.  He
     said  that  he  would  be  subjected  to  lengthy  interrogation.   The
     Immigration Judge dealt with this at paragraph 22 of the determination.
     She referred to the finding of the first Adjudicator that there  is  no
     evidence of risk of persecution as a deserter from the police force. At
     paragraph 19 of the determination, the Immigration Judge said  that  it
     still seems to be the case that the Appellant's primary fear is of  the
     LTTE and not the authorities. Mrs.  Rothwell  confirmed  that  that  is
     still the case. Nevertheless, the Appellant does fear  the  Sri  Lankan
     authorities, as he said at paragraph 5  of  his  statement,  which  was
     before  the  Immigration  Judge.  Accordingly,  I   accept   that   the
     Immigration Judge ought to have given  reasons  for  finding  that  the
     Appellant was not at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  She
     should not simply have relied on the finding of the  first  Adjudicator
     and/or the second Adjudicator that the Appellant is not at such risk.

40.    However,  this  is  not  material,  for  the  following  reasons:  At
     paragraph 4.1 of his report, Mr. Rampton suggested  that  desertion  is
     chargeable through the courts martial and is applicable under the  Navy
     and Army Acts in Sri Lanka, whereas  the  charge  under  administrative
     regulations in the police service would most likely be  dereliction  of
     duty. He states that, given the general breakdown in the  rule  of  law
     and military-civil distinctions, it is unclear what  charges  a  police
     officer may become open to in  a  case  of  dereliction  of  duty.  The
     examples he proceeds to give of police officers who were "charged  with
     cowardice" relates to police officers who abandoned  their  posts.  The
     Appellant is not someone who abandoned his post. His evidence was that,
     whilst he was on annual leave, he spoke to his uncle who advised him to
     leave Sri Lanka and that he did not return to work at the  end  of  his
     annual leave (see  Dr.  Kanagaratnam's  report,  on  page  108  of  the
     Appellant's bundle). Although  I  noted  that  the  second  Adjudicator
     accepted the Appellant's evidence that he  felt  it  unwise  to  resign
     (paragraph 39 of the second Adjudicator's determination, on page 60  of
     the Appellant's bundle), the fact still remains that he did not abandon
     his post; he simply did not return to work at the  end  of  his  annual
     leave. At paragraph 3 of his statement on page  2  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle,  the  Appellant  confirmed  that  Dr.   Kanagaratnam's   report
     correctly sets out the basis  of  his  claim.  Although  I  noted  that
     paragraph 4.0 of Mr. Rampton's report indicates that he had before  him
     the Appellant's statements, it is not clear whether he was  aware  that
     the Appellant left Sri Lanka whilst on leave, and that it  is  not  the
     case that he abandoned his  post  whilst  on  duty.  I  have  carefully
     considered the two statements in the Appellant's bundle, at pages 1  to
     16. Paragraph 20 of the statement dated 26 November 2002 refers to  the
     Appellant visiting his uncle during his fortnight's holiday but it does
     not specifically state that he did not return to work from  his  period
     of leave. As far as I  can  see,  this  is  only  referred  to  in  Dr.
     Kanagaratnam's report, which does not appear to have  been  before  Mr.
     Rampton.

41.   Even if Mr. Rampton was  aware  that  the  Appellant  left  Sri  Lanka
     whilst he was on annual leave, he (Mr. Rampton) did not explain why  he
     appeared to place the  Appellant  at  the  same  risk  as  someone  who
     abandoned his post whilst on duty. In addition, the  use  of  the  word
     "possible" by Mr. Rampton to describe the likelihood of  the  Appellant
     being disciplined or being detected on entry is not enough to show that
     the risk of this happening is such as  to  amount  a  real  risk  or  a
     reasonable likelihood, albeit that I am mindful  that  this  is  a  low
     standard of proof. Furthermore, Mr. Rampton does not suggest that  such
     a possibility (of being disciplined or being detected on  entry)  would
     be accompanied or followed by ill-treatment amounting to persecution or
     serious harm or treatment in breach of Article 3  as  opposed  to,  for
     example, being prosecuted for, for  example,  dereliction  of  duty  or
     going absent without leave. In the final sentence of paragraph  4.4  of
     his report, Mr. Rampton states that it "perfectly plausible"  that  the
     Appellant would suffer the same fate as returned  Tamil  failed  asylum
     seekers. However, it is plain that he assumes that Tamil failed  asylum
     seekers would be at risk of persecution. It is  clearly  not  the  case
     that Tamil failed asylum seekers would be at real risk  of  persecution
     simply because they are Tamil failed asylum  seekers.  In  addition,  I
     agree with Ms. Brown that the words "perfectly plausible" simply  place
     the likelihood of risk too low.

42.   The Immigration Judge relied on the finding of the  first  Adjudicator
     that the Appellant would not be at real risk of persecution on  account
     of his desertion from the police force.  The  first  Adjudicator  found
     that the Appellant would have a reasonably  fair  trial  and  that  any
     sentence that he might be given would not be seriously disproportionate
     (paragraph 41 of his determination,  on  page  61  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle). For the reasons I have given in the preceding  paragraph,  any
     failure by the Immigration Judge to engage with paragraphs 4.1 and  4.4
     of Mr. Rampton's report is not material. Even if she had  engaged  with
     it, she could not properly have reached a conclusion different  to  the
     one she reached, that the Appellant is not at real risk of  persecution
     or serious harm or treatment in breach of Article 3 at the hands of the
     Sri Lankan authorities.

43.   This leaves the assertion in  the  penultimate  bullet  point  on  the
     second page of  the  grounds  that  the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to
     consider the fact that the Appellant is  a  failed  asylum  seeker  who
     would be returning to Sri Lanka after twelve years'  absence.  However,
     the Immigration Judge was clearly aware that  the  Appellant  would  be
     returning to Sri Lanka after twelve years - see  paragraph  27  of  the
     determination, where she made it clear that she had to decide the  risk
     after a lapse of twelve years. It is inconceivable that she then failed
     to have this in mind when considering, in the next  paragraph,  whether
     the Appellant would be at risk on account of  returning  to  Sri  Lanka
     after an absence of twelve years. She was clearly aware  that,  if  the
     Appellant loses his appeal, he would be returning as  a  failed  asylum
     seeker.

44.   Accordingly,  I  concluded  that  Ground  1  does  not  establish  any
     material error of law.

      Ground 2:

45.    The  main  thrust  of  Mrs.  Rothwell's  submissions  was  that   the
     Immigration Judge incorrectly focused on the likelihood  of  arrest  or
     detention and that she did  not  consider  the  fact  that  it  is  the
     Appellant's own perception  of  the  risk  of  his  being  arrested  or
     detained which would precipitate the risk of suicide. However,  as  Ms.
     Brown correctly said, Dr. Kanagaratnam's does not state that it is  the
     Appellant's perception of the risk which would precipitate the risk  of
     suicide. To the contrary, Dr. Kanagaratnam specifically refers  to  his
     (Dr. Kanagaratnam's) concern that the Appellant is very  likely  to  be
     apprehended at the airport  and  detained.  He  then  states  that  the
     Appellant would be subjected to intense  interrogation  and  that  this
     would result in a great degree of distress (page 115 of the Appellant's
     bundle). In the next paragraph, he  states  that,  in  the  Appellant's
     disturbed state of mind, the likelihood of suicide is high.  When  read
     as a whole, I agree with Ms. Brown that Dr. Kanagaratnam indicates that
     the risk of suicide would be at the level he indicates in his report if
     the Appellant is arrested or detained  and  interrogated.  Accordingly,
     the Immigration Judge did not overlook any relevant  evidence,  because
     there was no medical evidence to the effect that it is the  Appellant's
     subjective  belief  that  he  would  be  arrested   or   detained   and
     interrogated which would itself raise the risk of  suicide,  regardless
     of whether his subjective fear is objectively founded.

46.   There  is  nothing  in  the  medical  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
     Appellant is delusional or that he suffers from hallucinations. Indeed,
     the notes  of  the  Accident  and  Emergency  Department  of  the  West
     Middlesex University  Hospital  NHS  Trust  in  March  2006,  when  the
     Appellant was seen as  an  out-patient  after  he  had  been  found  in
     possession of a large quantity of paracetamol, specifically state  that
     he is not hallucinating and that he is "oriented in time, [person?] and
     place" (page 124 of the Appellant's bundle).

47.   Accordingly, given the Immigration Judge's  finding  that  it  is  not
     reasonably likely that the Appellant would be detained at the  airport,
     she was entitled  to  reject  Dr.  Kanagaratnam's  opinion  as  to  the
     escalation of the risk of suicide.

48.   The Immigration Judge considered the  other  medical  evidence  before
     her at paragraph 31 of the determination. She then said  that,  in  the
     light of this  other  evidence,  she  attached  little  weight  to  the
     evidence of Dr. Kanagaratnam. I make the follow points.  In  the  first
     place, the weight to be given to specific aspects of the  evidence  was
     essentially a matter for the Immigration Judge. Secondly,  and  in  any
     event,  she  was  fully  entitled  to  place  little  weight   on   Dr.
     Kanagaratnam's opinion, for the reasons she gave. When considered as  a
     whole, she considered the medical evidence before her  adequately,  and
     gave adequate reasons for her conclusions.

      Ground 3

49.   This ground concerns the backlog policy. It  was  accepted  before  me
     that the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum  was  lodged  with  the
     Respondent in the period between 1 July 1993 and 31 December  1995  (it
     was lodged on 12 June 1995) and that it had not  been  decided  by  the
     Respondent as at 27 July 1998, the date on which the  White  Paper  was
     issued. Accordingly, Ms. Brown accepted that the Appellant fell  to  be
     considered under paragraph 8.30 of the White Paper. She  also  accepted
     that the refusal letter dated 24 May 2000 (page 47 of  the  Appellant's
     bundle), which states that the Appellant's application was  refused  on
     non-compliance grounds as well as after  substantive  consideration  of
     his asylum claim under paragraphs  3340  and  336  of  the  Immigration
     Rules, did not refer to the backlog policy and that the refusal  letter
     dated 2 October 2006 (page 76 of the Appellant's  bundle)  referred  to
     the wrong policy at paragraph 28 notwithstanding  the  fact  that  this
     letter was ostensibly a response to the  letter  from  the  Appellant's
     representatives dated 12 July 2005 (page 70 of the Appellant's  bundle)
     which asserted,  inter  alia,  that  the  Appellant  should  have  been
     considered under the backlog policy.

50.   In other words, it is accepted on the  Respondent's  behalf  that  the
     Appellant should have been considered under paragraph 8.30 of the White
     Paper.

51.   The first Adjudicator accepted that the  Appellant  had  not  received
     the letters from the Home Office requesting him to complete an  "asylum
     questionnaire". According to paragraph 2 of the refusal letter dated 24
     May 2000 (page 47 of the Appellant's bundle), the  Appellant  was  sent
     two letters, one dated 6 October 1999 and one dated  4  December  1999,
     requesting him to complete and return  an  "asylum  questionnaire".  He
     failed to do so. Ms. Brown said at the  hearing  before  me  that  this
     questionnaire was designed to elicit  the  information  the  Respondent
     considered necessary in order to decide  whether  the  discretion  with
     regard to the backlog policy should be  exercised  in  the  Appellant's
     favour. In oral evidence before the first  Adjudicator,  the  Appellant
     said that he did not receive these two letters and that he did reply to
     the letter he received (paragraph 13 of the determination of the  first
     Adjudicator,  on  page  57  of  the  Appellant's  bundle).  The   first
     Adjudicator believed the Appellant's evidence that he did  not  receive
     the two letters referred to at paragraph 2 of the refusal letter  dated
     24 May 2000 (see paragraph 47 of the determination, on page 62  of  the
     Appellant's bundle).  Ms.  Brown  submitted  before  me  that,  as  the
     Respondent had not received the questionnaire, it would not  have  been
     possible to decide whether the discretion should have been exercised in
     the Appellant's favour. Whilst it may well be that, in the absence of a
     completed questionnaire,  the  Respondent  may  have  had  insufficient
     information to enable him to reach an informed decision as  to  whether
     the discretion should be exercised in the Appellant's favour, this does
     not help the Respondent resist a challenge (if one had been brought  in
     this case) on the basis that the decision is not in accordance with the
     law because of a failure to consider the policy. A decision  under  the
     policy should have been reached on the basis  of  such  information  or
     evidence as had in fact been lodged. There was some.

52.   However, the difficulty in this case is  that  the  grounds  on  which
     this  appeal  was  brought  did  not  include  the  ground   that   the
     Respondent's decision is not in  accordance  with  the  law,  i.e.  the
     ground in section 84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act. The guidance in  AH  (Scope
     of s103A reconsideration) Sudan [2006] UKAIT 00038  was  considered  by
     the Court of Appeal in DK (Serbia) and others v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
     1747.  At paragraphs 16 and 17 of the judgment in DK  (Serbia),  Latham
     LJ set out a summary of the Tribunal's conclusions in AH, the  relevant
     parts of which read:

      "16.  ............ The head note to the determination [in AH] reads as
      follows:

           "In a reconsideration  of  an  appeal  following  an  order  for
           reconsideration made by the AIT (as distinct  from  a  grant  of
           permission to appeal to the IAT):
           (1)   the reconsideration is of the appeal as a whole; therefore
           (2)   it is not limited to the grounds of review or the  grounds
                 upon which reconsideration is ordered, but
           (3)   it is limited to the grounds of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal
                 (including any variation  allowed  under  Rule  14  by  the
                 original [judicial] decision maker)
            [(4) to (9) ] .........."


      17.   In  this  determination,  the  Tribunal,  presided  over  by  Mr
           Ockelton (Deputy President) considered in detail the  provisions
           of the 2004 Act and of the rules.  His conclusion was that there
           was no justification to be found in the 2004 Act or in the rules
           for restricting  the  scope  of  a  reconsideration,  either  in
           relation to the question as to what, if any, error or errors  of
           law could be identified in the original decision, or as  to  the
           scope of the reconsideration if any such error of law  has  been
           found.  The only constraint implicit in the  structure  is  that
           the reconsideration is restricted to the grounds of the original
           appeal, subject to the caveat that there  might  be  an  obvious
           point of convention law so far overlooked  (see  below).   This,
           the Tribunal reasoned, was the necessary consequence of rule  14
           being   omitted   from   the   powers   of   the   Tribunal   on
           reconsideration.  It concluded that rule 31(4) did  not  empower
           the Tribunal to restrict the scope of a reconsideration  to  the
           grounds upon which the reconsideration  had  been  ordered,  but
           only to "have regard" to directions  given  by  the  immigration
           judge ordering the reconsideration, and limiting submissions  or
           evidence to specified issues.  Rule 31(3) required the Tribunal,
           having identified a material error  of  law,  to  "substitute  a
           fresh decision".  It  further  concluded,  bearing  in  mind  in
           particular the decision of this court in R-v- SSHD ex p Robinson
           [1998] QB 929 that part of the recommendation might  involve  an
           issue which was obvious but had not formed part of the appeal...




      (my emphasis)

53.   Despite referring to the Tribunal's  conclusion  in  AH,  inter  alia,
     that reconsideration is  limited  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
     Tribunal as varied under rule 14 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
     (Procedure) Rules 2005 (as amended) (the Procedure  Rules)  subject  to
     the Robinson obvious caveat, Latham  LJ  did  not  disapprove  of  this
     conclusion. At paragraph 21 of the judgment, Latham LJ said:


      "21.  In the first instance, in relation to the identification of  any
           error or errors of law, that should normally  be  restricted  to
           those  grounds  upon  which  the   immigration   judge   ordered
           reconsideration, and any point which properly falls  within  the
           category  of  an  obvious  or  manifest  point   of   Convention
           jurisprudence, as described in Robinson (supra).  ... It must  [
           ] be very much the exception,  rather  than  the  rule,  that  a
           Tribunal will permit other grounds to be  argued.   But  clearly
           the Tribunal needs to be alert to the possibility of an error of
           law  other  than  that  identified  by  the  immigration  judge,
           otherwise its own decision may be unlawful."

      (my emphasis)

53.   If, in identifying an error of law, the Tribunal  should  normally  be
     restricted to those grounds upon which reconsideration was ordered  and
     any obvious points of convention law, as explained in R. v  SSHD  ex  p
     Robinson [1998] QC 929, it would be very odd indeed (again, subject  to
     any Robinson obvious points) if an appellant is not also restricted  to
     his original grounds of appeal as varied under rule 14.

54.   In my view, AH and DK  (Serbia)  are  authority  for  the  proposition
     that, on reconsideration, the parties are limited  to  the  Appellant's
     original grounds of appeal as varied, subject to any obvious  point  of
     convention law, as explained in Robinson.   It  is  accepted  that  the
     principle in Robinson extends to the rights protected  under  the  ECHR
     (see, for example, paragraph 29 of AM (Serbia) and others v SSHD [2007]
     EWCA Civ 16).

55.   The next  question  is  whether  the  fact  that  Respondent  has  not
     considered the Appellant's application under the backlog policy  is  an
     obvious point within ex p Robinson, as extended.

56.   In my view, it is not. The removal of an individual who may well  have
     qualified under the backlog policy if  the  Respondent  had  considered
     whether  to  exercise  the  discretion  under  that   policy   in   the
     individual's favour cannot, for this reason alone, be said  potentially
     to place the United Kingdom in breach  of  its  obligations  under  the
     Geneva  Convention;  nor  (by  extending  the  principle  to  potential
     breaches of an individual's rights under the ECHR) can it be  said,  on
     account of the failure alone, potentially to result in the  removal  of
     an individual in breach of his or her human rights.   It  is  axiomatic
     that  the  mere  fact  that  the  Respondent  has  not  considered  the
     Appellant's application under the backlog policy does not mean that the
     United Kingdom is potentially in danger of removing someone who may  be
     a refugee. Similarly, it does not, of itself, mean that  removal  might
     be in breach of the Appellant's human rights. Accordingly, the Robinson
     obvious exception does not help  the  Appellant  establish  a  material
     error of law in the Immigration Judge's determination.

57.   Accordingly, the Appellant is  limited  to  his  original  grounds  of
     appeal, as varied. As the Immigration  Judge's  Record  of  Proceedings
     shows, an application was not made to vary the grounds of appeal so  as
     to include the ground that the decision was not in accordance with  the
     law.

58.   I reject the suggestion that, even  if  an  application  to  vary  the
     grounds under rule 14 has not been made, the grounds of appeal  may  be
     varied by an Immigration Judge by implication. The issue as to  whether
     an appeal was brought on a particular ground goes to the very  core  of
     the appeal. It defines the scope of  the  appeal  and  determines  many
     important matters, such as the substantive  issues,  what  evidence  is
     relevant and the case-law applicable. Section 84 of the 2002  Act  sets
     out the various grounds of appeal. Rule 14 of the Procedure Rules  sets
     out the process  by  which  an  appellant  may  vary  his  grounds.  An
     appellant must state his case, and the grounds upon which he challenges
     the decision. This means that an appellant who  challenges  a  decision
     must state clearly the ground or grounds in section 84  upon  which  he
     brings that challenge. The grounds of appeal should be notified in  the
     Notice of appeal or "Statement of Additional Grounds" or other document
     attached to the Notice of appeal, or be the subject of  an  application
     before an Immigration Judge under  rule  14  to  vary  the  grounds  of
     appeal. If an application is made at the hearing, it should be made  at
     the outset. If it is made after a hearing has commenced, care should be
     taken to ensure that the other party has  an  adequate  opportunity  to
     deal with any evidence which may already have been given and  which  is
     relevant to the new ground.

59.   In the case of appellants who are not  represented,  there  may  be  a
     case for saying that an Immigration Judge ought to consider  the  basis
     of the claim, the grounds of appeal and whether variation is  an  issue
     that should be raised before the hearing commences. I do  not  need  to
     decide that point, because the Appellant  in  the  instant  appeal  was
     represented before the Immigration Judge.

60.   If an appellant is represented, his  representative  should  make  any
     application under rule 14 if the grounds need to be varied. If a formal
     application to vary the grounds of appeal is made, then an  Immigration
     Judge should make a decision on that  application  before  the  hearing
     commences, or continues. If no formal application  is  made,  then  the
     Immigration Judge should decide the issues in the appeal  by  reference
     to the grounds upon which it has been brought and as  set  out  in  the
     Notice of appeal or other document accompanying the  Notice  of  appeal
     which is said in the Notice of appeal to set out the grounds of appeal.
     Nothing I have said in this paragraph contradicts the principle in ex p
     Robinson.

61.   Further, and in any event, I do not accept  that,  in  the  particular
     circumstances of  this  case,  there  was  in  fact  any  variation  by
     implication in this appeal. In oral submissions before the  Immigration
     Judge, Counsel for the Appellant only argued the backlog policy in  the
     context of Article 8.   She  did  not  contend  that  the  Respondent's
     failure to consider the backlog policy meant that the decision was  not
     in accordance with the law. Accordingly, there was no  reason  for  the
     Immigration Judge to consider varying the grounds. The  final  sentence
     of paragraph 18 of the  determination  reinforces  the  fact  that  the
     Immigration Judge was only considering the submissions made before  her
     in connection with the backlog policy in the context of Article  8,  as
     does the  fact  that  paragraphs  34,  35  and  36,  which  record  the
     Immigration Judge's decision on the grounds of appeal, only state  that
     the appeal is dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection
     grounds and human rights grounds. The fact that the  Immigration  Judge
     did not indicate her conclusion on the ground in section 84(1)(e) is  a
     further indication that paragraph  18  of  the  determination  was  not
     intended to vary the grounds of appeal.

62.   The next question is whether section 86(3) of the 2002 Act  is  worded
     in such a way as to oblige the Tribunal  to  allow  an  appeal  on  the
     ground that the Respondent's decision is not "in  accordance  with  the
     law" even when an appellant's original grounds of appeal (as  may  have
     been varied under rule  14)  do  not  include  the  ground  in  section
     84(1)(e).

63.   The wording of section 86(1), (2), (3) and (5) is  important  in  this
     regard. It is also convenient to set out at this point the  wording  of
     section 82 (in so far as relevant) and sections 83, 84 and 85(2). These
     provisions read:

        "82 Right of appeal: general


        (1)      Where an immigration decision is  made  in  respect  of  a
           person he may appeal to the Tribunal.


        (2)      In this Part 'immigration decision' means-
           [ (a) to (k) ]


        83 Appeal: asylum claim


        (1)      This section applies where a person  has  made  an  asylum
        claim and-
           (a)   his claim has been rejected by the Secretary of State, but
           (b)   he has been granted leave to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom for a period exceeding one  year  (or  for  periods
                 exceeding one year in aggregate).


        (2)       The  person  may  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the
        rejection of his asylum claim.


        84 Grounds of appeal


        (1)      An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
           decision must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-


           (a)   that the decision is not in  accordance  with  immigration
        rules;
           (b)   that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 19B  of
                 the Race Relations Act  1976  (c.  74)  (discrimination  by
                 public authorities);
           (c)         that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the
                 Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to  act
                 contrary to Human Rights Convention) as being  incompatible
                 with the appellant's Convention rights;
           (d)   that the appellant is an EEA national or a member  of  the
                 family of an EEA national and  the  decision  breaches  the
                 appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in  respect
                 of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;
           (e)   that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with  the
        law;
           (f)         that the person  taking  the  decision  should  have
                 exercised differently a discretion conferred by immigration
                 rules;
           (g)   that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom  in
                 consequence of the immigration decision  would  breach  the
                 United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention
                 or would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
                 Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the   appellant's
                 Convention rights.


        (2)      In subsection (1)(d) "EEA national" means a national of  a
           State which is a contracting  party  to  the  Agreement  on  the
           European Economic Area signed at Oporto on 2nd May 1992  (as  it
           has effect from time to time).


        (3)      An appeal under section 83 must be brought on the  grounds
           that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
           breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
           Convention.


        85.      Matters to be considered


        (1)      ...........
        (2)      If an appellant under  section  82(1)  makes  a  statement
           under section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised
           in the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a  kind
           listed in section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.


        86.      Determination of appeal


        (1)      This section applies on an appeal under section  82(1)  or
        83.


        (2)      The Tribunal must determine-
           (a)   any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or not by
                 virtue of section 85(1)), and
           (b)   any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.


        (3)      The Tribunal must allow an appeal in so far as  it  thinks
        that-
           (a)   a decision against which  the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
                 treated as being brought was not in accordance with the law
                 (including immigration rules), or
           (b)   a discretion exercised in making a decision against  which
                 the appeal is brought or is treated as being brought should
                 have been exercised differently.


        (4)      .........


        (5)      In so far as subsection (3) does not apply,  the  Tribunal
        shall dismiss the appeal."

64.    There  appears  to  be  nothing  in  section  86  which  limits   the
     application of section 86(3) to the grounds of appeal. Accordingly, one
     might argue that the whole of section 86, including subsection (3),  is
     available in respect of any  appeal  brought  under  section  82(1)  or
     section 83 and that, once an appeal is brought under section  82(1)  or
     section 83, an Immigration Judge has the jurisdiction in section 86.

65.   The position under the Immigration and Asylum  Appeals  Act  1999,  as
     amended (the 1999 Act), was that an  Adjudicator's  jurisdiction  under
     section 19 of the Immigration Act  1971  as  amended  and  subsequently
     maintained in paragraph 21(1)(a) of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act was made
     "subject to ..... any restriction on the  grounds  of  appeal".  In  MA
     (Seven  Year  Child  Concession)  Pakistan  [2005]  UKIAT  00090,   the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal considered that  it  was  not  open  to  an
     appellant to contend that a decision was not in accordance with the law
     under the principles enunciated in D S Abdi [1996] Immigration  AR  148
     in that case because the appeal in that case was brought under  section
     65 of the 1999 Act, which meant that the appeal was restricted to human
     rights grounds. The Tribunal in MA left open the question  whether  the
     position might be different under the 2002 Act.

66.   The meaning of the phrase "in so far as he  thinks  that"  in  section
     86(3) of the 2002 Act was considered by the Tribunal, in  a   different
     context, in CP (Section 86(3) and (5); wrong immigration rule) Dominica
     [2006] UKAIT 00040. The issue which arises in the  instant  appeal  did
     not arise in CP.  In CP, the Tribunal held that the words: "in  so  far
     as it thinks that"  in section 86(3) enables the Tribunal, when dealing
     with one ground of appeal, to allow it in part under section  86(3)  to
     the limited (and, the Tribunal said, inconsequential) extent  that  the
     decision was "not in accordance with the law" and to dismiss the appeal
     in substance under section 86(5) if any (or all)  of  the  requirements
     under the Immigration Rules are not satisfied.

67.   Another (more frequently-encountered) example of  the  application  of
     the words: "in so far as it thinks that" in section 86(3)  and  "in  so
     far as subsection (3) does not apply" in section 86(5) is  as  follows:
     If, in a particular case, an Immigration Judge concludes that there  is
     a real risk that the appellant will suffer serious harm or treatment in
     breach of Article 3 but that there is no applicable  Geneva  Convention
     reason, then,  if  the  appeal  was  brought  on  asylum,  humanitarian
     protection and  human  rights  grounds,  the  Immigration  Judge  would
     dismiss the appeal on asylum  grounds  but  allow  it  on  humanitarian
     protection and human rights (Article 3). The phrase "in so  far  as  he
     thinks that" in the opening  sentence  of  section  86(3)  obliges  the
     Immigration Judge  to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
     grounds and on human rights grounds, and  the  phrase  "in  so  as  far
     subsection (3) does not apply" in section 86(5) obliges the Immigration
     Judge to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

68.   In SS (Jurisdiction - Rule 62(7); Refugee's  family;  Policy)  Somalia
     [2005] UKAIT 00167, the Tribunal held  that,  in  an  'upgrade'  appeal
     under section 83 of the 2002 Act against the  refusal  of  asylum,  the
     appellant cannot  invoke  the  other  (non-asylum)  grounds  listed  at
     section 84(1), which are available  on  an  appeal  under  section  82.
     Accordingly, the Tribunal went on to hold that the adjudicator in  that
     instant case had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal on the basis  that
     the Respondent's decision was 'not in accordance with the  law',  since
     the appeal was not under section 82.  At  paragraphs  16  and  17,  the
     Tribunal said:

        "16.     It is in our view abundantly clear that the wider  grounds
             available in an appeal under  s82  are  not  available  in  an
             appeal under s83.  Under s82, an appellant can  indeed  appeal
             on the ground that the decision against which he  appeals  "is
             otherwise not in accordance with the  law"  (s82(1)(e));   but
             that ground is not available under s83.  If a person has  been
             granted more than twelve months leave to enter or remain,  his
             appeal is on asylum grounds only.


        17.      The Adjudicator erred in stating that the appeal was under
             s82:  it was not.  It was under s83, as the  documents  before
             him made clear.  He also erred in taking into account  grounds
             which were not open to the Appellant in an appeal  under  s83.
             It follows that he had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal, as
             he did, on those grounds only."

69.   It is difficult to see where the restriction to asylum grounds in  the
     case of an appeal under section 83 is to  be  found.  The  words:  "may
     appeal to the Tribunal against the rejection of his  asylum  claim"  in
     section 83(2) does not help to explain the Tribunal's decision  in  SS,
     because these words refer to the type of decision that may be appealed.
     Section 84(3) does not help to explain the Tribunal's decision  in  SS,
     because section 84(3) specifies the ground upon which an  appeal  under
     section 83 must be brought. It does not  state  that  an  appeal  under
     section 83 cannot be brought on any other grounds, nor is section 84(3)
     concerned with the jurisdiction of  the  Tribunal.  Yet,  the  Tribunal
     found that the jurisdiction under section 86 to allow  the  appeal  was
     restricted to the available grounds and that, in the case  of  an  'up-
     grade' appeal, only one ground was available.

70.   Clearly, in the instant case,  the  ground  in  section  84(1)(e)  was
     available to the Appellant. For the reasons I have given in  paragraphs
     52 to 59 above, the first stage of the reconsideration in  this  appeal
     is restricted to the grounds actually before  the  Tribunal,  i.e.  the
     original grounds as varied pursuant to an application  under  rule  14.
     Since the original grounds, as  varied,  do  not  include  the  section
     84(1)(e) ground, the Appellant in this case can  only  succeed  if  the
     words "not in accordance with the law" in section 86(3)(a)  are  to  be
     interpreted so widely that section  86(3)(a)  will  always  oblige  the
     Tribunal to allow an appeal on the ground that the decision is "not  in
     accordance with the law" even when the original grounds of  appeal,  as
     varied, do not include the ground in section 84(1)(e).

71.   When one compares section 86(3) with the  various  grounds  listed  in
     section 84, it is interesting to note that only the ground  in  section
     84(1)(f) is reflected in section 86. The ground in section 84(1)(e)  is
     narrower than section 86(3)(a), because section 84(1)(e) states:  "that
     a decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law" whereas section
     86(1)(a) states: "that the decision .........  was  not  in  accordance
     with the law (including immigration rules)". The formulation in section
     86(3)(a) is wide enough to encapsulate all the grounds in section 84 as
     well as the ground in section 83, except  for  the  ground  in  section
     84(1)(f). This ground has  been  separately  provided  for  in  section
     86(3)(b). In other words, the formulation in  section  86(3)(a)  was  a
     convenient way of encapsulating all the grounds referred to in  section
     84(1) and section 83 with the exception of section 84(1)(f), which does
     not fit easily into this formulation, without any intention to  enlarge
     the jurisdiction of the  Tribunal  beyond  the  grounds  as  originally
     properly brought, or as varied.

72.   Furthermore, it  seems  to  me  that  if,  upon  reconsideration,  the
     Tribunal always has jurisdiction to allow an appeal on the ground  that
     the decision was not in accordance with the law in the sense  explained
     in Abdi regardless of whether the appeal was brought on the  ground  in
     section 84(1)(e), then rule 14 of the Procedure Rules would effectively
     be robbed of any useful purpose.  In  addition,  in  AH,  the  Tribunal
     decided that rule 14  is  not  available  on  a  reconsideration.  This
     restriction would also be rendered meaningless if section 86(3)(a)  can
     be employed to argue that, once an  appeal  is  brought  under  section
     82(1) or 83, the Tribunal's jurisdiction is not limited to the  grounds
     on which the appeal was brought.

73.   The clear benefits of requiring an appellant to state his  grounds  of
     appeal clearly (so that both parties have proper notice of the  issues)
     are lost, to the possible detriment of the respondent, if an  appellant
     is to be allowed to by-pass the rule 14 procedure by simply relying  on
     the jurisdiction in section 86(3)(a) to allow an appeal on  the  ground
     that it is not in  accordance  with  the  law.  More  importantly,  the
     Tribunal's conclusion in AH, that, upon reconsideration,  the  Tribunal
     is limited to the original grounds as varied, subject to  any  Robinson
     obvious points,  becomes  otiose  if  appellants  can  circumvent  that
     restriction by relying on the words "not in accordance with the law" in
     section 86(3)(a).

74.   I also draw support from the  fact  that  section  85(2)  obliges  the
     Tribunal to consider "any matter raised  in  [a  statement  made  under
     section 120] which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind  listed  in
     section 84(1) ....." (my emphasis). This means that grounds  of  appeal
     may be raised in a statement made under section 120 as well as  in  the
     Notice of appeal.  Importantly, it should be noted that matters  raised
     in a section 120 statement must constitute a ground of appeal of a kind
     listed in section 84 before  the  obligation  to  consider  it  arises.
     Section 86(2), which sets  out  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction,  states,
     inter alia, that the Tribunal must determine any  matter  raised  as  a
     ground of appeal, that is, a matter must  be  raised  as  a  ground  of
     appeal before the obligation to determine it arises. It is true to  say
     that neither section 85(2) nor section 86(2) prevent the Tribunal  from
     considering, or determining, any matter which has not been raised as  a
     ground of appeal. However, it would be very odd indeed if one  were  to
     conclude that the Tribunal is obliged to allow an appeal on  the  basis
     of a matter which has not been raised as a ground of appeal even if the
     Tribunal was not obliged to consider, or determine, the matter (because
     it had not been raised as a ground  of  appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in
     section 84). The result would be illogical  and  would  amount  to  the
     following: "I do not have  any  obligation  to  consider  or  determine
     matter X but, if I do consider it  or  determine  it,  then  I  may  be
     obliged to allow the appeal if I find in  the  appellant's   favour  on
     matter X".  This simply cannot be right.

75.   For all of these reasons, I have concluded that  the  jurisdiction  of
     the Tribunal under section 86(3)(a) is limited to the original  grounds
     of appeal as varied under rule 14 before the  Immigration  Judge,  with
     the  exception  of  any  Robinson  obvious  points  which   have   been
     overlooked. As I have said above, the backlog policy does not raise any
     such points, although there may well be other policies which do.

76.   Accordingly, I have concluded that  the  fact  that  it  was  accepted
     before me that the Respondent had failed to  consider  the  Appellant's
     application under the backlog policy does not show an error of  law  in
     the Immigration Judge's determination. The section 84(1)(e)  ground  of
     appeal was not before her, either in the original grounds of appeal nor
     by way of an application under rule 14. It was not  argued  before  her
     that the Respondent's failure to consider the  Appellant's  application
     under the backlog policy rendered his decision not in  accordance  with
     the law on Abdi principles.

77.   However, the policy was argued before the  Immigration  Judge  in  the
     context of the Article 8 claim which was  pleaded  in  the  grounds  of
     appeal. I turn to consider whether  the  Immigration  Judge  materially
     erred in law in deciding the Article 8 claim. Mrs. Rothwell argued that
     the Respondent's failure to consider the backlog policy means that  the
     decision was not in accordance with the law within Article 8(2).  There
     are three difficulties with this  submission.  Firstly,  this  was  not
     argued in the grounds of application for reconsideration. This  is  not
     necessarily fatal. Pursuant to the guidance of the Tribunal in AH,  the
     Tribunal reconsiders the original appeal upon  reconsideration  and  is
     therefore not limited to the grounds of application for reconsideration
     or the grounds  upon  which  reconsideration  was  ordered.  Since  the
     original appeal  was  brought  on  human  rights  grounds,  it  is,  in
     principle, possible for the Appellant to argue  that  the  Respondent's
     decision is not in accordance  with  the  law  within  the  meaning  of
     Article 8(2) even though  this  was  not  pleaded  in  the  grounds  of
     application for reconsideration.

78.   However, the second difficulty is that the argument that the  decision
     is not in accordance with the law within the meaning  of  Article  8(2)
     was not argued before the Immigration Judge. In oral submissions before
     the Immigration Judge, Counsel for the  Appellant  only  argued  it  in
     terms of the balancing exercise under Article 8(2). Immigration  Judges
     cannot be expected to pursue every possible argument,  whether  or  not
     advanced before them. This particular argument is not one which can  be
     said to be a Robinson obvious point with a strong prospect of  success.
     Accordingly, the Immigration Judge cannot be said to have erred in  law
     by failing to consider an argument that was never put to her.

79.   The third difficulty, which is determinative, concerns the meaning  of
     the term "in accordance with the law" under Article 8(2). This has been
     dealt with by the Tribunal in previous cases - see KK (Under 12  policy
     - in country implications) Jamaica [2004] UKIAT  00268  and  MA  (Seven
     Year Child Concession) Pakistan [2005] UKIAT 00090. Paragraph 17 of  MA
     provides a helpful and concise summary of the meaning  of  this  phrase
     for the purposes of Article 8 (2), as follows:

        "17.     ..........In Strasbourg jurisprudence the  `in  accordance
             with the law` requirement has essentially been seen to  embody
             the principle of legality, itself  seen  as  comprising  three
             rules: identification of a basis  in  law,  accessibility  and
             certainty. As the Tribunal has noted in KK [2004]  00268,  the
             jurisprudence of the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  thus
             requires   that   governmental   policies   are   sufficiently
             accessible and precise so as to enable  citizens  to  regulate
             their conduct by it."

80.   In MA, the Tribunal considered and  rejected  the  argument  that  the
     term "in accordance with the law" under Article  8(2)  encompasses  the
     same principle of administrative law as set out by the Court of  Appeal
     in Abdi. The relevant paragraph is paragraph 18 of MA, which reads:

        "18.     Ms Weston's argument was really about a somewhat different
             point, namely that "in accordance with the law" under Art 8(2)
             encompassed the same principle of administrative  law  as  set
             out in D S Abdi - that decision-makers were under  a  duty  to
             apply  the  law  (including  law  as  founding  the  form   of
             governmental policies). Here  there  is  this  difficulty.  We
             would accept it is arguable that  the  principle  of  legality
             includes the principle that decision-makers should  apply  (as
             well as properly identify) the law in this broad sense. But we
             are not prepared to accept without more  that  Strasbourg  has
             seen the principle of legality  to  extend  that  far  in  the
             context of Art  8(2).  Ms  Weston  produced  no  authority  in
             support of this contention. That being so, we  do  not  accept
             that Art 8(2) can be said to encapsulate  precisely  the  same
             principles as those set out in the context of  UK  Immigration
             Acts in D S Abdi."

81.   No authority was produced before me in support of the contention  that
     the term "in accordance with the law" under Article  8  (2)  bears  the
     same meaning as explained in Abdi with regard to administrative law.

82.   Accordingly, giving the term "in accordance with the law"  in  Article
     8(2) the meaning explained in paragraph 17 of MA, there is a  basis  in
     law for the  Respondent's  decision  of  18  May  2007  to  refuse  the
     Appellant leave to enter the United Kingdom. The  law  is  sufficiently
     accessible and precise so as to enable individuals  to  regulate  their
     conduct by it. Accordingly, the decision is  "in  accordance  with  the
     law" under Article 8 (2).

83.   Before the Immigration Judge, the backlog policy  was  argued  in  the
     context of the  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8(2).  I  turn  to
     consider whether the Immigration  Judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
     carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise.  At  paragraph   18   of   the
     determination, the Immigration Judge said that the backlog  policy  was
     irrelevant to the issues before her. Ms. Brown accepted before me  that
     the Appellant should have been considered under the backlog policy. The
     Respondent did have some information, such  as  the  Appellant's  name,
     date of arrival, circumstances of  his  claim  for  asylum,  length  of
     absence from Sri Lanka, basis of his claim etc. which should have  been
     considered. Limited though this information was, it  was  possible  for
     the Respondent to reach a decision as to whether the  Appellant  should
     benefit from the exercise of the discretion in his favour.

84.    In  IA  ('applying  policies')  Mauritius  [2006]  UKAIT  00082,  the
     Tribunal said (at paragraph 30) that, in deciding  whether  removal  is
     necessary or proportionate, an Immigration Judge is  entitled  to  have
     regard to a policy even if the appellant that he  is  considering  does
     not benefit directly from the policy,  and,  (at  paragraph  35)  that,
     where an Immigration Judge concludes  that  a  person  is  entitled  to
     remain under a policy, he must go on to conclude that removal would  be
     disproportionate  to  the  proper  purposes  of  enforcing  immigration
     control. In the instant appeal, the Immigration Judge found that  there
     is no evidence that the Appellant would have met the criteria in  order
     to be granted any form of  leave.  I  would  agree  that  much  of  the
     reasoning  she  gave  to  support  this  finding  was  irrelevant.  The
     reasoning she employed, as evidenced by her reference  to  MM,  largely
     concerned the  principles  that  are  generally  used  to  analyse  the
     significance of delay when  assessing  an  Article  8  claim  where  no
     specific policy is applicable on the issue of  delay  itself.  In  this
     case, there was a specific policy in place dealing with  the  issue  of
     delay. The general principles for deciding the  significance  of  delay
     were not relevant in deciding whether the  backlog  policy  was  itself
     relevant to the balancing exercise. It is clear  that  the  Immigration
     Judge  employed  the  reasoning  usually  employed   to   analyse   the
     significance of delay in Article 8 cases pursuant to the guidance in HB
     (Ethiopia) and others [2006] EWCA Civ 1713 in order to  decide  whether
     the backlog policy was relevant to the balancing exercise under Article
     8 (2). She erred in doing so. The Immigration Judge also relied on  the
     Appellant's failure to contact the Respondent after  the  decision  had
     been made. This failure was not  relevant  under  the  backlog  policy.
     Accordingly, both  of  the  reasons  the  Immigration  Judge  gave  for
     concluding that the backlog policy was not relevant to  the  Article  8
     claim were themselves not relevant to the questions she  was  deciding,
     i.e. whether the backlog policy was relevant to the balancing  exercise
     and whether the Appellant was  entitled  to  leave  under  the  backlog
     policy.

85.   Nevertheless, given the wording of the policy  (in  this  regard,  see
     paragraph 8.30 of the White Paper quoted  at  paragraph  11  above  and
     which  the  Immigration  Judge  quoted   at   paragraph   18   of   the
     determination), she  could  not  conceivably  have  reached  any  other
     conclusion on the balancing exercise. As paragraph 8.30  of  the  White
     Paper clearly states, the presumption was against the grant  of  leave.
     This  presumption  was  only   displaced   if   there   were   specific
     compassionate or other exceptional factors present which are linked  to
     the delay or which  compound  its  effects  on  the  situation  of  the
     applicant. Even where this was shown, the Respondent still  retained  a
     discretion to grant leave if justified. In contrast, the  appellant  in
     IA Mauritius was refused for two reasons only, i.e. that  her  marriage
     was not genuine and subsisting and  that  it  was  reasonable  for  her
     spouse to accompany her in the event of her  removal.  The  Immigration
     Judge who heard her appeal found in her favour on both of these factual
     issues. It was therefore possible to say that there  were  no  elements
     that genuinely left the decision under the policy open  (see,  in  this
     regard, the Tribunal's guidance in AG and others  (Policies;  executive
     discretions;  Tribunal's  powers)  Kosovo  [2007]  UKAIT  00082)).  The
     situation is very different in the present  case.  It  is  plain,  from
     paragraph 8.30 of the White Paper, that the benefit  to  the  Appellant
     under the policy depends on the exercise of a  discretion  outside  the
     Immigration Rules. Accordingly, it cannot be said that the Appellant is
     entitled to benefit from the backlog policy. For this reason  (and  not
     the reasons the Immigration Judge gave), the backlog policy was  either
     not relevant to the Article 8 claim  (as  distinct  from  the  question
     whether the backlog policy was relevant to any ground  of  appeal  that
     the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law)  or  it  could  not
     properly have carried much, if any, weight against the interests of the
     state in immigration control. In connection with the  latter,  I  noted
     that the reasons the Immigration Judge gave  at  paragraph  33  of  the
     determination for finding that the Appellant's removal would not be  in
     breach of Article 8 were not challenged.

86.   Accordingly, the Immigration  Judge  was  correct  to  find  that  the
     backlog policy was not relevant to the Article 8 claim, albeit not  for
     the reasons she gave at paragraph 18 of the determination.  This  means
     that any error in her reasoning at paragraph 18 of the determination is
     not material to the outcome.  Alternatively, if the backlog policy  was
     nevertheless relevant to the balancing exercise under Article 8(2), any
     error of the Immigration Judge in overlooking  this  consideration  was
     not material to the outcome, given her reasons at paragraph 33  of  the
     determination.

87.    In  case  it  is  suggested  that,  notwithstanding  the  Appellant's
     inability to show that he was entitled  to  benefit  from  the  backlog
     policy, the general delay was nevertheless a relevant consideration  in
     the balancing exercise pursuant to the guidance in HB  (Ethiopia),  the
     reasoning the Immigration Judge erroneously used  in  order  to  decide
     whether the backlog policy was relevant to the balancing exercise under
     Article  8  (2)  remains  valid  in  terms  of  an  assessment  of  the
     significance of the delay on  the  Article  8  claim  pursuant  to  the
     guidance in HB (Ethiopia). The Immigration Judge said at  paragraph  18
     of the determination that there was no evidence of any contact made  by
     the Appellant or his representative to progress his  case  until  after
     the  initial  refusal  of  his  asylum  claim  in  2000  and  that  the
     Appellant's continued presence in the United Kingdom has  been  because
     of his pursuing legal challenges  to  his  removal.  The  Appellant  is
     someone who does not have a potential right to  remain  in  the  United
     Kingdom (see paragraph 23. iii) of HB (Ethiopia)). Accordingly,  whilst
     the delay was a relevant factor in conducting the  balancing  exercise,
     the Appellant had to show that it had very substantial effects  if  the
     delay was to influence the outcome (paragraph 23.v) of HB  (Ethiopia)).
     In this regard, I make two points. In the first place, the  Immigration
     Judge's reasoning at paragraph 18  shows  that  she  did  consider  the
     relevance of the delay along the general principles embodied  in  cases
     such as Akaeke [2005] EWCA Civ 947 and HB (Ethiopia) (as opposed to the
     relevance of the delay under  the  backlog  policy),  albeit  that  her
     reasoning at paragraph 18 is at times  erroneous  in  relation  to  the
     relevance of the backlog policy to the Article 8 claim. Similarly,  her
     reasoning at paragraph 33 shows that she did consider the relevance  of
     the delay in line with general principles. In  the  second  place,  her
     reasoning at paragraph 33 with regard to the quality of the Appellant's
     private life  in  the  United  Kingdom  (she  found  that  he  had  not
     established family life) shows that she did not consider that the delay
     had had any substantial effect.

88.   I reject Mrs. Rothwell's submission that  Ms.  Brown  was  effectively
     asking me to apply the backlog policy myself and to decide  whether  to
     exclude the Appellant from  the  policy.  The  wording  of  the  policy
     determines its relevance to the balancing exercise under Article 8 (2).
     What I have done is to consider the Appellant's ability to satisfy  the
     requirements of the policy, in line with the guidance in decided  cases
     (see, in particular, IA Mauritius and AG and others) in order to decide
     whether the Immigration Judge materially erred  in  law  in  concluding
     that his removal would not be in breach of Article 8. I have  concluded
     that she did not.

89.   For all of the above reasons, I have concluded  that  the  Immigration
     Judge did not materially err in law.

90.   Decision:


     The original Tribunal did not make a material error of law and the
     original determination of the appeal shall stand. That is:


     The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.
     The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.
     The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.







Ms. D. K. GILL
Senior Immigration Judge                     Date:  25 June 2008


Approved for electronic distribution




