
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Reah) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
IJR [2016] UKUT 00055 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |                              |
|On 10 December 2015                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF JULIE REAH)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:     Ms S Pinder instructed by Duncan Lewis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Williams instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department

                                  JUDGMENT

JUDGE GRUBB:

 1. The applicant is a citizen of Canada who was born on 6 September  1967.
    In these proceedings she challenges the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State taken on 8 November 2014 refusing to grant her  leave  to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules and Art 8  of  the  ECHR.   Permission  was
    granted by HHJ Curran QC on 1 April 2015.



Background

 2. The applicant came to the United Kingdom  in  August  2008  with  entry
    clearance based upon her UK ancestry.  Prior to coming to the  UK,  she
    had known a British citizen, Ian Reah.  Shortly after arriving  in  the
    UK, the applicant and Mr Reah began a relationship.  Mr Reah  had  four
    children (Neil, Jasmine, Nicholas and Jessica).

 3. At the end of 2006, the applicant and Mr Reah moved in together  living
    with three of his children (Neil, Nicholas and Jessica).  At that  time
    they were 15, 12 and 11 years old respectively.

 4. In early 2009, Mr Reah was diagnosed with motor neurone disease.   This
    is a terminal condition and Mr Reah's condition gradually deteriorated.
     Having spent some time in hospital, Mr Reah returned to his home where
    he was looked after by the applicant with some professional support.

 5. In 2012, Mr Reah passed away.  Shortly before he  died,  the  applicant
    and Mr Reah were married.

 6. Throughout this time, Mr Reah's three children continued to  live  with
    the applicant and, following his death continued to do so.  At the time
    of his death, the children were aged 18, 15 and 13 respectively.   They
    are now 24, 21 and 20 years old respectively.  They  continue  to  live
    with the applicant.

 7. The evidence is that Nicholas suffers from ADHD and until 2012  was  in
    receipt of DLA because of his condition.

 8. The applicant's initial leave to enter the  UK  was  extended  until  1
    August 2011.  However, that leave expired without her seeking to  renew
    it.  As a result, she became an overstayer on 2 August 2011.

 9. In 2011, the applicant formed a relationship with a new partner,  David
    Ladd who is a British citizen.  He is separated from his wife with whom
    his young son lives.

10. On 15 August 2014, the applicant applied for leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of her private and family life.  She relied both upon her "family
    life" with her three stepchildren and with  her  new  partner  and  his
    child.

11. On 8 November 2014, the respondent refused the appellant's application.
     First, the respondent concluded that the applicant could  not  succeed
    under the "partner" route under Appendix FM as she was not  married  to
    Mr Ladd and they were not living together so as to meet the requirement
    of cohabiting for  at  least  two  years  in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage.  Secondly, the respondent concluded that the applicant  could
    not succeed under the "private life" rule in para 276ADE(1).  She could
    not establish that she had been in the UK for at least twenty years and
    it  had  not  been  established  that  there  were  "very   significant
    obstacles" to her integration into Canada if she were required to leave
    the UK.  Thirdly, and finally, the respondent concluded that there were
    no "exceptional circumstances" to justify the grant  of  leave  to  the
    applicant outside the Immigration Rules under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Applicant's Claim

12. The applicant's claim is set out in her detailed statement  of  grounds
    which were developed by Ms Pinder, on the applicant's  behalf,  in  her
    written skeleton argument and oral submissions before me.

13. The applicant accepts that she cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, whether under Appendix FM as a partner or on the  basis  of  her
    private life under para 276ADE.

14. The applicant challenges the respondent's decision on essentially three
    grounds:

      1)  In  reaching  her  decision  that  there  were   no   "exceptional
         circumstances" to justify the grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules
         under Art 8, the Secretary of State failed properly to consider the
         position of  the  applicant's  three  stepchildren,  in  particular
         whether their relationships with the applicant amounted to  "family
         life" under  Art  8  and  further  had  failed  to  consider  their
         circumstances including that Nicholas suffered from ADHD.

      2)  In  reaching  her  decision  that  there  were   no   "exceptional
         circumstances" to justify the grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules
         under Art 8, the Secretary of State had wholly failed  to  consider
         the relationship between the applicant and her partner, Mr Ladd.

      3) The Secretary of State  had  failed,  in  breach  of  s.55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (the "BCI Act  2009")
         to consider the best interest  of  the  child  of  the  applicant's
         partner.

15. In the statement of detailed grounds, the applicant also contended that
    the respondent acted unlawfully by failing to make a  removal  decision
    which was appealable.  Permission was not granted on that ground by HHJ
    Curran QC and Ms Pinder did not pursue that ground before me.

The Respondent's Case

16. The respondent's case is set out in the detailed grounds of defence and
    the written skeleton  argument  and  oral  submission  prepared  by  Ms
    Williams who represented the respondent.

17. The respondent's position may be  summarised  as  follows.   First  the
    Secretary of State implicitly accepted in  her  decision  letter  of  8
    November 2014 that "family life" existed between the applicant and  her
    three stepchildren.  The Secretary of State had, thereafter,  correctly
    gone on to consider whether there were "exceptional  circumstances"  to
    justify the grant of leave outside the Rules.

18. Secondly, in determining that there were no "exceptional circumstances"
    the respondent, although her reasons were not given  in  great  detail,
    had considered the circumstances  of  the  three  stepchildren.   Their
    circumstances were patently not "exceptional"  and  it  was  inevitable
    that the applicant's claim would fail.

19. Thirdly, it is accepted that the decision  letter  only  addressed  the
    position of the applicant's partner from the perspective of the  Rules,
    however in the pre-action protocol response dated 11 December 2014, the
    Secretary of State had concluded that there was "no  new  evidence"  to
    justify departure from her earlier decision and there  was  nothing  in
    the circumstances relating to  the  applicant  and  her  partner  which
    required a consideration outside the Rules under Art 8.   Further,  the
    applicant's claim based upon the  relationship  with  her  partner  was
    inevitably bound to fail.

20. Fourthly, in relation to s.55 of the BCI Act 2009 the position  of  the
    applicant's partner was fully dealt with in para 6(vi) and (vii) of the
    pre-action protocol response.  Again, the adverse decision against  the
    applicant was inevitable.

Discussion

21. There is no doubt that the Secretary of State approached the  issue  of
    Art 8 as a two-stage process first, considering the  applicant's  claim
    under the Rules; and secondly outside the Rules under Art 8 (see,  e.g.
    R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Singh and  Khalid  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74).

22. It is accepted that the applicant could not succeed  under  the  Rules.
    The respondent's reasons in relation to the second stage is set out  at
    pages 2 - 3 of her decision letter as follows:

         "Decision on Exceptional Circumstances

         It has also been considered whether  the  particular  circumstances
         set out in your application  constitute  exceptional  circumstances
         which, consistent with the right to respect for private and  family
         life contained in Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights, might warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom outside the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   In
         support of your claim you state you have  been  responsible  for  3
         step children one of whom suffers  from  ADHD  since  your  partner
         unfortunately died in 2009.  This has  been  carefully  considered,
         however all  the  children  are  now  over  18  and  no  longer  be
         classified as dependant.  You have claimed it would  be  unfair  to
         expect the children to return to Canada with you, however they  are
         entitled to remain in the UK and their biological mother resides in
         the UK if they still require support.

         It has  therefore  been  decided  that  there  are  no  exceptional
         circumstances in our case.  Consequently your application does  not
         fall for a grant of leave outside the rules."

23. Ms Pinder's first contention is that the Secretary of State has  failed
    to consider the position of  the  applicant's  three  stepchildren  and
    whether their relationships with the applicant amount to "family life".
     Ms Pinder submitted that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  made  an
    explicit finding.  She submitted that the case law demonstrated that an
    adult child could still enjoy "family life" with  another  (such  as  a
    stepparent) despite reaching the age of majority.  She  submitted  that
    the stepchildren continued to live with the applicant, and had done  so
    since 2002, and had not established an  independent  life.   They  were
    still dependent upon the applicant.

24. I accept Ms Pinder's contention about the proper approach to the  issue
    of family life with adult children.  Most recently in Singh and Singh v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630, the Court  of  Appeal  applying  the  earlier
    decisions of that court in Eti-Adegbola v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1319 and
    SSHD v HK (Turkey) [2010] EWCA Civ 583 acknowledged that where  "family
    life" existed between a child and a parent prior to the child  reaching
    majority, that child: "does not suddenly cease to have a family life at
    midnight as he turns 18 years of  age"  (per  Sir  Stanley  Burnton  at
    [24]).  The Court of Appeal recognised that: "a young adult living with
    his parents or  siblings  will  normally  have  a  family  life  to  be
    respected under Article 8".  However, the court went on to  note  that:
    "a young adult living independently of his parents may  well  not  have
    family life for the purposes of Article 8."  In other words, the  Court
    of Appeal acknowledged that the relationship of  dependency,  emotional
    and otherwise, usually existing between a minor child and  its  parent,
    does not disappear simply because that  child  attains  majority.   The
    difficulty, however, faced by Ms Pinder in making good  her  contention
    is, in my judgment, twofold.

25.  First,  in  considering  whether   the   applicant   has   established
    "exceptional  circumstances"  the   Secretary   of   State   implicitly
    recognised that Art 8.1 was engaged on the  basis  of  the  applicant's
    "private and family life".

26. Ms Pinder placed reliance upon the sentence in the refusal letter which
    is in the following terms: "... however all the children are  now  over
    18 and can no longer be classed as dependent".  In  my  judgment,  that
    issue was taken into account by the Secretary of State  in  determining
    whether there were any "exceptional" circumstances to justify the grant
    of leave outside the Rules.  In doing so, the Secretary  of  State  had
    necessarily moved beyond accepting that the applicant  had  established
    "private and family life" in the UK and was considering whether it  was
    justified.  I accept Ms Williams' submission that the  respondent  has,
    albeit implicitly, concluded that "family  life"  existed  between  the
    applicant and her three stepchildren.

27. Secondly, in any event, even if the respondent did not consider whether
    there  was  "family  life"  between  the  applicant   and   her   three
    stepchildren, there was undoubtedly "private life"  between  them.   Ms
    Pinder accepted as much based upon the Strasbourg Court's  decision  in
    AA v UK [2012] INLR 1 at [49].  In substance, it did not matter whether
    the Secretary of State considered that the  relationships  amounted  to
    "family" life or "private" life.   Providing  the  respondent  properly
    considered the relevant circumstances  and  whether  they  amounted  to
    "exceptional" or "compelling"  circumstances  so  as  to  outweigh  the
    public interest, the labelling of the relationships  was  not  crucial.
    That was recognised by the Strasbourg Court in AA at [49] and  also  by
    Sir Stanley Burnton in Singh and Singh at [25] where he said:

         "... the debate as to whether an applicant has or has not a  family
         life for the purposes of  Article  8  is  liable  to  be  arid  and
         academic.  ...as the European Court of Human Rights pointed out  in
         AA, in a judgment which I found most helpful,  the  factors  to  be
         examined in order to assess proportionality are the same regardless
         of whether family or private life is engaged.  The question for the
         Secretary of State, the Tribunal and the  Court  is  whether  those
         factors lead to the conclusion that it would be disproportionate to
         remove the applicant from the United Kingdom.   I  reject  [Counsel
         for the appellants'] submission that  the  Upper  Tribunal  judge's
         assessment of proportionality was flawed because she, on  his  case
         wrongly, based it on the appellants' private life rather than their
         family and private life."

28. That, in my judgment,  is  a  complete  answer  to  Ms  Pinder's  first
    challenge to the respondent's decision.

29. The correct focus is rather, as contended by Ms Pinder  in  her  second
    submission,   namely,   whether   the   respondent's   assessment    of
    proportionality (and whether there  were  "exceptional  circumstances")
    was flawed.

30. There is no gainsaying the fact that the respondent's consideration  of
    "exceptional circumstances" in the decision letter is relatively brief.
     However, there is equally  no  doubt  that  the  respondent  at  least
    addressed her mind to the fact that  the  applicant  claimed  that  her
    circumstances  were  "exceptional"  or  "compelling"  because  she  was
    responsible for three stepchildren one of whom suffered from  ADHD  and
    that she had been their carer since their father (her  former  partner)
    died in 2009.

31. Ms Pinder submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had,  in  effect,
    misdirected herself again when she had stated  boldly  that:  "all  the
    children are now over 18 and can no longer be  classed  as  dependant".
    Ms Pinder submitted that was inconsistent with the approach to  whether
    "family life"  existed  and  also  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    evidence, and in particular in the witness statements of the  applicant
    (at pages 101 - 103 of the bundle) and of the  three  stepchildren  (at
    pages 105 - 107 of the bundle) together with a letter from a GP, Dr J L
    Scott dated 28 July 2014, (at page 128 of the bundle) that stated:

         "Nicholas has been diagnosed with ADHD,  and  requires  supervision
         and support from Julie, and Jessica although legally an adult  also
         requires family support from her stepmother."

32. Ms Pinder also referred me to the letter from the DWP (at pages  126  -
    127) showing that Nicholas had been in receipt of DLA until 26th August
    2012 and, she submitted, this demonstrates his  then  (and  continuing)
    needs because of his ADHD.  Ms Pinder submitted that this evidence  had
    simply not been engaged with by the Secretary of State in reaching  her
    decision.

33. Although Ms Pinder's submissions are  not  without  some  force,  I  am
    unable to accept them.  The Secretary of State does appear to  conflate
    dependency with  a  child's  minority.   That  fails  to  consider  the
    particular circumstances of the individual and flies  in  the  face  of
    every day experience that even adult children before "making their  own
    way" in the world retain close emotional ties of dependency with  their
    parent (see, for example, AP (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 89 at  [45]
    per McCombe LJ).  However, it was not incumbent upon the  Secretary  of
    State to refer to each and every piece of evidence relied upon.   I  do
    not accept that on a realistic reading of the decision letter it can be
    said that the Secretary of State has simply ignored the evidence relied
    upon by the applicant.

34. In any event, I accept Ms Williams' submission that, despite the tragic
    circumstances  in  which  this  family  have  found   themselves,   the
    applicant's circumstances  cannot  be  described  as  "exceptional"  or
    "compelling", in the sense that the  impact  upon  her  and  her  three
    stepchildren if she were removed would amount to an unjustifiably harsh
    consequence.

35. Each of the children is an adult.  At the  date  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision they were 23, 20 and 18  years  of  age  respectively.
    Although Jessica and Neil have lived  with  the  applicant  since  2002
    there was no sound evidence submitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    demonstrate that they  now  have  any  particular  emotional  or  other
    dependency upon the applicant.  The GP's statement that  Jessica  "also
    requires family support  from  her  stepmother"  is  a  bald  statement
    unsupported by any explanation.  Whilst, of  course,  Nicholas  suffers
    from ADHD, the DWP letter makes clear that he has ceased to receive DLA
    and, I was  told  at  the  hearing,  he  has  switched  to  Jobseekers'
    Allowance.  Again, the GP's letter, whilst providing some  support  for
    the importance of the applicant  on  looking  after  Nicholas  and  his
    condition, has to be seen in the light of the fact that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that the children  were  other  than  maturing  and
    growing  towards  "making  their  own  way  in   the   world".    Their
    relationships with the applicant  are,  I  fully  accept,  close.   The
    circumstances involving the loss of  their  father  in  2009  no  doubt
    contributed to cement their relationships given the evidence  from  the
    applicant of her support to them  and  their  father.   They  have,  of
    course, continued to live with her.

36. There was, however, in truth no evidence before the Secretary of  State
    which suggested that the impact upon the three adult stepchildren would
    be other than that which would be expected if a parent and adult  child
    were separated.

37. Not only was the respondent's decision a rational one, on the  evidence
    submitted to the Secretary of State, her decision was, in my  judgment,
    inevitable.    The   applicant's   circumstances,   based   upon    her
    relationships with her stepchildren, could not amount to  "exceptional"
    or "compelling" circumstances.

38. For these reasons, I reject Ms Pinder's submissions on this ground.

39. Turning now to the issue of the applicant's partner and,  it  is  said,
    the Secretary of State's failure to properly consider  the  applicant's
    relationship with him outside  the  Rules,  Ms  Pinder  submitted  that
    simply because the applicant did not fall within  the  "partner"  route
    under Appendix FM based upon a lack of cohabitation,  did  not  absolve
    the Secretary of State from considering the  relationship  outside  the
    Rules under Art 8.

40. Ms Williams submitted that the Secretary of  State  was  not  under  an
    obligation to consider the applicant's relationship  with  her  partner
    outside the Rules as there was, as set out in the  pre-action  protocol
    response, "no new  evidence"  to  justify  such  a  consideration.   In
    effect, Ms Williams was placing reliance upon the approach set  out  in
    the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  Singh  and  Khalid  at  [64]  where
    Underhill LJ, approving the approach of Sales J (as  he  then  was)  in
    Nagre that:

         "there is no need to conduct a full separate examination of Article
         8 outside the Rules where, in the  circumstances  of  a  particular
         case, all the issues have been addressed in consideration under the
         Rules."

41. The difficulty in applying that approach here is that it must be  based
    on the premise that Appendix FM dealing with the position of "partners"
    deals with all such cases even when the relationship is not such as  to
    fall within the  definition  of  "partner"  in  Gen  1.2  because,  for
    example, the individual cannot show that the couple have cohabited  for
    at least two years in a relationship akin to marriage.

42. There is force in Ms Pinder's submission that, in a case  such  as  the
    present,  Appendix  FM  does  not  address  "all  the  issues"   in   a
    relationship which is a close one such as the applicant and her current
    partner but which does not involve cohabitation.  The evidence here was
    that they had chosen not to cohabit in order to 'acclimatise' both  the
    applicant's stepchildren and her new partner's son to the existence and
    development of their relationship.

43. It seems to me that Ms Pinder is correct that  Appendix  FM  cannot  be
    said to be a complete consideration of "all the issues" relevant to the
    relationship between the applicant and her partner.  The applicant  is,
    in effect, putting forward circumstances which she claims, despite  not
    complying with the Rules, calls for the grant of leave to her under Art
    8.  For present purposes I am content to accept Ms Pinder's  submission
    on this issue.

44. Here, however, again Ms Williams' submission that the  applicant  would
    inevitably fail  in  establishing  that  there  were  "exceptional"  or
    "compelling" circumstances based upon her relationship with her current
    partner is, in my view, irrefutable.  That relationship was  formed  in
    June 2011 when the applicant had no expectation of remaining in the  UK
    and for the most part, at a time when she was unlawfully in the  UK  as
    her leave expired on  1  August  2011.   Her  relationship  was,  as  a
    consequence, entitled to "little weight" by virtue of s.117B(4) and (5)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 whether  viewed  as
    "family"  or  "private"  life.   The  public  interest   in   effective
    immigration control was engaged by s.117B(1) of the 2002 Act.

45. Whether viewed alone or cumulatively, despite the evidence of  a  close
    relationship between the applicant and her partner, I see no basis upon
    which  the  applicant  could  succeed  under  Art  8  based  upon  that
    relationship and, even if fuller consideration had been given to it  by
    the Secretary of State, the result would have been  inevitable,  namely
    the applicant would have been unsuccessful.

46. For these reasons, I reject Ms Pinder's submission in  this  aspect  of
    the claim.

47. Turning now to the contention that the respondent  failed  properly  to
    consider the best interests of the child of the applicant's partner, Ms
    Pinder candidly accepted  that  this  was  not  her  strongest  ground.
    Indeed, she made no oral submissions in relation to it  other  than  to
    rely on the ground and her skeleton argument.

48. Ms Williams accepted that s.55 was probably engaged as the  applicant's
    partner's son was part of the 'factual matrix'.  However, she submitted
    that the Secretary of State had fully considered the  child's  interest
    in para 6(vi) - (vii) of the pre-action protocol  letter  response  (at
    page 31 of the bundle).

49. Ms Williams was undoubtedly correct to, in effect, accept that s.55  of
    the BCI Act 2009 applied in this case.  The respondent  was  aware  of,
    and had evidence relating to, the son of the applicant's  partner.   In
    her decision letter of 8 November 2004, the Secretary of State made  no
    reference  to  the  child's  interests.   However,  in  the  pre-action
    protocol letter response the Secretary of State dealt  in  detail  with
    his circumstances as follows:

         "(vi)    Decision on Exceptional Circumstances  and  s.55   It  has
             also been considered whether the particular circumstances  set
             out in our application  constitute  exceptional  circumstances
             which, consistent with the right to respect  for  private  and
             family life contained in Article 8 of the European  Convention
             on Human Rights, might warrant a grant of leave to  remain  in
             the United Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration
             Rules.  In support of your claim you state that your  client's
             partner  has  been  in  regular  contact  with  his  child  as
             confirmed in the letter you submitted from the child's mother.

         (vii)    This has been considered  taking  into  account  our  duty
             under s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 to promote and safeguard children's welfare  in  the  UK.
             However  it  is  noted  that  your  client   has   no   formal
             responsibilities for the partner's child, does not reside with
             the child in question and is not able to demonstrate that  she
             is taking an active role in this child's upbringing.  The fact
             that her partner has contact  with his child in  the  UK  does
             not entail that the child's best interests taken as a  primary
             consideration  outweigh  the  public  interest   in   ensuring
             effective immigration control, as neither the  child  nor  the
             partner is obliged to leave the UK by virtue  of  your  client
             being refused leave  to  remain.   Her  partner's  child  will
             remain in the care of his primary carer who can be assumed  to
             act in accordance with  his  best  interests  and  ensure  his
             welfare.  You have also stated that it would be  unduly  harsh
             to force all three of Ms Reay's adult step-children, who  have
             already lost a parent, to  have  to  relocate  to  Canada  for
             family life to continue.  This has been  carefully  considered
             however all the children are now over 18 and can no longer  be
             classed as dependant.  Your client has  claimed  it  would  be
             unfair to expect the step-children to return  to  Canada  with
             her, however they are entitled to remain in the UK  and  their
             biological mother resides in the  UK  if  they  still  require
             support."

50. This, in my judgment, amounts to a full consideration  of  the  child's
    interests based  upon  the  material  and  evidence  submitted  to  the
    Secretary of State.  The Secretary of State's failure to consider those
    interests in her earlier decision is now rendered academic and there is
    no basis for setting aside her decision of 8 November 2014  given  that
    she has now discharged her duty under s.55 of the BCI Act 2009.

51. As I have said, Ms Pinder did not seek to make any oral submissions  on
    this ground.  I see no conceivable basis upon which it can be said that
    the Secretary of State's consideration of s.55 was irrational or  could
    have led to the applicant's claim succeeding under Art 8.

52. For all these reasons, notwithstanding that the  respondent's  decision
    letter was not, in some respects, a model,  I  reject  the  applicant's
    claim that the decision was unlawful on public law grounds such that it
    should be quashed.

Decision

53. Consequently, this claim for judicial review is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
