
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                     AA (paras 131A-I: switching) Nigeria [2009] UKAIT 00055




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Procession House                                   Date of
Hearing: 22 September 2009


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     AA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr E Ifere, IEI Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

Paragraphs 131A-I of HC395 do not prohibit "switching".  In particular,  (1)
the reference to a particular immigration category is  a  reference  to  the
category the applicant had or has before the  present  application,  not  to
the category that will persist if the  present  application  is  successful;
(2) there is no requirement that current leave be in the  same  category  as
the leave that will result from the application's being successful.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She  appealed  to  the  Tribunal
   against the decision of the respondent on 4 March 2009 refusing  to  vary
   her leave in order to enable her to remain as a work permit  holder.   An
   Immigration  Judge  dismissed  her  appeal.   The  appellant  sought  and
   retained an order for reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

2.  The  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  13  October  2000  in
   possession of entry clearance as a student valid until 31  October  2003.
   On 7 November 2003 she was granted leave to remain as a student until  31
   December 2006.  On 18 January 2007 she was granted  leave  to  remain  as
   what is described as a "dependant student".   Mr  Deller  was  unable  to
   explain what that meant, but it appears that leave  was  granted  outside
   the rules to the appellant on the basis of a relationship  she  then  had
   with another person who may or not have been a student.   In  conjunction
   with the termination of that relationship, the appellant obtained  a  job
   offer and a work permit, and applied for leave to remain as a work permit
   holder.

3. The original application was made during the course  of  existing  leave,
   but was apparently treated as invalid because of  some  difficulty  about
   tendering the fee.  Questions relating to whether  that  application  was
   valid were, however, apparently resolved in the particular  circumstances
   of this case.  We say that  because  the  respondent  clearly  treated  a
   subsequent application as a variation of the original  one,  against  the
   refusal of which a right of appeal lay.

4. The relevant immigration rules for an extension of stay for  work  permit
   employment are in paragraphs 131-135  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
   Immigration Rules HC395.  Paragraphs 131 and 131A-131I set out  different
   provisions for those seeking to remain for work permit  employment  after
   entry in various categories.  Para 131 is the general provision  relating
   to those who enter the United Kingdom as work permit holders.  Paragraphs
   131A-I relate to other specific categories.  The wording of paras  131A-I
   is far from clear, and we think  it  must  have  misled  the  Immigration
   Judge.  There are two points of importance in this appeal, and by way  of
   example we set out the wording of para 131A; the  wording  of  the  other
   paragraphs is, so far as relevant, identical.

               "131A The requirements for an  extension  of  stay  to  take
               employment (unless the applicant is otherwise  eligible  for
               an extension of stay for employment under these Rules) for a
               student are that the applicant:


              i. entered the United Kingdom or was given leave to remain  as
                 a student in accordance with paragraphs 57 to 62  of  these
                 Rules; and
             ii. has obtained a degree qualification on a recognised  degree
                 course at either a United Kingdom publicly  funded  further
                 or higher education  institution  or  a  bona  fide  United
                 Kingdom  private  education  institution  which   maintains
                 satisfactory records of enrolment and attendance; and
            iii. holds a valid Home Office immigration  employment  document
                 for employment; and
             iv. has a written consent  of  his  official  sponsor  to  such
                 employment  if  he  is  a  member  of   a   government   or
                 international  scholarship  agency  sponsorship  and   that
                 sponsorship is either ongoing or has recently  come  to  an
                 end at the time of the requested extension; and
              v. meets each of the  requirements  of  paragraph  128(ii)  to
                 (vi)."

5. The first question is the meaning of the phrase "For  a  student".   Does
   the paragraph relate to employment by those who are  currently  students,
   or does it relate to employment by those who  have  been  students?   The
   phrase "for a student" would suggest the former; but we are sure that the
   latter is what is intended.  We derive  that  from  the  fact  that  para
   131A(ii) is in essence a requirement that the individual's  studies  have
   ceased.  The meaning of the phrase "for a student" is, as can  been  seen
   from the wording of all of paras 131A-I, a reference to the  category  in
   which the applicant entered the United Kingdom.

6. The other question that  arises  is  whether  it  is  necessary  for  the
   applicant to  have,  at  the  time  of  the  application,  leave  in  any
   particular category in order to meet the requirements  of  paras  131A-I.
   It does not appear to us that that is a requirement of the  rules.   When
   the rules require existing leave, they say so.   Examples,  if  they  are
   needed, are found in para 69P ("has  leave  to  enter  or  remain",  five
   times) and 284 ("has  limited  leave  to  enter  or  remain",  and  other
   conditions are specified). Nothing of the sort appears in the  rules  now
   under consideration.  What is required  is  that,  as  paragraph  131A(i)
   requires, the applicant entered the United Kingdom or was given leave  to
   remain as a student.  The rule contains no  requirement  as  to  existing
   leave. (For the avoidance of doubt we should add that, although  that  is
   the characteristic of the rule, an applicant who has no leave at the time
   of the application will have no right of appeal  if  the  application  is
   refused, because in such circumstances a refusal is not  an  "immigration
   decision" within the meaning of section 82 of the 2002 Act.)

7. The Immigration Judge took the view that the appellant  could  only  meet
   the requirements of the rules if, at the date of her application, she had
   current leave to remain as a student  or  one  of  the  other  categories
   mentioned in paras 131A-I.  In our judgement that  was  a  condition  not
   imposed by those rules.  The Immigration Judge materially erred in law in
   imposing it on the appellant.

8. The facts of the present case are not in dispute, and  in  particular  it
   is not  suggested  that  the  appellant  has  other  than  an  impeccable
   immigration history.  She met and meets all the requirement of para 131A.
   We substitute a determination allowing her appeal.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT



