
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     MD (same-sex oriented males: risk) India CG [2014] UKUT 00065 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2012 & 10 October 2013         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     MD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


       a. Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code  1860  criminalises  same-sex
          sexual activity. On 2 July 2009  the  Delhi  High  Court  declared
          section 377 IPC to be in  violation  of  the  Indian  Constitution
          insofar as it criminalises consensual sexual acts  between  adults
          in private. However, in  a  judgment  of  11  December  2013,  the
          Supreme Court held that section 377 IPC does not suffer  from  the
          vice of unconstitutionality and found the declaration of the Delhi
          High Court to be legally unsustainable.

       b. Prosecutions  for  consensual  sexual  acts  between  males  under
          section 377 IPC are, and have always been, extremely rare.

       c. Some persons who are, or are perceived to  be,  same-sex  oriented
          males   suffer   ill   treatment,   extortion,   harassment    and
          discrimination from the police and the general populace;  however,
          the prevalence of such incidents is  not  such,  even  when  taken
          cumulatively, that there can be said in general to be a real  risk
          of an openly same-sex oriented male suffering treatment  which  is
          persecutory or which would otherwise reach the threshold  required
          for protection under the Refugee Convention, Article 15(b) of  the
          Qualification Directive, or Article 3 ECHR.

       d. Same-sex orientation  is  seen  socially,  and  within  the  close
          familial context, as being unacceptable  in  India.  Circumstances
          for same-sex oriented males are improving, but progress is slow.

       e. It would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  an
          open same-sex oriented male (or a person who is  perceived  to  be
          such), who is able to demonstrate a real risk  in  his  home  area
          because of his particular circumstances, to relocate internally to
          a major city within India.

       f. India has a  large,  robust  and  accessible  LGBTI  activist  and
          support network, mainly to be found in the large cities.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by B.H.T. Immigration Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms A Athi (24/2/12) and Ms A Everett (10/10/13),
                    Senior Home Office Presenting Officers.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


|TABLE OF CONTENTS                         Paragraphs                       |
|Introduction                                        |1 - 9                 |
|Preserved and agreed facts                          |10 - 11               |
|Evidence -                                          |                      |
|- Dr Akshay Khanna                                  |                      |
|- Country background evidence                       |13 - 35               |
|- Evidence relating to the appellant                |36 - 41               |
|- Other country information                         |42 - 51               |
|- Appellant's evidence                              |52 - 62               |
|- Evidence of RD                                    |63 - 72               |
|                                                    |                      |
|Submissions                                         |                      |
|- Respondent's submissions                          |75 - 85               |
|- Appellant's submissions                           |86 - 101              |
|Legal Framework                                     |102 - 109             |
|Discussion                                          |110 - 113             |
|- Male same-sex sexual activity - identity defining |114 - 116             |
|- Evidence of Change                                |117 - 118             |
|- Prosecution                                       |119 - 132             |
|- Police violence and extortion                     |133 - 145             |
|- Violence other than from the police or other state|146 - 154             |
|authorities                                         |                      |
|- Employment                                        |155 - 161             |
|- Other discrimination                              |162 - 168             |
|- LGBT support groups                               |169 - 173             |
|Country Guidance                                    |174                   |
|Determination of the appeal                         |175 - 192             |
|                                                    |                      |
|Appendix - Country background documents considered  |                      |

Introduction

 1. This appeal concerns a male national of India born in January 1986. The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 21 February  2007  and
    applied to the Secretary of State to be recognised as a  refugee  on  7
    November 2007. This  application  was  refused  by  way  of  a  lengthy
    decision letter of the 22 November 2007. On the same  date  a  decision
    was made to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom. The appellant
    appealed this decision to the then  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal.
    Immigration Judge Mahmood dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds  in  a
    determination dated 12 February 2008. Senior Immigration  Judge  Jarvis
    subsequently made an order for reconsideration on 13 March 2008  and  a
    panel of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Designated  Judge  Barton
    and Immigration Judge James) thereafter  reconsidered  the  appellant's
    appeal but dismissed it in a determination of the 31 October 2008.

 2. After an  oral  hearing  Lord  Justice  Sedley  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal,  notice  to  this  effect
    being sealed on 10 November 2010. By way of a further notice, sealed on
    23 December 2010, Lord Justice Sullivan ordered  that  the  appellant's
    appeal be allowed to the extent  that  it  be  remitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for reconsideration pursuant to paragraph 12 of Schedule 4  to
    the Transfer of Functions of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  Order
    2010 (SI 2010/21). The attached Statement of Reasons reads as follows:

        "1. ...[T]he AIT made a finding that the appellant was a homosexual
        and noted (sic) accepted that anti-homosexual laws existed but that
        there are also areas and clubs where open displays of affection are
        accepted.

        2. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
        Appeal. The matter was stayed for a period, awaiting  the  judgment
        in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
        Department [2010] UKSC 31. Permission was granted by  Lord  Justice
        Sedley on 10 November 2010.

        3. The respondent accepts that the appellant's case will have to be
        reconsidered by the Upper Tribunal in light of  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
        (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC
        31.

        4. For this reason, the parties are agreed that  the  matter  being
        remitted back to the Upper Tribunal of the Immigration  and  Asylum
        Chamber  for  rehearing  of  the  reconsideration  hearing   by   a
        Tribunal."

 3. The appeal next came before Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 24 February
    2012. After hearing from both Mr  Eaton  and  Ms  Athi,  Judge  Gleeson
    concluded as follows:

        "5. The Court of Appeal having identified the error of law  by  the
        AIT in 2008, which may be summarised as its failure  to  anticipate
        the restatement of the correct approach to return to concealment in
        HJ and HT, I  set  aside  the  legal  analysis  in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's determination but the findings of fact  and  credibility
        are to be preserved."

 4. Judge Gleeson further identified this case as one in which the Tribunal
    could give country guidance on the  risk  to  homosexuals  returned  to
    India. The case has thereafter been prepared on such basis. The hearing
    of the appeal was delayed in order to await the decision of the  Indian
    Supreme Court in Koushal and another v Naz Foundation and Others (Civil
    Appeal No. 10972 of  2013)  regarding  the  application  and  scope  of
    section 377 of the Indian Penal Code of 1860, the provision  in  Indian
    law which criminalises, amongst other things, same-sex sexual activity.
    The proceedings were completed in March 2012. Given the length of delay
    it was eventually agreed between the parties, and by the Tribunal, that
    the hearing should proceed in the absence of such decision.

 5. By this route, the appeal has come before us to re-make  the  decision.
    As it turned out the decision of the Indian Supreme  Court  was  handed
    down on 11 December  2013.  As  a  consequence  we  gave  both  parties
    opportunity to file written submissions in relation  to  the  judgment,
    which we summarise below.

 6. As indicated above the "findings of fact and credibility"  of  the  AIT
    panel were preserved by Judge Gleeson. A Statement of Agreed Facts  was
    prepared by the parties prior to  the  hearing  of  the  appeal.  As  a
    consequence we heard only limited evidence from the appellant  and  his
    British citizen partner. We also heard oral evidence from an expert, Dr
    Akshay Khanna.

 7. The UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection  No.  9  -  Claims  to
    Refugee Status based  on  Sexual  Orientation  and/or  Gender  Identity
    within the context of Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention  and/or  its
    1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees (23 October 2012) uses
    the term "LGBTI" [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex]  in
    preference  to  the  term  "homosexuals";  and  the  terms  "gays"  and
    "lesbians" in preference to "homosexual males" and "homosexual  women".
    Whilst we have generally sought to follow such preferences this has not
    been possible throughout because  we  have  also  had  to  reflect  the
    language used in the evidence and submissions before us. Dr Khanna, the
    expert  who  provided  evidence  to  the  tribunal,  uses   the   terms
    "Homosexuals", "LGBT", "LGBTIQ" [lesbian, gay,  bisexual,  transgender,
    intersex and questioning], "same-sex desiring males" and "queer folk".

 8. For cultural reasons the terms "gay man" and "homosexual male" are  not
    apt to describe, as a  generality,  males  in  India  with  a  same-sex
    orientation. We have used  the  term  "same-sex  oriented  males"  when
    reference is being made to the group which incorporates gay persons and
    other male by birth local Indian sexual and gender identities, such  as
    Hijra and Kothi. In the very simplest of terms Hijras are physiological
    males  who  adopt  feminine  gender  roles  (many  of  whom  have  been
    castrated). Many Hijras live in well-defined Hijra communities often in
    the poorest urban areas of India,  and  they  often  work  in  the  sex
    industry. They have no exact match in  the  western  identification  of
    sexual orientation. An effeminate male who takes a "receptive" role  in
    sexual activity with a man will often identify as a Kothi.  Kothis  are
    to be distinguished from Hijras, although they often live within  Hijra
    communities; doing so with a degree of  subservience.  Both  Hijra  and
    Kothi have their own identifiable social spaces in India and  generally
    live at the margins of society with a very low status.

 9. We make findings in this determination only  in  relation  to  same-sex
    oriented males, and those perceived as such, whether they self identify
    as gay or not. Dr Khanna confirms that his evidence is not intended  to
    relate to the experiences of women or other females assigned  at  birth
    and we are not satisfied we have a  sufficiently  complete  picture  to
    make findings as to the risk to any group other than same-sex  oriented
    males; neither were we asked to make such findings.

Preserved and agreed facts

10. The findings of fact made by the AIT panel in its determination  of  31
    October 2008 were detailed and closely reasoned.  Its  conclusions  are
    summarised in paragraphs 111-112 of the determination:

        "111. The following findings have been made by the Tribunal to  the
        reasonable degree of likelihood standard: that the appellant is gay
        (that is, he is homosexual and likes to wear make up, but he  makes
        no claim that he is a cross-dresser, Hijra and transgendered); that
        he did not openly express his sexual preferences  when  he  was  in
        India prior to his arrival in the UK, and  that  he  was  aware  of
        discriminatory practices and social  stigma  of  homosexuality,  as
        well as the presence of homosexuals, in his home country; there was
        a serious family argument about the educational funding and  sexual
        orientation of the appellant necessitating him leaving  the  family
        home; the appellant was sacked from the restaurant  in  Mumbai  and
        lost his accommodation which was connected to his employment; it is
        accepted the appellant was reported for prostitution by  Shiv  Sena
        to the police, which led to his arrest and detention by the police;
        it is accepted the appellant was beaten by the police which led  to
        bruising; that the appellant was detained for a few days by police;
        he returned from India  to  the  UK  using  his  own  identity  and
        passport to resume his life as an openly gay man in Brighton.

        112. We reject the account of the appellant having received serious
        ill treatment by the  Mumbai  police,  that  he  required  hospital
        treatment, that he remained in custody during hospitalisation, that
        he escaped from custody with the help of a doctor, that he was able
        to leave India  only  by  employing  a  disguise,  and  that  there
        continued police interest in him and a warrant for his arrest. "

11. The Statement of Agreed Facts reads:


        a. The Appellant is a homosexual man from India.
        b. The Appellant freely expresses his sexual identity through
        relationships, personal appearance.
        c. The Appellant was engaged in a serious family argument which
        resulted in him leaving his family home.
        d. The Appellant lost the employment he subsequently secured as a
        result of wearing make up.
        e. The Appellant was reported to the police for prostitution.
        f. The Appellant was subsequently arrested, detained and beaten by
        the police, an assault which resulted in the Appellant sustaining
        injuries.
        g. The Appellant enjoys an openly gay life style in Brighton,
        Sussex and has no wish to hide his sexual orientation.

Evidence

12. In addition to the evidence of the appellant, his partner  RD  and  the
    expert Dr Khanna, there was also a considerable amount  of  documentary
    evidence before us, a schedule of which is attached. We have had regard
    to all of  this  material  when  coming  to  our  conclusions,  whether
    referred to specifically in the body of the determination or not.

Dr Akshay Khanna - Country background evidence

13. Dr Khanna provided the Tribunal with lengthy written  evidence  in  the
    form of a  report  dated  15  September  2013.  He  also  made  himself
    available to provide oral evidence, for which we express our gratitude.



14. Dr Khanna is a Research Fellow working with  the  Participation,  Power
    and Social  Change  Team  at  the  Institute  of  Development  Studies,
    University of Sussex. He has a doctorate in  Social  Anthropology  from
    the University of Edinburgh, a Masters in Medical Anthropology from the
    School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London as well as
    a degree in law from the  National  Law  School  of  India  University,
    Bangalore, India. He is currently the convener  of  the  Sexuality  and
    Development Programme at the Institute of Development Studies and  lead
    on  international  research  programmes  related  to  sexuality,   law,
    poverty, HIV/AIDS and human rights relating to sexual minorities in the
    global South including India,  Uganda  and  Brazil.  The  focus  of  Dr
    Khanna's doctoral research, and his subsequent research,  has  been  on
    the challenges faced by people identifying as lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,
    transgender, Kothi, Hijra, Aravani, Jogappa and other local sexual  and
    gender identities,  and  by  the  "Queer  movement"  in  India.  He  is
    currently engaged in research examining the  relationship  between  law
    and violence faced by sexual and gender minorities in India and Uganda.



15. Dr Khanna describes his  relevant  on  the  ground  experience  in  the
    following terms in his written report of 15 September 2013:


        "I have been working  on  issues  of  discrimination  and  violence
        against, and the human rights of sexual and  gender  minorities  in
        India since 1998. After my degree in  Law,  I  worked  as  a  human
        rights lawyer with The Lawyers Collective, a leading NGO in  India.
        I have worked as a research officer on issues relating to  domestic
        violence, and was responsible for the first draft of  what  is  now
        the law  relating  to  domestic,  familial  and  intimate  violence
        against women. This has  given  me  a  deep  understanding  of  the
        conditions of familial violence in India. Between  the  years  2000
        and 2002 I worked with a project dealing with  legal,  ethical  and
        rights issues arising out of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In addition  to
        the provision of legal services to communities with an  exacerbated
        vulnerability to HIV/AIDS due to  social,  political  and  economic
        marginalisation (working especially closely with groups of men  who
        have sex with  men,  commercial  sex  workers  and  injecting  drug
        users),  this  work  involved  designing,  implementing   and   co-
        ordinating research projects on the vulnerability  of  most-at-risk
        populations, with a special focus of the role of  criminal  law  in
        exacerbating such vulnerability. It is relevant here to  note  that
        this included working closely with the Queer movement in India  and
        that I have been involved in  providing  legal,  social  and  other
        support to people facing violence on  the  basis  of  their  sexual
        orientation  and  identity  and  their  gender  non-conformity  for
        several  years.  Since  then,  as  a  person  associated  with  the
        movement, I have had the experience of supporting and working  with
        people fleeing from extreme  violence  and  discrimination  due  to
        their sexual or gender non-conformity.  This  experience  has  been
        based primarily the state of Delhi, but has also  included  working
        with groups in Bangalore, Calcutta/Kolkata, Bombay/Mumbai and other
        parts of the country.

        [3] I have been engaged in  various  capacities  (as  a  lawyer,  a
        member of the Queer community, and as a researcher) in the  ongoing
        litigation challenging the Constitutional validity of  Section  377
        of the Indian Penal Code of 1860, the anti-sodomy law that has been
        the primary law used in the negation of the human  and  fundamental
        rights of sexual minorities, right from the inception of the  legal
        challenge. I am a founder-member of the Delhi-based  sexual  rights
        group 'Prism' which is a member  of  the  civil  society  coalition
        'Voices Against 377', which is a party to  the  litigation  in  the
        Supreme Court of India."

16.   His last visit to India  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  was
    between  December  2012  and  January  2013,  during  which   time   he
    interviewed lawyers engaged in  the  Supreme  Court  case  referred  to
    earlier in the determination. He also attended hearings at the  Supreme
    Court of India.

17.   Section A of Dr Khanna's report provides a brief  description  of  the
    cultural and political conditions of same sex desire in  India.  It  is
    observed that there are 1.2 billion  people  living  in  India  with  a
    "confounding range of religious,  ethnic,  linguistic  communities  and
    identities". Historically there has been a broad acceptance  of  sexual
    and gender diversity in several parts of India including the states  of
    Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra. However,  unlike  in  the  Euro-
    North American context, the nature  of  desire  does  not  historically
    define the [self] identity of a person, a point emphasised by Dr Khanna
    on a number of occasions within his report as well as during  his  oral
    evidence. In recent years the connection between  desire  and  identity
    has been made and the idea that there are categories of people based on
    sexual preferences has become a  reality.  This,  Dr  Khanna  suggests,
    implies the  recognition  of  non-normative  sexual  desires  as  being
    different, stigmatised and criminalised. Dr Khanna refers to  the  fact
    that "Queerness,  in  the  sense  of  multiple  genders  and  forms  of
    sexualness, is far from marginal to India Society". There are  a  large
    and increasing number of people in India identifying as "gay".

18.   In section B of his report Dr Khanna responds  to  specific  questions
    asked of him by the appellant's representatives. This evidence  can  be
    summarised as follows:

           a. Same-sex sexual activity was present, recognised and in  some
              cases celebrated in pre-colonial India. British  colonisation
              'heterosexualised' India. The British introduced section  377
              of the Indian Penal Code of 1860,  which  has  been  used  to
              target male homosexuals and working class identities such  as
              the Hijra and Kothi.

           b. The actual extent to which section 377 has been used  against
              same-sex desiring males since its inception is  difficult  to
              ascertain. There is no centralised register for  offences  in
              India. The law is used most often as a threat rather than for
              actual prosecution. In the higher courts there is  record  of
              only 131 cases in 140 years, a large number of  which  relate
              to child sexual abuse or non-consensual sex. That is  not  to
              say that the provision has not been used in the lower courts.



           c. LGBT groups had formed in most big cities  in  India  by  the
              late 1990's. The 1990's also saw the emergence  of  an  ultra
              conservative,  religious  fundamentalist  movement  of  Hindu
              nationalism, under the banner of 'Hindutva' who argued,  with
              demonstrations of violence, that homosexuality was a 'western
              evil';

           d. Dr Khanna's report sets out the history of  the  section  377
              litigation; including the arrest, detention and ill treatment
              in  Lucknow  of  four  workers  from   the   Naz   Foundation
              International [an NGO], and its sister organisation, in  July
              2001 which led to section  377  becoming  a  matter  for  the
              national media; the subsequent lodging of a  vires  challenge
              to section 377 in the High Court of Delhi in September  2001,
              the dismissal of such challenge in 2004 on the basis that  it
              was an 'academic question'; the overturning of the  dismissal
              by the  Supreme  Court  of  India  which  directed  that  the
              application must be determined on its merits;  and,  finally,
              the decision of the  Delhi  High  Court  in  July  2009  that
              section 377 must be read down so as to exclude consensual sex
              acts between adults  in  private.  Dr  Khanna  observes  that
              during the course  of  the  litigation,  support  groups  and
              "Queer activist collectives" engaged  in  the  collection  of
              evidence of  human  rights  violations  against  LGBT  people
              across the country and at the same time there were "concerted
              homophobic  campaigns  carried  out  by  political   groups",
              leading to "activist groups ... almost constantly  having  to
              provide shelter, legal, economic and emotional support  to  a
              large number of LGBT people  escaping  extreme  violence  and
              death threats";

           e. The 2009 judgment  of  the  High  Court  of  Delhi  has  been
              appealed to the Supreme Court of India, although not  by  the
              government of India. The proceedings were completed in  March
              2012 and the judgment was reserved. The judgment has  yet  to
              be handed down, and the principal Justice is due to retire in
              December 2013. If the judgment is not delivered by this date,
              it is expected that the matter  will  be  reheard  by  a  new
              constitution of the Court. The Justices of the Supreme  Court
              are thought of by the  legal  community  in  India  as  being
              conservative.

           f. The jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court is  limited  to  the
              State of Delhi. However there are conflicting positions as to
              whether  the  judgment  in   the   section   377   case   has
              applicability  outside  Delhi.  There  have  been  no   cases
              involving section 377 in the higher courts in India since the
              Delhi High Court's judgment. Dr Khanna refers to  reports  of
              four instances, since the Delhi judgment, where  section  377
              has been used in the lower courts in  the  context  of  adult
              consensual sex.

           g. Dr Khanna states that although LGBT activists can  now  speak
              as equal citizens there continue  to  be  instances  directed
              against  them  of  extreme   violence,   discrimination   and
              exclusion socially. The violence faced  by  LGBT  people  who
              fall outside the network of  support  groups  and  NGOs  goes
              largely unrecorded. People who join such networks live  under
              a constant threat of violence, especially  from  the  police.
              Where there is the presence of a strong movement,  poor  LGBT
              people are less vulnerable, but this cannot be said  of  most
              cities. Dr Khanna then summarises (i) a  fact-finding  report
              authored by the People's Union for Civil Liberties  published
              in 2001, (ii) a further report  from  the  same  organisation
              published in 2004, (iii) Human Rights Watch reports from  (a)
              2002, relating to police harassment of outreach workers,  (b)
              2007, regarding the arrest of four men who had  been  falsely
              alleged to have engaged in "unnatural sex in a  picnic  spot"
              and the subsequent "entrapment" and arrest of gay men  by  an
              undercover police officer, (c) 2008,  regarding  a  concerted
              campaign of eviction against more than  100  members  of  the
              Hijra community in Bangalore  and  subsequent  arrest  of  45
              sexuality rights activists who had  been  protesting  against
              the evictions (iv) affidavits presented in  the  section  377
              litigation relaying (a) information about the  torture  of  a
              Hijra in Bangalore in 2004, (b) the unjust  arrest  of  10-12
              Khojas in Bangalore in 2006 and (c) the custodial rape of  an
              LGBT person in Delhi in 2006, (v)  a  judgment  of  the  High
              Court of Chennai relating to police torture,  and  subsequent
              suicide, of an Aravani in Tamil Nadu in 2006, (vi)  newspaper
              stories relating to the suspension from his  employment,  and
              eviction  from  his  university  accommodation  in  2010,  of
              Professor Ramchandra Shrinivas Siras,  after  he  was  filmed
              having consensual sex with a rickshaw puller - the High Court
              suspended the effect of such decision  but  Dr  Siras  passed
              away shortly thereafter and (vii) reports of the murder of  a
              gay man in north-east India in 2006 and of  subsequent  death
              threats made against other LGBT persons in area.

           h. Blackmail is a common  experience  for  LGBT  persons  across
              India, irrespective of class; cases of blackmail having  been
              reported in the social media almost every month, if not every
              week, in recent years. The preponderance of cases  relate  to
              entrapment by police personnel; the most recent example being
              the assault and blackmail of a gay man in Mumbai by two plain
              clothed police officers reported in March 2013;

           i. The culture of ridicule and shaming of LGBT persons in  India
              is  pervasive.  "Working  class  Queer  males  tend  to  face
              violence at the hands of ... masculine  petty  criminals  who
              often work in gangs." There is no recourse to justice in such
              circumstances because approaching the police might result  in
              further violence, although the common experience of those who
              approach the police is to be "laughed at, sexually teased and
              dismissed off-hand,  with  no  action  taken  and  no  report
              filed."

           j.  There  is  discrimination  against  LGBT  persons   in   the
              workplace, as evidenced by Dr Siras' case and  several  other
              cases.  Information  about  the  latter  cannot  be  divulged
              because  it  is  sensitive  and   could   lead   to   further
              discrimination.   Obtaining   employment   is    particularly
              difficult for working class effeminate males.

           k. There are several  well-documented  cases  of  discrimination
              against  LGBT  persons  in  the  provision   of   healthcare.
              "...[m]en who  have  sex  with  men,  and  other  stigmatised
              communities such as sex workers and injecting drug users  are
              either refused treatment, given  differential  treatment,  or
              made to wait until all other  patients  have  been  treated."
              There is prevalence for the use  of  aversion  therapy  as  a
              treatment   for   homosexuality   amongst    mental    health
              practitioners in India; including electro-shock  therapy  and
              the use  of  psychotropic  drugs  in  an  attempt  to  'cure'
              individuals, although such practices are not approved by  the
              Indian Psychiatrists Association.

           l. According to Dr Khanna, there are differences in  the  levels
              of police violence against LGBT persons  as  between  states.
              Tamil Nadu has  been  at  the  forefront  of  establishing  a
              positive  legal  and  policy  stance  towards  third   gender
              identities. In Karnataka there  is  a  very  strong  movement
              especially in the cities. In some cities, such as  Bangalore,
              movement has grown strong  enough  to  demand  accountability
              from the police in relation to this violence. However, Kerala
              is notorious for  higher  levels  of  violence  against  LGBT
              persons. In the north, Uttar  Pradesh  has  the  most  public
              instances of  concerted  campaigns  against  homosexuals.  In
              Delhi there is  a  pattern  of  migration  from  neighbouring
              states of Punjab and  Haryana,  again  related  to  the  high
              levels of violence in those states. There is an emergence  of
              the phenomenon of moral policing in several cities in  India,
              typically when high-level police  functionaries  are  of  the
              Hindu right wing affiliation. There is the possibility of the
              most militant Hinduvta taking power  in  the  coming  general
              elections in 2014.

19. Dr Khanna acknowledges in his report that because of the  diversity  of
    the experience of sexuality in India, it  is  difficult  to  arrive  at
    generalisations as to  the  type  of  personal  characteristics  of  an
    individual  that  might  heighten  the  risk  of  ill  treatment  as  a
    consequence of such person's sexuality. Upper caste  Hindu  groups  are
    most averse  to  homosexuality,  the  Hindutva  groups  representing  a
    certain upper caste Hindu ideology. Various Christian groups have  also
    been publicly opposed to sexuality  rights  whereas  the  reactions  of
    Muslim groups have been less vociferous.

20. The expert continues by  commenting  that  the  question  of  class  is
    crucial; low caste poor  and  working-class  LBGT  persons,  especially
    effeminate males, face the most extreme forms  of  exclusion,  violence
    and discrimination. This is partly related to  the  fact  that  working
    class and poor people cannot afford privacy  and  thus  intimacies  are
    forced into the public sphere.  Exclusion  of  LGBT  persons  from  the
    family, as well as the  difficulty  in  getting  employment,  leads  to
    further vulnerability, abuse and  violence.  "There  has  been  a  long
    disjuncture between upper class Gay men and working class queer  males,
    such as Kothis. While the upper class Gay man is in a position to  reap
    the benefits of the Delhi  High  Court  judgment  by  performing  'good
    citizenship' in a way so as to fit in with the conservative  elite,  he
    does so by pushing the  working  class  Kothi  further  to  the  edges,
    further into precarity."  As  more  morality  emerges  where  there  is
    legitimate homosexual sex in private, the sexuality of those who cannot
    afford  privacy  is  deemed  even   more   illegitimate   and   morally
    reprehensible.

21. There is limited  evidence  available  on  the  issue  of  violence  in
    villages (as opposed to cities), but LGBT groups are constantly engaged
    in providing support to LGBT persons running away from extreme violence
    from small towns. In Dr Khanna's opinion the problem of  homophobia  is
    primarily  an  urban  phenomenon,  although  he  accepts  that  further
    research is required on this matter.

22. Dr Khanna responds to the question  of  whether  there  are  any  areas
    within India which would provide a safe  haven  for  any  gay  man,  by
    stating that, in so far as the person does not belong to the  community
    concerned, it is possible for a gay person to make a life in India, but
    it is not an easy task if one does not have  the  financial  means.  He
    continued by stating that if one is able, and willing, to suppress  the
    public expression of one's sexuality  and  gender  so  as  to  make  it
    invisible then this is a possibility. There is also the possibility  of
    finding a community that might provide support, including  housing  and
    employment. There are several groups in several  cities  that  one  can
    access in this regard; although in  Dr  Khanna's  view  this  would  be
    particularly difficult if one has experienced extreme violence  in  the
    past and therefore has difficulty trusting strangers. He confirms  that
    if one is explicit about being gay, and is not upper class, it would be
    difficult to find both housing and employment. The  main  cities  where
    people facing  violence  tend  to  migrate  to  are  Bangalore,  Delhi,
    Calcutta and Mumbai. If one is able to make a connection with the  LGBT
    community in any city this might ease relocation.

23. When asked whether gay couples cohabit in  India  Dr  Khanna  confirmed
    that they do, "but with difficulty." If one is upper class and property-
    owning this is easier. Obtaining housing  as  a  middle-class  same-sex
    couple is also possible but under the guise of  friendship.  Renting  a
    property as an openly gay couple would be  very  difficult  in  middle-
    class  urban  India  and  would  often  require  alienation  from   the
    biological family.

24. India is the first country in the world to recognise gender  plurality;
    there being three options for gender (male, female and other) - this is
    true in the electoral roll, on  official  identity  documents  such  as
    passports and in the census.

25. In oral evidence Dr Khanna attested to  the  accuracy  of  his  written
    report and expanded further on matters  raised  therein.   He  observed
    that LGBT support groups are generally informal collectives of  people,
    most of whom have been rejected by their own families. They are  groups
    of people that gather in urban areas to provide  support  networks  for
    the LGBT community. HIV or human rights NGOs assist with the  provision
    of space for group meetings. Contact with these support groups  can  be
    made through HIV NGO's, who often have outreach programs in  particular
    spaces, such as public parks.

26. These support networks assist persons to  stay  on  the  run  from  the
    police, provide emotional and financial support until a person is  able
    to stand  on  their  own  feet  and  provide  assistance  in  obtaining
    employment  through  community  contacts.  Such  support  is  generally
    provided for a maximum of six months by which time hopefully the person
    being supported had established themselves  within  the  community  and
    found regular employment. People often move  to  different  cities  for
    support.  Most  people  in  the  support  communities  have  to  juggle
    employment  with  their  support  work.  There  are  some   interesting
    initiatives underway in India such as the attempt in Gujarat to set  up
    homes for old age LGBT persons because the usual social networks do not
    exist.

27. Dr Khanna emphasised the information provided in his report  about  the
    ongoing section 377 litigation, and the prospect of the  matter  having
    to be reheard. He also gave additional evidence  of  the  situation  in
    Bangalore, indicating that there is  a  political  sense  to  the  LGBT
    movement  in  that  city,  it  deriving  from  the  trade  unions   and
    untouchable castes; whereas as in other cities the movements have  been
    instigated  by  civil  society  or  NGO's  not  political  collectives.
    Consequently there is a difference to the way police accountability can
    be demanded. In Bangalore if there is an instance of  extreme  violence
    the community can be mobilised quickly. Despite all  this  however  the
    attitudes of the police on the ground in Bangalore have not changed.

28. When asked what he meant by the use of the  phrase  "good  citizenship"
    [as referenced in paragraph 19 above] Dr Khanna confirmed that an upper-
    class gay man would be able to present himself as a tax paying citizen.
    The idea of a 'gay person' emerged from the mainstream media after  the
    section 377 judgment. This idea relates to an  upper-class  gay  person
    and any action that militates against this "normality" of a gay  person
    becomes even more illegitimate. There  have  been  instances  in  which
    upper-class gay persons  have  acted  aggressively  towards  Kothi  for
    tarnishing the name of gay persons.

29. Dr Khanna then confirmed that in his opinion  upper-class  gay  couples
    can cohabit in India but persons outside of this group  would  have  to
    present themselves as friends and "perform the idiom of  bachelorhood".
    He personally  knows  several  persons  who  were  evicted  from  their
    accommodation the minute there was  a  hint  of  homosexuality.  It  is
    possible for non-upper-class gay couples  to  cohabit  but  they  would
    either have  to  be  careful  to  make  people  think  they  were  just
    heterosexual friends living  together,  find  a  "queer  landlord",  or
    alternatively find space in a slum close to a  Hijra  community,  which
    has its own dangers.

30. Dr Khanna was asked to comment on the Secretary  of  State's  assertion
    that his report cited only a few instances of police misconduct, mostly
    from 2006-2007, but offered no background evidence as  to  the  overall
    incidence of such conduct by the police in relation to LGBT persons. In
    response he stated that it was impossible to provide detailed  evidence
    of  overall  incidence,  because  nobody  is  doing  research  on  such
    experiences. During the section 377 litigation NGOs would travel around
    India and document the experiences. Public records are actively  silent
    about homophobic violence. The LGBT activist groups  do  not  have  the
    resources. The lack of  evidence  does  not  point  to  an  absence  of
    violence. He accepted the assertion that LGBT persons are not the  only
    victims of police corruption in India.

31. As to the comments made in his report about aversion therapy, Dr Khanna
    confirmed that  he  knows  some  people  who  have  gone  through  such
    treatment. People end up in such therapy after  having  been  taken  by
    their parents or having referred themselves to therapy  because  of  an
    internal self-hatred. He accepted that such therapy was undertaken on a
    purely voluntary basis.

32. Under cross-examination Dr Khanna was invited to comment on  whether  a
    Kothi could obtain assistance from a  support  group.  In  response  he
    stated that it depended on the city they were in, not all cities having
    organisations with sufficient resources. He was  uncertain  as  to  the
    extent such a person would fall within the radar of  a  support  group.
    Kothi tend to live where there are Hijra communities  and  they  access
    protection in this way. In exchange they "perform subservience" to  the
    Hijra community. Access to privacy would lessen  the  risk  but  Kothis
    tend to live in shared spaces with other people and consequently  would
    have limited privacy. It is the same in general for gay persons because
    in all likelihood their families would  have  thrown  them  out.  In  a
    heterosexual  household  matters  are  arranged  in  such  a  way  that
    individuals and couples would have "private time" at home.

33. Working class vendors face police violence and extortion  but  this  is
    exacerbated if somebody is visibly "queer". Dr  Khanna  noted  that  in
    Delhi there are checkpoints every couple of  kilometres;  if  you  look
    normal you will not be stopped, but if you look  "queer"  you  will  be
    stopped. There are checkpoints on the outskirts of the slums and people
    need to pay a bribe to get past. He then clarified the comments made in
    his report that the support groups assist in helping people stay on the
    run from  the  police;  stating  that  by  this  he  had  had  in  mind
    circumstances where a family had made a complaint that  their  son  had
    been kidnapped by a certain type of person and consequently the  police
    would be looking for the son.

34. Dr Khanna accepted that people do relocate away from areas  where  they
    have had problems, and that there are patterns  of  migration  in  this
    respect. He emphasised however that the problem with relocating is  the
    need to retain the support of the community in the place of relocation.

35. Dr Khanna finally confirmed that the support communities grow by people
    establishing themselves during the time they are  being  supported  and
    thereafter becoming part of the community which provides support to the
    next person. He thought it typical that a supported person would either
    find employment or move elsewhere prior to the end  of  the  six  month
    period of support.

Dr Khanna - evidence relating to the appellant

36.  In  Section  C  of  his  report  Dr  Khanna  considers  the   personal
    circumstances of the appellant. He observes that the  claimed  reaction
    of  the  appellant's  father   to   disclosure   of   the   appellant's
    homosexuality is plausible and a very common experience in India, as is
    the appellant's arrest at the behest of the local Shiv Sena group,  and
    the fact that he would have been put under guard whilst in hospital.

37. As to the risk to the appellant should he return to India,  the  expert
    confirms that it is not plausible that the appellant remains  a  person
    of interest to the authorities or that he would be  identified  at  the
    airport. There is a probability however of the appellant suffering from
    extreme violence  from  his  family,  who  could  also  reactivate  the
    machinery of the law. Dr Khanna asserts that it would be difficult  for
    the appellant to obtain employment or housing without community support
    and, consequently, that returning to sex work on the streets  might  be
    his only option. He could start life afresh, but this would require him
    "to get the support of local groups,  a  relevant  skill  set  and  the
    confidence to take on a difficult challenge."

38. In oral evidence, Dr  Khanna  confirmed  that  having  interviewed  the
    appellant he believed him to be a middle-class person from a small town
    in India. It would be  possible  for  him  to  relocate;  however,  the
    difficulties he would have in doing so would depend on his  ability  to
    hide the fact that he is a homosexual. When  asked  why  the  appellant
    would need to hide his homosexuality Dr  Khanna  responded  by  stating
    that this was because he was not connected to a community. In order  to
    be openly gay one either  has  to  be  upper-class  and  propertied  or
    culturally intelligible as an effeminate man, such a  Kothi  or  Hijra.
    The appellant is neither and consequently he would  have  to  hide  the
    fact that he is gay, for example when seeking to rent a property,  even
    in Bangalore.

39. When asked whether the appellant could simply  access  initial  support
    from a community group in Bangalore, Dr Khanna did not think this to be
    impossible but was of the opinion that the  appellant  would  not  fall
    within the category of  persons  to  whom  support  would  be  provided
    because "he does not make sense"; his sexual identity having  developed
    during the lengthy period he has lived in the United Kingdom.  The  gay
    male space in India is an upper-class space and the  appellant  is  not
    upper-class.

40. Dr Khanna thought it  difficult  to  imagine  the  appellant  obtaining
    employment, even in a western owned business, such businesses not being
    run by westerners. The appellant would have to  find  employment  in  a
    business where a gay person had risen to a managerial position and then
    be discreet as to his homosexuality. As to the  self-employed  economy,
    there are opportunities to make a livelihood in large Indian cities and
    LGBT activists have started self-help groups in this regard.

41. Dr Khanna finally gave evidence that in his opinion it  would  also  be
    difficult for the appellant to find accommodation; this being the  case
    generally for gay people and Muslims. Hijra have  their  own  community
    space.

Other Country Information

42. The most recent Home Office Country of Origin Report (COIR) for  India,
    dated March 2012, sets out, under the heading "Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual
    and Transgender (LGBT) persons - Legal Rights",  passages  relating  to
    the Delhi High  Court's  judgment  on  section  377  from  reports  and
    articles authored, inter alia, by Human  Rights  Watch,  the  US  State
    Department, BBC News and the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights
    Commission.  The fact and terms of the judgment, as well as the fact of
    the subsequent appeal, are noted and it is  further  noted  that  Human
    Rights Watch are of the  belief  that  although  the  judgment  applies
    purely to Delhi it is  likely  to  influence  the  legal  establishment
    across the nation.

43. The US State Department report for 2012  (dated  April  2013)  observes
    that:

       "Although LGBT groups were active throughout the country, sponsoring
       events and activities including rallies,  gay  pride  marches,  film
       series,  and  speeches,  they  faced  discrimination  and   violence
       throughout society, particularly in rural areas. Activists  reported
       that transgender persons who were HIV positive often had  difficulty
       obtaining medical  treatment.  Activists  also  reported  that  some
       employers fired LGBT  persons  who  were  open  about  their  sexual
       orientation or gender identity. LGBT  persons  also  faced  physical
       attacks, rape, and blackmail. Some police committed  crimes  against
       LGBT persons and used the threat of arrest to coerce victims not  to
       report the incidents. Several states, with the aid of NGOs,  offered
       police education and sensitivity training."

44. More  generally,  the  US  State  Department  report  cites  continuing
    societal violence against persons with HIV  and  on  religious  grounds
    [generally  against  Muslims],  the  existence  of  discrimination   in
    employment, education and access to health care  against  persons  with
    physical and mental disabilities and instances of unlawful killings and
    torture by state bodies of persons, particularly in the conflict  areas
    of Jammu and Kashmir, the North-eastern States and the  Naxalite  belt,
    as well as the rape of  women  in  detention.  Such  matters  are  also
    reflected  in  the  March  COI  report,  which  cites  further  reports
    detailing widespread police impunity.

45. An article published in the Times of India on 3 July  2010  noted  some
    significant changes affecting the LGBT community in the 12 months since
    the judgment of the Delhi High  Court,  observing  in  particular  that
    activists had stated that there had been a spurt of gay activity in the
    open, and that some of the stigma about being gay had been taken  away,
    although the judgment "...[d]id  not  automatically  bring  with  it  a
    change in societal attitudes". In a July 2011 report from the Times  of
    India [cited in the Australian Refugee Review Tribunal's Country Advice
    on India of 12 January 2012: headed  "India:  IND39685  -Homosexuals  -
    Sikhs - Relocation"] reference is made to the  emergence  of  at  least
    half a dozen "gay clubs" in the  engineering,  medical  and  journalism
    colleges in Chennai.  In  addition,  Mumbai  now  has  an  LGBT  store,
    dedicated LGBT websites, an LGBT film festival, a Pride week  and  LGBT
    nights at popular bars and clubs [report from the Research  Directorate
    of the Immigration and Refugee Board  of  Canada  2  May  2012:  titled
    "India: Treatment of sexual minorities,  including  legislation,  state
    protection, and support services (April 2009-March 2012)"].

46. One of India's first gay weddings took place in  a  small  township  in
    central India in 2001.  Kolkata saw its first march by gay men in  June
    2003 and the first Gay Pride march took place  in  Mumbai  in  December
    2003 [report from the  Research  Directorate  of  the  Immigration  and
    Refugee Board of Canada, 13 May 2004 titled;  "India:  Update...on  the
    situation of homosexuals (26  June  1999-April  2004)].  A  significant
    number of the major cities in India now have annual Gay  Pride  marches
    [Al Jazeera, 5 July 2011; referenced in the report  from  the  Research
    Directorate of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada 2 May 2012],
    and New Delhi, Calcutta, Bangalore and Mumbai held events to  mark  the
    anniversary of the Delhi High Court's judgment.  The  organiser  of  an
    event in Mumbai to mark this anniversary  is  quoted  as  stating  that
    there had been a reduction 'in  the  incidents  of  police  harassment'
    since the judgment [Associated Press, July 2010:  cited  in  Australian
    Refugee Review Tribunal's Country Advice of 12 January 2012].

47. In a speech of the 12 February 2011, Mr Justice Sathasivam, Justice  of
    the Indian Supreme Court, observes that India's transsexuals have  been
    "listed as 'others', distinct from  males  and  females,  on  electoral
    rolls and voter identity cards since 2009". In April 2010, according to
    2010 US  State  Department  report,  Tamil  Nadu  hosted  a  week  long
    transgender  festival  to  facilitate  the  acceptance  of  transgender
    persons  into  mainstream  society.  The  state  also   established   a
    Transgender Welfare Board in 2008.

48. According to paragraph  22.21  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  Country
    Information of Origin report  (COI),  the  Indian  Network  for  Sexual
    Minorities (INFOSEM) website lists organisations in  India  that  offer
    counselling  and  support  to  sexual  minorities.  Further,  the   Naz
    Foundation, based in Lucknow and a party to  the  ongoing  section  377
    proceedings, provides advocacy and support to LGBT communities and  its
    website has links to organisations and institutions working  on  issues
    of gender, sexualities and HIV.

49. In its Country Advice on India of the 12 January  2012  the  Australian
    Refugee Review Tribunal state that:

       "Homosexuals in India continue to be subject  to  various  forms  of
       mistreatment,  including  harassment,  violence  and   issues   with
       accessing employment. There are  reports  which  indicate  that  the
       level of police harassment  has  dropped,  although  there  is  also
       information available which refers to it continuing...

       There is contrasting  information  available  regarding  the  recent
       treatment of homosexuals by Indian security forces...

       Homosexuals may  experience  discrimination  in  hiring,  promotion,
       assignment of work duties, compensation and termination, as well  as
       various forms of harassment. Some employers  have  reportedly  fired
       gay men who do not hide their sexual orientation, although  specific
       examples were not located to describe where and in which  industries
       this is  most  prevalent.  In  2011,  the  organisers  of  a  public
       celebration in Delhi to mark the second  anniversary  of  the  Delhi
       High Court decision regarding Section  377  distributed  a  pamphlet
       which  called  for  an  end  to   employment   discrimination.   The
       aforementioned January 2012 Deccan Herald report  refers  to  claims
       from  Mitr  members  that  they  were  denied  employment   "because
       employers are uncomfortable with their social identities."

50. In  its  report  of  2  May  2012,  the  Research  Directorate  of  the
    Immigration and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada,  states,  inter  alia,  as
    follows:
       "Al Jazeera notes that "homosexuals have slowly gained a  degree  of
       acceptance in a few parts of India, especially  in  big  cities"  (5
       July 2012). A Wall Street Journal (WSJ) article on  its  India  Real
       Time blog indicates that  Mumbai  is  "arguably  the  least  hostile
       environment for the LGBT community in the country"  (9  Mar.  2012).
       According to the  article,  Mumbai  has  an  LGBT  store,  which  is
       temporarily in  Goa,  as  well  as  six  local  websites  and  media
       platforms, an LGBT film festival, a pride week, and LGBT  nights  at
       popular bars and clubs (WSJ 9 Mar. 2012)...
       Country Reports 2010  indicates  that,  although  LGBT  groups  were
       active throughout India, "they faced discrimination and violence  in
       many areas of society, particularly in rural areas" (US 8 Apr. 2011,
       Sec. 6). Similarly, a UN report by the  Special  Rapporteur  on  the
       situation of human rights defenders, based on  a  mission  to  India
       from 10 to 21 of January in 2011, states that LGBT rights  defenders
       in India "face discrimination, stigmatization and threats reportedly
       from many parts of society, especially in rural areas"  (UN  6  Feb.
       2012,  para.  122).  The  UN  report  also  notes  that  "[o]n  some
       occasions, the police attacked LGBT  activists  for  raising  issues
       pertaining to the situation of the LGBT community" (ibid.)...

       Section 377 has been used against LGBT people in India  to  "target"
       (South Asia LGBT Network Feb. 2011, 41; US 8  Apr.  2011,  Sec.  6),
       "harass" (Al Jazeera 5 July 2011; US  8  Apr.  2011,  Sec.  6),  and
       "punish" them (ibid.). In a lecture on transgender rights  delivered
       to civil  judges  on  12  February  2011,  Supreme  Court  judge  P.
       Sathasivam noted that Section 377 "has been extensively used by  the
       law enforcers to harass  and  exploit  homosexuals  and  transgender
       persons" (12 Feb. 2011, 3). Similarly, the Associate Professor noted
       that the police use the law to "blackmail"  LGBT  persons  (16  Apr.
       2012)...

       Sangini [i.e. Sangini (India)  Trust,  an  organization  that  works
       primarily with women attracted to women and individuals dealing with
       issues around their gender orientation] stated  that  there  are  no
       government services or protection  specifically  offered  to  sexual
       minorities (14 Apr. 2012). Similarly, the  Associate  Professor  [at
       York University  and  a  faculty  associate  at  York's  Centre  for
       Feminist  Research]  noted  that  the  government  does  not   offer
       protection to sexual minorities...
       Sangini also indicated that when LBT  individuals  decide  to  leave
       their parental home and live with their  partner,  there  have  been
       instances of forced repatriation to the parental home through police
       intervention, false cases have been  put  on  people,  so  that  the
       police can intervene. It is relatively easy for the parents/families
       to convince the police to support  them  in  the  search  for  their
       daughter. Then emotional blackmail is used to force the [individual]
       back to his/her parents, partners often face charges of abduction...
       According to the South Asia LGBT Network report, "India has a robust
       and effective LGBT activist movement, and largely  supportive  civil
       society and mass media that supports LGBT rights" (Feb.  2011,  41).
       The Associate Professor explained that the main purpose of LGBT NGOs
       in India is to provide a "social space" where sexual minorities  can
       meet and organize,  as  well  as  education  on  health  and  sexual
       minorities (16 Apr. 2012). She added that NGOs can also  respond  to
       cases in which LGBT persons have been arrested or  affected  by  the
       law; however, they  cannot  provide  assistance  in  cases  of  LGBT
       discrimination affecting employment or housing (Associate  Professor
       16 Apr. 2012). The Associate Professor also noted that NGOs are  not
       able to provide protection for LGBT members on  an  "ongoing  basis"
       (ibid.)..."

51. On 17 July 2012  the  World  Bank  issued  a  discussion  paper  titled
    "Charting the Programmatic Roadmap for Sexual Minority Group in India".
    Its title page indicates that the information  provided  therein  comes
    with the significant caveat that (i) the 'findings, interpretations and
    conclusions expressed' therein do not necessarily reflect the views  of
    The World Bank or its affiliate organisations and (ii) that  The  World
    Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data  in  the  report.  The
    report refers to the Delhi High Court's judgment  on  section  377  and
    postulates that the LGBT community in India stands at a cross roads. It
    further refers to the existence of violence and discrimination  against
    the LGBT community in India, as well as poor access to health  services
    and education. It is  also  said  that  the  World  Banks  consultation
    process revealed that most cases of discrimination against LGBT persons
    went unreported or "took place...covertly".

Appellant's evidence

52. The appellant relied upon the contents of  a  statement  signed  on  23
    September 2013.

53. In this statement he asserts that he first met RD at the end  of  2005,
    and thereafter enjoyed a brief relationship with him until  about  June
    2006. Upon his (the appellant's) return  to  the  United  Kingdom  from
    India in February 2007 (he having left the United  Kingdom  in  January
    2007) he contacted RD and subsequently lived for a short period with RD
    in RD's parents' house. Sometime in 2008 or 2009 he and RD entered into
    a 'proper' relationship, which continues to this day.

54. RD has financially supported the appellant since his return  to  United
    Kingdom. He presently pays the appellant's rent of 95 per week  (which
    includes all household bills) and  also  provides  the  appellant  with
    additional monies which allows  him  to  buy  personal  items  such  as
    toiletries and clothes.

55. The appellant maintains that he loves  RD,  and  observes  that  RD  is
    generous,  caring,  honest  and  funny.  He  cites  a  number  of  RD's
    mannerisms which he finds "adorable". It has not been possible for  him
    and RD to be entirely open  about  their  relationship  in  the  United
    Kingdom because RD lives with his parents and who were born in Iran and
    retain certain "conservative values". The appellant visits RD's  family
    house approximately twice per  month,  usually  having  a  meal  whilst
    there. He gets on well with RD's parents and is now able to speak Farsi
    fluently. There is never any physical contact between the appellant and
    RD in front of RD's family and they have never mentioned to RD's family
    that they are in a relationship. RD's family have  never  commented  on
    the nature of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  RD,  although  the
    appellant is sure that they are aware of the relationship.

56. RD has recently completed a law degree, and also  owns  his  own  pizza
    business. He intends  to  study  at  the  law  school  in  London  from
    September 2014 onwards and the plan is that the appellant and  RD  live
    together in London at this time. It is their intention to  get  married
    but they have yet to fix a date  for  this.  They  have  discussed  the
    possibility of adopting, although  this  is  not  something  that  will
    happen in the immediate future.

57. The appellant's evidence continues by stating that "apart from actually
    living together we do everything that a normal couple  in  a  long-term
    relationship would do. I see him almost every single  day.  We  try  to
    have at least one meal together every day... I don't stay overnight  at
    his family home but he spends around two nights  a  week  in  my  room.
    We'll go out together at the weekend to pubs  and  clubs  in  Brighton.
    Sometimes we will go to London for a weekend. We also  take  day  trips
    together... and go to the gym together regularly... There is  no  doubt
    in my mind that my relationship with RD is a permanent one. I am really
    looking forward to us growing old together..."

58. The appellant gives further evidence in his statement that RD would not
    want to give up his pizza business and legal career in the UK  to  move
    to India. He (the appellant) does not want to go back  to  India  given
    the bad experiences he had there in the past. He has  not  had  contact
    with anyone in India for a  long  time.  He  wrote  to  his  sister  in
    November 2012 but has not received a response.

59. The appellant also gave oral evidence to  the  tribunal,  adopting  the
    contents of his witness statement when doing so. He confirmed  that  he
    wrote to his sister because she was the closest member of his family to
    him. He has not spoken to any member of his family since 2007.

60. Turning to his relationship with RD, he stated that RD gives  him  cash
    for his rent, which he then passes on to the landlord.  He  intends  to
    move to London next September with RD, at which time  RD  and  he  will
    enter into a civil partnership.

61. Under cross-examination the appellant accepted that it was not possible
    to be open about his sexuality in the United Kingdom either  with  RD's
    family or whilst within the Iranian community. When asked why he and RD
    were waiting until next September to enter into  a  civil  partnership,
    the appellant stated that as RD still lives with his parents he has  to
    have a reason to move out of the  family  house;  in  his  culture  one
    cannot simply move out of the family house without good reason. He will
    have such a reason next September. The appellant continued  by  stating
    that he thought that RD's parents already knew about the relationship.

62. The appellant finally stated that if he  were  not  successful  in  his
    appeal, and he therefore had to return to  India,  RD  would  send  him
    money and also assist him with his application to return to the  United
    Kingdom.

Evidence of RD

63. RD relies on the contents of statements drawn in his name on 4 May 2012
    and 23 September 2013, as well as a statement  previously  provided  to
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 23 January 2008.

64. In his 2012 statement RD confirms that he is an Iranian national by the
    birth, but was naturalised as a British citizen in 2004. At  that  time
    he saw the appellant two to three times a week,  staying  over  at  the
    appellant's house. He confirmed that he fully  supports  the  appellant
    financially, paying his rent and providing him with  small  amounts  of
    cash for his personal needs. In addition to the ownership of the  pizza
    takeaway he was, at that time, studying for a law degree.

65. It has been difficult for himself and the appellant to  openly  express
    and celebrate their relationship because  of  the  background  he  (RD)
    comes from. Being gay is not something that it is considered normal  in
    the Iranian community. His parents know that he is gay but do not  talk
    about it; indeed they still ask when he will settle down  with  a  wife
    and child. He would be surprised  if  his  parents  did  not  know  the
    appellant was his boyfriend although they  never  openly  talked  about
    this fact. The appellant has never been introduced in that manner. When
    he and the appellant go out together they are careful not to behave  in
    an overtly physical or friendly way as they do not want to be  seen  to
    be gay by members of the Iranian community. If  they  want  a  'proper'
    night out together they go to London.

66. RD believes the appellant to be an honest and reliable person and  very
    committed to the relationship. The long-term plan is for  him  and  the
    appellant to move in together in London when he (RD) moves there to  do
    the Legal Practice Course. He and the appellant want to enter  a  civil
    partnership. There is no  doubt  in  their  minds  that  they  will  be
    together for the long term.

67.  If  the  appellant  were  to  be  sent  back  to  India  it  would  be
    heartbreaking. The appellant would have serious problems there  and  it
    would probably mean the end of the relationship or, at the very  least,
    a significant period of separation. RD confirmed that he has never been
    to India and that all of his family live in the United Kingdom. If  the
    appellant were returned to India RD would do all  he  could  to  ensure
    that he could return legally to United Kingdom.

68. In his statement made shortly before the hearing, RD confirmed that  he
    had now completed his law degree and  postponed  attending  law  school
    until September 2014. He still lives with his family and  continues  to
    enjoy a relationship with the appellant, whom he now  sees  every  day.
    They have had serious talks about entering into a civil partnership but
    it has been decided that it is better to wait until they are living  in
    London  together  because  they  would  need  to  be   secretive.   The
    relationship is still kept "low-key" because of his (RD's)  family  and
    members of the Iranian community.

69. RD has no doubts that he wants to spend the rest of his life  with  the
    appellant. They have researched the possibility of adopting a child and
    this is something that they would very much like to do in  the  future.
    If the appellant were to be sent back to India, RD would not follow him
    there because (i) he has nothing in that country, (ii)  it  is  a  very
    difficult place for gay couples to live and (iii) he  has  his  studies
    and business in the United Kingdom and he wants to make a career.

70. In his oral evidence RD adopted the contents of the above statements as
    being true and accurate. He further confirmed that he pays cash to  the
    appellant for his rent and that it is his intention  to  enter  into  a
    civil partnership next September, at which time he  and  the  appellant
    will start a new life living together in London. They  cannot  be  open
    about their relationship  at  present  because  of  his  (RD's)  family
    background. Whilst the family are aware that he is  gay,  they  do  not
    talk about it. RD informed his sister few years ago  and  she  was  not
    happy.

71. Under cross-examination RD stated that his family believe the appellant
    to be a good friend. He would not tell his family about entering into a
    civil partnership with the  appellant.  He  could  not  live  with  the
    appellant in Brighton  because  of  his  (RD's)  family  and  community
    culture. In Iranian culture the child does not move out of  the  family
    house until marriage, however, moving to London for the Legal  Practice
    Course would provide a good excuse for RD to move out.

72. RD finally indicated that he had not thought  about  whether  he  would
    support the appellant financially in India, although he could afford to
    do so.

Submissions

73. The parties submitted detailed skeleton arguments, which  we  summarise
    below. Each supplemented their skeleton argument with oral submissions.

74. During the hearing both parties made submissions as to the relevance of
    the opinion of Advocate General Sharpston in the cases  which  are  now
    referenced as Court of Justice of the European Union decision X, Y  and
    Z v Minister voor Immigratie en Asiel  [C-199,  200  and  201/12].  The
    decision of the CJEU in these matters was handed down after  the  close
    of the hearing before us, on the 7 November 2013. As a  consequence  we
    gave the both  parties  an  opportunity  to  provided  further  written
    submissions in relation to this judgment. Additionally,  as  identified
    above, the Supreme Court of India also handed down its judgment in  the
    section 377 litigation (Koushal) after the close of the hearing  before
    us, on the 11 December 2013. Again, we gave both parties opportunity to
    make further written submission in relation to this judgment.

Respondent's submissions

75. In summary, Ms Everett observed and submitted that:

     a. The Naz Foundation Trust, the principal respondent in  the  section
        377 Supreme Court case, have advised that they are not aware of any
        persons being tried and convicted under  section  377,  in  a  case
        involving adult consensual sex, in any Indian  state  in  the  past
        couple of years. The foundation also confirms that it  has  seen  a
        lot more openness in relationships in urban areas  and  that  "many
        couples are living together";

     b. There is no real evidence in Dr Khanna's report to show that  there
        is still violence perpetrated against same-sex desiring  males,  or
        that such violence is, or ever has been, widespread;

     c. Detailed information has not been made available to the COI service
        pertaining to the examples given in paragraph  28  of  Dr  Khanna's
        report that since the Delhi High Court  judgment  section  377  has
        been used in the context of cases involving adult consensual sex;

     d. Dr Khanna's report cites only a few incidents of police misconduct,
        mostly from 2006 to 2007, and offers no background evidence as  the
        overall incidence of such conduct by the police in relation to LGBT
        persons. There are several thousand police stations  in  India  and
        the states and union territories have their own police  forces  and
        law courts. LGBT  persons  are  not  the  only  victims  of  police
        corruption in India;

     e. The propositions drawn by the expert from  the  case  of  Professor
        Ramchandra Siras are "sweeping";

     f. Dr Khanna's report does not provide any  evidence  to  support  the
        conclusion that aversion therapy is "prevalent";

     g. Dr Khanna appears to accept that there are  certain  states  within
        India in which there is a more enlightened  and  positive  attitude
        towards LGBT communities.

76. Attention is also drawn in her  skeleton  argument  to  the  fact  that
    "according to the National Crime Records  Bureau,  there  were  275,165
    violent crimes reported in India in 2012, including 34,434 murders" and
    that a Humsafar Trust survey, quoted by  the  Dr  Khanna,  shows  that,
    amongst 'transgender' respondents (to the 'community survey'), 54% felt
    that the Delhi High  Court  judgment  had  affected  their  lives;  75%
    thought that the change in law  had  made  the  state  acknowledge  the
    presence of sexual minority communities, 98% felt an increased sense of
    belonging to the community  and  felt  that  Indian  cinema  had  begun
    portraying gay characters better, 96% reported feeling  more  confident
    going to a counsellor  and  felt  that  gay  issues  were  more  openly
    discussed,  98%  perceived   other   community   members   being   more
    approachable, and 90% reported that they could talk to  the  police  to
    stop harassment.

77. The skeleton argument further addresses the position of the  appellant,
    submitting that:

     a. Even if the appellant had been pursued under  section  377  in  the
        past it is not likely that he would be so pursued again  given  the
        evidence of the Naz Foundation;

     b. It is no longer plausible that section 377 can be effectively  used
        by police or others for extortion or blackmail purposes;

     c. 70% of working people in India are self-employed, and  consequently
        the appellant would not need to maintain a low profile in terms  of
        his sexuality in order to earn a living;

     d. The appellant and his partner maintain a low profile  in  terms  of
        their  sexuality  in  United  Kingdom,  for  social  reasons.   The
        appellant could, therefore, be expected to do so in India;

     e. If necessary the appellant could access support in India and  start
        his life afresh;

     f. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, it would not be disproportionate  to
        require the  appellant  to  return  to  India  and  make  an  entry
        clearance application to return as RD's partner, should he wish  to
        do so. In any event, any interference with their relationship would
        not be disproportionate to the legitimate aim pursued.

78. In her oral submissions, Ms Everett relied upon  the  contents  of  her
    skeleton argument and submitted that it was clear  that  the  appellant
    could not make out a claim that all openly gay people  are  ill-treated
    in India. She drew attention to  passages  within  the  report  of  the
    expert which,  she  asserted,  demonstrate  that  it  is  difficult  to
    identify a coherent set of risk factors for gay people in  India  given
    the vastness and diversity of the country. Same-sex relationships are a
    part of the culture of the population. There has been a change  on  the
    ground for LGBT persons as a consequence  of  the  Delhi  High  Court's
    decision in relation to section 377.

79. Ms Everett further asserted that clear evidence had been provided  that
    there are accessible support groups for LGBT persons in  India.  If  an
    individual does have a problem in any particular area  of  the  country
    internal relocation is available  to  places  such  as  Tamil  Nadu  or
    Bangalore where there are more politicised LBGT movements that hold the
    police accountable for their actions.

80. As to the assertion that an openly gay  person  would  find  it  almost
    impossible to find employment in India, she submitted that (i) this was
    not borne out by the evidence and, in any event (ii) the vast  majority
    of Indian  people  are  self-employed  and  there  is  no  satisfactory
    evidence to support the proposition that an openly gay person could not
    earn a living from being self-employed. She further  asserted  that  in
    relation to accommodation  a  gay  person  could,  in  the  worst  case
    scenario, find this with a gay-friendly landlord, whether independently
    or via a support group; alternatively,  accommodation  could  be  found
    within the Hijra communities.

81. Ms Everett submitted that it is inconceivable,  given  the  appellant's
    skill set, that he would not be able to access support if  he  were  to
    return to India. In addition, she observed that the  expert  had  given
    evidence that the appellant could relocate within India. It was further
    submitted that, given that the appellant was  discreet  in  the  United
    Kingdom for social reasons, he could be expected to be so in India.  It
    would not therefore be known that he is a gay person  and  consequently
    the difficulties detailed by the expert in his report regarding  access
    to employment and accommodation for openly gay people were not  present
    themselves to this appellant.

82. As to the article 8 grounds, Ms Everett accepted that the appellant was
    in a long-standing relationship with RD, although she  did  not  accept
    this relationship was akin  to  a  marriage.  Despite  the  latter  she
    accepted that the relationship constituted family life for the purposes
    of article 8. It was submitted, however, that it would be proportionate
    to require the appellant to return to  India  permanently  or,  in  the
    alternative, to return to  India  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance. In support  of  the  latter  submission  Ms  Everett  placed
    reliance on the decision of Blake J in Kussin v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2009] EWHC 358 (Admin).

83. In her written submissions made in relation to the decision in X,Y  and
    Z Ms Everett observed the CJEU had concluded that (i) the existence  of
    legislation criminalising homosexual acts  cannot  be  regarded  as  so
    significant that it reaches the level of seriousness  necessary  for  a
    finding that it constitutes persecution, but that imprisonment pursuant
    to such provision might amount to persecution  and  (ii)  it  would  be
    wrong to require a person to conceal their sexuality in order to  avoid
    persecution. She maintained, in relation to the appellant that  (i)  he
    would conceal his identity not through  fear  of  persecution  but  for
    other reasons and, in any event, (ii) that any treatment he might  face
    upon return to India, even if he were to be open about  his  sexuality,
    would not amount to persecution.

84. As to the respondent's further written submissions made in relation  to
    the judgment of the Indian Supreme Court in Koushal,  received  by  the
    tribunal on  10  January  2014,  these  set  out  the  history  of  the
    litigation, note the fact of the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  and  then
    state as follows:


       "Significance of Supreme Court Decision


       8. As Section 377 has  been  enforced  only  very  rarely  in  cases
       involving consenting adults, and  because  the  Delhi  High  Court's
       ruling of July 2009 was only applicable within the  union  territory
       of Delhi, we would submit that the Supreme Court's  judgment  of  11
       December is of little practical consequence to the situation of  gay
       men in India. Amnesty International  and  Human  Rights  Watch  both
       expressed their disappointment at the SC's decision,  but  they  did
       not predict any material change to the  treatment  of  LGBT  persons
       arising from it.


       Update


       9. BBC News reported on 20 December  2013  that  the  Government  of
       India had filed a petition in the Supreme Court, asking it to review
       its decision of 11 December 2013. The Government  stated  that  "the
       position of the central government on this issue has been  that  the
       Delhi High Court verdict... is correct." The President of the ruling
       Indian National Congress party described Section 377 as "an archaic,
       unjust law".  Various government ministers have echoed this view."

85. Attached to these submissions was a letter dated 4 September 2013  from
    the Migration Delivery Officer at the British High  Commission  in  New
    Delhi to the Home Office Country of Origin Information Service  (COIS).
    The letter sets out questions sent to the Executive Director of the Naz
    Foundation at the request of the COIS and the  replies  thereto.  Those
    replies accord with, and appear to be the source for,  the  information
    set out by the respondent in  paragraph  3  of  her  skeleton  argument
    (summarised in paragraph 75(a) above). No application has been made  by
    the respondent to produce this evidence, and no  explanation  has  been
    provided as to why it was only been produced on 10 January 2014 despite
    being dated in September 2013; a  date  prior  to  the  final  hearing.
    Having considered all of the circumstances, we decline  to  admit  this
    evidence.

Appellant's submissions

86. In his skeleton argument, Mr Eaton cites numerous passages from (i) the
    decision of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) (ii) the Advocate  General's
    opinion in the case of X, Y and Z (iii) the Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department's guidance on "Sexual Orientation Issues in the  asylum
    claim" and (iv) the "UNHCR Guidelines on International  Protection  No.
    9: Claims to Refugee Status based on Sexual Orientation..." There is no
    development thereafter of the conclusions  he  seeks  to  persuade  the
    Tribunal to draw from these sources.

87. The skeleton argument then turns to the background situation in  India.
    The following general submissions are made, and each is followed in the
    skeleton argument by an extract from  background  material  before  the
    Tribunal that is said to support such proposition:

     a. The existence of section 377 has allowed public bodies in  general,
        and in particular the police, to harass  intimidate  and  persecute
        gay men in India;

     b. There is no settled view on the applicability of  the  decision  of
        the High Court of Delhi to other  states  within  the  Republic  of
        India;

     c. There is evidence of continued use of  section  377  following  the
        decision of the High Court of Delhi;

     d. There is still  intimidation,  harassment,  ridicule  and  violence
        perpetrated against gay men in India;

     e. Gay men suffer discrimination in accessing health care;

     f. There is very little space for a gay man to live safely  in  India,
        without fitting into one of the prescribed forms of "third  gender"
        identities. A poor or low caste gay man, who does  not  fit  within
        one of the accepted  third  gender  groups,  is  most  at  risk  of
        violence and intimidation. Gay Indians, who are  not  wealthy,  are
        reliant on the family support in establishing a  sustainable  life,
        which includes  contacts  enabling  them  to  find  employment  and
        education and to assess housing;

     g. The family for many gay Indians is the "first  and  main  force  of
        persecution"; "the Indian police are the main organ of  persecution
        of gay men in India";

     h. The capacity to internally relocate is dependent on the ability  to
        access a support network in the area  of  relocation;  however  the
        long-term viability of a safe haven continues to  be  dependent  on
        the gay  man  hiding  his  sexuality.  After  relocation  there  is
        unlikely to be any of the  usual  mechanisms,  through  family,  of
        accessing education, housing and work;

     i. The capacity of support networks to assist is hampered by the scale
        of the problem  and  they  also  have  to  work  in  a  climate  of
        harassment and violence;

     j. It is accepted that  some  states  "have  developed  a  modicum  of
        protection for  third  gender  groups",  whilst  the  anonymity  of
        India's biggest cities can at times provide  protection  for  those
        able to hide their sexual identity.

88.  Specifically  in  relation  to  the  appellant,  Mr  Eaton's   written
    submissions state:

     a. The appellant freely expresses  his  sexual  identity  through  his
        personal appearance, including wearing  make  up.  It  is  not  his
        intention to live discreetly as a gay man in India;

     b. In the past he has been forced to leave the family home because  of
        his sexuality, lost his employment in the restaurant in Mumbai, had
        to rely upon prostitution to support himself and  was  reported  to
        the police by an ultra nationalist political group which led to him
        being detained and beaten;

     c. It is accepted there would be no ongoing interest in the  appellant
        from the police; however, it was submitted that he  would  continue
        to be at risk from his  family  either  in  the  form  of  personal
        violence perpetrated against him, or by operation of the  machinery
        of law;

     d. Upon return to India the appellant would be without  the  necessary
        support mechanisms. He is not a member of a third gender group  and
        is likely to fall back into  street  prostitution.  He  could  only
        access LGBT support groups in the short term. The  only  meaningful
        strategy to avoid violence is to hide his identity as a gay man.

89. As to article 8 ECHR, it is submitted that the appellant has  a  family
    life in the United Kingdom akin to marriage with RD; he has  amassed  a
    substantial private life in the United Kingdom; removal would interfere
    with his private and family life and  such  interference  would  be  of
    sufficient severity so as to engage article 8. Turning to the issue  of
    proportionality, Mr Eaton draws attention to  (i)  the  fact  that  the
    appellant is able  to  openly  express  his  sexuality  in  the  United
    Kingdom, (ii) he can enter into a civil partnership here and  (iii)  he
    can adopt a child here. This, it was submitted, must be contrasted with
    the circumstances that face the appellant in India, where he  would  be
    subjected  to  constant  discrimination  and  possibly  harassment  and
    violence. It is not reasonable to  expect  RD  to  move  to  India  and
    neither would it be proportionate to require the appellant to leave the
    United Kingdom simply  in  order  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance. In relation  to  this  latter  submission  Mr  Eaton  placed
    reliance on the decision of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2009]
    EWCA 953. He consequently submitted that the appellant's removal  would
    be disproportionate to the legitimate aim being pursued.

90. In his oral  submissions,  Mr  Eaton  drew  our  attention  to  various
    passages within the decision of the Supreme Court  in  HJ  Iran  [2010]
    UKSC 31, and further submitted that following  the  Advocate  General's
    opinion in X, Y and Z it is clear that a consideration of  whether  the
    appellant  should  act  discreetly  upon  return  must  be  based  upon
    objective and not subjective considerations. We were  further  reminded
    that an accumulation of discriminatory actions  against  an  individual
    could, when taken together, amount to persecution.

91. Mr Eaton then took us through passages in Dr Khanna's written evidence,
    asserting there to be a strong culture of discrimination  against  LGBT
    persons in India from both the police and the public which, when looked
    at as  a  whole,  amounted  to  persecutory  treatment.  Attention  was
    particularly drawn to evidence given by Dr Khanna in  relation  to  the
    lack of employment opportunities for openly gay persons  in  India.  It
    was submitted that the same  discriminatory  treatment  must  apply  to
    those openly gay persons in self-employment: although Mr Eaton accepted
    that Dr Khanna had not given evidence to this effect before us.

92. Mr Eaton accepted that not all gay men are at risk in India,  and  that
    there are groups of gay persons who can find  space  to  express  their
    homosexuality there, such as (i) gay  persons  who  have  property  and
    wealth (ii) the third gender identities such as the Hijra and (iii) gay
    persons with supportive family networks. He  submitted,  however,  that
    all other groups of gay persons are at risk of  persecution,  with  the
    urban poor (including Kothi) being most at risk  as  a  consequence  of
    their limited ability to (i) obtain privacy and (ii)  access  the  LGBT
    support networks, which in any event do not provide  a  sufficiency  of
    protection given their limited budgets and  the  fact  that  they  work
    within a climate of discrimination and violence.

93. As to the possibility of  internal  relocation,  it  was  the  expert's
    evidence that it is not the case that Tamil  Nadu  provides  a  greater
    protection for gay men, but that it simply recognises third genders  in
    their legal system.  Neither  is  the  risk  of  violence  to  gay  men
    ameliorated by living in Bangalore, Dr Khanna having given evidence  to
    the effect that although LGBT groups  in  Bangalore  have  a  political
    background and are consequently able to hold  the  police  to  account,
    this has not affected the actions of the police on the ground.

94. Turning to the  appellant's  particular  case,  he  observed  that  the
    appellant is not content to be discreet about the  fact  he  is  a  gay
    person and that he is only being discreet about his  relationship  with
    RD in Brighton in the short term.

95. He submitted that if the appellant were to return  to  India  he  would
    fall within a group of persons not able to find their own space to live
    an openly gay lifestyle. He has no family  support  in  India  and  his
    identity as a western gay  person  is  not  a  grouping  that  has  any
    resonance there. When the appellant previously lived in  India  without
    support he lost his  employment,  was  forced  into  prostitution,  was
    targeted by a nationalist group and was  arrested  and  beaten  by  the
    police. This, it was submitted, are the circumstances that  would  face
    the appellant should he return to India. He accepted that the appellant
    may be able to mitigate his circumstances if he were able to  access  a
    supportive LGBT group, however, this would only be a possibility in the
    short term.

96. As to article 8 ECHR, Mr Eaton observed that it had been accepted  that
    the appellant has a family life with RD in the United Kingdom and  that
    his removal would lead to an interference with his private  and  family
    life here. As to the issue of proportionality he submitted that it  was
    not proportionate to require the appellant to return to India  to  make
    an application for entry clearance, the decision of Blake J  in  Kussin
    was to be distinguished. Further, in order  to  survive  in  India  the
    appellant would  have  to  act  discreetly  in  order  to  avoid  being
    persecuted, such matter being relevant even if  the  tribunal  were  to
    conclude that the risk to the appellant was not at a  level  so  as  to
    lead to a breach of the Refugee Convention or Article 3 ECHR.

97. In his written submissions made in relation to  the  relevance  of  the
    CJEU's judgment in X, Y and Z Mr Eaton first summarised  the  questions
    asked of the court, then the court's ruling;  observing  in  particular
    that the CJEU had concluded that "a Member State could  not  require  a
    LGBT person to behave in a more restrained manner than  a  heterosexual
    person, in order to avoid persecution, as long as their  conduct  would
    not amount to a criminal offence in a Member State."

98. It was submitted, in reliance on  the  CJEU's  ruling,  that  (i)  LGBT
    persons form a particular social group in India for the purposes of the
    Qualification Directive and  (ii)  although  prosecutions  pursuant  to
    section 377 are historically uncommon the existence of  this  provision
    has allowed public bodies in general to harass and persecute gay men in
    India.

99. In his further written submissions made in relation to the decision  of
    the Indian Supreme Court in Koushal, Mr Eaton summarised the  terms  of
    the judgment, observed once again that the CJEU  in  X,  Y  and  Z  had
    concluded  that  the  mere  existence  of   legislation   criminalising
    homosexual acts could not be regarded as so significant that it reaches
    the level of  seriousness  necessary  to  constitute  persecution,  and
    accepted that recorded prosecutions under section 377  were  relatively
    uncommon.

100. He continued his written submissions by asserting that the tone of  the
    Indian Supreme Court's judgment  reflected  the  deep  lying  prejudice
    against LGBT persons that pervades much  of  Indian  Society  and  that
    section 377 had been used as an "umbrella for the harassment, blackmail
    and torture of LGBT by the Indian  police  and  non-state  actors."  Mr
    Eaton observed that the Naz Foundation had  pursued  its  case  in  the
    Supreme Court in reliance on the fact of such harassment, blackmail and
    torture of LGBT persons; submitting that  the  Supreme  Court  had  not
    rejected the evidence that such acts took place, but  rather  concluded
    that (i) it was not the intention of section 377 that  it  be  used  in
    such a manner and (ii) that's its misuse by the police and  others  did
    not make it unconstitutional.

101. Mr Eaton contended that any advances in the space carved  out  by  LGBT
    persons since the 2009 judgment of the Delhi High Court would likely be
    lost as a consequence of the judgment in Koushal. He further identified
    as matters relevant to the tribunal's considerations the fact that  (i)
    the Indian government had not legislated to repeal section 377  in  the
    intervening period between the Delhi High  Court's  judgement  and  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court and (ii) 2014  is  an  election  year  in
    India and that Dr Khanna had given evidence that there is a possibility
    that the BJP, which has been  consistent  in  its  opposition  to  LGBT
    rights, might  take  the  lead  in  the  next  government.  He  finally
    submitted that it is reasonable  to  speculate  that  the  judgment  in
    Koushal would embolden those in India who carry  out  attacks  on  LGBT
    persons.

Legal Framework

102. The legal framework considered in these appeals  includes  the  Refugee
    Convention, Council Directive 2004/83/EC, the  Charter  of  Fundamental
    Rights of the European Union  and  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights. Although on 21 December 2013 the Recast Qualification Directive
    (2011/95/EU) came into force throughout the European Union, the  United
    Kingdom has not opted in to this Directive  (recital  50  thereof)  and
    consequently  for  the  purposes  of   our   considerations   Directive
    2004/83/EC remains of application.

103. Article 9 of the Directive defines acts of persecution as follows:

       "1.  Acts of persecution within the meaning of  Article  1A  of  the
           Geneva Convention must

             (a) be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition  as
                  to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in
                  particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made
                  under Article 15(2) of the  European  Convention  for  the
                  Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

             (b)  be  an  accumulation  of  various   measures,   including
                  violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  mentioned
                  in (a).

         2. Acts of persecution as qualified  in  paragraph  1,  can,  inter
             alia, take the form of:

             (a) acts of physical or mental  violence,  including  acts  of
                  sexual violence;

             (b) legal, administrative, police,  and/or  judicial  measures
                  which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which  are
                  implemented in a discriminatory measure;

             (c) prosecution or punishment  which  is  disproportionate  or
                  discriminatory;

             (d) denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate
                  or discriminatory punishment;

             (e) prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform  military
                  service in a conflict, where performing  military  service
                  would include crimes or acts falling under  the  exclusion
                  clauses as set out in Article 12(2);

             (f) acts of gender-specific or child-specific nature.

         3. In accordance with Article  2(c)  there  must  be  a  connection
             between the reasons mentioned in Article 10 and  the  acts  of
             persecution as qualified in paragraph 1."

104.  Article 10 of the Directive identifies  the  reasons  for  persecutory
    treatment capable of engaging the Directive  (and  indeed  the  Refugee
    Convention). These include the following:

         "1(d) a group shall be considered to form an  innate  social  group
        where in particular;

                  1. members of that group share an  innate  characteristic
                     or a common background  that  cannot  be  changed,  or
                     share  a  characteristic  or   belief   that   is   so
                     fundamental to identity or conscience  that  a  person
                     should not be forced to renounce it, and

                  2. that group has a distinct  identity  in  the  relevant
                     country because it is perceived as being different  by
                     the surrounding society;

        depending  on  the  circumstances  in  the  country  of  origin,  a
        particular social group might include a group  based  on  a  common
        characteristic of sexual orientation..."


105.  Paragraph 65 of HJ and HT [2010]  UKSC  31  summarises  the  basis  of
    protection provided:


         "...so far as the social group  of  gay  people  is  concerned  the
         underlying rationale of the Convention is that they should be  able
         to live freely and openly as gay men  and  lesbian  women,  without
         fearing that they may suffer harm of  the  requisite  intensity  or
         duration because they are gay or lesbian. Their home  state  should
         protect them and so enable them to live in that way. If it does not
         and they will be threatened with serious harm if they live  openly,
         then most people threatened with persecution will be forced to take
         what steps they can to avoid it."


106. Lord Rodger at [82] sets out the assessment to  be  carried  out  by  a
    decision-maker:


      i. When an applicant applies for asylum  on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality.


     ii. If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on
         the available evidence that gay people who lived  openly  would  be
         liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.

    iii. If so, the tribunal must go on  to  consider  what  the  individual
         applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

     iv. If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
         "discreetly".

      v. If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.

     vi. If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.

    vii. If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him.


107. The Supreme Court in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38  at  [24]  considered
    whether there could be a distinction between core and  marginally  held
    rights or beliefs and in discussion [40-52] concluded [51] that:


         "...nothing...supports the idea that it is  relevant  to  determine
         how important the right is to the individual. There is no scope for
         the application of  the  core/marginal  distinction  (as  explained
         above) in any of the appeals  which  are  before  this  court.  The
         situation in Zimbabwe as disclosed by RN is not that the  right  to
         hold political beliefs is generally accepted subject only  to  some
         arguably peripheral or minor restrictions. It is that anyone who is
         not thought to be a supporter of the  regime  is  treated  harshly.
         That is persecution."

108. In X, Y and Z the CJEU considered the case of three  asylum  applicants
    in the Netherlands from Sierra  Leone,  Uganda  and  Senegal.  In  each
    country homosexuality is a criminal offence punishable  by  a  term  of
    imprisonment. The Raad van State requested a  preliminary  ruling  from
    the CJEU on the following matters:


       "(1) Do foreign nationals with  a  homosexual  orientation  form  a
          particular social group as referred to in Article 10(1)(d) [of the
          Directive]?

       (2)  If the first question is to be answered  in  the  affirmative:
          which homosexual activities fall within the scope of the Directive
          and, in the case of  acts  of  persecution  in  respect  of  those
          activities and if the other requirements are met, can that lead to
          the granting of refugee  status?  That  question  encompasses  the
          following subquestions:

          (a)     Can foreign nationals with a  homosexual  orientation  be
              expected to conceal their orientation from everyone in  their
              [respective] country of origin in order to avoid persecution?

          (b)     If the  previous  question  is  to  be  answered  in  the
              negative, can foreign nationals with a homosexual orientation
              be expected to exercise restraint, and if so, to what extent,
              when giving expression to that orientation in  their  country
              of origin, in  order  to  avoid  persecution?  Moreover,  can
              greater  restraint  be  expected  of  homosexuals   than   of
              heterosexuals?

          (c)     If, in that regard, a distinction  can  be  made  between
              forms of expression which relate to  the  core  area  of  the
              orientation and forms of expression which do not, what should
              be understood to constitute the core area of the  orientation
              and in what way can it be determined?

       (3)  Do the criminalisation of homosexual activities and the threat
          of imprisonment in relation thereto, as set out  in  the  Offences
          against the Person Act 1861 of Sierra Leone (Case  C-199/12),  the
          Penal Code Act 1950 of Uganda (Case C-200/12)  or  the  Senegalese
          Penal Code (Case C-201/12) constitute an act of persecution within
          the meaning of Article 9(1)(a), read in conjunction  with  Article
          9(2)(c) of the Directive? If not, under what  circumstances  would
          that be the case?"


109. The CJEU ruled as follows:


        "1.    Article 10(1)(d) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April
             2004 on minimum standards for the qualification and  status  of
             third-country nationals or Stateless persons as refugees or  as
             persons who otherwise need  international  protection  and  the
             content of  the  protection  granted  must  be  interpreted  as
             meaning that the existence of criminal laws, such as  those  at
             issue in each of the  cases  in  the  main  proceedings,  which
             specifically target  homosexuals,  supports  the  finding  that
             those persons must be regarded as forming a  particular  social
             group.


        2.      Article 9(1)  of  Directive  2004/83,  read  together  with
             Article 9(2)(c) thereof, must be interpreted  as  meaning  that
             the  criminalisation  of  homosexual  acts  per  se  does   not
             constitute  an  act  of  persecution.  However,   a   term   of
             imprisonment which  sanctions  homosexual  acts  and  which  is
             actually applied in the country of origin  which  adopted  such
             legislation must be regarded as being  a  punishment  which  is
             disproportionate or discriminatory and thus constitutes an  act
             of persecution.


        3.      Article 10(1)(d) of Directive 2004/83, read  together  with
             Article 2(c) thereof, must be interpreted as meaning that  only
             homosexual acts which  are  criminal  in  accordance  with  the
             national law of the Member States are excluded from its  scope.
             When assessing an application for refugee status, the competent
             authorities cannot reasonably expect, in  order  to  avoid  the
             risk of persecution, the applicant for asylum  to  conceal  his
             homosexuality in his country of origin or to  exercise  reserve
             in the expression of his sexual orientation."



Discussion

110. We now turn to our  assessment  of  the  expert  and  other  background
    evidence.

111. In summary, Dr Khanna's  evidence  is  to  the  effect  that  "same-sex
    desiring" males, except those in the upper classes,  are  generally  at
    risk of suffering from violence and extortion from the police in India,
    as well as violence and other discrimination from the general  populace
    including discrimination in the accessing housing,  employment,  health
    care and education. He further opines that LGBT persons do not  receive
    protection from the police and that although there are  NGOs  and  LGBT
    support groups, the assistance they can provide is  short-term  and  is
    difficult to access.

112. Dr Khanna's curriculum vitae is formidable. There can be no doubt  that
    he has relevant academic  credentials  and  substantial  experience  in
    India, in particular within the field of the consideration of the human
    rights  of  sexual  and  gender  minorities.  He  also  has  long  held
    allegiances and associations with the "Queer movement" in India,  is  a
    founder member of a Delhi  based  sexual  rights  group,  has  provided
    legal, social and other support to people facing violence in  India  on
    the basis of their sexual orientation, and has been engaged in  various
    capacities in  the  ongoing  litigation  challenging  the  validity  of
    section 377.

112. Dr Khanna clearly has a close sympathy with the difficulties  faced  by
    same-sex oriented persons in India and we consider that his views as an
    expert have been shaped in part by this sympathy and  also  his  avowed
    support for the rights of such persons. This is reflected in the  tenor
    of his evidence and we have borne it in mind in our evaluation  of  his
    evidence.

Male same-sex sexual activity - identity defining


113. Our assessment of the current circumstances  prevailing  in  India  for
    same-sex oriented males, or those perceived  as  such,  has  been  much
    assisted by Dr Khanna's evidence as to the history of same sex  desire,
    gender plurality and homosexuality in India.

114. It is not in  dispute  that  same  sex  sexual  activity  was  present,
    recognised and indeed celebrated  in  pre-colonial  India,  across  the
    different religions. Unlike in the Euro-North  American  context,  same
    sex desire did not, at that time, define self identity; although it has
    to an extent come to do so in the post colonial era. The  emergence  of
    the idea of sexuality as defining identity fuelled the  recognition  of
    non-heterosexual sexual desires as being different, which in  turn  led
    to such desires becoming stigmatised.

115. Self-identification as "gay" is most common in  the  middle  and  upper
    classes of Indian society. Same-sex oriented males of lower or  working
    class tend not to self identify as  gay  but  instead  have  their  own
    social spaces or descriptors (such as Hijra and Kothi), as explained in
    Dr Khanna's evidence and referred to in paragraph 8 above.

Evidence of change - an overall picture

116. In our conclusion the  general  circumstances  for  same  sex  oriented
    males in India are improving and have been  doing  so  for  some  time,
    albeit progress is still slow. Examples of such improvement can be seen
    in the fact that in 2001 India had one of its first gay  weddings;  gay
    pride marches first took place in Kolkata and Mumbai in  2003  and  now
    take place annually in a significant number of major cities  in  India;
    Mumbai now has a dedicated LGBT store, dedicated LGBT websites, an LGBT
    film festival and dedicated LGBT nights at bars and clubs. Chennai also
    has a number of "gay clubs". Although  these  clubs  and  bars  are  on
    occasion subjected to police raids there open  existence  is  a  matter
    which, on the evidence before us, is not  something  which  would  have
    been a possibility until relatively recently. The conclusions  we  draw
    from these examples are re-enforced by other evidence before us to  the
    effect that some Indian  state  authorities,  with  the  assistance  of
    NGO's, have offered the police education and  sensitivity  training  in
    relation to their dealings with LBGT  persons  and  that  incidents  of
    police harassment of LGBT persons are,  although  still  occurring,  in
    decline.

117. We agree with the observations made in an  article  in  Al  Jazeera  in
    July 2012 [cited in the report from the  Research  Directorate  of  the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada] that "Homosexuals have  slowly
    gained a degree of acceptance in a few parts of  India,  especially  in
    big cities". The reality is that although homosexuality  remains  taboo
    and is still seen as socially unacceptable in India it is emerging into
    the public sphere. We do not accept that the decision  of  the  Supreme
    Court in Koushal will lead to a national or  general  reversal  of  the
    positive changes that have occurred in India for LGBTI persons  and  in
    particular for same-sex oriented males.

Prosecution

118. It was made clear in X, Y and Z  that  article  9(1)  of  Qualification
    Directive,  read  together  with  Article  9(2)(c)  thereof,  must   be
    interpreted  as  meaning  that  the  mere  existence   of   legislation
    criminalising homosexual acts is not to  be  regarded  as  constituting
    persecution, although  a  term  of  imprisonment  which  accompanies  a
    legislative  provision  punishing  a  homosexual  act  is  capable   of
    amounting to persecution provided that there is a real risk of it being
    applied in any given case.  We endorse and apply  this  conclusion.  It
    has not been  argued  before  us  that  the  existence  of  legislation
    criminalising homosexual acts  can  of  itself  amount  to  persecutory
    treatment as defined in any other of the subparagraphs of Article 9  of
    the Directive, or within Article 1A(2) of the  Refugee  Convention.  In
    such circumstances, and given the judgment in X, Y and Z, we proceed on
    the basis that does not.

119. Turning to the history of the criminalisation  of  homosexual  acts  in
    India, this begins with the introduction of such laws in  England.  The
    Buggery Act of 1533 was an Act of  the  Parliament  of  England  passed
    during the reign of Henry VIII. It defined "buggery"  as  an  unnatural
    sexual act against the will of  God  and  man  and  prescribed  capital
    punishment for commission of the offence. This provision was re-enacted
    by Queen Elizabeth I, after which it became the charter for  subsequent
    criminalisation of sodomy in the British Colonies. The Act was repealed
    in England by the Offences against the Person Act 1828, and in India by
    Section 125 of the Criminal Law (India) Act 1928, when it was  replaced
    by Section 63 of the  same  Act,  which  provided  that  buggery  would
    continue to be a capital offence.

120. Following Lord Macaulay's Draft Penal Code of 1837,  the  Indian  Penal
    Code was eventually introduced into Indian law in  1860,  consolidating
    penal law in India. Section 377 of that Code remains in force today and
    reads:

       "Unnatural Offences': Whoever  voluntarily  has  carnal  intercourse
       against the order of nature with any man, woman or animal, shall  be
       punished with [imprisonment  for  life],  or  with  imprisonment  of
       either description for a term which may extend  to  ten  years,  and
       shall also be liable to fine".

121. Three things are immediately apparent from the terms  of  section  377:
    (i) that whilst homosexual acts have  been  held  to  fall  within  its
    ambit, they do not do so exclusively, (ii) it applies to acts of carnal
    intercourse, even  where  the  parties  to  such  act  consent  to  its
    undertaking and (iii) it is not relevant  whether  such  an  act  takes
    place in a public or a private place.

122. The constitutional challenges to section  377  began  as  long  ago  as
    1994, when the AIDS  Bhedbhav  Virohi  Andolan  (ABVA  -  the  campaign
    against AIDS-related discrimination) filed a  challenge  in  the  Delhi
    High Court in response to the Inspector General of Prisons  refusal  to
    issue condoms to prisoners on the basis that to do so  would  encourage
    male homosexual behaviour  in  prisons.  This  petition  was  dismissed
    without consideration having been given to its substantive merit.

123. Thereafter, the arrest of four workers from the  Naz  Foundation  India
    Trust in Lucknow (referred to  in  detail  in  paragraph  18(d)  above)
    attracted international attention and instigated the formation  of  new
    activist collectives in India. In September  2001  an  NGO  called  the
    Lawyers Collective filed a public interest suit in the Delhi High Court
    on  behalf  of  the  Naz  Foundation  India  Trust,   challenging   the
    constitutional vires of section 377. The government of  India  at  that
    time (the Bharatiya  Janta  Party  (BJP))  opposed  the  petition.  The
    petition was dismissed by the Delhi High Court in 2004 for reason  that
    (i) it was academic, and (ii)  the  petitioner  had  no  locus  standi.
    However, this decision was set aside by the  Indian  Supreme  Court  in
    2006 and the application was 'remanded' back to the Delhi High Court to
    be heard substantively.

124. The Delhi High Court heard evidence and submissions over a  twelve  day
    period and gave its judgment some 8 months later, on the 2  July  2009;
    it concluded as follows:

       "We declare that Section 377 IPC, insofar it criminalises consensual
       sexual acts of adults in private, is violative of  Articles  21,  14
       and 15 of the Constitution. The provisions of Section 377  IPC  will
       continue to govern non-consensual penile non-vaginal sex and  penile
       non-vaginal sex involving minors. By 'adult' we mean everyone who is
       18 years of age and above. A person below 18 would be  presumed  not
       to be able to consent to a sexual act. This clarification will  hold
       till, of course, Parliament chooses to amend the law  to  effectuate
       the recommendation of the Law  Commission  of  India  in  its  172nd
       Report which we believe removes a great deal of confusion."

125.  Sixteen  petitioners  filed  challenges  to  the  Delhi  High  Court's
    judgment with the Supreme Court. The petitioners include  amongst  them
    individuals, numerous religious organisations and the Delhi  Commission
    for the Protection of Child Rights.  Significantly  the  government  of
    India did not appeal the judgment.

126. There were also  a  significant  number  of  interventions  before  the
    Supreme Court in support of the High Court's judgment,  including  from
    groups  representing  the  parents  of  LGBT  children,  mental  health
    professionals, academics and a collective formed as  a  "Voice  against
    377".  The proceedings were completed on 27 March 2012 and the judgment
    reserved.

127. As we have indicated above the judgment of the Indian Supreme Court  in
    Koushal was handed down on the 11 December 2013: the  court  concluding
    that section 377 of the Indian Penal Code "does  not  suffer  from  the
    vice of unconstitutionality", and ruling the declaration of  the  Delhi
    High Court to be legally unsustainable.

128. Despite the breadth of its terms, prosecutions under section  377  have
    been rare. Dr Khanna refers to studies from 2000 and  2001  identifying
    131 prosecutions under section 377 reaching the higher courts in  India
    (State High Courts, the Supreme Court and previously the Privy Council)
    in the 140 years since its introduction. The report from  the  Research
    Directorate of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada of May  2004
    refers to studies by the Peoples Union of Civil  Liberties  identifying
    the fact that only 30 prosecutions under section 377  had  reached  the
    higher courts between 1860 and 1992. In its  judgment  in  Koushal  the
    Indian Supreme Court referred to  their  having  been  "less  than  200
    persons prosecuted for committing offence under Section 377 IPC" in the
    last 150 years. Putting these figures in context, India currently has a
    population of approximately 1.2 billion people and the  Indian  Supreme
    Court cited evidence that the total population of "MSM" [men  who  have
    sex with men] was estimated to be 25,000,000 as of 2006.

129. The Supreme Court did not stay the effect of the judgment of the  Delhi
    High Court pending the hearing of the appeal. Dr Khanna  observes  that
    there were conflicting positions on the applicability of  the  judgment
    outside the jurisdiction of Delhi High Court, a view that  is  mirrored
    in other evidence before us. The evidence does disclose that in January
    2012 a Magistrates Court in Mumbai rejected an application to dismiss a
    charge brought under section 377, declaring that "section 377 was still
    alive in statute", but does not further identify the  ultimate  outcome
    of the matter or the reasons therefore.

130. Drawing all of this together, whilst  we  note  Dr  Khanna's  assertion
    that the fact that prosecutions under section 377 only rarely reach the
    higher courts does not of itself mean that prosecutions  under  section
    377 are rare, we nevertheless  find,  given  the  complete  absence  of
    evidence before us capable of leading us to a contrary conclusion, that
    such prosecutions are extremely rare,  and  have  always  been  so.  In
    coming to this conclusion we have taken fully into account Dr  Khanna's
    evidence that it would be impossible to provide evidence of the overall
    incidence of such prosecutions  given  the  lack  of  national  records
    against which to make the relevant checks; however, be that as it  may,
    this does not satisfactorily  explain  the  extent  of  the  dearth  of
    examples of such prosecutions before us. Not only is there  a  lack  of
    evidence relating to the frequency of prosecutions in the lower courts,
    but such evidence as there is about prosecutions suggests that a  large
    proportion of whatever number there are relate to child rape  cases  or
    cases of non-consensual sex.

131. We conclude, therefore, that on the  evidence  before  us  we  are  not
    satisfied that there is a real risk  of  consensual  sexual  activities
    between males being prosecuted in India. This was the case  before  the
    2009 judgment of the Delhi High Court, and remains so now.

Police violence and extortion

132. Although the central government provides guidance and support to  state
    authorities, the  28  states  and  seven  union  territories  of  India
    maintain primary responsibility for  maintaining  law  and  order.  The
    police are under state jurisdiction.

133. The fact that police officials extort  money  and  ill  treat  same-sex
    oriented males is a  common  thread  running  throughout  the  evidence
    before us,  as  indeed  are  examples  of  police  officials  in  India
    arbitrarily arresting and ill-treating non-LGBT persons.

134. The US State Department report for  2012  confirms  that  LGBT  persons
    faced "physical attacks, rape and  blackmail"  and  that  "some  police
    committed crimes against LGBT persons and used the threat of arrest  to
    coerce victims not to report incidents". The same report also  observes
    that several states, with the assistance  of  NGOs,  now  offer  police
    education  and  sensitivity  training.  This   evidence   is   entirely
    consistent with information from other  sources  before  us,  including
    that contained within the Australian  government's  Country  Advice  on
    India of January 2012 which makes reference to  the  fact  that  whilst
    violence against homosexuals continues, "the level of police harassment
    has dropped."

135. In  his  written  evidence  Dr  Khanna  states  that  there  is  "ample
    evidence" of a culture of violence by the police towards LGBT  persons.
    In doing so he draws on information disclosed in a  number  of  reports
    pre-dating the Delhi High Court's judgment[1]. In addition reliance was
    placed on the suspension from employment, and subsequent eviction  from
    his university accommodation,  of  Professor  Siras  in  2010  and  the
    detention of 100 people after a raid on an all male party in a  bar  in
    Hyderabad in September 2013, the bar workers eventually being  arrested
    for enabling obscene acts.

136. Dr Khanna's view is clear: that the question of  class  is  crucial  to
    determining the risk to a same-sex oriented male in India; the poor and
    working class persons, especially effeminate males, being  most  likely
    to face extreme violence, exclusion  and  discrimination,  whereas  the
    upper class gay person is not at risk of ill treatment.

137. As to instances of blackmail  and  extortion  by  the  police  of  LGBT
    persons, Dr Khanna concludes that this is  a  common  experience.  When
    doing so he refers to, but does not provide details  of,  reports  from
    social media networks relating to  such  blackmail  and  extortion.  He
    observes that reports of blackmail and extortion are made on a monthly,
    and sometimes more frequent, basis.  He  further  provides  by  way  of
    example the fact that he was stopped at one of the many checkpoints  in
    Delhi 'because of his looks'.

138. In the Indian Supreme Court the Naz Foundation attacked section 377  on
    the ground that it has been used to  perpetrate  harassment,  blackmail
    and torture on certain persons, especially those belonging to the  LGBT
    community. At paragraph 51 of its judgment  the  Indian  Supreme  Court
    stated in relation to this argument that:

       "... [t]his treatment is neither mandated by the section nor condoned
       by it and the mere  fact  that  the  section  is  misused  by  police
       authorities and others is not  a  reflection  of  the  vires  of  the
       section."

139. Mr Eaton submits that the fact that the Court  did  not  conclude  that
    section 377 had not been used in this way is  supportive  of  the  fact
    that it has been so used. A number of points can be made in relation to
    this aspect of the Indian  Supreme  Court's  decision  and  Mr  Eaton's
    submission. First, we do not accept that the Indian Supreme  Court  was
    implicitly accepting that such acts against LGBT persons had taken,  or
    continue to take, place. It did not need to address  this  issue  given
    its conclusion that any misuse of section 377 by the police authorities
    and others does not reflect  on  the  vires  of  the  section.  Second,
    insofar as it did refer to the evidence  relevant  to  such  issue,  it
    found it to be of poor quality. For example, in  paragraph  40  of  its
    judgment the Supreme Court refers to the fact that in its  opinion  the
    Naz Foundation had "miserably failed  to  furnish  particulars  of  the
    incidents of discriminatory attitude exhibited by  the  State  agencies
    towards sexual minorities  and  consequential  denial  of  basic  human
    rights to them." Later in the same paragraph the  Court  conclude  that
    "[T]hese details are wholly insufficient for recording a  finding  that
    homosexuals,  gays,  etc.,  are  being  subjected   to   discriminatory
    treatment either by the State or its agencies or the  society."  Third,
    even if the Supreme Court did accept the fact that section 377 had been
    misused by the police authorities and others, it made no observation as
    to the prevalence of such misuse, either historically or at the present
    time.

140. It is additionally relevant that there is  a  significant  LGBT  rights
    network of NGOs in India, and the case before the Delhi High Court  and
    the Supreme Court has brought together and focused  the  work  of  such
    organisations. There is also a lively social  media  with  interest  in
    LGBT rights. Whilst we accept Dr Khanna's evidence that  it  is  likely
    that a significant number of cases of police violence and extortion  of
    LGBT persons go unreported, had the practice of violence and  blackmail
    of LGBT persons by the police been at the level Dr Khanna suggested  it
    is, or at such a level that it could be said that there is a real  risk
    to any particular same-sex oriented male, we would have  expected  this
    to have been better reflected by the examples of such  treatment  given
    in the evidence before us.

141. Whilst reference is made in Dr Khanna's evidence to a  police  raid  of
    an all male party at a bar  in  Hyderabad  in  September  2013,  it  is
    significant that although it is said that 100  persons  were  detained,
    there is no mention of these persons being ill-treated  or  subject  to
    extortion attempts by the police whilst in detention.

142. In addition, in the section of his report  headed  'Blackmail  of  LGBT
    people', Dr Khanna states, in relation to blackmail by the police, that
    "[T]he most recent example of this is a case in Bombay/Mumbai, where  a
    28 year old gay man was  assaulted  in  a  lavatory  at  Vasai  railway
    station, by two plainclothes policemen, who then proceeded to force him
    to withdraw cash at an auto-teller machine...". The  article  to  which
    this incident is referenced is dated 2 March 2013. It is to be recalled
    that Dr Khanna's written report is dated 18 September 2013. We find  it
    surprising that if such incidents were as common as Dr Khanna  suggests
    that the 'most recent' example of blackmail that Dr  Khanna  was  aware
    of, as of 18 September 2013, was  an  incident  that  occurred  over  6
    months earlier.

143. There can be  no  dispute  that  violence  and  extortion  of  same-sex
    oriented males still occurs in India and that those of lower caste,  or
    working class (such as the Hijra or Kothi), are more vulnerable to such
    actions.  However,  the  evidence  before   us   comes   nowhere   near
    establishing that the scale and frequency of police  violence  against,
    or extortion and blackmail of, same-sex oriented males is so  prevalent
    as to constitute a real risk  to  any  given  same-sex  oriented  male,
    whatever their  class  or  status  in  Indian  society.  The  generally
    historic nature of the examples that have been provided and the  dearth
    of up-to-date examples of such practices serve only to  highlight  this
    point. We find nothing in the recent judgment  of  the  Indian  Supreme
    Court in Koushal that leads us to a different conclusion.

144. Further, the evidence before us does not support a conclusion that  the
    fact  of  the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  will  trigger  any,  or  any
    significant, increase in the levels of violence or  extortion  attempts
    levelled at same-sex oriented males by the police, or  indeed  by  non-
    state actors, such that there will be a real  risk  to  any  particular
    same-sex oriented male of being subjected to such treatment. There  was
    no real risk of a  same-sex  oriented  male  being  subjected  to  such
    treatment in the years immediately preceding the 2009 judgment  of  the
    Delhi  High  Court,  and  since  the  section  377  litigation   began,
    homosexuality has emerged into the public sphere  and  the  number  and
    reach of the LBGTQ support organisations has steadily grown.

Violence other than from the police or state  authorities  [i.e.  from  non-
state actors]

145. We here consider the current position relating  to  risks  of  violence
    against openly same-sex oriented males, where such violence is said  to
    emanate from persons  other  than  the  police  or  state  authorities;
    including family members of the same-sex oriented males.

146. Dr Khanna considers that (i) upper-class gay persons are  in  the  best
    position to reap the benefits of  the  Delhi  Judgement,  such  persons
    being likely to own property and to have their own  social  space.  The
    upper-class gay person is not, according  to  Dr  Khanna,  at  risk  of
    suffering from violent treatment at the hands of  non-state  actors  in
    India; (ii) although working class same-sex oriented males, such as the
    Kothi and Hijra, have a social space and are  culturally  intelligible,
    they  are  nevertheless  subjected  to   high   levels   of   violence,
    particularly those who work in the sex trade.  He  observes  that  most
    people he interviewed for the purposes of his  research  had,  at  some
    time, faced physical violence and other forms of abuse and (iii) middle
    class  gay  persons  have  no  social  space  and  are  not  culturally
    intelligible in India. As a consequence they have no ability to  access
    privacy, and face ridicule, taunting and casual violence on an everyday
    basis.

147. Dr Khanna's evidence on this aspect has some degree of  resonance  with
    other background evidence before us, but  there  are  features  of  his
    evidence that present an altogether more extreme picture  for  same-sex
    oriented males than that generally presented elsewhere.  There  is,  we
    consider, an element of overstatement in his position.

148. We accept that homophobic violence does occur in India and that (i)  it
    is more prevalent in urban areas and (ii) those of 'working class'  are
    the most likely to be subjected to violent acts.  However,  we  do  not
    consider that the evidence establishes that there is generally  a  real
    risk of an openly same-sex oriented  male,  whether  upper,  middle  or
    working class, being the subject of such violence.

149. Dr Khanna supports his conclusions  as  to  the  high  level  of  risks
    occasioned by those working in the sex industry (which in  reality  are
    those of the working or lower castes) by reference  to  information  he
    received directly from such persons during the course of  his  research
    in India. However, he does not provide  any  details  of  the  research
    methods he used, how many persons he interviewed for  the  purposes  of
    his research, when such interviews took place, or what criteria he used
    to choose the persons whom he interviewed. Dr Khanna's  conclusions  as
    to the levels of risk generally and the  particularly  high  levels  of
    risk to those working in the sex industry are not  further  sourced  or
    referenced in his report, nor did he identify any examples  or  sources
    during the course of his oral testimony in support of his conclusions.

150. In so far as the other evidence before us assists in  ascertaining  the
    extent of violence occasioned by non-state actors, it does no more than
    support the conclusion that such violence exists; however it  comes  no
    where near demonstrating that there is a real risk  to  any  particular
    individual of suffering ill treatment at the hands of non-state actors.
    The Australian government's Country  Advice  on  India  (January  2012)
    cites evidence from 2011 which makes  reference  to  homosexuals  being
    subject to mistreatment in Calcutta and Hyderabad, as well as  evidence
    that members of the Mitr Trust (a Delhi based LGBT  organisation  whose
    members now number close to 20,000) report  that  they  have  been  the
    subject of harassment from members  of  the  public  (as  well  as  the
    police), but provides no detail or scale to such occurrences. The  same
    is the case for the other evidence before us.

151. Absent further detail, we find that neither Dr Khanna's  evidence,  nor
    the generalised and  unsourced  evidence  found  elsewhere  before  us,
    assists to any great degree in establishing the level of  risk  of  ill
    treatment from non state actors faced by an  openly  same-sex  oriented
    male in India. Such evidence as is before  does  not  demonstrate  that
    there is a real risk that any particular same-sex oriented male,  or  a
    person perceived as such, will be subjected violence from  a  non-state
    actor.

152. As to  the  risks  arising  to  same-sex  oriented  males  from  family
    members, such cases have to be considered on their individual facts. It
    is plainly the case that it cannot be said that there is a general risk
    to all same-sex oriented males from  their  own  family  members.  Each
    family will treat the disclosure of homosexuality differently, although
    we accept that there is a strong cultural  family  expectation  that  a
    son/daughter will engage in a heterosexual marriage. Insofar as it  can
    be established that a family of a  particular  same-sex  oriented  male
    have the willingness and ability to persecute such person, there is  no
    reason why internal relocation to a major city  away  from  the  family
    members should not ameliorate any risk to  a  level  where  it  can  no
    longer be considered to be 'real'.

153. There is very limited  evidence  before  us  of  families  successfully
    using the police in an attempt to track down those family  members  who
    have fled, with a view to those persons being 'repatriated' back to the
    family. In any event, India is a country of 1.2 billion people  and  we
    have  not  been  drawn  to  any  evidence  that  there  is  a   central
    registration system in place which would enable the police to check the
    whereabouts of inhabitants in their own state, let alone in any of  the
    other states or unions within the country. We consider the  possibility
    of the police, or any other person or body, being able  to  locate,  at
    the behest of an individual's family, a person who has fled to  another
    state or union in India, to be remote.

Employment

154. We accept that there is some discrimination in employment of those  who
    are known to be, or  who  are  openly  or  perceived  to  be,  same-sex
    oriented males.

155. The Australian Government's report of  2012  indicates  that  there  is
    evidence  to  suggest  that  [emphasis  added]  "some  employers   have
    reportedly fired gay men who do not  hide  their  sexual  orientation";
    although no examples were provided and the report itself observes  that
    the source evidence it relies upon does not describe where and in  what
    industries such actions are most prevalent. The Australian report  also
    references reports that some Mitr Trust members have stated  that  they
    were denied employment because employers felt uncomfortable with  their
    social identities. This evidence is consistent with that set out in the
    2012 US State Department Report, which indicates that  "Activists  also
    reported that some employers fired LGBT persons  who  were  open  about
    their sexual orientation or gender identity".

156. We do not,  however,  accept  that  the  difficulty  in  obtaining,  or
    keeping, employment in India for openly  homosexual  males  is  of  the
    scale suggested by Dr Khanna in his  oral  evidence  i.e.  that  it  is
    'difficult to imagine' a person known  to  be  a  homosexual  obtaining
    employment in India, unless it is in  a  business  where  a  homosexual
    person had risen  to  a  managerial  level  and  homosexuality  is  not
    discussed at work. We think that there is a gap in the  evidence  which
    shows the conclusions reached by Dr Khanna to be too sweeping.

157. In  support  of  his  conclusion  Dr  Khanna  makes  reference  to  the
    circumstances of  Professor  Siras.  We  have  set  out  the  facts  of
    Professor Siras' case in paragraph 18(g) above,  at  least  insofar  as
    they are recited in Dr Khanna's report. Those details are  limited  and
    do not include either the actual reasons given by  the  University  for
    dismissing  the  Professor  and  withdrawing  his  use  of   University
    accommodation, or of Professor Siras' response.  This  is  a  case,  of
    course, in which a video of the Professor engaging in  same-sex  sexual
    activities  became  publicly  available.  Whether  his  dismissal   was
    motivated purely by the fact that Professor Siras had been disclosed to
    be gay, or whether other factors were involved in the decision, such as
    the possible damage  to  the  University's  reputation  caused  by  the
    publicly available video, is impossible to tell. What is known is  that
    the Professor had the opportunity to seek legal redress, an opportunity
    he took and which led to him obtaining a stay of the  order  suspending
    him from employment. He unfortunately  died  before  these  proceedings
    could be pursued further. At its highest, this  incident  provides  one
    example of discrimination of a gay person in employment;  however,  the
    facts of this example are somewhat unusual and, as identified above, it
    also provides an example of the availability of legal redress.

158. Other than Professor Siras' case,  Dr  Khanna  indicates  that  he  has
    personally come across several other cases  where  people  have  either
    been dismissed, or conditions made so difficult for them, that they had
    been forced to resign from their employment once it was known that they
    were homosexual. Dr Khanna declined to provide  any  details  of  these
    cases, it is said, as a consequence of his concern that the  divulgence
    of such information would lead to further  discrimination.  As  is  the
    case with many of Dr Khanna's conclusions,  the  supporting  evidential
    foundation, insofar as it was put before us, was sparse and of  limited
    value. Such evidence is insufficient to warrant extrapolation into  the
    sweeping conclusions drawn by Dr Khanna.

159. Given Dr Khanna's evidence as to the limited possibility of  an  openly
    same-sex oriented male obtaining employment in India,  we  invited  his
    opinion as to the prospects of such a person obtaining an income by way
    of self-employment. We observed that a significant  proportion  of  the
    working population of India are self-employed. In response,  Dr  Khanna
    accepted that there were opportunities for same-sex oriented  males  to
    make a living as self-employed persons in a large Indian city.  In  his
    submissions, Mr Eaton asked us to find that  openly  same-sex  oriented
    males would not be able to make a living from self employment,  outside
    of the sex trade, given the level  of  discrimination  that  they  were
    likely to encounter. He accepted, however,  that  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Khanna did not support this submission.

160. We find that there is an ability for a same-sex oriented male to  'make
    a  living'  in  India  outside  of  the  sex  trade.  Whilst  there  is
    discrimination against persons, or persons perceived  to  be,  same-sex
    oriented males in obtaining and keeping employment, this is not on  the
    scale postulated by Dr Khanna. In the event that employment  cannot  be
    found, it is open to an openly same-sex  oriented  male  to  enter  the
    large self-employed economy in India.

Other discrimination

161.  Dr  Khanna  makes  reference   to   discrimination   of   "stigmatised
    communities", in the provision  of  health  care,  such  discrimination
    particularly acting against persons such as men who have sex with  men,
    sex workers and injecting drug users, whom,  it  is  said,  are  either
    refused  healthcare  treatment  or  given  differential  treatment.  In
    support of his conclusions Dr Khanna refers to  (i)  the  existence  of
    research publications relating to Kothi and "men who have sex with  men
    and transgender  people"  and  (ii)  preliminary  findings  of  current
    research taking place on discrimination in  health  care  in  different
    parts  of  India,  which,  it  is  said,  suggests   that   levels   of
    discrimination remain high.

162.  Dr  Khanna  does  not  provide  extracts  or  any  detail   from   the
    aforementioned sources and neither does he indicate  that  he  has  any
    independent   and   direct   experience   of   occurrences   of    such
    discrimination. We observe, however, that the World Bank, in its report
    of 2012, also identifies the fact of "poor access" to  health  care  in
    India for LGBT persons.  The other evidence before us is largely silent
    on this issue.

163. On the basis of the limited evidence available to us  we  are  prepared
    to accept that there is some discrimination against LGBT persons in the
    provision of health care in India, but we do not conclude that there is
    a reasonable degree of likelihood or a real risk of an openly same  sex
    oriented male being denied  healthcare  altogether,  or  indeed  of  an
    openly same sex oriented male being given differential treatment to the
    general populace.

164. As to the prevalence of aversion therapy as a 'cure' for  homosexuality
    amongst mental health professionals in India, it was  clarified  by  Dr
    Khanna during in his oral evidence that such therapy was  not  forcibly
    given to anyone.

165. Turning to the issue of the availability of accommodation for  same-sex
    oriented males; Hijra have their  own  communities  within  which  they
    live, and Kothi tend also to live within those  communities.  According
    Dr Khanna, upper class gay males who own their own property are able to
    cohabit as male couples  without  any  real  difficulty.  It  is  said,
    though, that the same is not the case for middle class gay  males  who,
    if they wish to cohabit with each other, need to present themselves  to
    a landlord as 'friends'. Dr Khanna further observes that it  is  common
    in India for landlords to share the same accommodation as  the  tenant,
    which increases the difficulties of a gay person being able to hide his
    sexual orientation.

166. Dr Khanna provides evidence that he  is  personally  aware  of  several
    persons who have been evicted from their accommodation when  suspicions
    were raised that they might be gay. Given  the  prejudice  against  gay
    persons in India, we have no difficulty in  accepting  that  there  are
    landlords who also hold such prejudices and that those landlords  would
    be reluctant to rent their properties to openly gay persons, let  alone
    to a gay couple. However, the evidence  does  not  disclose  that  this
    problem is endemic or anywhere approaching it.  Dr  Khanna's  evidence,
    that the only possibilities for a gay person or couple wishing to  rent
    are to (i) live discreetly so that the landlord does not  become  aware
    of a person's sexuality, (ii) find a LGBT landlord, or (iii) live in an
    area close to a Hijra community, suggests that in his view the  problem
    is virtually universal. This conclusion must, though, be based  on  the
    underlying presumption that  all  non-LGBT  landlords  hold  homophobic
    prejudices to the extent that they would not rent to a known gay person
    or couple. The evidence before us does not bear this out.

167. If a same-sex  oriented  male,  or  couple,  do  have  difficulties  in
    obtaining accommodation because of the prejudice of the landlords  they
    have approached, assistance in finding accommodation can  be  obtained,
    certainly in the major cities, from LGBT support organisations. We deal
    with the role of these groups further below.

LGBT support organisations

168. LGBT support organisations had formed in most of the  major  cities  in
    India by the late 1990s, and it was the formation of these groups which
    brought to the fore the  experiences  of  violence  and  discrimination
    against LGBT persons at that time. The challenges to section  377  also
    provided a rallying point  for  such  organisations  and  over  time  a
    nascent movement emerged focussed on decriminalising homosexuality  and
    same-sex orientation in males.

169. In his oral evidence Dr Khanna observed that LGBT  support  groups  are
    in general informal collectives of  people  in  urban  areas  who  come
    together with the purpose of building support  networks  for  the  LGBT
    community. Group meetings often take place in the  offices  of  HIV  or
    human rights NGOs. These groups provide a range of assistance  to  LGBT
    persons including (i) "keeping them  underground"  if  the  police  are
    looking for them, (ii) emotional and financial support, and  (iii)  the
    providing  of  community  connections  and  assistance  to  enable  the
    supported person to obtain  employment  and  accommodation.  Dr  Khanna
    gives an example of an LGBT support group in Gujarat also setting up  a
    home for elderly LGBT persons who are not able  to  access  the  normal
    familial support networks. The LBGT  support  communities  continue  to
    grow  as  a  consequence  of  persons  previously  supported  by   such
    communities becoming a part of the support structure of  the  community
    themselves.

170. Dr Khanna's evidence on this issue generally  chimes  with  that  found
    elsewhere before us. A report from the South Asia LGBT Network confirms
    that "India has a robust and  effective  LGBT  activist  movement,  and
    largely supportive civil society  and  mass  media  that  support  LGBT
    rights". The May 2012 report from the Immigration and Refugee Board  of
    Canada records an Associate Professor  at  the  research  unit  of  the
    University of York explaining that the "main purpose of  LGBT  NGOs  in
    India is to provide a social space where sexual minorities can meet and
    organise, as well as education on health... but that NGOs are not  able
    to provide protection for LGBT members on an ongoing basis."

171. Dr Khanna observes  that  because  of  a  general  lack  of  resources,
    support from an LGBT network would be unlikely to be available for more
    than 6 months. When asked what would happen to the supported person  at
    the end of the 6 month period, Dr Khanna  replied  by  indicating  that
    "typically"  the  supported  person  would  by  that  time  have  found
    employment or, alternatively, would  have  moved  to  another  city  to
    access further support there.

172. Whilst there is evidence before us, which we accept, that  on  occasion
    the LGBT support networks themselves, or at least those operating them,
    are the subject  of  violence  and  discriminatory  acts  as  a  direct
    consequence  of  the  work  they  are  doing,  the  support   networks,
    nevertheless, continue to function, and indeed to grow; the latter as a
    consequence of previously supported  people  becoming  a  part  of  the
    support structure. The attacks and discrimination appear to have little
    impact on the willingness of these support communities to  continue  to
    assist those in the LGBT community who require support and the  section
    377 litigation appears  to  have  strengthened  ranks  of  the  support
    networks.

Country Guidance

173. On the basis of the evidence before us we give the following guidance:

       a. Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code  1860  criminalises  same-sex
          sexual activity. On 2 July 2009  the  Delhi  High  Court  declared
          section 377 IPC to be in  violation  of  the  Indian  Constitution
          insofar as it criminalises consensual sexual acts  between  adults
          in private. However, in  a  judgment  of  11  December  2013,  the
          Supreme Court held that section 377 IPC does not suffer  from  the
          vice of unconstitutionality and found the declaration of the Delhi
          High Court to be legally unsustainable.

       b. Prosecutions  for  consensual  sexual  acts  between  males  under
          section 377 IPC are, and have always been, extremely rare.

       c. Some persons who are, or perceived to be, same-sex oriented  males
          suffer ill treatment,  extortion,  harassment  and  discrimination
          from the police and the general populace; however, the  prevalence
          of such incidents is not such, even when taken cumulatively,  that
          there can be said to be in general a real risk of an openly  same-
          sex oriented male suffering  treatment  which  is  persecutory  or
          which would otherwise reach the threshold required for  protection
          under the Refugee Convention, Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification
          Directive, or Article 3 ECHR.

       d. Same-sex orientation  is  seen  socially,  and  within  the  close
          familial context, as being unacceptable  in  India.  Circumstances
          for same-sex oriented males are improving, but progress is slow.

       e. It would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  an
          open same-sex oriented male (or a person who is  perceived  to  be
          such), who is able to demonstrate a real risk  in  his  home  area
          because of his particular circumstances, to relocate internally to
          a major city within India.

       f. India has a  large,  robust  and  accessible  LGBTI  activist  and
          support network, mainly to be found in the large cities.

Determination of the appellant's appeal

174. We have set out the preserved and agreed facts in paragraphs 10 and  11
    above. It is not disputed that the appellant is a gay person who  likes
    to wear makeup. He came to the United Kingdom  in  October  2004  as  a
    student but abandoned those studies  in  October  2005.  He  thereafter
    remained in the United Kingdom until January 2007 "enjoying  life  with
    partners". The appellant admits breaching the conditions of his student
    visa   during   this   time   [paragraph   27   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination].

175. The appellant returned to his family home in India on 23  January  2007
    but shortly thereafter he was required to leave the house, having had a
    serious family argument about the waste of his educational funding  and
    about his sexual orientation.  He  travelled  to  Mumbai  and  obtained
    employment in a restaurant.  He  then  lost  his  employment,  and  was
    evicted from his accommodation, because his employer found out that the
    appellant had  lied  about  his  sexual  orientation.  He  subsequently
    entered the sex trade, providing sexual  services  to  men.  Shiv  Sena
    reported his activities to  the  police  who  arrested  him  under  the
    auspices of section 377. He was detained for a  few  days  and  beaten,
    although not to the extent claimed. He was then released and  travelled
    back to the United Kingdom in his own identity and on his own passport,
    arriving here on 21 February 2007.

176. The appellant asserts that if he returns to India he  will  suffer  the
    same fate as he suffered in 2007; we do not, however, accept that  this
    is reasonably likely to be so. Even if he were open  about  his  sexual
    orientation on return, applying the guidance we have set out above,  he
    is not now reasonably likely to be at  risk  of  suffering  persecutory
    treatment from the police, other  state  bodies  or  non-state  actors;
    particularly in one of the major cities.

177. Since he was last in India  the  circumstances  for  same-sex  oriented
    males have improved in part, although not wholly, because of the  Delhi
    Judgment in 2009. There is no reason why he would need to return to the
    sex trade. He has skills from his time in the United Kingdom, including
    his fluency in English and indeed Farsi, which  will  no  doubt  be  of
    benefit to him in the employment market. Alternatively, he  could  join
    the 70% of  the  working  population  of  India  in  the  self-employed
    economy. He also clearly has  the  wherewithal  to  locate  and  obtain
    assistance from an LGBT support  group  should  he  require  short-term
    assistance in finding employment and accommodation. We  do  not  accept
    that such organisations would not assist the appellant because 'he does
    not make sense' in Indian culture as a consequence of the fact that his
    sexual identity was derived from  his  time  in  the  west.  Dr  Khanna
    provided no supporting evidence for his  assertion  that  LGBT  support
    groups would limit those to whom they provide assistance in this way.

178. Nor is it reasonably likely, given the facts  accepted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that the police in Mumbai,  or  in  any  other  city  or
    state, have any  current  interest  in  the  appellant;  as  Dr  Khanna
    accepts. There is also no evidence that the appellant's family have  an
    intention, or the ability, to seek him out upon his return to India  in
    order to persecute him. Indeed, no evidence has been provided as to how
    they would even know he has returned to India should they have such  an
    intention.

179. In summary, we find,  in  relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention,  that
    although, if he were not to act discreetly upon return,  the  appellant
    may be the subject of  some  discrimination  in  his  daily  life,  for
    example in finding employment or obtaining  accommodation,  we  do  not
    accept that even if such discrimination is taken  cumulatively,  it  is
    capable of amounting to a real risk of being persecuted in  India.  For
    the same reasons we find that requiring him to return  to  India  would
    not lead to a breach of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 ECHR.

180. Turning to article 8 ECHR and  following  the  familiar  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27] steps, it is not in dispute that (i) the  appellant  is  in  a
    long-term relationship with RD and (ii) that this relationship  amounts
    to family life for article 8 purposes. The extent of  the  relationship
    we find is as described by the appellant and RD in their  evidence.  It
    is not yet a relationship akin to marriage, but the  appellant  and  RD
    have an intention to begin living together in September 2014,  when  RD
    will be moving out of his family home  in  order  to  study  the  Legal
    Practice Course in London. They also intend, at around the  same  time,
    to enter into a civil partnership. There has also been discussion about
    the possibility of adoption of children by the couple  at  some  future
    time.

181. There is little evidence of a wider private life in the United  Kingdom
    for this appellant save for those aspects of his life which  he  shares
    with RD. He has lived here for approximately 9 years, save for a  short
    period in 2007.

182. We find that if the appellant were to be returned to India  this  would
    cause an interference with his private and family  life  of  sufficient
    severity so as to engage Article  8.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the
    appellant's removal to India would be anything other than in accordance
    with the law (in the wider sense given to this phrase when the ECHR  is
    under consideration), nor it is said that  it  is  not  being  done  in
    pursuance of a legitimate aim.

183. The core  issue  before  us  in  relation  to  article  8  is  that  of
    proportionality. Ms Everett submits that (i) it would be  proportionate
    to require the  appellant  to  leave  the  country  to  make  an  entry
    clearance  in  order  to  return,  and,  in  any  event,  (ii)  it   is
    proportionate to require him to permanently leave the United Kingdom.

184. In support of her former submission she relied  upon  the  decision  of
    Collins J in Kussin [2009] EWHC 358 (Admin), whereas Mr  Eaton  relied,
    for a contrary position, on the more recent decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 953.

185. We have had regard to both decisions, and also to the more recent,  and
    well-known, decision from the Court of Appeal in Treebhowan and Hayat v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1054;  which
    provides  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  case  law   relevant   to   a
    consideration of whether a person should be required to leave the UK in
    order to make an entry clearance application from abroad;  including  a
    consideration of the decision in MA (Pakistan).

186. The following passages are taken from  the  judgment  of  Elias  LJ  in
    Treebhowan and Hayat:-

         "11.     Lord Brown accepted that the maintenance  and  enforcement
             of immigration control was a legitimate aim. However,  he  was
             unpersuaded by the argument, accepted by Laws LJ  in  Mahmood,
             that others required to apply from abroad would feel it unfair
             if persons like the appellant who also fell within the  policy
             were permitted to have their cases  determined  without  first
             returning home. Consistency of treatment was not such a virtue
             that it dictated an unthinking enforcement of the policy. Lord
             Brown identified a  different  justification  for  the  policy
             (paras 41-42):


                  "Is not the real rationale  for  the  policy  perhaps  the
                  rather different one of deterring people  from  coming  to
                  this country in the first place  without  having  obtained
                  entry clearance and to do so by subjecting  those  who  do
                  come to the very substantial  disruption  of  their  lives
                  involved in returning them abroad?


                  Now I would certainly not say that such an objective is in
                  itself necessarily objectionable. Sometimes, I accept,  it
                  will  be  reasonable  and  proportionate  to   take   that
                  course....."


         12.      He then identified situations where the enforcement of the
             policy would  be  appropriate,  such  as  where  a  claimant's
             immigration history was poor, as in Ekinci. He also identified
             factors which might have  a  bearing  on  whether  the  policy
             should be implemented. For example, it would be relevant  that
             an applicant who had arrived illegally had good reason  to  do
             so, such as where he has a genuine asylum claim; in an Article
             8 family claim the prospective length and degree of disruption
             involved  in  requiring  the  applicant  to  return  would  be
             material; and it would be legitimate  to  enforce  the  policy
             where the entry clearance officer abroad was better placed  to
             investigate the claim.


         13.      Moreover, Lord Brown emphasised that the routine dismissal
             of Article 8 cases on this basis was  not  consistent  with  a
             proper respect for Article 8 rights, and nor did it make sense
             in administrative terms (para 44):


                  "I am far from suggesting  that  the  Secretary  of  State
                  should routinely apply this policy in all but  exceptional
                  cases. Rather it  seems  to  me  that  only  comparatively
                  rarely, certainly  in  family  cases  involving  children,
                  should an article 8 appeal be dismissed on the basis  that
                  it would be proportionate and  more  appropriate  for  the
                  appellant to apply for  leave  from  abroad.  Besides  the
                  considerations already mentioned, it should  be  borne  in
                  mind that the 1999 Act introduced  one-stop  appeals.  The
                  article 8 policy instruction is  not  easily  reconcilable
                  with the new streamlined approach. Where a  single  appeal
                  combines (as often it does) claims both for asylum and for
                  leave  to  remain  under  article  3  or  article  8,  the
                  appellate authorities would necessarily  have  to  dispose
                  substantively of the asylum and article 3 claims.  Suppose
                  that these fail.  Should  the  article  8  claim  then  be
                  dismissed so that it can  be  advanced  abroad,  with  the
                  prospect of a later, second section 65 appeal if the claim
                  fails  before  the  ECO  (with  the  disadvantage  of  the
                  appellant then being out of the  country)?  Better  surely
                  that in most cases the article 8 claim be decided once and
                  for all at the initial stage. If it is well-founded, leave
                  should be granted. If not, it should be refused."
                 ...
         18.      It may at first blush seem odd that Article 8  rights  may
             be infringed by an unjustified insistence that  the  applicant
             should return home to make  the  application,  even  though  a
             subsequent decision to refuse the application  on  the  merits
             will not. The reason is that once  there  is  an  interference
             with family or private life, the decision maker  must  justify
             that interference. Where what is relied upon is an  insistence
             on complying with formal procedures that may  be  insufficient
             to justify even a temporary  disruption  to  family  life.  By
             contrast, a full  consideration  of  the  merits  may  readily
             identify features which justify a refusal to  grant  leave  to
             remain.
         ...
         26.      ... Chikwamba provides that at least where  Article  8  is
             engaged, the decision  maker  should  not,  absent  some  good
             reason, fail to engage with the merits and dismiss  the  claim
             on the  ground  that  the  application  should  be  made  from
             abroad."

188.  Having considered a number of Court of  Appeal  authorities  concerned
    with the application of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, Elias  LJ  summarised
    the principles to be derived from them as follows:-
        "a) Where an applicant who does not  have  lawful  entry  clearance
        pursues an Article 8  claim,  a  dismissal  of  the  claim  on  the
        procedural ground that  the  policy  requires  that  the  applicant
        should have made the application from his home state may  (but  not
        necessarily will) constitute a disruption of family or private life
        sufficient to engage Article 8,  particularly  where  children  are
        adversely affected.
        b) Where Article 8  is  engaged,  it  will  be  a  disproportionate
        interference with family or private life to enforce such  a  policy
        unless, to use the language of Sullivan LJ,  there  is  a  sensible
        reason for doing so.
        c) Whether it is sensible to enforce that policy  will  necessarily
        be  fact  sensitive;  Lord  Brown  identified  certain  potentially
        relevant factors in Chikwamba. They will  include  the  prospective
        length and degree of disruption of family life  and  whether  other
        members of the family are settled in the UK.
        d) Where Article 8 is engaged and there is no sensible  reason  for
        enforcing the policy,  the  decision  maker  should  determine  the
        Article 8 claim on its substantive merits,  having  regard  to  all
        material factors, notwithstanding that the applicant has no  lawful
        entry clearance.
        e) It will be a very rare case where  it  is  appropriate  for  the
        Court of  Appeal,  having  concluded  that  a  lower  tribunal  has
        disproportionately interfered with Article 8  rights  in  enforcing
        the policy, to make the substantive Article 8 decision for  itself.
        Chikwamba was such an exceptional case. Logically the  court  would
        have to be satisfied that there is only one proper  answer  to  the
        Article 8 question before substituting  its  own  finding  on  this
        factual question.
        f) Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter the  way  the  courts
        should approach substantive Article 8 issues as laid down  in  such
        well known cases as Razgar and Huang.
        g) Although the cases do not say this in terms, in my  judgment  if
        the Secretary of State has no sensible  reason  for  requiring  the
        application to be made from the home state, the fact  that  he  has
        failed to do so should not  thereafter  carry  any  weight  in  the
        substantive Article 8 balancing exercise."

189.  Although in the first of his principles Elias LJ  makes  reference  to
    applications from those who do not  have  lawful  entry  clearance,  we
    observe that on the facts of Hayat itself, the  claimant  had  made  an
    application for an extension of his leave (the refusal of which was the
    decision appealed to the First-tier Tribunal) during  the  currency  of
    his extant leave to enter as a student, as is the case in  the  instant
    appeal. Despite this fact the Court of Appeal concluded that the  Upper
    Tribunal  had  been  wrong  to  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination; the First-tier Tribunal having  concluded  that  it  was
    proportionate to require Mr Hayat to return  to  Pakistan  to  make  an
    entry clearance application.

190.  Neither the opinions of their Lordship's House in Chikwamba,  nor  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Treebhowan and Hayat,  seek  to  set
    out a legal threshold as to when it would be appropriate, in any  given
    case, to require an applicant to make an application from  outside  the
    United Kingdom; rather, each alludes to an expectation  that  in  cases
    where the only matter weighing in the respondent's side of the  balance
    is the public policy of requiring a person to  apply  under  the  Rules
    from abroad, that legitimate objective will usually  be  outweighed  by
    factors resting on the appellant's side of the balance.

191.  In the instant appeal the public  policy  of  requiring  a  person  to
    apply under the Immigration Rules from abroad is not  the  only  matter
    weighing in the respondent's side  of  the  balance.  There  are  other
    cogent reasons for requiring the appellant to return to India  to  make
    an application for entry clearance and, in our conclusion, it would  be
    proportionate to require him to do so:

    (1)     It  has  not  been  suggested  that  the  appellant  meets  the
           requirements of any of the Immigration Rules; whether that be in
           relation to the Rules currently in force or those that  were  in
           force at the time of the decision  under  appeal  in  2007.  The
           question of the likelihood of  an  entry  clearance  application
           meeting with success is not  a  relevant  consideration  in  the
           assessment of whether such application should  be  made.  In  SB
           (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 28 the Court of Appeal  that
           an article 8 claim of a person resisting  removal  is  not  made
           weaker  by  strong  prospects  of  success   in   a   subsequent
           application for entry clearance; nor is it made stronger by weak
           prospects in such an application.  It found  that  it  would  be
           proper for the Tribunal to  exclude  the  prospects  of  success
           altogether when assessing the proportionality of  removal.  Such
           rationale  was  confirmed  by  the  Court  of   Appeal   shortly
           thereafter in HC (Jamaica) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 371, and  once
           again in SZ (Zimbabwe) [2009] EWCA 590.

    (2)     The appellant accepts that he remained in  the  United  Kingdom
           for over a year, until January 2007, in breach of the conditions
           of his leave to enter as a student.  He  then  left  the  United
           Kingdom, only to return during the currency of his student leave
           in February 2007, knowing full well that he was not a student at
           that time. The appellant's leave to enter expired on 31  October
           2007 and he claimed asylum shortly thereafter, on the 7 November
           2007. When doing so he exaggerated his  account  of  the  events
           which occurred in India, both to the Secretary of State  and  to
           the Tribunal (see paragraph 112  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
           determination).

    (3)     The appellant's  relationship  with  RD  began,  and  has  been
           maintained, whilst the appellant's immigration status  has  been
           precarious; indeed for the most part  whilst  he  has  been  the
           subject of a decision to remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom;
           this we find to be significant. We have taken into account  that
           since 2007 the appellant has been within the immigration  appeal
           process and that he is not be expected to have put his  life  on
           hold for this  lengthy  period;  nevertheless  he  and  RD  made
           choices about their relationship knowing full well the nature of
           the  appellant's  immigration  position.  Although  it  is   the
           intention of RD and the appellant to adopt a child in the future
           they, as yet, have no children. Neither  do  they,  at  present,
           live together on a full time and permanent basis.

    (4)     Mr Eaton submits that the  circumstances  for  gay  persons  in
           India must be a relevant factor  in  the  determination  of  the
           appellant's article 8 rights, even if the article 3 threshold is
           not met; we accept that this is so. As we have identified above,
           homophobic discrimination and violence does occur in  India  and
           we have borne this in mind in coming to our conclusion. We  have
           also  borne  in  mind  that  India  has  in  place   legislation
           criminalising same-sex sexual activity undertaken in private and
           that  the  existence  of  such  legislation  would,   upon   the
           appellant's   return   to   India,   constitute   an   arbitrary
           interference with his privacy, this being  irrespective  of  the
           rarity of prosecutions brought under it  (see  for  example  the
           decision  in  Toonen  v  Australia   UNHRC   Communication   No.
           488/1992).

    (5)     The appellant will, we find, receive financial support from  RD
           whilst he is making his application and, if  necessary,  he  can
           also  approach  one  of  the  LGBT  support  organisations   for
           assistance. RD will  support  the  appellant's  application  for
           entry clearance and there is no reason  to  think  that  regular
           communication cannot be maintained between the appellant and  RD
           for the duration of the application process, however  long  that
           maybe (we observe at this juncture that we  have  been  provided
           with no evidence as to the length of such application process in
           India). It is not reasonable to expect RD to move to India to be
           with the appellant during the period of entry clearance process,
           or indeed permanently. He can, albeit  without  the  appellant's
           physical company, continue  his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,
           running his pizza business and furthering his studies if  he  so
           chooses.

192.  Looking at the relevant circumstances in this appeal as  a  whole,  we
    conclude, for the reasons identified above, that there is  good  reason
    why this appellant should be required to leave the  United  Kingdom  to
    make an entry clearance application and that  it  is  proportionate  to
    require him to do so.

Decision

For the reasons given  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson,  the  First-tier
Tribunal's determination contains an error of law requiring  it  to  be  set
aside. Upon re-making the decision on appeal, we dismiss it on all  grounds.


We have made an anonymity direction. Such direction is to  remain  in  place
unless or until this Tribunal,  or  any  other  appropriate  Court,  directs
otherwise. No report of these proceedings  shall  directly,  or  indirectly,
identify the appellant. Failure to comply with this direction  could  amount
to a contempt of court.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

Date: 26 January 2014













Appendix  - Country Background Documents considered


|Source                                                   |Date             |
|Report of Dr Akshay Khanna                               |                 |
|                                                         |18 September 2013|
|Gay Star News article, "Campaigners protest against gay  |                 |
|witch-hunt in India"                                     |                 |
|                                                         |24 August 2013   |
|US Department of State, 2012 Human Rights Report: India  |                 |
|http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/2012/sca/204399.htm |                 |
|                                                         |19 April 2013    |
|                                                         |13 February 2013 |
|Pink News article, "India, police raid gay party and     |                 |
|arrest 22 men"                                           |                 |
|                                                         |16 January 2013  |
|The Hindu, 'Delhi High Court legalises gay sex.'         |                 |
|http://www.hinduonnet.com/thehindu/holnus/000200907021111|                 |
|.htm                                                     |                 |
|                                                         |17 July 2012     |
|World Bank report, "Charting a Programmatic Roadmap for  |                 |
|Sexual Minority Groups in India"                         |                 |
|                                                         |10 May 2012      |
|Reuters News article, "Indian society struggling with gay|                 |
|rights activist"                                         |                 |
|                                                         |                 |
|Research Directorate of the Immigration & Refugee Board  |2 May 2012       |
|of Canada: India: Treatment of sexual minorities,        |                 |
|including legislation, state protection, and support     |                 |
|services (April 2009-March 2012)                         |                 |
|http://www.refworld.org/docid/50b4a62c2.html             |                 |
|                                                         |                 |
|Extracts from COIR for India                             |30 March 2012    |
|                                                         |                 |
|RRT Government of Australia Country Advice               |20 January 2012  |
|                                                         |                 |
|Country Advice on India of the Australian Refugee Review |12 January 2012  |
|Tribunal: headed "India: IND39685 -Homosexuals - Sikhs - |                 |
|Relocation" http://www.refworld.org/docid/50597bdf2.html |                 |
|Pink News article, "Mumbai police fine 150 gay men after |                 |
|breaking up party"                                       |                 |
|                                                         |                 |
|Times of India, "Pink India tiptoes out of the closet"   |20 September 2011|
|http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Pink-India-tipto|                 |
|es-out-of-the-closet/articleshow/6123358.cms             |                 |
|                                                         |                 |
|                                                         |3 July 2010      |
|                                                         |                 |
|                                                         |                 |
|                                                         |2 July 2010      |
|Hindustan Times, 'Gays celebrate one year of Delhi High  |                 |
|Court judgment.'                                         |                 |
|http://www.hindustantimes.com/India-news/NewDelhi/Gays-ce|                 |
|lebrate-one-year-of-Delhi-High-Court-judgment/Article1-56|                 |
|6604.aspx                                                |                 |
|                                                         |1 October 2009   |
|Bhagwad Jal Park blog, 'Section 377 - Mess in the SC.    |                 |
|Hearing for 29th Oct. 2009'                              |                 |
|http://www.bhagwad.com/blog/2009/rights-and-freedoms/sect|                 |
|ion-377-mess-in-the-sc-hearing-for-29th-oct-2009.html/   |                 |
|                                                         |18 September 2009|
|International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission    |                 |
|(IGLHRC), 'India: Government Defers Decision on 377 to   |                 |
|Supreme Court, 18 September 2009'                        |                 |
|http://www.iglhrc.org/content/india-government-defers-dec|                 |
|ision-377-supreme-court                                  |                 |
|                                                         |                 |
|Human Rights Watch, ''India: Court Strikes Down Sodomy   |2 July 2009      |
|Law'                                                     |                 |
|http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/country,COI,HRW,,IND,,4a51a|                 |
|8af1e,0.html                                             |                 |
|                                                         |19 September 2007|
|Australia: Refugee Review Tribunal: RRT Case No.         |                 |
|071494945, [2007] RRTA 276, Australia: Refugee Review    |                 |
|Tribunal  http://www.refworld.org/docid/47ea2e4e2.html   |                 |
|                                                         |13 May 2004      |
|Immigration & Refugee Board of Canada: 'Update to        |                 |
|IND32120.E of 25 June 1999 on the situation of           |                 |
|homosexuals'                                             |                 |
|http://www.refworld.org/docid/41501c1e2a.html            |                 |
|                                                         |Undated          |
|Supreme Court of India: Notes of Proceedings in Suresh   |                 |
|Kumar Koushal v. Naz Foundation, February 23 to March 27,|                 |
|2012                                                     |                 |
|http://orinam.net/content/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Naz_|                 |
|SC_Transcript_2012_final.pdf                             |                 |
|                                                         |Undated          |
|International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex |                 |
|Association: News (India)                                |                 |
|http://ilga.org/ilga/en/countries/INDIA/Articles         |                 |
|                                                         |                 |
|Naz Foundation India:  MSM Programme                     |Undated          |
|http://www.nazindia.org/msm.htm                          |                 |
|                                                         |                 |

-----------------------
[1] Two reports authored by the Peoples  Union  for  Civil  Liberties,  from
 2001 and 2004 respectively, a 2002  report  from  Human  Rights  Watch,  a
 report of an incidence of torture by the police in  2004,  a  further  two
 reports of incidents of arrest and ill treatment by the  police  in  2006,
 the murder of a gay person in  the  same  year  by  persons  unknown,  one
 incident of extreme torture of an Aravani (a  third  gender  identity)  in
 Tamil Nadu in 2007, the forceful  eviction  of  100  members  of  a  Hijra
 community in 2008.

