
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of AM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(legal "limbo") [2021] UKUT 00062 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                     The Queen on the application of AM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel, instructed by Paragon
For the Respondent:    Mr R Fortt, Counsel, instructed by the Government
                  Legal Department

(1)  A  person  whose  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  has  become   an
impossibility in the sense identified by the House of Lords in R (Khadir)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 39 cannot be  subject
to  immigration  bail  (formerly   temporary   admission).   Such   "Khadir"
Impossibility is, however, a high threshold to surmount.

(2) Applying the four-stage analysis of  Haddon  Cave  LJ  in  RA  (Iraq)  v
Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  850,  an
individual who is subject to immigration bail may still succeed in  a  human
rights challenge, based on ending his state of legal "limbo" in  the  United
Kingdom, where the case is of a truly exceptional nature.


                                  JUDGMENT


A. THE APPLICANT AND HIS HISTORY

 1. We have both substantially contributed to what follows.

 2. The applicant is a citizen of Belarus who entered the United Kingdom in
    January 1998, when it appears he was about 21 years  old.   He  claimed
    asylum in January 1998.  On 12 December  2000,  his  asylum  claim  was
    refused, and he appealed unsuccessfully to an  adjudicator  (Mr  Andrew
    Jordan).  The applicant had made his asylum claim in a  name  which  we
    abbreviate as AM.  His claim before the adjudicator was that he  was  a
    sympathiser of the Belarusian Popular Front.  He had been detained on a
    number of occasions and beaten.  He was  warned  not  to  attend  anti-
    government meetings.  The adjudicator said he was  not  satisfied  that
    the applicant was of any interest to the  authorities.   The  objective
    evidence  regarding  Belarus   drew   a   clear   distinction   between
    participants and organisers of  BNF  demonstrations.   The  adjudicator
    concluded the applicant would not be at any risk whatsoever if he  were
    returned to Belarus.

 3. In June 2001, the applicant was deported to Belarus.  However,  he  was
    refused entry on arrival and returned by the authorities to the  United
    Kingdom the following day.  We shall have more to say about this in due
    course.

 4. Upon his return to the United Kingdom, the applicant contends  that  he
    was encouraged by an official of the respondent to make a fresh  asylum
    claim.  He did so on an admittedly false basis, giving his patronym  as
    A******, and claiming that he had left Belarus in 1986.

 5. On 12th January 1998, the applicant gave  the  respondent  a  document,
    which we shall call a Factory ID, purporting to show the  applicant  as
    having been employed in a book-binding factory in Minsk.   The  British
    Embassy there undertook investigations.  In November 2001, the  Embassy
    informed the respondent that the Factory ID  was  considered  to  be  a
    forgery because the claimed company did not exist in Belarus.  Although
    there was a factory with a similar  name,  upon  being  contacted,  its
    representative stated that nobody with the applicant's surname had ever
    worked for them; nor did they have identification cards.   The  embassy
    official also called the Ministry of  Health  who  confirmed  that  the
    company did not exist.  The  applicant  says  about  this  that  it  is
    unclear what was asked, and no explanation  was  given  about  why  the
    Ministry of Health would know about the applicant's employer.

 6. In February 2002, the  applicant  provided  instructions  to  his  then
    solicitor.  The applicant was detained at Yarl's  Wood,  where  he  had
    attempted suicide.  The applicant retracted his false claim,  made,  so
    he said, because he was scared and did  not  want  to  be  deported  to
    Belarus for a second time.  He now also said that on  his  way  to  the
    United Kingdom, he had claimed asylum in Belgium but failed  to  attend
    an interview because he felt  unsafe  in  that  country.   He  provided
    details of a person called Robert Berk, a Belarusian journalist who had
    subsequently been granted asylum in the United Kingdom.  The  applicant
    said he had seen Mr Berk in Belarus in September 1997.

 7. On 14 June 2002, the  applicant's  second  appeal  hearing  took  place
    before an Adjudicator,  Mr  Edwards.   The  adjudicator  dismissed  the
    applicant's appeal.  Although Mr Berk had made a witness statement,  he
    did not attend the  hearing  in  order  to  give  oral  evidence.   The
    applicant's case before Mr Edwards was now  that  he  was  not  just  a
    supporter of the BPF but a member of  it.   He  had  been  distributing
    leaflets for the BPF, and as he had also told Mr Jordan, the  applicant
    had been secretly printing them as well.

 8. Mr Edwards noted the adverse credibility findings  of  Mr  Jordan.   Mr
    Edwards then went on to make his own  independent  adverse  credibility
    findings regarding the applicant having admitted lying  to  immigration
    officials, both in Belarus and in the United Kingdom.  He had told  the
    officials in Belarus that he was not a citizen  of  that  country.   Mr
    Edwards concluded that there was no evidence to show that the applicant
    had any fear of persecution in Belarus.

 9. In October 2002, the respondent sought extensive and specific biometric
    information from the applicant.  The applicant gave detailed  evidence,
    inter  alia  asserting  that  the  family  home  was  situated  on   an
    insignificant side street in a named small town or village in  a  named
    Administrative Region, subsequently shown to  exist.   The  applicant's
    last asserted address in Minsk was on a minor street,  which  objective
    evidence showed to exist.  The  respondent  also  had  the  applicant's
    fingerprints, taken on 12th January 1998, noteworthy in that  the  tips
    of several of the applicant's fingers are missing.

10. The British Embassy undertook further enquiries.   It  found  that  the
    school that the applicant said he had attended in his "false claim" did
    not exist.  There were several technical institutes  in  Minsk,  though
    not one with the name given by  the  applicant  as  that  at  which  he
    studied.

11. In January 2003, the  British  Embassy  reported  that  there  were  no
    records of the applicant at the Number 1 School in the town in which he
    claimed to have studied at that level.  The applicant points  out  that
    it is unclear whether what was being searched was the Number  1  school
    in the town or the Number 1 school in a particular city.   The  embassy
    confirmed that there  was  no  school  at  the  address  given  by  the
    applicant, nor residence records in Minsk or the town for AM, with  the
    patronym A... .  The applicant points out that  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest a search was undertaken for him with the patronym I********.

12. The respondent observes that in the applicant's first asylum claim,  he
    said he moved to Minsk when he was 18.  He worked  in  a  book  factory
    until 1997.  By contrast, the asylum claim of June 2001  contained  the
    assertions that the applicant had left Belarus in 1986 and had attended
    school prior to that in Minsk.   He  said  he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 1996, not 1998.

13. In February 2003, the respondent arranged for the applicant  to  attend
    the Belarusian  Embassy  with  a  travel  application  form  and  three
    photographs,  together  with  biometric  information.   The  Belarusian
    Embassy  later  informed  the  respondent  that   the   applicant   had
    categorically denied being a Belarusian  citizen;  that  some  Russians
    pretended to be  Belarusian;  and  that  he  said  he  was  giving  the
    officials false details and that it was "all a game".   The  Belarusian
    Embassy also said that the applicant had two  broken  front  teeth  and
    that he had an indistinct accent.  The applicant points  out  that  his
    teeth are not, in fact, broken.

14. On 7 March 2003, Ms Temani, an official of the respondent,  interviewed
    the applicant in  detention  in  Harmondsworth.   She  noted  that  his
    account of the interview at the Belarusian  Embassy  "greatly  differs"
    from that given by the First  Secretary.   Interpol  had  already  made
    searches in Minsk, Kiev and Vilnius (Lithuania) on  the  applicant  and
    had closed their files, given that the results of the searches had been
    negative.  Checks had also been made with Russia.

15. Ms Temani noted the  applicant  as  being  cooperative  and  polite  in
    interview.  He felt he had been "forgotten" by the respondent.  At this
    point, the applicant had been in immigration detention for 810 days.

16. Ms Temani noted that the applicant was described as violent and that he
    had served a sentence in 1999 of three and a half  years'  imprisonment
    for actual bodily harm and unlawful imprisonment.  His report from  the
    Governor of HMP Liverpool was, however, positive, saying  that  he  was
    well behaved and no problem to staff or other prisoners.

17. Ms Temani concluded that, on the information held  by  the  respondent,
    the applicant would appear to be a national of Belarus.   She  recorded
    the checks with the embassy in Minsk and with the  British  Embassy  in
    Moscow.  She noted that the checks  in  Kiev,  Minsk  and  Vilnius  had
    produced negative results.

18. So far as the visit to the Belarusian Embassy in London was  concerned,
    Ms Temani spoke to one of the three escorts who had taken the applicant
    to the  embassy.   The  escort  reported  the  applicant  as  remaining
    handcuffed during the interview because of the open nature of the  room
    in which the interview was conducted.  The interview was conducted  "in
    their own  language".   The  applicant  answered  questions  and  there
    appeared to be "no grimaces or particular facial  expressions  made  by
    either party during the interview".  The interview was said to be  very
    short and the applicant well behaved.

19. Having noted the description of the interview by the  First  Secretary,
    including what the applicant said, Ms Temani recorded the applicant  as
    saying that he felt humiliated and frightened going to the  embassy  in
    handcuffs.  He had answered questions about his home and  his  parents.
    According to the applicant, the First Secretary said that it was not up
    to him to decide whether the applicant would be sent to  Belarus;  but,
    if the answer was negative, "then I should not mention again that I  am
    from Belarus or that I had something to do with Belarus".

20. The applicant then gave Ms Temani more details about Minsk, going  into
    detail also about his course at the Secondary  Technical  Institute  in
    that city and his job as a press operator at  the  book  factory.   She
    then recorded his information about places  in  Minsk  and  customs  in
    Belarus.

21. The interview ended with the applicant telling Ms Temani  that  he  was
    indeed a member of the BPF and that he worked under the  leadership  of
    Rusian Vasilevich.

22. In March 2003, the British Embassy in  Minsk  provided  the  respondent
    with further information.  The embassy confirmed the information  given
    by the respondent that there was a market in Minsk  called  Komarovskiy
    and the main street in Minsk with government buildings on it is  called
    Francisk Skoriny Prespect.  V town was near the River Pripiat which was
    30 to 40 kilometres  from  Chemohyl.   A  Secondary  Technical  College
    existed in Minsk, but not quite at the address the applicant had given.



23. By contrast, there was no Viktory Park in Minsk, as the  applicant  had
    claimed, though there was a Viktory Square.   The  applicant  had  said
    that the River Berezna runs through Minsk.  This  was  incorrect.   The
    embassy said that the River Berezina "is  at  least  100  km  far  from
    Minsk".  The name of a metro station, given by the applicant  as  being
    in  Minsk,  was  incorrect.   There  was  no   such   station.    Also,
    Krasnotkatskaya Street did not exist in  Minsk.   In  April  2003,  the
    embassy  informed  the  respondent  that  according  to   a   telephone
    conversation with the authorities of ZAGS in Gomel, a person under  the
    name [surname of applicant] has never been registered in Gomel ZAGS.

24. On 6 November 2003, the applicant was interviewed at  Dover  IRC.   The
    applicant gave a great deal of detail about himself and his  family  in
    Belarus.   The  interview  recorded  the  applicant   as   giving   the
    information that the River Dnieper runs through the region,  which  was
    said to be correct.  The applicant said  that,  in  some  respects,  he
    could not remember information but it is said on  his  behalf  that  no
    attempt was made later to check whether he had been able to recall  the
    relevant details.

25. On 14 November 2003, a report was prepared for the  Minister  of  State
    for Immigration, Beverley Hughes.  This recorded that the applicant had
    been detained since 30 June 2001, when he returned from Belarus, having
    been refused entry by the authorities there.  It noted that he had been
    sentenced to three and a half years' imprisonment in March 1999 for the
    offences described earlier.  It  recorded  the  Belarusian  Embassy  as
    saying that if the applicant left Belarus  before  1991  (when  Belarus
    achieved independence from the Soviet Union) he  would  have  lost  his
    claim to Belarus citizenship.  It was, however, not substantiated  that
    the applicant had no entitlement to Belarusian nationality, as  he  had
    subsequently withdrawn his assertion that he left Belarus in  1986  and
    reverted to his original claim  to  have  left  the  country  in  1997.
    Evidence was  now  required  to  support  any  attempt  to  remove  the
    applicant on a European Union letter, to corroborate his claim that  he
    was born in Belarus and lived there until 1997.

26. The report stated that the respondent was unable to  confirm  that  the
    applicant was a national  of  Belarus.   He  had  provided  conflicting
    information at interview.  The report continued:-

         "The removal of uncooperative  nationals  of  former  Soviet  Union
         states has become very difficult due to  the  nationality  laws  of
         Russia and the emerging former satellite states  and  we  shall  be
         discussing with the appropriate  embassies  how  best  to  overcome
         these problems.  Notwithstanding this, in the absence  of  evidence
         to confirm that [the applicant] was in Belarus  after  independence
         it is unlikely that the Belarus authorities will  be  persuaded  to
         accept [him]".

27. The report then turned to advice from the respondent's legal branch:-

         "11.     Advice from Legal Advisers Branch is  that  the  power  to
             detain pending removal is subject to implied limitations.   In
             particular, a person may only be detained for a period that is
             reasonable in all the circumstances; if, before the expiry  of
             that period,  it  becomes  apparent  that  removal  cannot  be
             effected [within] a reasonable period, the power of  detention
             cannot lawfully  be  exercised.   Factors  that  are  relevant
             include:

                . The  length  of  detention  (currently  in  excess  of  27
                  months).

                . The nature of the obstacles which stand  in  the  path  of
                  removal.

                . The level of cooperation given by [the applicant].

                . The diligence, speed and effectiveness of the steps  taken
                  by the Immigration Service to overcome  the  obstacles  to
                  remove as evidenced by the progress that has been made  to
                  document or establish [the applicant's] nationality.

                . The likelihood of absconding.

                . The conditions in which [the applicant] is being kept  and
                  the effect of detention on him."

28. The report continued:-

         "12.     We have reached an impasse with the Belarus Embassy.   The
             Immigration Service Documentation  Unit  has  advised  that  a
             further  interview  with  the  Belarus  authorities   is   not
             appropriate in the absence of  any  new  evidence.   Enquiries
             through the National Criminal Investigation Service,  Interpol
             and British Embassies in Moscow, Kiev, Minsk and Vilnius  have
             all failed to find any trace  of  [the  applicant].   In  this
             particular case, Legal Adviser's Branch have  taken  the  view
             that a court would be likely to conclude that removal within a
             reasonable time is not a realistic prospect and that detention
             is no longer therefore lawful.

         13.      The area of non-cooperation by detainees and its relevance
             to the length of reasonable detention under immigration powers
             is subject to legal proceedings in  other  cases  at  present.
             The constancy and accuracy of  information  provided  by  [the
             applicant] is open to question;  despite  extensive  enquiries
             nothing  that  will  assist  with   documentation   has   been
             substantiated, leading to the  conclusion  that  he  may  have
             provided false information.

         ...

         15.      This  is  a  difficult  case  to  balance  and  there  are
             arguments for and against releasing [the applicant].   Release
             may  send  out  the  wrong  message  to   other   undocumented
             detainees.  Moreover, [the applicant] has been convicted of  a
             serious criminal offence.  His deportation was recommended  by
             the court and is now the  subject  of  an  extant  deportation
             order.  There is potential for embarrassment  if  he  were  to
             commit a further offence on release.  While there  are  issues
             about the level of cooperation provided by [the applicant], he
             has now been detained under Immigration Service powers for  27
             months beyond the end  of  his  custodial  sentence.   Despite
             extensive enquiries the Immigration Service  has  made  little
             progress in establishing his nationality for  the  purpose  of
             obtaining a travel document from the Belarus authorities.   It
             follows that  removal  within  a  reasonable  time  is  not  a
             realistic prospect and continued detention is therefore likely
             to  be  deemed  unlawful.   Prior  to  his  [detention]   [the
             applicant] was on bail for nine months and adhered to the bail
             conditions.  On  balance  and  despite  the  risks  identified
             above, we consider that release is appropriate in the  current
             circumstances.

         16.      [The applicant] applied for humanitarian protection in the
             United  Kingdom.   He  is  not   eligible   for   humanitarian
             protection or discretionary  leave  and  his  application  was
             refused on 31 May.  On release he will be subject to temporary
             admission  with  stringent  reporting  restrictions  and   the
             Immigration Service will continue to make efforts to  document
             [the applicant] for removal."

   The recommendation for release was accepted.  The applicant was  released
   on 2 December 2003 on temporary admission.  Prior to release he had  been
   detained for 1080 days.    At this point, it may  be  helpful  to  record
   that  at the date of the hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  (11  November
   2020),    the    applicant    had    been    subject     to     temporary
   admission/bail/immigration detention for 7360 days, excluding periods  of
   imprisonment, amounting to a period of over twenty years.  It is  thought
   by those acting for the applicant that this is the longest  use  of  such
   powers by the respondent "by a substantial margin".  The respondent  does
   not demur.

29. In January 2004, the applicant sought support under section  4  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (so-called "hard cases" support).  This
    was refused on the basis that the respondent considered  the  applicant
    to be removable and so not entitled to support.

30.  The  applicant  made  a  fresh  claim,  the  refusal  of   which   was
    unsuccessfully challenged by judicial review proceedings in  2004.   In
    connection with that challenge, the applicant provided an expert report
    by Robert Chenciner, together with a signed witness statement  from  Mr
    Berk.  Mr Chenciner  stated  that  false  internal  exile  had  been  a
    favoured tool in Soviet times for  oppositionists  and  others.   As  a
    small country, Belarus could no longer  use  this  device  and  so  was
    relying instead on external exile.   The  Belarusian  authorities  were
    intent on crushing opposition.  For this purpose, they had the  benefit
    of KGB apparatus.  Mr Chenciner believed  that  merely  seeking  asylum
    would be sufficient to make a person  liable  to  be  regarded  by  the
    Belarusian authorities as an oppositionist and thus amount  to  a  good
    reason for non-admission.

31. On 10 February 2008, the applicant was arrested  for  possession  of  a
    false Lithuanian identity document.  It is the applicant's  case  that,
    lacking any means to support himself, he obtained the false document in
    order to work.

32. On 1 May 2008, the applicant was sentenced to ten months'  imprisonment
    for possession of a false  instrument.   On  26  August  2008,  he  was
    detained again under immigration powers  but  bailed  on  21  September
    2009.

33. In an interview conducted at HMP  Nottingham  in  September  2008,  the
    applicant told the respondent that he had an internal  passport,  which
    had been taken from him by the Belarusian authorities  in  1997.   This
    repeated a claim made five years earlier.

34. On 15 October 2008, the respondent took the applicant  to  the  Ukraine
    Embassy, providing the same biometric  details  as  earlier  described.
    Nothing came of this visit.

35. On 8 December 2008,  the  applicant's  current  advisers,  Paragon  Law
    Solicitors, wrote to the Belarusian Embassy, providing the  applicant's
    biometric information.  On 6 January 2009,  the  embassy  replied  that
    there were no records of  the  applicant  and  that  he  could  not  be
    considered a citizen of Belarus.

36. In September 2011, the respondent agreed to reconsider the  applicant's
    further submissions as a fresh application for asylum.  The  respondent
    refused that application and the applicant appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  His appeal was heard on 16 March 2012 by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Pooler.  The applicant gave evidence, as did Mr Berk.  Again, the
    applicant told the judge that  he  had  not  merely  been  distributing
    leaflets for the BPF but had been secretly printing them at  his  place
    of work.  He also said that he had been  beaten  and  interrogated  and
    that his hands had been jammed in a door, breaking two of his  fingers.
    This was a new detail.

37. Judge Pooler considered that the evidence of Mr Berk was supportive  of
    the applicant's claim but that this could not be the end of the  matter
    in relation to the applicant's  credibility.   Clear  adverse  findings
    have been made in this regard in the two earlier determinations.  Judge
    Pooler applied the guidance in Devaseelan in respect of  those  earlier
    findings.  He considered the evidence as a whole.

38. The applicant had before him expert evidence  from  Mr  Chenciner.   It
    was, however, not apparent that Mr Chenciner had been provided with the
    two earlier determinations of the adjudicators.

39. Judge Pooler recorded that at the hearing before him it was  said  that
    the applicant had lied on arrival in Belarus by telling the authorities
    that he had not been resident  in  that  country  since  1986  and  was
    therefore unable to show  any  period  of  residence  since  Belarusian
    independence.  The judge considered that  factor  would  have  been  of
    considerable importance in assessing the applicant's  nationality.   At
    the hearing the applicant denied having lied to this effect; but  Judge
    Pooler did not accept his evidence.  He found  the  applicant  had  not
    given a credible account.  He also found as a fact that  the  applicant
    was not refused entry to Belarus because he was regarded as a political
    opponent.  The fact that  he  had  admitted  lying  previously  to  the
    Belarus authorities was a significant factor that had to be taken  into
    account by those authorities in 2001 when  the  applicant  was  refused
    entry.  Judge Pooler found that the refusal of the Belarus  authorities
    to recognise the applicant as a citizen or  issue  him  with  a  travel
    document was not based on his political opposition.  On  the  contrary,
    "it is likely that the  [applicant]  has  failed  to  provide  accurate
    information to enable the Belarus authorities to trace him or  to  find
    any record of him" (paragraph 47).

40. Judge Pooler dismissed the applicant's appeal.  The applicant  obtained
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  His appeal was heard on 17
    April 2013 by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern.  No error of law was found
    in Judge Pooler's determination, with the result that the appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal was dismissed.

41. The applicant obtained permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  In
    AM (Belarus) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1506, the court rejected  the  applicant's  submission  that  Judge
    Pooler  had  "wrongly  treated   the   Devaseelan   Guidelines   as   a
    straitjacket" (paragraph 34).  The court then turned to the applicant's
    Article 8 argument.  It was said that the applicant had  more  ties  to
    the United Kingdom than to Belarus and that the United Kingdom was  the
    only place in which, for the future, he could develop a  private  life.
    Giving judgment, Lewison LJ held as follows:-

         "43.     At the heart of [Mr Karnik's] submission  is  the  factual
             proposition that the [applicant] would still be refused  entry
             to Belarus if he told the truth to the authorities there.  But
             the judge decided that question against him, as did the  judge
             in the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Karnik says that that in itself was
             a misapplication of Devaseelan.  But at paragraph  45  of  the
             decision of the FTT, the judge considered evidence  which  the
             [applicant] gave to him in the course  of  that  hearing.   He
             said in terms that he did not believe it.  That is clearly  an
             independent and third adverse credibility finding made against
             the [applicant].

         44.      Whether something is or is not  proportionate,  which  was
             the question which the FTT had to  decide,  is  essentially  a
             value  judgment  on  which  different  people  can  reasonably
             disagree.  We can only interfere if the value  judgment  which
             the FTT made is  one  that  no  reasonable  tribunal  properly
             instructed could have reached.  In my judgment,  the  FTT  was
             perfectly entitled to reach the conclusion that it did on  the
             question of proportionality.

         45.      I would, therefore, dismiss the appeal."

42. On 25 February 2015, the applicant  applied  again  to  the  Belarusian
    Embassy, providing his biometric details.  It appears that the response
    was, again, negative.  On  11  October  2015,  the  applicant  provided
    further  information  to  the  embassy  and  on  19  January  2016  the
    respondent sent another travel document application to  the  Belarusian
    authorities.  A year later, the respondent informed the applicant  that
    the  Belarusian  authorities  were  requesting  a   version   of   that
    application in Russian.  It then appears that the respondent arranged a
    telephone interview between the  applicant  and  Belarusian  officials.
    Nothing appears to have come of this.

43. On 11  September  2018,  the  applicant  was  sentenced  to  42  weeks'
    imprisonment for possession  of  an  offensive  weapon.   The  sentence
    comprised 26 weeks for the offence, together with the activation  of  a
    suspended sentence of sixteen weeks.

44. The applicant suffers from hepatitis C and psoriasis.  According  to  a
    medical report of 10 June 2020, the applicant "is under the psychiatric
    team for drugs misuse.  He uses Cannabis, Cocaine and Heroin.  He is on
    Methadone, Olanzapine and Mirtazapine".  He was assaulted in 2018 but a
    test showed  no  brain  abnormality.   The  applicant  told  Dr  Falah,
    Consultant Neurologist, that, following the  head  injury,  he  started
    having  attacks  suggestive  of  generalised  seizures.    The   doctor
    concluded that the  "episodes  are  strongly  suggestive  of  epileptic
    seizures.  I am arranging an EEG.  I would have done an MRI brain [sic]
    but in view of the current epidemic, we will delay that for now".

45. At paragraph 58 of his skeleton argument, Mr Karnik says  that,  except
    for the periods when the applicant has been detained or  imprisoned  or
    was working illegally -

         "he has been destitute, he remains so, he has relied  upon  charity
         and support from friends, he has no place of his own to reside, and
         relies upon the goodwill of friends and others  for  accommodation,
         he spends time street homeless and has  been  subject  to  violence
         during these periods."

46. This, together with his medical position, leads  Mr  Karnik  to  submit
    that those involved in the applicant's care see a pressing need for him
    to obtain some formal status.  That last submission appears to be based
    upon a letter of 16 October 2018 from Nottinghamshire Healthcare (Debra
    Goode CPN).  This stated that, prior to  his  detention  in  Nottingham
    Prison in August 2018, the applicant "had presented as  physically  and
    mentally unwell whilst in  the  community".   He  was  hearing  voices,
    believing he was being controlled,  "was  paranoid,  and  presented  as
    dissociative and disconnected".  The letter stated that it was believed
    this presentation was linked to the applicant's legal  status  in  this
    country and the length of time it was taking to resolve the issue.

47. When Debra Goode visited the applicant in prison in October  2018,  she
    found his physical and mental health "were much improved ...  I believe
    that this improvement in [the applicant's] health is as a result of the
    stability that prison life has  offered".   The  applicant  was  taking
    advantage of learning opportunities in prison and was taking an English
    course.  He seemed motivated to learn new skills.  Ms Goode  opined  as
    follows:-

         "I believe that given legal status in this country [the  applicant]
         would maintain his present  good  health,  and  that  he  would  be
         motivated to work and make positive changes in his life,  and  have
         the potential to be a valuable asset to society.

         Should [the  applicant's]  lack  of  status  continue  when  he  is
         released from prison, I feel it is highly likely that his  physical
         and mental health will once more deteriorate.

         Given this, I would strongly advocate for  [the  applicant]  to  be
         granted legal status in this country."

48. In his reply of 9 November 2020 to Mr  Fortt's  skeleton  argument,  Mr
    Karnik says that, currently, the applicant -

         "survives on NASS "short-term" support and lives in  NASS  provided
         accommodation, neither are designed for a state of permanency,  the
         former providing �35.39 per  week  on  a  payment  card  for  food,
         clothing and toiletries, and the latter a place to shelter  at  the
         direction and discretion of the SSHD and not a home."



B. THE APPLICANT'S STATELESSNESS APPLICATION

49. On 9 February 2017, the applicant applied for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a  stateless  person.   On  27  November  2019,  that
    application was refused by the respondent.

50. Paragraph 403 of the Immigration Rules provides that  the  requirements
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  stateless  person  are
    that the applicant:-

    (a)    has made a valid application to the respondent for limited leave
         to remain as a stateless person;
    (b)    he is recognised as a stateless  person  by  the  respondent  in
         accordance with paragraph 401;
    (c)    he is not admissible to his country of former habitual residence
         or any other country; and
    (d)    he has obtained and submitted all reasonably available  evidence
         to enable the respondent to determine whether he is stateless.
51. Paragraph 401 of the Immigration Rules defines a stateless person as  a
    person who:-

    (a)    satisfies the requirements of Article 1(1) of  the  1954  United
         Nations Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons,  as
         a person who is not considered as a national by any state under the
         operation of its law;

    (b)    is in the United Kingdom; and

    (c)    is not excluded from recognition as  a  Stateless  person  under
         paragraph 402.

52. Paragraph 402 contains certain exemptions, which are not  relevant  for
    the present purposes.

53. The respondent's refusal letter make reference to  the  biometric  data
    provided  by  the  applicant,  as  described  earlier.   The   decision
    concluded that there were problems with  the  applicant's  inconsistent
    claims for asylum, besides other discrepancies.  It was, in particular,
    noted that the applicant appealed against the refusal of asylum  on  27
    September 2001 "on the grounds that my second  application  for  asylum
    which  was  made  on  30-Jul-2001  is  a  complete  fabrication".   The
    respondent also observed that, on being deported on 29 June  2001,  the
    applicant had  convinced  the  Belarus  authorities  that  he  was  not
    entitled to citizenship as he had not lived there since 1986  and  that
    he admitted lying about this matter to those authorities.

54. Reference was then made to the attempts which the respondent  had  made
    to validate information given by the respondent and to the difficulties
    which those investigations had disclosed.

55. Reference was also made to the interview at the Belarusian  Embassy  in
    2003, when  the  applicant  categorically  denied  being  a  Belarusian
    citizen and said it was "all  a  game".   The  letter  noted,  in  this
    regard, the adverse credibility findings of the  adjudicators  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

56. The respondent observed that the  applicant  was  in  possession  of  a
    photocopy of a Republic of Belarus passport in the  name  AM  but  that
    confirmation had been received that this was  "a  valid  passport,  and
    used by its  Belarusian  national  owner"  (not  the  applicant).   The
    applicant had not offered an explanation as to how he acquired  a  copy
    of this passport.  Nor had he explained how he obtained the  Lithuanian
    passport, which he had subsequently falsified.  The Belarus Factory  ID
    card had also been exposed as a forgery.

57. In addition, the applicant had "utilised  alternate  patronymic  middle
    names, I... and A..., thereby generating additional aliases to  confuse
    and obscure your true identity".  The authorities could find  no  trace
    of his birth in G city in 1976.

58. Furthermore, whilst held at  HMP  Liverpool,  it  was  noted  that  the
    applicant had given the nationality "Russian - Urals", claiming that he
    described himself as Russian as people had never heard of Belarus.  The
    applicant claimed to know nothing about the Urals.

59. Notwithstanding all this, the respondent considered that there  was  "a
    level of consistency across Home Office records of  your  claim  to  be
    from Belarus".  The applicant  had  generally  maintained  that  claim.
    However:-

         "...that the Belarus  authorities  have  refused  to  confirm  your
         Belarus nationality, and that applications  for  an  ETD  had  been
         unsuccessful, does not provide the necessary weight of evidence  to
         support your stateless claim.  That  the  Belarus  authorities  are
         unwilling to issue an ETD is, in  the  consideration  of  the  Home
         Office, due solely  to  the  fact  that  your  identity  cannot  be
         verified - and it is a further consideration  of  the  Home  Office
         that you have deliberately adopted a strategy of lies and deceit to
         frustrate the removal process and to obscure your identity."

60. The respondent concluded that, although the applicant claimed to be AM,
    he had provided no substantive proof that this was his name.   If  that
    were the case, and the applicant was  AM,  the  Belarusian  authorities
    would be able to provide a trace of his schooling, work or  healthcare,
    even if his birth was not registered in Belarus.  In the circumstances,
    therefore, "it is only rational that the Belarus authorities would fail
    to verify your identity  based  on  the  objective  evidence  discussed
    above".

61. The decision continued:-

         "Importantly, that the Belarus authorities have thus far refused to
         issue an ETD or verify your Belarus nationality is not, in  itself,
         proof that you are not a citizen of the country, or that  you  have
         had  your  Belarus   citizenship   revoked.    Significantly,   the
         Belarusian authorities have not refused to accept you as a  citizen
         of the country, merely that they are unable to identify  you  based
         on the information you have provided.  Indeed, the authorities have
         themselves been explicit in stating  they  believe  you  are  being
         dishonest about your true identity having failed to provide a trace
         of you with regards to your birth, family, schooling, place of work
         or health records (based on the claims you have made).

         Taking these factors fully into account, and in  acknowledging  the
         inconsistencies in the information and details  you  have  provided
         with regards to your identity, it is the consideration of the  Home
         Office that  you  have  failed  to  demonstrate,  to  the  required
         standard of proof  and  balance  of  probabilities,  that  you  are
         stateless as claimed."

62. The decision concluded by stating that the  applicant  had  "adopted  a
    wilful strategy of lies, obfuscation and deceit to confuse and obstruct
    endeavours to confirm your identity".  It was  not  accepted  that  the
    applicant was  inadmissible  to  Belarus  and  the  application  failed
    therefore  to  satisfy  the  provisions  of  paragraph  403(c)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  application  also  failed  to  provide   the
    necessary weight of proof of evidence, thereby failing to  satisfy  the
    terms of paragraph 403(d).

63. In addition, it was noted that on 11 September 2018, the applicant  had
    been convicted of possession of an article which had  a  blade  or  was
    sharply pointed in a public place, for which he  was  sentenced  to  26
    weeks'  consecutive  imprisonment  on  each  count.   Accordingly,  the
    application was refused  under  paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  This provides that an application for leave should normally  be
    refused where it would be undesirable to grant leave, in the  light  of
    the conduct (including convictions) character or  associations  of  the
    person concerned.



C. THE JUDICIAL REVIEW

64. The procedural history of these proceedings is somewhat elaborate.  For
    present purposes, it  is  sufficient  to  recount  that  in  2018,  the
    applicant applied for judicial review of  the  respondent's  continuing
    failure to grant the applicant leave to enter or remain in  the  United
    Kingdom, as opposed to maintaining  his  status  of  immigration  bail.
    Permission to bring judicial review  proceedings  on  this  ground  was
    granted; and on 21 July 2020 the  applicant  was  given  permission  to
    amend the grounds of challenge in order to challenge the decision of 27
    November 2019 in which the respondent  refused  the  application  based
    upon alleged statelessness.  A "rolled-up" hearing of the challenge  to
    the statelessness decision was ordered, to take place at the same  time
    as the hearing in respect of the original ground.  That original ground
    is now described as ground 1 and the  challenge  to  the  statelessness
    decision is ground 2.




D. THE LIMITS OF IMMIGRATION BAIL

65. The applicant's case under ground 1  is  that  the  respondent  is  not
    legally empowered to keep the applicant on immigration bail  (formerly,
    temporary admission) and that she must consequently grant the applicant
    leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.  In order to comprehend
    ground  1  it  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  examine   the   relevant
    legislation.

66. Paragraph 16 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration  Act  1971  concerns  the
    detention of persons liable to examination or removal.  Paragraph 16(2)
    of Schedule 2 provides as follows:-

         "If there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that  a  person  is
         someone in respect of whom directions may be  given  under  any  of
         paragraphs [8 to 10A] or 12 to 14,  that  person  may  be  detained
         under the authority of an immigration officer pending-

             (a) a decision whether or not to give such directions;

             (b) his removal in pursuance of such directions."

67. Paragraphs 8 to 10A, and 12 to 14 make provision for the respondent  or
    an immigration officer, as the case may  be,  to  give  directions,  in
    certain circumstances, for the removal of  a  person  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Section 16(2), therefore, makes a person liable to  detention
    pending a decision whether or  not  to  give  such  directions  or  the
    person's removal in pursuance of them.

68. Until it was repealed by the Immigration  Act  2016,  paragraph  21  of
    Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act provided as follows:-

         "17(1)   A person liable to detention or detained  under  paragraph
                16 above may, under the written authority of an  immigration
                officer, be  temporarily  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom
                without being detained or be released  from  detention;  but
                this shall not prejudice a later exercise of  the  power  to
                detain him.

            (2)  So long as a person is at large in the United  Kingdom  by
                virtue of this  paragraph,  he  shall  be  subject  to  such
                restrictions as  to  residence,  as  to  his  employment  or
                occupation  and  as  to  reporting  to  the  police  or   an
                immigration officer as may from time to time be notified  to
                him in writing by an immigration officer."

69. Section 11(1) of the 1971 Act  provided  that  a  person  on  temporary
    admission was not deemed to have entered the United Kingdom so long  as
    they were subject to temporary admission.   The  practical  effects  of
    being on temporary admission, as opposed to having some form of  leave,
    were profound.  There were severe restrictions on the person's  ability
    to work; they were disqualified from access to all  but  emergency  NHS
    treatment; and they were subject to other significant restrictions, not
    faced by those having some form of (albeit  limited)  leave  under  the
    1971 Act.

70. The Immigration Act 2016 abolished the concept of temporary  admission.
    Paragraph 21 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act was, as a result,  repealed.
    Instead, Schedule 10 to the 2016 Act made comprehensive  provision  for
    immigration bail.  Paragraph 1(5) of Schedule 10 provides as follows:-

         "(5)     A person may be granted and  remain  on  immigration  bail
             even if the person can no longer be detained, if -

             (a) the person  is  liable  to  detention  under  a  provision
                  mentioned in sub-paragraph (1), or

             (b) the Secretary of State is considering whether  to  make  a
                  deportation order against the person under section 5(1) of
                  the Immigration Action 1971."

71. The provisions mentioned in  paragraph  1(1)  of  Schedule  10  include
    paragraph 16(1), (1A) and (2) of Schedule  2  to  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

72. As can be seen, the relevant touchstone for whether an  individual  may
    be subject to immigration bail is the same as  that  which  applied  to
    determine  whether  a  person  could  be  made  subject  to   temporary
    admission; that is to say, that he or she is "liable to detention" (old
    paragraph 21 of  Schedule  2  to  the  1971  Act/paragraph  1(5)(a)  of
    Schedule 10 to the 2016 Act).

73. The practical  consequences  of  being  subject  to  immigration  bail,
    without leave, continue to be significant.  Paragraphs 360 to  360E  of
    the Immigration Rules set out a narrow range of circumstances in  which
    a person who is an asylum applicant may be granted permission  to  take
    up employment.  The circumstances do not encompass those of the present
    applicant.  Furthermore, the effects of the Immigration Acts  2014  and
    2016 are that a person without leave is disqualified from entering into
    a tenancy agreement and from opening a bank account.  As  before,  they
    only have available to them emergency NHS treatment.

74. There are, of course, powerful policy reasons behind the  treatment  of
    those who are not in possession of leave to enter or remain.  They  are
    intended to prevent abuse of the United Kingdom's system of immigration
    control.  The question in the present case is  whether  the  point  has
    nevertheless been reached, whereby there is  no  legal  alternative  to
    ending what has been described as the applicant's state of "limbo" (see
    R (AR and Others) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 1310).

75. It is now time to examine the relevant case law.  The first case  is  R
    (Khadir) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  UKHL  39;
    [2006] 1 AC 207.  The claimant was an Iraqi Kurd  who  arrived  in  the
    United  Kingdom  in  2000.   He  was  given  temporary  admission.   He
    contended, however, that given the respondent's  long-term  failure  to
    find a safe means for the claimant to return to the Kurdish  Autonomous
    Area of Iraq, he should be granted exceptional leave to enter.

76.  In his opinion, with which the other members of  the  House  of  Lords
    agreed, Lord Brown summed up the claimant's position as follows:-

         "7.      The status of ELE has very  considerable  advantages  over
             that of temporary admission.  The benefit regime is altogether
             more favourable: those  on  temporary  admission  obtain  only
             benefits  in  kind,  never  cash.   Those  with   leave   will
             ordinarily be permitted to work;  those  temporarily  admitted
             will not.  Those with leave can live where  they  want;  those
             temporarily admitted only where they  are  directed  to  live.
             There are other important differences too.  Because  of  these
             disadvantages the appellant sought to challenge the  Secretary
             of State's refusal of ELE.  He did so on two  grounds.   First
             and principally he contended that because  of  the  continuing
             inability to find a safe route for  his  return  to  the  KAA,
             there was no longer power to authorise his temporary admission
             under Schedule 2  so  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  no
             alternative but to grant him ELE.  Alternatively he  contended
             that,  even  assuming  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  a
             discretion in the matter, he had not exercised it lawfully."

77. The Khadir litigation had begun in 2002, when Crane J  concluded  that,
    as at 3 May 2002,  Mr  Khadir's  "temporary  admission  was  no  longer
    lawful" and that the respondent's refusal letter in any event contained
    "wholly inadequate reasoning".

78. Very shortly after Crane J's decision, and before the case reached  the
    House of Lords, Parliament  enacted  section  67  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in order to  put  beyond  doubt  that,
    whatever might previously have been a true ambit  of  paragraph  21  of
    Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act, it was to be construed as  extending  to  a
    case such as that of Mr Khadir.  There was concern  that  if  a  person
    could not be lawfully  detained,  he  could  not  be  lawfully  granted
    temporary admission.

79. Section 67 provides as follows:-

         "67      Construction of reference to person liable to detention

             (1) This section applies to the construction  of  a  provision
                  which-

                  (a)  does not confer power to detain a person, but

                  (b)  refers (in any terms) to a person who  is  liable  to
                      detention under a provision of the Immigration Acts.

             (2) The reference shall be taken to include a  person  if  the
                  only reason why he cannot be detained under the  provision
                  is that-

                  (a)  he  cannot  presently  be  removed  from  the  United
                      Kingdom, because of a legal impediment connected with
                      the   United   Kingdom's   obligations    under    an
                      international agreement,

                  (b)  practical difficulties are impeding or  delaying  the
                      making of  arrangements  for  his  removal  from  the
                      United Kingdom, or

                  (c)  practical difficulties, or demands on  administrative
                      resources, are impeding or delaying the taking  of  a
                      decision in respect of him.

             (3) This  section  shall  be  treated  as  always  having  had
                  effect."

80. At paragraph 20 of his opinion, Lord Brown, discussing section 67, held
    that "the section recognises that it is one thing to  detain  a  person
    during what may be a long delayed process of removal, quite another  to
    provide for his temporary admission during such delays" (paragraph 20).
     That distinction fell to be made because in R  v  Governor  of  Durham
    Prison, ex parte Hardial Singh [1984] 1 WLR 704, it was held  that  the
    power of detention under the Immigration Act 1971  cannot  actually  be
    exercised where, in all the circumstances, the respondent cannot effect
    removal of the person concerned within a reasonable period.

81.  Discussing Hardial Singh and other cases where the same  approach  had
    been taken, Lord Brown said:-

         "25.     ... I doubt it crossed the minds  of  anyone  involved  in
             those cases that the applicants on release might not have been
             properly made subject to such restrictions but instead  should
             have been released unconditionally.  Yet that necessarily must
             be the effect of Mr Blake's argument.


         26.      That argument can now be summarised I think essentially as
             follows:
             (1) The power to detain under paragraph 16  exists  only  when
                  removal is "pending".
             (2) Removal cannot be said to be "pending" unless it  will  be
                  possible to effect it within a reasonable time.
             (3) That is why the applicants in the above  series  of  cases
                  had to be released (and why it would be unlawful to detain
                  the appellant in the present case): since removal was  not
                  "pending", they were  not  liable  to  be  detained.   The
                  limitation was upon  the  existence  and  not  merely  the
                  exercise of the detention power.
             (4) By the  same  token  that  they  were  not  liable  to  be
                  detained, so too they were not subject to the restrictions
                  provided for by paragraph 2(5) of Schedule 3  and  so  too
                  this appellant is not now able to be temporarily  admitted
                  under paragraph 21 of Schedule 2."
82. When Khadir  was  in  the  Court  of  Appeal,  Mance  LJ  had  drawn  a
    distinction between the circumstances in which a person is  potentially
    liable to detention  (and  can  properly  be  regarded  as  temporarily
    admitted), and the circumstances in which the power to  detain  can  in
    any particular case properly be exercised.  Lord Brown agreed, saying:-

         "31.     ...  It surely goes without saying  that  the  longer  the
             delay in effecting someone's removal the more  difficult  will
             it be to justify his continued detention meanwhile.  But  that
             is by no means to say that  he  does  not  remain  "liable  to
             detention".  What I cannot see is how the  fact  that  someone
             has been temporarily admitted rather than detained can be said
             to lengthen the period properly to be regarded as "pending ...
             his removal".


         32.      The true position in my judgment is  this.   "Pending"  in
             paragraph 16 means no more than "until".  The  word  is  being
             used as a preposition, not as an adjective. Paragraph 16  does
             not say that the removal must be "pending", still less that it
             must be "impending".   So  long  as  the  Secretary  of  State
             remains intent upon removing the  person  and  there  is  some
             prospect of achieving this, paragraph 16 authorises  detention
             meanwhile.  Plainly it may  become  unreasonable  actually  to
             detain  the  person  pending  a  long  delayed   removal   (ie
             throughout  the  whole  period  until   removal   is   finally
             achieved).  But that does not mean that the power has  lapsed.
             He  remains  "liable  to  detention"  and   the   ameliorating
             possibility of his temporary admission in  lieu  of  detention
             arises under para 21.


         33.      To my mind the Hardial Singh line of cases says everything
             about the exercise of the power to detain  (when  properly  it
             can be exercised  and  when  it  cannot);  nothing  about  its
             existence.  True it is that in Tan Te Lam  the  Privy  Council
             concluded that the power itself had ceased to exist.  But that
             was because there was simply no possibility of the  Vietnamese
             Government accepting  the  applicants'  repatriation;  it  was
             effectively conceded that removal in that case was  no  longer
             achievable.  Once that prospect had gone, detention  could  no
             longer be said to be "pending removal".  I acknowledge that in
             the first passage of his judgment  set  out  in  paragraph  24
             above,  Lord  Browne-Wilkinson,  having  correctly  posed  the
             question whether detention was "pending  removal,"  then  used
             the expression "if removal is not  pending."   That,  however,
             can only have been a slip.  He was clearly  following  Hardial
             Singh and no such error appears in Woolf J's approach.


         34.      None of this,  of  course,  is  to  say  that  the  regime
             governing temporary admission  as  presently  administered  is
             other than harsh.  But that harshness has been  sanctioned  by
             Parliament  and  cannot  affect  the  true  construction   and
             application of paragraphs 16(2) and 21  of  Schedule  2.   Its
             only possible relevance  would  be  to  the  exercise  of  the
             Secretary of State's undoubted discretion, irrespective of the
             legal position under Schedule 2, at any time to grant ELE."

83. Lord Brown dismissed the challenge  to  the  respondent's  decision  as
    being inadequately reasoned.  He said:-

         "I would do so less by reference to section 67 than because it must
         require an altogether stronger case  on  the  facts  than  this  to
         impugn a refusal of  ELE  in  circumstances  where  Parliament  has
         expressly provided for temporary admission as  the  alternative  to
         detention.  ELE  means  what  it  says:  it  is  exceptional.   The
         Secretary of State's discretion is a very wide one and it is hardly
         surprising that he found nothing exceptional about this  case  when
         he refused to grant ELE a mere  18  months  after  the  appellant's
         unlawful entry into this country.  Nor should  the  fact  that  the
         appellant has now been here for a further five years  occasion  any
         particular optimism for the future: by section  67  Parliament  has
         manifested its clear intention that even those awaiting removal  on
         a long-term basis should  ordinarily  do  so  under  the  temporary
         admission regime."

84. Lord Brown concluded by stating that section 67 of the 2002 Act was  an
    unnecessary enactment.  What it said had always been the law.

85. Although agreeing with Lord Brown, Baroness Hale gave a short  opinion,
    which has featured in the subsequent case law:-

         "4.      I agree that this  appeal  should  be  dismissed  for  the
             reasons given by my noble and learned friend,  Lord  Brown  of
             Eaton-under-Heywood.  A person  is  'liable  to  be  detained'
             within the meaning of Schedule 2 to the Immigration  Act  1971
             where there is power to detain him even if it would not  be  a
             proper exercise of that power actually to  do  so.   There  is
             some parallel here with the expression 'liable to be detained'
             in, for example, sections 17 and 20 of the Mental  Health  Act
             1983.  A person who is liable to be detained in a hospital  by
             virtue of an application or order under that Act may either be
             actually detained or given leave of absence.  While  on  leave
             of absence it may well be that the patient's disorder  is  not
             such that he needs to be detained in hospital.  But he remains
             liable to be detained, and may be recalled to hospital, unless
             and until the application or order authorising  his  detention
             lapses or he is discharged: see B v Barking etc Healthcare NHS
             Trust  [1999]  1  FLR  106,  CA.  Under  Schedule  2  to   the
             Immigration Act  1971,  there  is  power  to  detain  'pending
             removal'.  'Pending'  in  this  context  means  no  more  than
             'until'. There may come a  time  when  the  prospects  of  the
             person ever being able safely to return,  whether  voluntarily
             or compulsorily, are so remote that it would be irrational  to
             deny him the status which would enable him to  make  a  proper
             contribution to  the  community  here,  but  that  is  another
             question. It certainly did not arise  on  the  facts  of  this
             case."

86. In MS and others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 1310, the Court of Appeal applied  the  law,  as  set  out  in
    Khadir, in the case of three claimants who were  subject  to  temporary
    admission but who for particular reasons could not be removed.

87. Having noted, in one of the cases at first instance, Cranston  J's  use
    of the expression "limbo", Sedley LJ described the practical effects of
    temporary admission:-

         "2.      ...  They have �5 a day to live on, cannot take work, must
             live where they are required to, have access only  to  primary
             healthcare, can obtain no social security benefits  or  social
             services assistance and can study only  in  institutions  that
             require no payment.  In these respects, which  are  determined
             by law and are not simply discretionary conditions imposed  by
             the Home Office, they may be no worse off than  asylum-seekers
             (which all three of the present appellants initially were) but
             are markedly worse off  than  if  they  had  formal  leave  to
             remain.  Their case is that they are entitled to the latter."

88. Discussing section 67 of the 2002 Act, Sedley LJ noted the  finding  in
    Khadir that it  "was  and  had  always  been  the  law  that  temporary
    admission was not time-limited but could last  as  long  as  there  was
    "some  prospect"  of   removal.    A   terminal   point   would   come,
    correspondingly, if and only if it became clear - as it had in  Tan  Te
    Lam  [1997]  AC  97  -  that  there  was  "simply  no  possibility   of
    repatriation" (paragraph 23).  Sedley LJ continued:-

         "24.     Mr Supperstone has felt obliged by  Khadir  to  abandon  a
             potentially interesting argument (albeit one which he  accepts
             was not advanced to Cranston J) that s.3 of the  Human  Rights
             Act 1998 requires s.67 to be interpreted so as not  to  permit
             temporary admission to become a disproportionate  interference
             with private life by keeping someone  on  temporary  admission
             for excessively or indefinitely long  -  conceivably,  if  the
             Home Secretary is right, even decades.  It may  be  that  this
             will require consideration in another case or context.


         25.      Instead it is argued for the appellants


             (a)  that   legal   difficulties   fall   outside   s.67(2)(b)
                  altogether; and


             (b) that a point may come, short of sheer impossibility,  when
                  the prospect of removal is too remote to  be  regarded  as
                  merely  a  practical  difficulty  impeding   or   delaying
                  removal.


         26.      The first of these  submissions  I  would  reject  without
             hesitation.  As Cranston J pointed  out,  foreign  law  is  in
             legal principle a matter of fact.  It is also  the  case  that
             the obstacles to return  are  commonly  an  amalgam  of  fact,
             governmental practice and policy, international law and  local
             law, often in a form which is impossible to disentangle.   The
             present  cases  illustrate  this.   I  would  hold  that   any
             difficulty, whatever its  nature  or  origin,  which  has  the
             effect of impeding return is a practical difficulty within the
             meaning of s.67(2)(b).


         27.      If we were construing  s.67  afresh,  I  would  have  much
             sympathy with a construction which gave  value  to  the  verbs
             "impede" and "delay", neither of which suggests  a  more  than
             temporary difficulty.  But in  my  judgment  the  decision  in
             Khadir puts this beyond our reach.  It  compels  us  to  treat
             s.67(2)(b) as  embracing  all  circumstances  in  which  there
             remains, in Lord Brown's  words,  some  prospect  of  removal,
             ending only when there is "simply no possibility" of  it.  The
             corollary, as Baroness Hale put in a short concurring  speech,
             is  that  the  legal  situation  may  change  only  "when  the
             prospects of the person ever being able safely to  return  ...
             are so remote that it would be  irrational  to  deny  him  the
             status which would enable him to make a proper contribution to
             the  community  here"  (one  notes  the   echo   of   Art.   8
             jurisprudence).



         28.      It is, however, not inconceivable that in two of the three
             cases before us this will turn out to be the  case.   We  have
             not yet heard argument  on  the  facts.   Mr  Supperstone  has
             realistically accepted that in the case of AR a tipping  point
             has not been reached.  He reserves his position in  the  other
             two.  In one of these cases, that of FW, the  outcome  of  the
             interview with the embassy may prove decisive one way  or  the
             other.  If not, it will be for counsel to decide whether it is
             appropriate to restore her appeal or that of MS  in  order  to
             argue that the facts are such as to carry the case outside the
             twin powers of detention and temporary admission and  make  it
             incumbent on the Home Secretary (as Jason Beer on  his  behalf
             accepts would follow) to give conscientious consideration,  if
             asked, to a grant of discretionary leave to remain."

89. Toulson LJ said:-

         "33.     Lord Brown went on to say that the Hardial Singh  line  of
             cases were for the most part relevant  only  to  the  question
             when the power to detain might properly be exercised  and  not
             to the question whether the power had  ceased  to  exist.   An
             exception was Tan Te Lam [1997] AC 97, where the Privy Council
             had held that the power itself had ceased to exist.  But  Lord
             Brown explained that this was because in that case  there  was
             "simply no possibility" of the applicants' repatriation and it
             had been effectively  conceded  that  removal  was  no  longer
             achievable.  Once that prospect had gone, detention  could  no
             longer be said to be "pending removal".


         34.      It  is  an  integral  part  of  this  reasoning  that  the
             existence of the power of detention under  paragraph  16,  and
             consequential  eligibility  for  temporary   admission   under
             paragraph 21, requires there to  be  "some  prospect"  of  the
             person's removal.


         35.      I agree with Laws  LJ  that  this  "residual  requirement"
             requires  no  more  than  the  possibility  of  removal.   The
             prospect of removal may be distant, but must not be so  remote
             as to be unreal.  In Khadir Lady Hale referred,  at  paragraph
             4, to the possibility of a time coming "when the prospects  of
             the  person  ever  being  able  safely  to   return,   whether
             voluntarily or compulsorily, are so remote that it would  [be]
             irrational to deny him the status which would  enable  him  to
             make a  proper  contribution  to  the  community  here".   She
             clearly had in mind an exceptional case. Similarly Lord  Brown
             observed, at paragraph 35, that "by section 67 Parliament  has
             manifested  its  clear  intention  that  even  those  awaiting
             removal on a long-term basis should ordinarily do so under the
             temporary admission regime".

         ...

         43.      In a case where there is no prospect of  the  person  ever
             being removed, the reason why  he  cannot  be  detained  under
             paragraph 16 is more fundamental than the fact that he  cannot
             practicably be removed "at that precise moment".  Applying the
             reasoning in Khadir, the absence of  any  possibility  of  his
             future removal negates the very  existence  of  any  power  to
             detain.


         44.      For those reasons, which I  believe  accord  in  substance
             with  those  of  Laws  LJ,  I  agree  with  Mr   Supperstone's
             submission that it was necessary for  the  judge  to  consider
             whether there  was  some  prospect  of  the  appellants  being
             removed, once that  issue  was  raised,  although  my  reasons
             differ from the way in  which  Mr  Supperstone  presented  his
             argument.  But in considering whether there is "some prospect"
             of a person's removal, the test is of  an  entirely  different
             nature from that which arises in the  Hardial  Singh  line  of
             cases, where the court is concerned with the reasonableness of
             the exercise of the power to detain.  I would also not  accept
             Mr Supperstone's argument to the effect that s 67 in some  way
             narrows the power which the Secretary of State would otherwise
             have to grant temporary admission under paragraph 21.


         45.      I can deal briefly with the Article 8 argument. Sedley  LJ
             has referred to the far reaching restrictions on those who are
             temporarily admitted.  I would  not  exclude  the  possibility
             that there might be a case  in  which  the  combination  of  a
             decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant   temporary
             admission on the  usual  conditions  and  other  statutory  or
             bureaucratic provisions might result in a breach of Article 8;
             but I am not persuaded that such a stage has arisen in any  of
             these cases, and the possibility that it might arise does  not
             make s 67 or paragraphs 16 and 21 of  themselves  incompatible
             with the ECHR." (our emphases)


90. Laws LJ concurred with Toulson LJ, giving reasons for arriving  at  the
    "unanimous" conclusion that differed somewhat from those of Sedley  LJ.
    He said:-

         48.      S.67(1)(b) makes reference to paragraph 21(1) of  Schedule
             2 to the 1971 Act.  The opening words of s.67(2)  also  cross-
             refer to paragraph 21(1). S.67  was  enacted  because  it  was
             thought, after  Crane  J's  judgment  in  Khadir  [2002]  EWHC
             (Admin) 1597, that a person who  was  prima  facie  liable  to
             detention pursuant to paragraph 16, but could not lawfully  be
             so detained because of Hardial Singh considerations ([1984]  1
             WLR 704), could not lawfully be  granted  temporary  admission
             either. The reasoning was that such a person was  not  "liable
             to detention" within paragraph 21(1),  and  so  the  temporary
             admission power could not be applied to him.


         49.      On that  footing,  what  s.67  did  was  to  preserve  the
             temporary admission power in such a case, in effect by deeming
             ("[t]he reference shall be taken to include..." - s.67(2)) the
             person to be "liable to detention".  Thus someone  whose  case
             fell within the Hardial Singh principle could still be subject
             to temporary admission. All the matters in  s.67(2)(a)  -  (c)
             are Hardial Singh considerations.  Their language does not  in
             my judgment  imply  any  substantive  test  or  limitation  of
             temporality;  they  merely  recognise   that   the   practical
             possibility of detention, while ruled out for the present, may
             be reinstated.


         50.      Had the matter  been  free  from  authority  that  is  the
             approach which with great respect I would have  taken  to  the
             relationship between  s.67  and  paragraph  21(1).  It  treats
             "liable to detention" as importing the possibility of a lawful
             detention, and not  merely  the  existence  of  the  power  to
             detain; accordingly the phrase had to be  stretched  to  cover
             the case,  for  the  purpose  of  temporary  admission,  where
             (because  of  Hardial  Singh)  there   was   no   such   legal
             possibility.  It is, however, not consistent with the analysis
             advanced by Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood in Khadir.  Lord
             Brown (their other Lordships assenting) held that  "liable  to
             detention" refers merely to the  existence  of  the  power  to
             detain, not its exercise, and so applies  even  in  a  Hardial
             Singh case.  Thus a person whose case falls within the Hardial
             Singh principle may be lawfully detained  under  paragraph  21
             without the aid of s.67, which is therefore surplusage.


         51.       Lord  Brown  acknowledged,  however,  that   "liable   to
             detention" requires  that  there  remain  "some  prospect"  of
             removal.   That  requirement  applies  both  to  paragraph  16
             (detention) and to paragraph 21 (temporary admission).  But in
             my judgment it means no more  than  that  the  possibility  of
             removal  is  not  altogether  ruled  out;  and  that  is  also
             reflected by the language of s.67(2)(a) - (c).


         52.      In the result the temporary  admission  power  is  subject
             only to that residual requirement, whether  available  through
             paragraph 21 without more (the Khadir approach)  or,  were  it
             open to us  to  go  down  this  route,  through  paragraph  21
             qualified by s.67.  In either case the underlying issue of law
             in these appeals falls to be resolved against the appellants."

91. The judgments in MS  are  important.   They  make  it  clear  that  the
    respondent's ability to subject a person to  temporary  admission  (now
    immigration  bail)  turns  upon  whether  that  person  "is  liable  to
    detention" (see paragraph 72 above).  The  House  of  Lords  in  Khadir
    interpreted that phrase broadly.  There nevertheless is a limit to  the
    power, which is expressed by Lord Brown in Khadir by reference  to  the
    need for there to be "some prospect" of removal.  That  limit  is  not,
    however, easily reached.  At paragraph  43  of  the  judgments  in  MS,
    Toulson LJ spoke of there being "no prospect of the person  ever  being
    removed."  In the same vein, Laws LJ held the  possibility  of  removal
    needs to be "altogether ruled out" before a person is no longer "liable
    to removal" and, thus, no longer to be dealt with by way  of  temporary
    admission  or  (now)  immigration  bail  (paragraph  51).   Sedley   LJ
    described the endpoint of the power as being where there was "simply no
    possibility"  of  the  individual  being  removed  by  the   respondent
    (paragraph 23).  It is also implicit, from Sedley LJ's rejection of the
    argument  for  the  appellants  set  out  in  paragraph  25(b)  of  the
    judgments, that nothing short of "sheer  impossibility"  will  suffice.
    There is no indication that the other members of  the  court  disagreed
    with this part of his judgment.

92. Although Sedley LJ, at paragraph 24, considered that it was unnecessary
    to engage with the  appellants'  submissions  regarding  human  rights,
    Toulson LJ did so at paragraph 45.  In view of the  way  in  which  the
    case law has developed, that paragraph is, in  our  view,  significant.
    It emphasises that there is an crucial difference between, on  the  one
    hand, an individual escaping "limbo" by demonstrating that he or she is
    no longer "liable to detention", by  reason  of  the  impossibility  of
    removal in Khadir terms; and, on the other hand, the  ability  of  that
    individual to succeed on the basis that, although  this  jurisdictional
    endpoint may not have been reached, he or she  must  be  released  from
    "limbo" because the respondent's continuation of that state of  affairs
    - though lawful on the face of  the  1971  Act  -  would  constitute  a
    disproportionate interference with  the  individual's  Article  8  ECHR
    rights.

93. Although, in MS, Sedley LJ detected an echo of Article 8  jurisprudence
    in Lady Hale's concurring opinion in  Khadir,  she  did  not  make  any
    reference to Article 8.  The correct way of  interpreting  her  opinion
    is, we suggest, that she was doing  no  more  than  to  point  out  the
    consequence of there being an objective endpoint to the liability of an
    individual to detention and, thus, to temporary admission.  Ultimately,
    the identification of that endpoint is for the courts to determine.

94. In any event, it is the words of Lord Brown, with which Lords  Bingham,
    Hope and Roger concurred, that must be determinative of how courts  and
    tribunals identify the  endpoint  of  the  power  in  paragraph  16  of
    Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act and the power in paragraph 1(5) of  Schedule
    10 to the 2016 Act, with their identical phrase "liable to  detention".
    That was the approach taken by the majority in MS.



E. RA (IRAQ) v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
850

95. With these observations in mind, we turn to the important  recent  case
    of RA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 850.  This was an appeal by an  individual  who  enjoyed  leave  to
    remain but who faced the prospect of losing  that  leave  and  assuming
    "limbo" status, described by Haddon-Cave LJ as:-

         "...  a  continuing  stasis,  whereby  a  person  is  prevented  by
         continuing circumstances from being deported, but also prevented by
         lack of leave  to  remain  from  working,  receiving  normal  State
         benefits, renting or buying property, or accessing a full range  of
         NHS benefits ..." (paragraph 1).

96. RA's situation was, accordingly, one of  "prospective"  as  opposed  to
    "actual" limbo.  It is also important to observe that the appellant  in
    RA was appealing against a decision of the Upper Tribunal that it would
    not be a disproportionate interference with his Article  8  rights  for
    the respondent to place him in "limbo" at the end of  his  (statutorily
    extended) period of leave.

97. Haddon-Cave LJ dealt with eight  domestic  authorities  concerning  the
    "limbo" ground, beginning with Khadir.  In addressing MS (there  called
    AR and Others), Haddon-Cave LJ set out paragraphs  27  and  28  of  the
    judgment of Sedley LJ and part of paragraph 45 of Toulson LJ's judgment
    where, as we have seen, the latter expressly raised the possibility  of
    an Article 8 challenge in a "limbo" case.

98. In SH (Iran) and Others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1469, the Court of  Appeal  approved  the  judgment  at
    first instance of Simler J that although there may have been times when
    it had not proved possible for undocumented Iranians to be  removed  to
    Iran, "it does not follow that will always remain  the  case;  and,  as
    found as a fact by Simler J, there at no stage has been in existence  a
    policy that those whose removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  cannot  be
    enforced should for that reason alone be granted leave" (paragraph 38).
     A similar result was reached in BM (Iran) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 491, where the  claimant  had  been  in
    "limbo" for only five months and the Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the
    respondent was entitled to expect the claimant to  return  voluntarily.
    The claimant had not attempted to obtain documentation  to  effect  his
    return.

99. In R (Abdullah) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  2016
    (unreported), an Iraqi national who had been in "limbo" for potentially
    five years was held not to be entitled to relief.  Lady Hale's words in
    Khadir were held to be "focussed on the future prospect of removal, not
    on the historical inability to remove the claimant to Iraq"  (paragraph
    38).

100. The last domestic authority cited by  Haddon-Cave  LJ  was  AB  (Sierra
    Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (unreported, 7 July
    2017).  The appellant in that case had been in the United  Kingdom  for
    fourteen years.  The  Court  of  Appeal  nevertheless  considered  that
    "limbo" had not yet become a live issue.  The appellant had been  "non-
    cooperative, disruptive  and  ...  inconsistent",  albeit  probably  on
    account of his poor mental health"  (paragraph  16).   The  respondent,
    meanwhile, had not ceased to make efforts to obtain a  travel  document
    or been so dilatory in her efforts that it would be disproportionate or
    unreasonable not to give the claimant some  form  of  leave  (paragraph
    20).

101. Of the two cases from Strasbourg cited  by  Haddon-Cave  LJ,  reference
    should be made to Aristimuno Mendizabal v France  (2010)  50  EHRR  50.
    The claimant in that case had arrived in France from Spain in 1975  and
    was given asylum; but that status was withdrawn in 1979.  Between  1979
    and 1989, the  claimant  lived  lawfully  in  France  on  a  series  of
    temporary residence permits, valid for one year  each.   From  1989  to
    2003, the French authorities granted her only  temporary  receipts  for
    her application for renewal of her EU residence permit, each only valid
    for three months.  There did not appear to have been  any  question  of
    her being removed to Spain.  The claimant  challenged  the  refusal  to
    regularise her status on Article 8 grounds.  The ECtHR  held  that  the
    claimant's precarious situation and the uncertainty as to her fate  has
    had a significant moral and financial impact on her,  including  having
    to take causal and unskilled jobs and the impossibility as a result  of
    not having a residence permit  of  renting  premises  and  carrying  on
    professional activity.

102. Under the heading  "Discussion  on  the  authorities",  Haddon-Cave  LJ
    held:-

         "59.     The authorities recognise that, in  principle,  there  can
             exist a state of affairs, in respect of a person who is liable
             to be deported, where the prospects of that person ever  being
             able safely to return, voluntarily  or  compulsorily,  to  his
             country of origin are so remote, that  to  keep  him  in  that
             state of 'limbo' (i.e. stasis) would amount to a breach of his
             Article 8 rights; or, in the words of Lady Hale, mean that  it
             would be irrational to deny him the status which would  enable
             him to make a proper contribution to the community here.
         60.       Whilst  the  authorities  acknowledge   the   theoretical
             possibility of a state of 'limbo' giving rise to a  breach  of
             Article 8 rights, it is striking that  there  is  no  domestic
             case in which such a 'limbo' argument has  succeeded.   It  is
             also striking  that  the  only  known  example  of  a  'limbo'
             argument being successful is in the ECtHR case  of  Aristimuno
             Mendizabal  v  France  (supra)  which  involved  two  singular
             features: (a) an  exceptionally  lengthy  period  of  'limbo',
             namely 14 years; and (b) there was no question of the claimant
             being returned to Spain."

103. Haddon-Cave LJ then set out the following four-stage analysis  where  a
    limbo argument is raised in the context of Article 8:-

         "(1) Stage 1: Distinguish between prospective  'limbo'  and  actual
         'limbo'
         63.      The term 'limbo' is a convenient shorthand for  describing
             the position of a person whom the SSHD  wishes  to  deport  or
             remove, but there is a limited prospect of ever effecting  his
             deportation or removal (for the purposes of this judgment, the
             terms deport and deportation should be viewed  interchangeably
             with remove and removal).  The term 'limbo' is loosely used to
             cover individuals who may be in one of  two  discrete  states:
             (i) first, someone in respect of whom a decision to deport has
             been taken, but no deportation order has in fact been made; or
             (ii) second, someone in respect of whom  a  deportation  order
             has already been made but who has not yet been  deported.   In
             many cases, an individual in the first  state  (such  as  this
             Appellant to date) may have suffered little or  no  day-to-day
             impact on his or her private or  family  life.   Thus,  for  a
             person in the first state, the effect of possessing  leave  to
             remain under s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971  (i.e.  pending
             appeal) will have been that they are free to work and to enjoy
             private and family life.  This may be described as prospective
             'limbo'.  Where, however, in the second state,  a  deportation
             order has in fact been made, there will normally be  no  leave
             to remain, and the individual will be unable  to  work,  claim
             benefits or receive more than basic GP  care  under  the  NHS.
             This may be described as actual 'limbo'.


         64.       In  approaching  any  claim  based  on  'limbo'  grounds,
             therefore, it is necessary first of all to distinguish between
             these two different situations, namely prospective 'limbo' and
             actual 'limbo', when assessing the  balance  between  (a)  the
             public interest in making or sustaining a decision  to  deport
             and then a deportation order on the  one  hand,  and  (b)  the
             impact  on  Article  8  and  other  Convention  rights  of  an
             individual on the other.   The  former  state  of  prospective
             'limbo' is likely to weigh less heavily in the balance in  the
             interests of the individual than the latter  state  of  actual
             'limbo', but each case will depend on its own  facts  and  the
             periods involved.


         (2) Stage 2: Prospects of effecting deportation must be remote
         65.      There is a threshold question to be addressed  as  to  the
             (non) 'deportability' of the individual. In order to  raise  a
             'limbo' argument in the first place, i.e. whether  the  public
             interest justifies making or sustaining a decision  to  deport
             or issuing a deportation order itself, the following  must  be
             demonstrated:  (i)  first,  it  must  be  apparent  that   the
             appellant  is  not  capable   of   being   actually   deported
             immediately, or in the foreseeable  future;  (ii)  second,  it
             must be apparent that there are no further or remaining  steps
             that can currently be  taken  in  the  foreseeable  future  to
             facilitate his deportation; and (iii) third, there must be  no
             reason for anticipating change in the situation and, thus,  in
             practical terms, the prospects of removal are remote.


         66.      If those criteria are not satisfied,  a  challenge  to  an
             otherwise lawful decision to deport, or deportation order,  on
             the basis of 'limbo' (or  prospective  'limbo')  calling  into
             question whether the public interest in deportation should  be
             overcome by considerations of family or private life or  other
             Convention  rights,  is  likely   to   face   formidable,   or
             potentially insuperable, obstacles. (our emphasis)
         (3) Stage 3: Fact-specific analysis
         67.      Where those criteria are satisfied, a  court  or  tribunal
             must next engage in a fact-specific examination of  the  case.
             This  will  typically  comprise  both  a   retrospective   and
             prospective analysis, including: (i) an assessment of the time
             already spent  by  the  individual  in  the  UK,  his  status,
             immigration history and family circumstances; (ii) the  nature
             and seriousness of any offences of which  the  individual  has
             been convicted; (iii) an assessment of the time elapsed  since
             the decision or order to deport; (iv)  an  assessment  of  the
             prospects of deportation ever being achieved (see above);  and
             (v) whether the impossibility of achieving deportation is  due
             in part to the conduct of the  individual,  e.g.  in  not  co-
             operating with obtaining documentation.
         (4) Stage 4: Balancing exercise
         68.      The fourth stage is the balancing exercise to  be  carried
             out  between  (a)  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   an
             effective system of  immigration  control,  and  in  deporting
             those who ought not to be in the United  Kingdom  and  (b)  an
             individual's Article 8 and other Convention rights.


         69.      This  will  involve  an  assessment  of  (i)  whether  the
             individual remaining in a state  of  'limbo'  (or  prospective
             'limbo') will have an impact on the individual's Article 8  or
             other Convention rights and, if so, the extent of that impact;
             and (ii) how far that impact is  proportionate  when  balanced
             with the public interest in the decision to make an order,  or
             to sustain the same.


         70.      The public interest in question is principally the  public
             interest in maintaining an  effective  system  of  immigration
             control, and in deporting those who are in the  UK  illegally.
             There is  no  separate  public  interest  in  preventing  such
             individuals from  e.g.  working  or  relying  on  benefits  or
             gaining the full range of free health care.   Parliament  has,
             however,  decreed  by   statute   that   such   benefits   and
             opportunities are to be withheld from  those  here  illegally.
             Parliament must be taken to have intended  that  the  lack  of
             such benefits and opportunities will form  a  disincentive  to
             coming or remaining here illegally.  The  statute  has  to  be
             read in accordance with s.3 of the Human Rights Act 1998.   It
             is compatibility with Article 8 and  other  Convention  rights
             which is relevant - not 'criminalisation' of  the  Appellant's
             presence in the UK as Mr Chirico would suggest.  Further,  the
             parallels he seeks to draw with the Hardial  Singh  principles
             are of marginal assistance since they arise in  the  different
             context of release from temporary detention (c.f.  R  (Hardial
             Singh) v. Governor of Durham Prison [1983] EWHC 1 (QB)).


         71.      The principal basis on which it might  be  said  that  the
             public interest in continued 'limbo' may be so weakened,  such
             that Article 8 rights or other Convention rights might tip the
             balance, will normally only arise in cases where it  is  clear
             that  the  public  interest  in   effective   immigration   is
             extinguished  because,  in  practical  terms,  there   is   no
             realistic  prospect  of   effecting   deportation   within   a
             reasonable period (see above).


         72.      Further, as Simler J said in R (Hamzeh and others) (supra)
             at [50]:


                  "[50]  There is no  policy  or  practice  whereby  persons
                  whose removal from the UK cannot be enforced, should,  for
                  this reason alone, be granted leave to remain.  It is  not
                  difficult to see why this should be the  case.   A  policy
                  entitling a person to leave to remain  merely  because  no
                  current enforced removal is possible, would  undermine  UK
                  immigration law and  policy,  and  would  create  perverse
                  incentives to obstruct removal, rewarding those  who  fail
                  to comply with their obligations as compared to those  who
                  ensure such compliance.  Moreover,  in  the  same  way  as
                  immigration  law  and  policy  may  change,  so  too   the
                  practical situation in relation to enforcing  removal  may
                  change  or  fluctuate  over  time  so  that  any   current
                  difficulties cannot be regarded as perpetual.""



F. KHADIR IN THE LIGHT OF RA (IRAQ)

104. If, as we consider it to be the case, the  decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in Khadir is authoritative as to the extent of the power to  keep
    an individual on temporary admission or (now) immigration bail, stage 2
    of RA (Iraq) (prospects of affecting deportation must be remote)  falls
    for careful consideration.  There would seem to be  only  two  ways  of
    interpreting stage 2.  Either the language  used  in  paragraph  65  is
    intended directly to correspond with that used by Lord Brown in Khadir,
    as interpreted by the Court of  Appeal  in  MS;  or  that  language  is
    intended  to  identify  a  threshold,  lower  than  that   of   "Khadir
    impossibility", as part of the argument - foreshadowed by Toulson LJ in
    MS - whereby a person who may, in law, still be liable  to  immigration
    bail can nevertheless contend that the continuation of  that  state  of
    affairs represents  a  disproportionate  interference  with  Article  8
    rights.

105. The first interpretation is possible only if the legal cessation of  an
    individual's liability to detention in "Khadir"  terms  could  lawfully
    result in the respondent still not granting the person concerned  leave
    to enter or remain.  That does  not  seem  to  be  possible.   In  this
    scenario, the individual would cease to have any legal basis whatsoever
    for being in the United Kingdom.  It  is  very  hard  to  see  how  the
    respondent could rationally accede to that state of affairs, given  the
    present form of the Immigration Acts.  Certainly, in Khadir, there  was
    no suggestion that, if a person's liability to temporary admission were
    lost, he or she would not, as a result, become effectively entitled  to
    exceptional leave to remain. Legislation would be needed to alter  this
    position (as to which, see S and others v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1157).

106. It seems to us, therefore, that the second scenario described above  is
    the only proper way of interpreting stage 2 of the four-stage RA (Iraq)
    process.   In  other  words,  the  applicant  must  show  serious   and
    potentially long-lasting difficulties in the  respondent's  ability  to
    have the individual removed, falling short of  "Khadir  impossibility".
    That is the approach we adopt.



G. APPLYING THE LAW TO THE FACTS OF THE APPLICANT'S CASE

(a) Is removal impossible?

107. We look first at whether the applicant has shown that the  respondent's
    legal ability to keep the applicant on immigration bail has  ceased  to
    exist, with the result that (pursuant to what we have just said), there
    is no legal alternative but for the respondent to grant  the  applicant
    leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.   In  determining  this
    question, the fact that the applicant has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for 22 years is of less relevance than  in  the  RA  (Iraq)  four-stage
    Article 8 analysis.  The sheer length of  time  may,  nevertheless,  be
    indicative of the permanent impossibility of removal.

108.   Mr  Karnik  contends  that  this  is,  indeed,  the  position.    The
    protracted history of the respondent's interactions  with  the  Belarus
    authorities and the United Kingdom Embassy in Minsk  shows,  Mr  Karnik
    says, that permanent stasis has been reached.

109. In support of this submission, Mr Karnik pointed to the fact  that  the
    applicant has for many years maintained a consistent account in respect
    of a number of matters concerning his past in Belarus.   As  a  result,
    the Belarus authorities have had sufficient to go on, if they  were  in
    any way willing to facilitate the return of the applicant  to  Belarus.
    Having regard to the evidence of Mr Chenciner,  however,  it  is  plain
    that they are not.

110. Alternatively, even if the applicant is  continuing  to  rely  upon  an
    account that is, in fact, false and/or incomplete,  Mr  Karnik  submits
    the time has long passed when it can be  reasonably  assumed  that  the
    applicant might change his stance and give  the  respondent  completely
    true information,  which  might  enable  her  to  secure  the  relevant
    documentation from the Belarusian authorities.

111.  Mr  Karnik  also  relies  upon  the  following   passages   from   the
    respondent's detailed grounds of defence:-

         "11.     Without prejudice to the contention that the limbo  period
             to  date  was  lawfully  maintained  having  regard   to   his
             deliberate  non-cooperation  and  prospect  of  removal,   the
             [respondent] does not at the present time advance  a  positive
             case  that  there  is  at  present  a  realistic  prospect  of
             effecting  deportation  until  the  applicant's  identity  and
             background  have  been  resolved  so  as  to  be  capable   of
             confirmation by the Belarus authorities.  The [respondent]  is
             carrying on enquiries.

         ...

         25.      In relation to Ground 1, the  [respondent]  is  unable  to
             advance a positive case  to  show  that  removal  is  possible
             within a reasonable timescale."

112. In similar vein, in his skeleton argument, Mr Fortt says:-

         "6.      The respondent is not able at present to assert that there
             is any prospect of removing  the  applicant  in  a  reasonable
             timescale due to his entrenched position  of  not  cooperating
             with establishing his true  identity.   Given  the  very  long
             period  during  which  he  has  maintained  this  tactic,  the
             respondent is unable to conclude that he is likely  to  change
             his position in that respect."

113. For the reasons we have given earlier, we  do  not  consider  that,  in
    determining the Khadir issue, Article 8 proportionality has a  part  to
    play.  There is no suggestion in the House of Lords' opinions in Khadir
    that the immigration history of the  individual  in  question  has  any
    relevant bearing, in the sense that - the worse that history and/or the
    stronger the public interest in removal  -  the  higher  the  threshold
    becomes for concluding that the relevant legal limit has been  reached.



114. Furthermore, a person who contends that his or her removal  has  become
    impossible because of their own refusal to disclose their true identity
    to the Secretary of State faces the obvious problem that it lies within
    their power to change that state  of  affairs.   For  this  reason,  an
    argument of Khadir impossibility that is based upon such  a  stance  is
    highly unlikely to succeed.  It will  be  open  to  the  respondent  to
    respond that it is perfectly possible for the applicant to change their
    mind.

115. In some cases, we accept that such a response may not  carry  the  day.
    For example, the individual in question may have become so mentally ill
    as to be permanently incapable of recollecting who they  are.   In  the
    present case, however, the evidence does not disclose such a  state  of
    affairs. As we shall see, however, the applicant does have a number  of
    medical issues which, whilst not of such apparent severity as to render
    him incapable of  exercising  freewill  or  discerning  the  difference
    between truth and falsehood, or as to have irrevocably  have  destroyed
    his memory, nevertheless impact  upon  the  practical  ability  of  the
    respondent to remove the applicant to Belarus.

116. We do not accept that the applicant has been candid in the  past  about
    sufficient aspects of  his  personal  information,  as  to  enable  the
    respondent to effect his return, were the Belarusian authorities to  be
    cooperative in this regard.  We accept Mr Fortt's  submission  that  no
    proper basis has been shown for us to go behind the adverse findings of
    the two adjudicators  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Although
    certain of the documentation, including  the  interview  at  the  Dover
    Removal Centre, has only been adduced relatively recently in the course
    of the current proceedings, the relevant interview  records  relied  on
    were supplied to the applicant's previous advisers  or  were  otherwise
    available to them.

117. So far as concerns  the  submission  that  the  Belarusian  authorities
    would not re-admit the applicant, even if he told the truth, the  Court
    of Appeal at paragraph 43 of AM (Belarus) in 2014 specifically rejected
    this aspect of the applicant's case, on the basis that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge decided that question  against  the  applicant,  as  did
    Upper Tribunal Judge Southern.  Again, no satisfactory  case  has  been
    made for us to re-open this matter.

118. For these reasons, we  find  the  applicant  has  not  shown  that  the
    respondent cannot continue, in law, to exercise the power to  keep  the
    applicant on conditions of immigration bail, pursuant to Schedule 10 to
    the  2016  Act.   To  the  extent  that  ground  1  relies  on   Khadir
    impossibility, it accordingly fails.

119. That is, of course, not the end of ground 1 because we must now  embark
    upon the four-stage analysis set out by Haddon-Cave LJ in RA (Iraq).



(b) Stage 1

120. Stage 1 requires us to  distinguish  between  prospective  "limbo"  and
    actual "limbo".  That is straightforward.  The applicant has unarguably
    been in "actual" limbo for over  twenty  years,  whether  as  a  person
    subject to temporary admission or  immigration  bail.  The  period  far
    exceeds the fourteen years, which led the Strasbourg Court to  conclude
    that Ms Mendizabal should have her  status  regularised  on  Article  8
    grounds (see above).



(c) Stage 2

121. We turn to stage 2.  We apply the interpretation of it  which  we  have
    described above.  In essence, the test in paragraph  65  of  RA  (Iraq)
    comes down to whether the prospects  of  removal  are  "remote".   This
    compares with the  "simply  no  possibility"/  possibility  "altogether
    ruled out" language of the Court of Appeal in MS, when considering  the
    Khadir endpoint.

122. Here, the applicant is on stronger ground.  On the  facts  as  we  have
    set them out earlier in this  judgment,  the  position  that  has  been
    reached,  after  over  two  decades,  is  that  the  prospects  of  the
    applicant's removal to Belarus are, indeed, remote.  The fact that this
    is because the applicant has maintained an entrenched position will  be
    relevant when we come to stages 3 and 4 of the analysis.  Nevertheless,
    the passages from the respondent's detailed grounds of defence  and  Mr
    Fortt's skeleton argument, which we have set out above, constitute what
    we regard as a concession by the respondent in respect of stage 2.   In
    any event, we find the stage 2 question falls to  be  answered  in  the
    applicant's favour.  It is not impossible that the applicant may change
    his mind.  The possibility of him doing so, however, is remote.



(d) Stage 3

123. Stage 3 requires a fact-specific  analysis.   The  time  spent  by  the
    applicant in the United Kingdom and his status during  that  time  have
    already been addressed.  The applicant's immigration  history  is  also
    manifest from what we have said earlier.  The applicant has  no  family
    in the United Kingdom, but we  accept  he  has  some,  albeit  minimal,
    private life through friendships.  He is subject to a deportation order
    because he  has  committed  serious  criminal  offences,  including  an
    offence of violence.  The GCID notes identify that:-

         "Between 16 April 1999 and 11 September 2018  Mr  M...  acquired  7
         convictions for 11 offences.

         These offences include 2 x offence against the person, 1 x offences
         against the property, 1 x fraud and kindred offences, 1 x  offences
         relating  to  Police/Courts/Prisons,  1  x  drug   offence,   4   x
         "firearms/shotguns/offensive weapons and 1 miscellaneous".

    And

         "15/03/99 - Charged with ABH and false imprisonment.

         16/04/99 - Convicted of both charges and sentenced to 3 years and 6
         months. Court recommended for deportation".

      ...

         "Mr M... was arrested on 13 March 2005 for possession of a class  C
         drug and possession  of  an  offensive  weapon  for  which  he  was
         sentenced to 18 months conditional discharge.

         He was arrested again on 10 February 2008 for harassment and  found
         to be in  possession  of  a  forged  Lithuanian  passport.  He  was
         sentenced to 10 months imprisonment on 23 July 2008 for  possession
         of the passport".

    And in 2018 it was recorded:-

         "On 11 September 2018  at  Nottingham  Crown  Court,  Mr  M...  was
         convicted of 2x on 31 July 2018 at Nottingham had with you, without
         good reason or lawful authority, in a public place Roden Street  an
         article which had a blade or was sharply pointed, a Knife-  Stanley
         knife and  Kitchen  Knife  and  you  were  sentenced  to  26  weeks
         consecutive for which he was overall length of  sentence  42  weeks
         imprisonment".

124. We shall address later the issue of the applicant's criminal  offending
    and the deportation order.

125. The time the applicant has spent in the United Kingdom is  very  great,
    probably the longest spent by anyone in  immigration  "limbo"  in  this
    country.  The present prospects of  the  applicant  changing  his  mind
    about his  identity  are,  as  we  have  said,  remote.   Although  the
    respondent's difficulties in this  regard  stem  from  the  applicant's
    entrenched stance, we take into account the fact that  -  had  he  been
    proffered to give evidence - the applicant  would  have  fallen  to  be
    treated as a vulnerable witness,  owing  to  his  physical  and  mental
    health problems.

126.  We turn to the evidence of these problems. In  June  2020,  Dr  Felah,
    Consultant  Neurologist,  had  a  telephone   consultation   with   the
    applicant. Dr Felah noted that the applicant is "under the  psychiatric
    team for drugs misuse." The applicant is on Methadone,  Olanzapine  and
    Mirtazapine. As well as having hepatitis C and psoriasis, the applicant
    "had a CT head [scan] following an assault in 2018 and this  showed  no
    brain  abnormality.  There  was  a  left  frontal  bone  osteoma".  The
    applicant said that, following  the  head  injury,  he  started  having
    attacks suggestive of generalised seizures; and  that  these  had  been
    happening on almost a weekly basis. "He gets a flashback of the  person
    who hits him at the time and following back he  feels  dizzy.  He  does
    lose consciousness but wasn't told  for  sure  if  he  does  have  body
    jerking or not." The attacks did not seem to coincide with  taking  the
    recreational drugs or withdrawal from them. The applicant said  he  had
    been told by his parents that he had seizures during his childhood. The
    doctor recorded : "Family history is unremarkable".

127. Dr Felah prescribed Levetiracetam, since  this  does  not  cause  liver
    dysfunction. A blood test of the applicant in 2014 had been  "abnormal,
    likely related to the diagnosis of hepatitis. I do not have  access  to
    his recent blood test." Dr Felah  considered  that  the  "episodes  are
    strongly suggestive of epileptic seizures."

128. The professional opinion of Debra Goode of Nottinghamshire  Healthcare,
    writing in 2018, was that the applicant benefited  from  the  stability
    which life in prison offered him and that he took advantage of learning
    opportunities whilst incarcerated.  We also have regard to  Ms  Goode's
    view that, if the applicant were  given  legal  status,  "he  would  be
    motivated to work and make positive changes in his life  and  have  the
    potential to be a valuable asset to society".  By contrast, if his lack
    of status continued after  release,  Ms  Goode  considered  it  "highly
    likely that his physical and mental health will once more deteriorate".



129. We  have  been  careful  not  to  put  undue  emphasis  on  Ms  Goode's
    professional opinions. The applicant's criminal offending  is  serious.
    Since at least 2009, the GCID notes on the applicant contain references
    to  his  psychosis,  alcoholism  and  drug  addiction.   Against   this
    background, it is plainly unlikely that, if he were to be  given  leave
    to remain, the applicant would become a model member of society.  We do
    nevertheless place certain weight on Ms Goode's evidence,  which  shows
    that the applicant retains capacity for self-improvement.



(e) Stage 4

 130. We move to stage 4 (the balancing exercise). When considering  whether
      deportation is justified  as  an  interference  with  the  appellant's
      private life under Article 8(2) we are required by section 117A(2)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  to
      have regard to the considerations under sections 117B  and  117C  (the
      latter relating to foreign criminals). Section 117C of the  2002  Act,
      so far as relevant, provides:-

                   "(1) The deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the
public interest.
         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.
         ...
         (5) Exception 1 applies where -
             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life:
             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and
             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.


         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2".


131. The applicant has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  less
    than 4 years but at least 12 months. Although at first  sight,  section
    117C(6) would therefore not appear to have any application to him, that
    is not, in fact, the case for  the  reasons  given  by  Jackson  LJ  at
    paragraphs 24 to 27 of NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662. The position is,  therefore,  that  the
    applicant will  succeed  if  he  can  satisfy  Exception  1  (the  same
    requirements occurring in paragraph 399A of the Rules); or  if  he  can
    show there are very  compelling  circumstances,  in  terms  of  section
    117C(6).

132. The applicant cannot satisfy Exception 1.  He  has  not  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK and is not socially and  culturally  integrated  (on
    the facts we have found).   The public interest therefore will only  be
    outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in section 117C(4).

133.   So far as  concerns  the  weight  to  be  attributed  to  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control, despite what  is  said  in
    paragraph 71 of RA (Iraq) and notwithstanding we have given a  positive
    answer at stage 2, we do not consider that, in the  present  case,  the
    public interest can be said  to  have  been  extinguished.  It  is  the
    applicant's refusal to be candid about himself  that  has  led  to  him
    being still in the United Kingdom in 2020, having arrived here in 1998.
    During his  irregular  presence  in  this  country,  he  has  committed
    criminal offences of a serious nature.

134. We note, however, that, in paragraph 71 of RA (Iraq),  Haddon  Cave  LJ
    was careful to say that it  would  "normally"  be  the  case  that  the
    balance will tip in favour of  the  individual  only  when  the  public
    interest is extinguished. In the  present  case,  the  residual  public
    interest resulting from the applicant's  problematic  actions  and  his
    criminal offending has to be seen in the overall context of the  highly
    unusual circumstances of this case.

135.  An important element of the public interest  concerns  the  effect  on
    public  confidence  in  the  system  of  immigration  control,  if  the
    applicant's limbo were now to be ended by the grant of leave. As Haddon
    Cave LJ said at paragraph 70 of RA (Iraq), Parliament has decreed  that
    working and relying on benefits should be withheld from those  who  are
    in the United Kingdom illegally, in part as a disincentive to coming or
    remaining here illegally. The stark question in  the  present  case  is
    whether that principle of deterrence is likely to  be  damaged  by  the
    grant of leave to this applicant.

136.  It seems to us that a dispassionate member of the public,  considering
    the applicant's history, would not  conclude  that  the  applicant  has
    gained any real benefit from his presence in the  United  Kingdom  over
    the past two decades and more.  He has not forged any family life.   On
    the contrary, his life has been one  lived  at  the  outer  margins  of
    society.  He has been legally unable to work.  We accept  that  he  has
    had periods of street homelessness.  He has become  addicted  to  drugs
    and alcohol.  Although one does not, of course, know what kind of  life
    the  applicant  might  have  led,  had  he  remained  in   Belarus,   a
    hypothetical member of the British public would be likely  to  conclude
    that, if the applicant did come to the  United  Kingdom  for  a  better
    life, he has conspicuously failed in that aim. Accordingly, a grant  of
    leave to the applicant at this point is unlikely to encourage others to
    follow his example, thereby leading  to  a  general  weakening  of  the
    immigration system.

137. In striking the overall balance and deciding  whether  very  compelling
    circumstances exist, we are guided by paragraph 69 of RA (Iraq),  which
    speaks of an assessment of (i) whether the individual  remaining  in  a
    state of 'limbo' will have an impact on the individual's Article  8  or
    other Convention rights and, if so, the extent of that impact; and (ii)
    how far that impact is proportionate  when  balanced  with  the  public
    interest.

138. As we have  already  said,  the  respondent  effectively  concedes  the
    prospects of removing the applicant are remote. Despite the  fact  that
    this situation has been generated by the applicant, it would  be  wrong
    to ignore the reality of the matter, when assessing the proportionality
    balance to be struck in respect of Article 8.

139. Mr Karnik points to paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.   This
    sets out the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
    on the grounds of private life.  Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) requires  the
    applicant to have "lived continuously in the UK for at least  20  years
    (discounting any period of imprisonment)".

140. As held in Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability;  ties)  [2015]  UKUT
    00042 (IAC), in order to be able to fulfil Paragraph 276ADE, the person
    concerned  must  meet  the  suitability   requirements   of   Paragraph
    276ADE(1).  In effect, the application must not fall for refusal  under
    any of the grounds in Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to
    S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM.   We also  note  that  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules states:-


          "Deportation and removal





         "Where  the  Secretary  of  State  or  an  immigration  officer  is
         considering deportation or removal of  a  person  who  claims  that
         their deportation or removal from the UK would be a breach  of  the
         right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 of the
         Human Rights Convention that person may  be  required  to  make  an
         application under this Appendix or paragraph 276ADE(1), but if they
         are not required to make an application Part 13 of these Rules will
         apply" (our emphasis).

141. Although leave must be refused by reason of Part 13 of the  Immigration
    Rules and general unsuitability, we consider that Mr  Karnik  is  still
    entitled to point to the applicant's twenty years' continuous  life  in
    the United Kingdom as representing a  material Article 8  private  life
    factor.

142. In approving the Rules, Parliament has acknowledged that  a  period  of
    20 years spent in the United  Kingdom  is  an  important  yardstick  in
    determining the right to respect for a person's  private  life.  Whilst
    the  commission  of   criminal   offences   may,   depending   on   the
    circumstances, result in the refusal of leave on the basis of 20 years'
    presence, it is plain that imprisonment is not, per se, a disqualifying
    factor, since paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) speaks of having  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom continuously for at least  20  years  "(discounting  any
    period of imprisonment)".

143. We do not have details of the actual time spent  by  the  applicant  in
    prison but, assuming he served half of the sentences imposed on him, he
    would be still have accrued 20 years, or be very close to doing so.

144. Whilst we note that the applicant is not at  present  street  homeless,
    it must be asked  whether  the  public  interest  would  be  served  by
    perpetuating, in all likelihood indefinitely, his present unstable  and
    fragile existence, when there is, on the evidence, some (albeit modest)
    reason to think that, if given leave, the applicant would begin to turn
    his life around, building on the efforts he made whilst last in prison.
    We refer to the evidence of Ms Goode and the fact  that  the  applicant
    has been able to  secure  employment  (albeit  illegally).  Ms  Goode's
    conclusion  that  the  applicant  was  taking   steps   towards   self-
    improvement suggest that there is reason to think  that  the  appellant
    would continue in this vein, if given the  stability  of  a  period  of
    leave.

145. We factor into our assessment the medical condition of  the  applicant,
    particularly as detailed by the Consultant Neurologist, which  we  have
    mentioned earlier.  Although  there  was  no  brain  abnormality,   the
    Consultant did identify a left frontal osteoma  (bone-forming  tumour),
    following  a  head  injury  from  an  attack  in  2018,  epilepsy   and
    generalised seizures (not associated  with  recreational  drugs).   The
    applicant reported that he had had seizures from childhood.    We  also
    note that the  applicant  is  taking  Olanzapine,  which  is  an  anti-
    psychotic drug.

146. It is possible that, in saying what we have at paragraph 144 above,  we
    may be accused of taking an overly-optimistic view of  the  applicant's
    capacity for self-improvement. It may the case that, to use Mr Karnik's
    description of the applicant, his medical state means  he  is  at  this
    point a "broken man". The stark question nevertheless  remains  whether
    there is a sufficient public interest at this point to justify what  is
    likely now to be the continuation of limbo status for the remainder  of
    the applicant's life, since such would appear to be the  logic  of  the
    respondent's position, as articulated before us.

147. We take into account the considerations mentioned in  section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act. We are fully aware that the applicant has only ever  been
    in detention or had, at  best,  precarious  immigration  leave  through
    temporary admission which affords little weight to  his  private  life.
    He can speak English but is currently not financially independent.

148. The combination of the remoteness of removal; the fact that taking  the
    applicant out  of  limbo  in  2021  would  not  materially  damage  the
    principle of deterrence inherent in the statutory scheme; and regard to
    the overall rationale of paragraph 276ADE,  lead us to  conclude  that,
    whilst not extinguished, the public interest in  effective  immigration
    control is  weakened  to  the  point  where  it  is  capable  of  being
    outweighed by the very  compelling  circumstances  of  the  applicant's
    Article 8 case.  The public interest, albeit described  as  "high"  and
    "strong" in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662  and HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176,  is not a fixity and in this  case  is
    reduced in  strength.  We  are  aware  that  facts  can  be  usual  but
    exceptional but also unusual and at the same  time  unexceptional.   We
    consider the facts of the present case to be both  highly  unusual  and
    exceptional.

149. Balancing all relevant factors and reiterating that we are  mindful  of
    the applicant's criminality, we conclude that the applicant's  case  is
    exceptional, in  the  true  sense  of  the  word.  Anyone  reading  the
    applicant's history cannot reasonably  regard  our  conclusion  as  any
    "green light" for others to attempt to withhold  material  relevant  to
    the establishment of their true identity. The alternative  to  granting
    leave to the applicant would be to remove any prospect of effecting the
    positive changes in  his  life  described  by  Ms  Goode,  without  any
    commensurate benefit to the public interest.

150. Ground 1 accordingly succeeds. We propose to make a declaration to  the
    effect  that  continuing  to  refuse  to  grant  leave   would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with the applicant's Article 8 rights.




H. STATELESSNESS

151. The burden of proof lies on the applicant to show that he  is,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, stateless:  AS (Guinea v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 2234.

152. In Nhamo v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWHC  422,
    it was held that  a  country's  refusal  to  recognise  that  a  person
    claiming its nationality is  in  fact  one  of  its  nationals  is  not
    determinative of the question  of  whether  that  person  is,  thereby,
    stateless.  Amongst other things, the country in question "may not have
    the full range of evidence bearing on that question" (paragraph 35).

153. As Mr Fortt points out, in the present case, the  applicant  faces  the
    insurmountable obstacle that the refusal of the Belarus authorities  to
    recognise him as one of its citizens is due to his  persistent  failure
    to tell the truth as to his identity.  We adopt, in  that  regard,  the
    findings we have set out above.

154. We reject Mr Karnik's submission  that  the  mere  fact  the  applicant
    arrived in Belarus from the United Kingdom in June  2001  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker meant that - whatever he might have told them  about  his
    identity - they would not have accepted him.  As we have already  held,
    the applicant cannot re-open the finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  -
    upheld by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 43 of AM  (Belarus)  -  that
    the applicant would still have been refused entry, even if he had  told
    the truth to the authorities in Belarus.   In  any  event,  having  due
    regard to all the evidence,  including  that  from  Mr  Chenciner,  the
    applicant has failed to show on balance that the Belarusian authorities
    know who he is, but are nevertheless refusing to acknowledge him as one
    of its citizens; or that they had no intention of cooperating with  the
    United Kingdom government to so recognise the applicant,  even  if  the
    latter were to change his stance and provide the respondent with wholly
    true information about his identity.

155. Although we grant permission  in  respect  of  ground  2,  that  ground
    fails.

156. We shall hear counsel on the form of the order, if the same  cannot  be
    agreed. We also invite written submissions on whether, in the light  of
    our decision, the applicant should be the subject of  an  anonymisation
    order.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  applicant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.











                      Signed: Mr Justice Lane






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

