
SM (Paragraph 60(v): "passing" and "relevant") Pakistan [2007] UKAIT 00068

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Manchester
Date of Hearing: 25 May 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                         Immigration Judge De Haney
                           Immigration Judge McAll

                                   Between

                                     SM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Dr Choudhry, of International Immigration Advisory
                       Services
For the Respondent:          Mr O'Leary, Home Office Presenting Officer

The requirement in paragraph 60(v) that  a  student  has  taken  and  passed
relevant examinations does not preclude failures.  The question  is  whether
(whatever previous failures  there  may  have  been)  all  the  examinations
appropriate to the period of leave have been passed.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appealed to an Immigration  Judge
    against the decision of the respondent on 13 May 2006 refusing to  vary
    his leave in order to allow him to remain  for  further  studies.   The
    appellant appealed to an Immigration Judge,  who  allowed  his  appeal.
    The  Secretary  of   State   sought   and   obtained   an   order   for
    reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. The relevant Immigration Rules are  in  Part  3  of  the  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395.  The requirements  for  extension
    of stay as a student, in paragraph 60, include one that the applicant:

      "(v)  can show evidence of satisfactory progress  in  his  course  of
             study  including  the  taking  and  passing  of  any   relevant
             examinations."

 3. As the Immigration Judge found,  the  appellant  was  admitted  to  the
    United Kingdom as a student in December 2000.  He successfully  studied
    and completed courses between 2000 and 2004.  He applied  for  and  was
    granted further leave to remain as a student on 22 October  2001  until
    31 March 2002; on 4 May 2002 until 30 September  2002;  on  4  December
    2002 until 31 March 2003; on 12 May 2003 until 30 September 2003; on  9
    October 2003 until 31 December  2004;  and  on  30  December  until  28
    February 2006.  All those applications were made in time, although,  as
    is apparent from the dates  of  the  grant,  they  were  sometimes  not
    decided until an earlier period had expired.

 4. The appellant's last grant  of  leave  from  30  December  2004  to  20
    February 2006 was  in  order  to  allow  him  to  study  for  the  ACCA
    certificate part 2.  There were exams in June 2005 and  December  2005,
    which the appellant failed.  He did, however, study and complete a City
    and Guilds course in computerised accounts.  His application for  leave
    to remain was in order to enable him to re-sit the part 2  examinations
    and to study for the ACCA certificate part 3.  One of  the  grounds  of
    refusal was that the appellant had not produced  satisfactory  evidence
    that he  had  made  satisfactory  progress  in  his  course  of  study,
    including the taking and passing of any relevant examinations.

 5. The evidence before the Immigration Judge was that between February and
    June 2005 the appellant  had  various  illnesses,  which  affected  his
    studies and prevented him passing the June 2005 examinations.  Further,
    the appellant's father fell ill  on  29  October  2005;  the  appellant
    immediately went to Pakistan to be with him,  suffered  mental  anguish
    and stress and so was not prepared for  the  exams  in  December  2005.
    Following the date of the decision, the appellant had failed  a  re-sit
    in June 2006, a failure which he attributed to the stress caused by the
    present appeal.  The Immigration Judge accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's illnesses and of his visit to Pakistan.  He said that  "the
    appellant has proved that there were good and  compelling  reasons  for
    not successfully completing the examinations for the part 2 ACCA course
    set for June 2005", and "the appellant has proved good reasons for  his
    failure to successfully complete the examinations  in  December  2005".
    He reached no conclusion on the reasons  for  the  appellant's  further
    failure in June 2006.  He wrote as follows:

       "23.   In  my  judgment  the  appellant   has   faced   considerable
             difficulties during 2005.  It is hard enough to undertake  full
             time study in normal circumstances, but here  there  have  been
             serious and compelling intervening  circumstances  which  could
             have been considered.  The appellant  has  a  good  history  of
             academic success prior to 2005 and again this could  have  been
             considered.  The appellant has faced further  setback  in  June
             2006 where he failed to pass his examinations.   The  appellant
             complains of the stress he has faced due to the appeal process.




      24.   Considering the appellant's position, as I must, on the day  of
             hearing in October 2006, I find that the appellant  would  have
             made adequate progress, but for  intervening  personal  illness
             and other events.  The evidence  of  illness  could  have  been
             considered (if available) when considering the wider  issue  of
             satisfactory   progress.    The   appellant's   past   academic
             achievement could also have been balanced.  The issue here  is:
             has the appellant made satisfactory progress, not has he merely
             passed or failed  examinations.   The  passing  or  failing  of
             examinations is one indicator of progress and is to be balanced
             with all the other  material  that  can  indicate  whether  the
             appellant has made satisfactory progress.  In my  judgment  the
             appellant can  successfully  argue  he  has  made  satisfactory
             progress and will ultimately pass the ACCA course.  It  is  the
             appellant's intention, upon completing the course, to return to
             Pakistan.  In my judgment the appellant should  be  given  that
             opportunity.


      25.   For all of the above reasons I allow the appeal."

 6. The grounds for review assert that  the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to
    apply paragraph 60(v) correctly: reference  is  made  to  SW  &  Others
    [2006] UKAIT 00054.  The grounds also assert that the Immigration Judge
    appears to have allowed himself a discretion in considering the  effect
    of the illness of the appellant, when there is no  such  discretion  in
    the relevant Immigration Rules.

 7. We heard submissions from Mr O'Leary based on the grounds, and from  Dr
    Choudhry who acknowledged that he had a difficult task.

 8. We ought to say something generally about the Tribunal's decision in SW
    & Others.   The  relevant  paragraphs  of  that  determination  are  as
    follows:


        "7.       The  phraseology  of  the  rule  is  slightly   peculiar.
             Whatever may be its precise effect in the course of an  appeal,
             on its face it does not require the appellant to establish that
             she has made satisfactory progress by  producing  evidence:  it
             requires her to  produce  evidence  of  certain  matters.   The
             evidence is  required  to  be  of  'satisfactory  progress  ...
             including the taking and passing of any relevant examinations'.
              It does not appear to us that it  is  possible  to  read  that
             phrase  as  meaning  that  evidence  of  passing  any  relevant
             examinations is an optional extra.  The clear  meaning  of  the
             words is that whatever other evidence  is  also  provided,  the
             applicant is required to show  that  she  has  both  taken  and
             passed any 'relevant examinations'.


        8. Of course it is right, as Mr Goldborough  pointed  out  that  if
             there are no 'relevant examinations', an applicant will not  be
             able to show that she has taken and passed them: that,  in  our
             view, is the value of the word 'any'.  The rule is  constructed
             in such a way that satisfactory progress may be  shown  without
             examinations if there have been no examinations; but, if  there
             have been examinations, satisfactory progress has to  be  shown
             by evidence including evidence that the examinations have  been
             taken and passed.


        9. It is also true that on its face this rule  makes  no  allowance
             for a person who may, within the  regulations  of  his  or  her
             course, have an opportunity to re-sit an examination  or  paper
             which  has  not  been  passed  at  the  first  attempt.    That
             consideration,  however,  does  not  cause  us  to  modify  our
             interpretation  of  this  paragraph  of  the   rules,   because
             paragraphs 69A - 69 F make  specific  provision  for  leave  to
             enter or remain in order to re-sit an examination."


    We see no reason to resile from what the Tribunal said  there;  but  we
    should not wish the Tribunal to be understood to say that failure in an
    examination is always fatal to an application for further  leave  under
    the Rules.  The question is not whether examinations have been  failed:
    it is whether they have been passed.  If a failure  in  an  examination
    prevented  any  further  grant  of  leave,  the  re-sit  provisions  in
    paragraphs 69A-69F would be of somewhat limited utility.  A student who
    passed a re-sit would want to remain  to  continue  his  course,  which
    would be impossible if his previous failure prevented him from  meeting
    the requirements of the Rules.

 9. It seems to us that what is required is that the examinations  are  not
    merely relevant to the course of study but also relevant to the  period
    of leave have been taken and passed.  The student who has leave for the
    first year of a course, and during that year passes the first year exam
    (even if on a re-sit, having failed them  the  first  time)  should  be
    regarded as having taken and passed relevant exams.  But a person  who,
    for example, is granted two (academic) years' leave in order  to  study
    the first two years of the course,  who  fails  examinations  in  June,
    fails a re-sit in September and then  passes  a  re-sit  the  following
    June, so that at the end of two years he  has  only  passed  the  exams
    appropriate to the first year, is unlikely to be able to show  that  he
    has taken and passed "any relevant examinations", because in two  years
    of leave as a student he has only passed the examinations  relevant  to
    one year.  If the position at the end of the  two  years  is,  however,
    that he has passed all the examinations relevant to the two  years,  it
    seems to us that he is likely to show that he can meet the requirements
    of paragraph 60(v), despite any failures.

10. In the present case it is clear to us that the Immigration Judge  erred
    in treating the passing of examinations as not  required  by  paragraph
    60(v).  The appellant before him did not meet the requirements of  that
    paragraph and his appeal could not be  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

11. We note that the Immigration Judge did not regard the appellant on  the
    facts as having made satisfactory progress: he said that the  appellant
    "would have made adequate progress", but for the  difficulties  he  had
    suffered.  In those circumstances it is very surprising that he treated
    the appellant as meeting the requirements of paragraph 60(v),  even  if
    he had been right in treating the passing of examinations as  optional.
    We say no more about that.

12. We agree with the Secretary of State that the wording  of  the  student
    rules does not import any discretion  on  this  issue.   If  there  are
    exams, the relevant ones must have been taken and passed.  If they have
    not been taken and passed, the applicant cannot meet  the  requirements
    of paragraph 60(v).  If, as the Immigration Judge found in the  present
    case, there is a good or sufficient explanation for the fact  that  the
    examinations have not been taken or passed, that is a matter  that  the
    Secretary of State is entitled to and perhaps should  consider  outside
    the Rules.  But if he declines to depart from the Rules, the  appellant
    cannot succeed in an  appeal  on  the  ground  that  his  case  was  so
    deserving that the Secretary of State should  have  departed  from  the
    Rules,  because  of  the  provisions  of  s86(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

13. The Immigration Judge was wrong to arrogate a discretion to himself  in
    this appeal.  Part 3 of the Immigration Rules  appears  to  contain  no
    discretions to make a decision in favour of an applicant who  does  not
    meet the requirements of the Rules.  In particular, paragraph 62 is  as
    follows:

        "62.     An extension of stay as a student is to be refused if  the
             Secretary  of  State  is  not  satisfied  that  each   of   the
             requirements of paragraph 60 is met."

    If a discretion was to be exercised, it would  have  been  outside  the
    Rules, and, as we have said, could not be the subject of an Immigration
    Judge's review.

14. At the hearing before us Dr Choudhry told us  that  the  appellant  has
    now, without (as we understand it) any authorisation from the Secretary
    of State, begun another  course.   He  has  abandoned  his  attempt  to
    qualify as an accountant.   We  are  entirely  unpersuaded  that  those
    subsequent facts, if we were to take them into  account  under  s85(4),
    would demonstrate that the appeal should be allowed.

15. For the reasons we have given, we consider that the  Immigration  Judge
    materially erred in law.  We substitute a determination dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
