
AN & SS (Tamils - Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00063


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

Heard at :  Field House
On :        11th - 13th February 2008


Before :
                      Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
                       Senior Immigration Judge McKee
                           Mr A.P. Richardson, JP

Between :
                                   AN & SS
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation :

For the appellants :   Mr Alasdair Mackenzie, instructed by Birnberg Peirce
                 & Partners, for 'AN' ; Mr Peter Morris, likewise instructed
                 by Birnberg Peirce & Partners, for 'SS'

For the respondent :   Miss Jenni Richards, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor


Since the breakdown of the ceasefire, heightened  security  in  the  capital
has restricted the operations there of the LTTE, who are focusing on  'high-
profile' targets.  The background evidence does  not  show  that  Tamils  in
Colombo who have stopped supporting  the  Tigers,  or  who  support  parties
opposed to them,  are  at  real  risk  of  reprisals,  absent  some  feature
bringing them to prominence.  The conclusion to that effect in  PS  (LTTE  -
internal flight - sufficiency of protection) Sri Lanka CG [2004] UKIAT  297,
which this determination updates and supersedes, is thus affirmed.

There is no good evidence that the LTTE maintain a computerized database  of
their opponents, such that new arrivals in Colombo can  be  checked  against
it.  Checks are, on the other  hand,  run  on  a  computerized  database  by
immigration officers when passengers arrive  at  Bandaranaike  International
Airport, or by members of the security forces when people are detained,  but
there is no good evidence to show that everyone who has  in  the  past  been
detained and questioned about possible involvement with the LTTE is on  that
database.  On the contrary, it is likely to contain the names only of  those
who are of serious interest to the authorities.

The twelve 'risk factors' listed in LP (LTTE  area  -  Tamils  -  Colombo  -
risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT  76  can  usefully  be  divided  into  risk
factors per se, one or more of which are likely to make a person of  adverse
interest to the authorities, and 'background factors', which neither  singly
nor in  combination  are  likely  to  create  a  real  risk,  but  which  in
conjunction with risk factors per se will intensify the risk.

A failed asylum seeker who hails from the north or east  of  Sri  Lanka  and
who has no relatives or friends to turn to  in  Colombo  will  generally  be
able to relocate  there  in  safety  and  without  undue  harshness.   Those
arriving without their National Identity  Card  should  be  able  to  get  a
replacement without too much difficulty, while the great majority  of  those
detained at checkpoints and in  cordon-and-search  operations  are  released
within a short time.   A generous support  package  is  available  for  five
years from the International Organisation for Migration to those who  return
voluntarily.  Those who refuse to do so cannot pray in aid the  prospect  of
being destitute in Colombo.

PR (medical facilities) Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT  4269  is,  owing  to  its
antiquity, no longer to be treated as country guidance on  the  availability
of medical treatment for returnees.  The guidance in  PS  and  LP,  however,
has been considered and approved by the European Court of  Human  Rights  in
NA v United Kingdom, handed down on 17th July 2008.


                                DETERMINATION


1.  This is the reconsideration of two appeals by Sri Lankan asylum  seekers
of Tamil ethnicity, which have been linked before us because they raise  the
issue of whether returning asylum seekers are at risk in  Colombo  from  the
Liberation  Tigers  of  Tamil  Eelam  ('LTTE'),  either  because   of   past
opposition (or perceived opposition) to them, or because  of  desertion  (or
perceived desertion) from their ranks.  They also raise  the  issue,  albeit
to a lesser extent, of whether returned Tamil asylum seekers are at risk  in
Colombo from the authorities there.  The two appellants  in  this  case  are
both said to have worked for the LTTE and then gone over to the other  side.
 The appellants' names have been anonymized in the usual  way,  and  neither
of them gave evidence before us, the reconsideration being conducted by  way
of  oral  evidence  from  two  expert  witnesses,  and  oral   and   written
submissions from the three representatives.  The appeal  of  AN  is  against
the respondent's decision on 25th June 2005 to  remove  her  as  an  illegal
entrant, and was dismissed by  an  immigration  judge,  Mrs  I.  Montgomery,
after a hearing at Hatton Cross on 18th August 2005.  The appeal  of  SS  is
against the refusal on 8th February  2005  of  leave  to  enter  the  United
Kingdom, and was dismissed by an immigration judge,  Mr  David  Ross,  in  a
determination signed on 20th June 2005.  It will be convenient  to  set  out
first a brief history of each claim.

AN's claim
2.  Miss AN hails from the Jaffna region in the north  of  Sri  Lanka.   Her
story is that in 1995 she worked for a few months as a  librarian  with  the
Tamil Rehabilitation Organisation ('TRO'), an outfit which did  relief  work
for Tamils but was a 'front' for the LTTE.  The  library  closed,  but  some
three years after she stopped working for the TRO, Miss AN was  detained  by
the security forces  and  for  three  weeks  endured  brutal  interrogation,
torture and indeed rape in order to make  her  give  information  about  the
LTTE.  In August 1998 she was  released  through  the  intervention  of  the
EPDP, a pro-government Tamil organisation which had been asked to  intercede
by AN's father.  They now prevailed upon AN to work for them,  and  she  was
indeed employed by the  EPDP  as  a  development  officer  from  1998  until
December 2004, when the LTTE approached her parents  and  demanded  that  AN
report to them.

3.  AN had in the meantime been living in Jaffna with another  EPDP  worker,
whom we may call 'K'.  He was on an assignment in Batticaloa when,  for  her
own safety, AN was advised by the EPDP to move to their  camp  at  Vavuniya,
and it was there that she heard, in January  2005,  that  her  paramour  had
been killed by the Tigers in Batticaloa.  AN  suffered  a  miscarriage,  and
then in May 2005 the EPDP camp at Vavuniya was itself attacked by the  LTTE,
and the appellant was advised to seek safety abroad.  The  EPDP  offered  to
arrange this, if AN could come up with the money.  This was  in  due  course
provided by an uncle in Canada, and an agent took AN from the EPDP  camp  at
Mankulam (whither she had now moved) to Bandaranaike International  Airport.
 A false passport had been prepared for her, and the agent  accompanied  the
appellant to this country, where she passed through immigration control  and
claimed asylum some three days later, on 13th June 2005.

4.  Immigration Judge Montgomery found AN's story wholly credible, and  this
finding  has  not  been  challenged  by   the   respondent.    What   caused
reconsideration to be ordered was  the  inconsistency  between  the  judge's
conclusion that the appellant would not be of interest to the  Tamil  Tigers
so long after going over to  the  EPDP  in  1998,  and  AN's  own  evidence,
accepted by the judge, that in May 2005 her father was questioned as to  her
whereabouts,  and  that  her  family  in  Jaffna  were  being   kept   under
surveillance by the LTTE.  The  question  for  us  is  whether  -  it  being
accepted that she has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  by  non-state
actors in her home area - the appellant will be at  risk  from  the  Tigers,
and indeed from the  security  forces,  in  Colombo,  and  whether  she  can
reasonably be expected to relocate there.

SS's claim
5.  Mr SS hails from the Batticaloa region in the east of  Sri  Lanka.   His
story is that in 1988 he was detained for three days by the Sri Lankan  Army
and tortured.  He was not a member of the LTTE at  that  time,  but  he  did
join them in  1990,  and  until  1998  was  engaged  in  armed  combat  with
government forces, taking part in many battles.  In 1998 the  appellant  got
married,  and  thereafter  his  role  changed  to  that  of  driver  for  an
assassination  squad.   The  squad  successfully  eliminated  one  local  MP
(although they failed in their attempt upon another) as well as a  prominent
businessman who had links with  the  army,  and  several  other  people  who
belonged to organisations opposed to the Tigers.   When  the  ceasefire  was
called in 2002 the appellant's  driving  duties  became  more  mundane,  but
things 'hotted up' for him in March 2004, when the commander of the LTTE  in
the eastern part of the island, Colonel Karuna, rebelled  against  the  LTTE
leadership.  SS, who had been decorated by Colonel Karuna and  stayed  loyal
to him, was forced to flee when the northern LTTE launched  an  attack,  and
was persuaded to give himself up the following  month.   Between  April  and
December 2004 he was detained and tortured by the LTTE to make him  disclose
information about the Karuna group, and he was only  able  to  escape  after
the tsunami struck.  He sought asylum here when he arrived on  28th  January
2005.

6.  Immigration Judge Ross accepted that the appellant had  been  an  active
combatant in the LTTE and had taken  part  in  the  assassination  of  their
opponents, but  did  not  accept  the  authenticity  of  letters  which  had
purportedly been sent to SS's mother and wife  in  January  2005,  demanding
that he report to the LTTE, or of a 'wanted' poster  purportedly  issued  by
the LTTE.  What caused a review of his determination to be ordered  was  the
judge's failure to say whether he believed SS to  have  been  imprisoned  by
the LTTE and to have subsequently escaped.  All he said was that, whilst  SS
might well be associated with the Karuna faction, he was  not  a  high-level
associate of the Colonel, and so would not be a likely target  of  the  LTTE
if he were to settle in a government-controlled area.

7.  The  risk  to  SS  in  Colombo  was,  of  course,  to  be  part  of  our
reconsideration, but after the first day's hearing  Miss  Richards  told  us
that the respondent was no longer contending that SS could  live  safely  in
Colombo.  Within a few  months  of  coming  to  this  country  he  had  been
diagnosed with a serious mental  illness,  and  the  latest  medical  report
(from Dr  Catherine  King,  MRCPsych)  revealed  such  an  acute  degree  of
psychosis that his behaviour on return was likely to get  him  into  serious
difficulties.  It was accepted therefore that he was at real  risk  of  ill-
treatment on return, crossing the threshold of Article 3.  It  is,  however,
the respondent's contention that SS is excluded from the Refugee  Convention
(and by analogy from humanitarian protection) by  virtue  of  Article  1F(a)
and (c), in that his participation in the murder  of  civilians  amounts  to
war crimes and crimes against humanity, making him guilty of  acts  contrary
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

AN's current circumstances
8.  As was to be expected, we  had  before  us  a  very  large  quantity  of
documentary material on the general situation in Sri Lanka  as  well  as  on
the two appellants themselves.  We shall  look  first  at  the  medical  and
other documents relating to Miss AN's current circumstances.  A  psychiatric
report  was  initially  prepared  for  her  on  3rd  August   2005   by   Dr
Kanagaratnam, a  consultant  psychiatrist  who  originally  qualified  as  a
doctor at the University of Ceylon in Colombo,  and  whose  report  stresses
the shortcomings of psychiatric treatment in Sri  Lanka  compared  to  here.
After  a  three-hour  consultation  on  16th  July  2005,  Dr   Kanagaratnam
diagnosed   post-traumatic   stress   disorder   and   depressive   illness,
recommending both psychotherapy and antidepressant  medication.   Return  to
Sri Lanka would, he predicted, exacerbate both her PTSD and her  depression,
giving rise to a risk of suicide.

9.  The appellant did not, however, make any mention to Dr  Kanagaratnam  of
the friendship which she had formed with a Sri Lankan man whom she met  very
soon  after  being  released  from  her  initial  fortnight's  detention  at
Oakington in June 2005, and by whom she became pregnant shortly  thereafter.
 In March 2006 she gave birth to a son, and on 19th January 2008 she told  a
consultant psychiatrist, Dr Charlotte Harrison, that she was now  living  in
a rented room, and would see the father of her child every  two  weeks.   He
was, she said, more loving towards her than she was  towards  him,  although
she also described him as "an  inspiration"  and  even  as  her  reason  for
living.  Dr Harrison records without comment  Miss  AN's  estimate  that  it
took her about six months after meeting this  man  before  she  could  bring
herself to have sexual relations with him, but that does not seem to  accord
with the amount of time available before giving birth.

10.  In her report, prepared after an  interview  lasting  one  and  a  half
hours, Dr Harrison goes on to say that Miss AN received  weekly  counselling
for four or five months during  2007,  although  this  had  now  temporarily
stopped.   She  was  getting  telephone  calls  about  once  a  month   from
neighbours of  her  family,  rather  than  directly  from  her  parents  and
siblings.  The latter were still living  in  their  home  village  but  were
unwilling to contact her directly, lest they get into trouble with the  LTTE
or the Army.  They did, however, pass on news to the appellant  through  the
neighbours.  In Dr Harrison's opinion, the depressive illness  diagnosed  by
Dr Kanagaratnam had  improved  "due  to  the  biological  and  psychological
treatment she has received as well following the development of her  current
relationship and the birth of her child."  But although AN did  not  exhibit
"a current major depressive episode", and was not "at  significant  risk  of
completing  suicide  due  to  her  appropriate  feelings  of  responsibility
towards her son", she  was  still  suffering  from  PTSD,  and  Dr  Harrison
considered that return to Sri Lanka would exacerbate this condition as  well
as leading to a recurrence of her depressive  disorder  "due  to  her  fixed
beliefs that return would inevitably lead to further torture or death."   In
the psychiatrist's opinion, the deterioration in  her  mental  health  would
also lead to her  "being  unable  to  explain  herself  to  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities if she were questioned by them."

Dr Smith's report
11.  The mass of documentary material going to  general  country  conditions
in Sri Lanka is listed in the Appendix  to  this  determination.   We  shall
refer to individual items at the points where  they  are  mentioned  in  the
representatives' submissions.  First, however, we shall set out the gist  of
the reports and oral evidence of the two experts, upon which the  appellants
principally rely.  The report by Dr Chris Smith,  a  research  associate  at
Chatham House and formerly the Deputy Director of the  International  Policy
Institute at King's College, London, is dated 30th January 2008 and runs  to
some 49 pages.  Perhaps the most important point made by Dr Smith  is  that,
according to confidential information given to him by a  former  officer  in
the Sri Lankan intelligence service, "[t]he LTTE is known to  have  its  own
electronic database."  He is  not  referring  just  to  the  finding  of  J.
Goodhand and his associates (in a report  mimeographed  by  SOAS  in  August
2005) that the LTTE maintains computer databases of  potential  contributors
to the organisation's funds, both in the homeland and in the Tamil  diaspora
overseas.  Rather, he thinks that anyone of adverse interest to the  LTTE  -
which includes the appellant, as shown by the Tigers'  insistence  that  she
report to them - is likely to be included in the  database.   Being  on  the
database because of her past involvement with the EPDP, Miss AN  is  likely,
in Dr Smith's opinion, to come to the  adverse  attention  of  the  LTTE  in
Colombo.

12.  Dr Smith acknowledges that there has been a significant decline in  the
LTTE's operations and activities in Colombo since the end of  the  ceasefire
and the consequent tightening of security, but he describes the LTTE  as  "a
far from emasculated force in Colombo."  Although there is  "little  current
evidence of LTTE operations against the EPDP in Colombo",  Dr  Smith  thinks
that such operations may be taking place but are simply getting reported  as
'Tamil-on-Tamil' violence.  Besides, the EPDP members are comparatively  few
in number, and of them many have sought safety outside Sri Lanka,  while  in
Colombo itself they have protection in army camps, police stations  and  the
highly-fortified EPDP headquarters.

13.  Apart from the LTTE getting to know that a former employee of the  EPDP
is in  Colombo,  would  the  appellant  be  at  risk  from  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities there?  Dr Smith thinks she would be.  Having been  detained  by
the authorities in 1998, she would be  of  adverse  interest  to  them  now,
particularly returning from London, one of the centres of LTTE  fundraising.
 How would they know about her detention in 1998?  They would  find  out  by
checking  her  details  against  their  "central  database",   which   holds
information about "all those who have been detained and have left  detention
as unacquitted suspects", and the  police  would  run  this  check  because,
having no valid reason for being in Colombo and having no ID card,  Miss  AN
would naturally arouse their suspicion.  So important is it to  have  an  ID
card that the UNHCR is issuing "unofficial,  makeshift"  ID  cards  to  help
people who do not have official ones.  Miss AN would not  be  able  to  pass
through the many check-points in Colombo without a valid  ID  card,  and  in
order to get one, she would have to go back to Jaffna.  But  Miss  AN  would
face a more immediate crisis as soon as she arrived in Colombo.  Without  an
ID card she would be  unable  to  obtain  legal  employment,  and  might  be
reduced to begging or prostitution.

14.  There would be difficulty too in finding accommodation.   The  'lodges'
in which Tamils stay if they have no relatives or friends  to  put  them  up
have been regularly harassed by the authorities, and  on  31st  May  2007  a
mass clear-out was ordered.  Apart from  being  encouraged  to  go  back  to
their native areas in the north and east of the island, many of  the  guests
in the lodges have ended up in detention at the  infamous  Boosa  Camp  near
Galle.  Dr  Smith  also  draws  attention  to  the  difficulties  which  the
appellant would face as a single woman, indeed an unmarried mother,  on  top
of the stigma of mental illness, although in terms of treating that  illness
he notes that pharmaceuticals are subsidized by the government  and  are  in
any event relatively cheap, being imported from India.

15.  As examples of the risk facing Miss AN, Dr Smith cites the fate of  two
failed asylum seekers expelled from Britain, one of whom  committed  suicide
at Colombo airport on 10th September 2006, while  the  other  was  allegedly
killed by agents  of  the  state  on  20th  August  2006.   The  Immigration
Minister, Liam Byrne, had been forced to answer a Parliamentary Question  on
this.  The International Organisation for Migration  ('IOM')  had  told  the
Hotham Mission (sent from Australia on a  field  trip  to  Sri  Lanka)  that
returnees not assisted by the IOM as participants in the Voluntary  Assisted
Return Programme ('VARP') had been arrested and harassed on  or  soon  after
their arrival, particularly when they no longer  held  a  National  Identity
Card.  Taking account also of the scarring on her arms and  legs,  Dr  Smith
was sure that AN too  would  be  detained  immediately  or  soon  after  her
arrival, and would be vulnerable to abuse and torture.

Dr Smith's oral evidence
16.  At the hearing before us on 11th February 2008, Dr  Smith  adopted  his
report and was questioned in-chief about his prediction that AN's record  of
detention in 1998 as an LTTE suspect would be on  a  database  consulted  by
the Sri Lankan authorities.  That there was such a  database  seemed  to  be
contradicted by a letter from the British High Commission in  Colombo  dated
25th January 2008, conveying information  accrued  by  our  Airline  Liaison
Officer  ('ALO'),  who  spends  several  days   a   week   at   Bandaranaike
International Airport and works closely with the CID  there.   The  ALO  had
never seen any CID  officers  use  a  computer,  indeed  no  computers  were
installed at the CID's airport offices.  This information tallied with  what
the High Commission's Risk Assessment Officer had seen when he  visited  the
CID Headquarters  in  Colombo.   Typewriters  were  on  the  desks,  but  no
computers.

17.  In response to this,  Dr  Smith  said  that  arrivals  at  Bandaranaike
International Airport are now entirely computerized, and he had  heard  that
a 'wanted' list was attached to  the  computer,  which  enables  immigration
officers to alert the CID to passengers who are on that list.   As  for  the
CID having no  computers  themselves,  Dr  Smith  was  sure  that,  when  he
interviewed a CID operative called Prasad Fernando a couple  of  years  ago,
there was a computer in his office - but he could not swear to it.

18.  Another passage in the BHC letter was now cited, in which the  issuance
of a National Identity Card is said to be based mainly on the production  of
a birth certificate, while forged or improperly  issued  birth  certificates
are said to be obtainable for as little as US  $5-$20.   Dr  Smith  did  not
agree that it would be easy for the appellant to get a replacement  for  the
ID card which she had left behind.  She might be able to get  a  replacement
in Colombo if she produced her passport and a photocopy of her old ID  card,
or at least the relevant details from it.  Otherwise, she would have  to  go
back to Jaffna and get her village headman ('grama seveka') to certify  that
she was who she said she was.  If she could  not  obtain  an  ID  card,  she
would  have  serious  problems.   That  was  why  the  UNHCR  were   issuing
unofficial ID cards.  But having one of those would,  in  Dr  Smith's  view,
simply draw attention to the fact that you did not  have  an  official  one,
and invite questions as to why you did not have an official one.

19.  Dr Smith was now asked  whether,  having  been  merely  a  'development
officer' for the EPDP, without a specifically military  or  political  role,
the appellant would really be of adverse interest to the  LTTE  in  Colombo.
Just working for the EPDP would be enough, in Dr  Smith's  view,  given  the
antipathy shown by the LTTE to any Tamil groups  who  opposed  them.   Would
the appellant's work for the  EPDP  not,  on  the  other  hand,  reduce  any
adverse interest from the government side which her  earlier  work  for  the
Tigers might have excited?  Dr Smith did not think that the  EPDP,  a  group
numbering hundreds rather than thousands which was not  well  structured  or
organized, would have told the authorities that the  appellant  was  working
for them.  Her name would therefore  still  be  on  the  database  of  those
detained as LTTE suspects.

20.  Having completed his  examination-in-chief,  Mr  Mackenzie  now  handed
over to Miss Richards, who returned to the  question  of  computers  at  the
airport and whether the CID there had any.  Was it not likely that the  ALO,
who was at the airport most days of the week, would know  if  the  CID  were
using them?  Dr Smith insisted that, according to interviews  which  he  had
had with the head of immigration  and  with  a  former  chief  inspector  of
police, a computerized database was available to the  CID  at  the  airport.
As for what was on the  database,  this  would  be  records  of  individuals
suspected of LTTE involvement, going back ten or even fifteen years.

21.  Miss Richards turned now to LTTE activity in Colombo in  recent  years,
which she suggested had focused on high-profile targets.   That,  agreed  Dr
Smith, was the impression conveyed by the English-language press,  but  much
lower-level Tamil-on-Tamil violence did not get reported,  and  the  Tigers,
although "deeper underground" because of tight  government  security,  still
knew exactly what was going on.  For example, a lodge-keeper in  the  Pettah
district of Colombo had told Dr Smith that while he  had  to  keep  a  guest
list, which would be checked by the army, the Tigers had no need to  consult
the list to find out who was staying at the lodge.   Their  intelligence  at
street level was so good that they knew who was staying there.

22.  Miss Richards was even less happy with the notion that Miss AN  was  on
an LTTE database,  than  with  the  notion  that  the  appellant  was  on  a
government database.  Who was the  "former  intelligence  officer"  who  had
told Dr Smith about the LTTE  database?   Dr  Smith  would  not  reveal  the
source of this information, which  was  given  to  him  in  confidence,  but
observed how easy it was nowadays to build up an  electronic  database,  how
Jonathan Goodhand's study had shown that there already  was  a  database  of
LTTE supporters for fundraising purposes, and how it would  make  sense  for
the LTTE to build up a parallel database of opponents.  Dr  Smith  conceded,
however, that  he  had  no  empirical  evidence  that  the  latter  database
existed, save what he had been told by his anonymous informant.

23.  Turning to Miss AN's mental  health  problems,  Miss  Richards  queried
whether these would carry such  a  stigma  nowadays,  given  the  background
evidence that, in the wake  of  the  tsunami,  very  large  numbers  of  Sri
Lankans were suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder  and  depression.
Dr Smith felt that mental illness  was  still  something  which  Sri  Lankan
society was unwilling to come to terms with, but acknowledged that,  of  the
limited facilities available for its treatment, the bulk  were  in  Colombo.
As for assistance with day-to-day living, Dr Smith  thought  that  the  NGOs
which had come to the rescue after the tsunami  were  reaching  the  end  of
their funding cycle, but accepted that  the  IOM  was  providing  very  good
support for voluntary returnees, and was  at  least  assisting  with  onward
travel those returned against their will to Colombo.

24.  Miss Richards proceeded to  criticize  aspects  of  Dr  Smith's  report
concerning general conditions in  Colombo,  such  as  his  highlighting  the
expulsion of large numbers of Tamils from the lodges after  an  LTTE  attack
in Colombo, but his failing to mention that the Supreme Court had ruled  the
expulsion unlawful and that the Prime Minister  had  apologized.   Dr  Smith
explained that he was just trying to outline the process whereby  Tamils  in
Colombo were  being  put  under  pressure.   He  was  unwilling  to  believe
government statistics that most of those  detained  after  cordon-and-search
operations were released.  Many languished in Boosa Camp,  where  they  were
mistreated.  Miss Richards picked up  a  further  reference  in  Dr  Smith's
report to two failed asylum seekers who died after being returned  from  the
UK, one committing suicide at Colombo airport in September 2006,  the  other
being shot by the security forces in August  2006.   Dr  Smith  acknowledged
that this was misleading.  Both asylum seekers had  in  fact  been  returned
from the United Kingdom several years before their  deaths  in  2006.   This
had come to Dr Smith's attention when he gave evidence to  the  Tribunal  in
the 'country guidance' case of LP [2007] UKAIT 76, but he had  forgotten  to
amend his report template in the light of it.

25.  Dr Smith was now taken to the last  paragraph  of  his  report  on  AN,
where he said that, London being a major location for LTTE  fundraising,  it
would therefore be reasonable to conclude that Miss AN would be detained  on
arrival from that city.  Asked for evidence that  passengers  arriving  from
London were likely to be detained, Dr Smith could not point to any  specific
evidence, but averred that if he were a Sri Lankan immigration  officer,  he
would certainly be suspicious.

26.  Moving on finally to Dr Smith's report on  SS,  Miss  Richards  queried
the  assertion  that  "all  Karuna  supporters  are  vulnerable  to   murder
attempts, detention and torture" at the hands of the LTTE.  Was it  not  the
case that, apart from one incident highlighted in Professor  Good's  report,
there had been no instances of  Karuna  supporters  being  tracked  down  to
Colombo since 2004?  Dr  Smith  agreed  that  the  level  of  Tamil-on-Tamil
violence had decreased in Colombo, but thought that some of  it  might  have
been LTTE-Karuna violence, only not reported as such.   Miss  Richards  also
queried Dr Smith's opinion that, as well as being on the LTTE database as  a
defector to Karuna, Mr SS would be on the government database  too,  because
of his detention by the army in 1988 and  because  the  Karuna  group  would
have passed to the authorities the information that SS had been detained  by
the LTTE in 2004 and might have given them information.  Dr Smith could  not
pinpoint any evidence for this  assumption,  but  based  it  upon  years  of
observing the situation in Sri Lanka and absorbing things "by osmosis".

Professor Good's report
27.  Dr Smith was not re-examined, and we heard  next  from  Professor  Good
who, albeit his report had been prepared specifically for SS's case,  kindly
agreed to give oral evidence, although the Secretary of State  had  by  then
indicated that SS would be granted some kind of leave.  First,  however,  we
shall summarize the contents of that report.

28.  Professor Anthony Good is Head of the School of  Social  and  Political
Studies at the University of Edinburgh, and has an international  reputation
as a social anthropologist.  He paid fact-finding visits  to  Sri  Lanka  in
2003 and 2006, and keeps in regular contact  with  PhD  students  and  other
researchers whose field is Sri Lanka, as well as  with  organisations  based
on that island.  His report, dated 28th January 2008,  gives  a  history  of
the conflict between the Karuna faction and the 'official' LTTE in the  east
of the island, and emphasizes that, although most  of  the  casualties  have
been inflicted outside Colombo, there have been examples in Colombo  itself,
such as the gunning down  of  a  pro-LTTE  MP  and  his  bodyguard  on  10th
November 2006.  Both sides, he says, "have the  organisational  capacity  to
carry out killings of opponents or rivals."   More  recently,  however,  the
Karuna faction has been split in two,  with  the  larger  group  (the  TMVP)
being commanded by  his  rival,  one  Pillaiyan,  and  with  Colonel  Karuna
himself now in British custody.

29.  As for the risk posed by the LTTE to members of the Karuna  faction  in
Colombo, Professor Good infers from a recent spate  of  incidents  that  the
Tigers continue to have a  considerable  clandestine  presence  in  Colombo.
These incidents include double bomb blasts at  a  government  office  and  a
shopping mall on 28th  November  2007,  the  killing  of  a  UNP  Member  of
Parliament on 1st January 2008, bomb attacks against  military  vehicles  on
2nd and 8th January, and the assassination of a  government  minister,  also
on 8th January this year.  High-profile supporters of  Colonel  Karuna  have
also been targeted, eight top aides of Colonel Karuna having been shot  dead
in Colombo in July 2004, and a politician known as PLOTE Mohan  having  been
assassinated in Colombo that same month.  But the targets  of  such  attacks
have not always, adds Prof. Good, been such high-profile persons.  In  March
2007 five bodies were discovered in a swamp near Colombo and  were  said  to
belong to TMVP members who had been abducted by the Tigers after being  sent
to Colombo from the eastern part of the island for their own safety.

30.  Apart from assassinations, Prof. Good notes  the  widespread  abduction
of Tamils in Colombo by various paramilitary groups acting  as  proxies  for
the security forces, often using white vans without number plates.   Ransoms
will often secure release, but many people  have  simply  disappeared  after
being abducted.  Some of the abductions are no  doubt  carried  out  by  the
Tigers, but in the majority of cases it is  uncertain  who  is  responsible.
While senior members of the Karuna faction have been afforded protection  in
Colombo by the security forces, Prof. Good does not think  that  this  would
be extended to someone like Mr SS.

31.  The report now turns  to  record-keeping,  in  particular  whether  the
immigration authorities or the CID at the airport would have information  on
returnees.  Professor Good refers  to  a  Dutch  report  of  1999  that  the
National Intelligence Bureau ('NIB') had a computerized database  of  wanted
persons, including both ordinary criminals and LTTE  suspects.   The  police
would consult this database after arresting somebody at the  airport  or  in
round-ups, and the person was likely to be on it if he had  previously  been
arrested or informed upon.  The CIPU Report  for  October  2005  added  that
computerized records were only available in the south of  the  country,  but
that details of arrests in the north were sent down and transferred  to  the
computer.  Professor Good thinks  that,  given  the  ongoing  conflict,  the
authorities have every incentive to maintain official  records  on  suspects
who have been  arrested,  even  if  they  have  subsequently  been  released
without charge.  Indeed, according to  a  report  in  October  2006  by  the
Hotham Mission, the NIB "keeps records on people dating back more  than  ten
years and, since 2004, has been using a national computerized database."

32.  From this Professor Good infers that prior detentions are likely to  be
known to the authorities when failed asylum  seekers  are  returned  to  Sri
Lanka and, "extrapolating slightly from  the  evidence",  that  there  is  a
central database going back at least 10-15 years, which  tallies  with  what
Dr Smith was told  by  the  retired  Inspector-General  of  Police,  Chandra
Fernando.  Even if the returnee  passes  successfully  through  the  airport
immigration  procedures  on   arrival,   Professor   Good   emphasizes   the
difficulties facing him in Colombo if he does not have a  National  Identity
Card ('NIC').  According to  the  Hotham  Mission's  report,  returnees  not
being assisted by the  IOM  have  been  arrested  and  harassed  soon  after
arrival, particularly if they no longer hold an NIC.   In  order  to  get  a
replacement NIC,  applicants  must,  according  to  a  2002  report  by  the
Canadian IRB, present themselves to the 'Front Office'  in  Colombo  with  a
copy of their police registration, a police report documenting the  loss  of
the original card, and their birth certificate.   If  they  do  not  have  a
birth certificate, they can apply for one through the Front Office.  But  if
there is no record in the central registry  archives,  they  must  obtain  a
certificate from the grama sevaka, the headman of their native village.

33.  As for  the  reasonableness  of  relocation  to  Colombo  for  a  Tamil
originating from the north or east of the island,  Professor  Good  observes
that, unless one has relatives or friends with whom  one  can  put  up,  the
only alternative except for  the  well-to-do  is  to  use  the  crowded  and
unsanitary accommodation afforded by hostels (usually  known  as  'lodges'),
where the residents are nearly all young, single  men.   A  close  watch  is
kept by the authorities on these lodges, which are often subjected to  raids
during cordon-and-search operations.  They are not, Professor Good  insists,
suitable places for single women to stay, far less for women  with  children
to bring up.  When it comes to making a living,  Tamils  in  general  suffer
discrimination in the labour market,  but  getting  a  job  is  particularly
difficult for Tamils coming to Colombo from the north or east of the  island
who do not have a kinship network or personal contacts in the  city  to  put
them in touch with employers and to vouch for them.  Such  Tamils  are  also
unlikely to speak Sinhalese, which increases their difficulties in  Colombo,
particularly when they are stopped at a checkpoint and  cannot  explain  why
they are in Colombo.

34.  Indeed, Tamils who are recently arrived in Colombo and who do not  seem
to have a valid reason for being  there  are  likely  to  be  taken  in  for
questioning if picked up at  a  checkpoint  or  during  a  cordon-and-search
operation, and although most are released quickly, some end up in more long-
term detention.  The most notorious  example  of  the  state  harassment  of
Tamils took place on 6th June 2007, when  the  police  raided  a  number  of
lodges and rounded up some 291 Tamil men and 85 women, who were packed  into
buses and driven to their home areas in the north and  east  of  Sri  Lanka.
Shortly afterwards, however,  the  Supreme  Court  intervened  to  halt  the
evictions,  declaring  them  illegal,  and  most  of  those   evicted   were
subsequently brought  back  free  of  charge  to  the  capital.   But,  says
Professor Good, "the very fact that the  evictions  took  place  at  all  is
indicative of current levels of  security  in  Colombo."   Even  though  the
Supreme Court went on last December to declare cordon-and-search  operations
an infringement of civil liberties, and to  order  the  dismantling  of  all
permanent  security  checkpoints,  the  government   got   round   this   by
substituting  mobile  checkpoints,  which   soon   turned   into   permanent
checkpoints manned by mobile units.  Professor Good ends his report  with  a
statement made to the House of Commons on  17th  January  2008  by  the  FCO
Minister,  Kim  Howells,  deploring  the  withdrawal  of  the  international
mission which had been monitoring the ceasefire (now officially at  an  end)
and the culture of impunity which  had  been  highlighted  by  the  UN  High
Commissioner for Human Rights on her recent visit to Sri Lanka.

Professor Good's oral evidence
35.  In evidence-in-chief, Professor Good was asked only whether the  letter
dated 25th January 2008 from  the  British  High  Commission,  reporting  an
absence of computers  at  the  CID  offices  in  Bandaranaike  International
Airport, had caused him to alter the view expressed in his report about  the
availability of records of previous detentions.  It had not.

36.  In cross-examination,  Professor  Good  acknowledged  that,  while  the
hostility between the LTTE and the Karuna faction had manifested  itself  in
Colombo, it  was  mostly  confined  to  the  eastern  part  of  the  island.
Referring to the murder of high-level Karuna supporters in July 2004 and  to
the discovery of several bodies in a swamp in March  2007,  as  detailed  in
his report, Miss Richards asked whether there had been any  other  incidents
of violence perpetrated by the LTTE against the  Karuna  group  in  Colombo.
Professor Good was not aware of any, and although there had  been  a  plague
of abductions, he could not say how many had been the  work  of  either  the
Tigers or Karuna supporters.

37.  On the question of  killings  and  disappearances,  Miss  Richards  now
turned to a report released on 31st October 2007 by the Law & Society  Trust
in Colombo which, in collaboration with other local NGOs, had  analysed  the
662 unnatural deaths and 540 disappearances reported throughout  the  island
during the eight-month period from January  to  August  2007.   The  victims
were nearly all male, and preponderantly young Tamil men.  Of the  killings,
Jaffna, Batticaloa and Vavuniya had the highest scores, with only 11 out  of
the 662, or 1.66%, taking place  in  Colombo.   For  disappearances,  Jaffna
again topped the poll, but this time Colombo came second,  with  78  out  of
540, or 14.44%.  Professor Good saw no reason to doubt the balance of  those
figures, while making  allowance  for  the  under-reporting  of  deaths  and
disappearances.   Miss  Richards  now  adduced  the   centrepiece   of   her
documentary evidence, namely a list of all the reported attacks by  bomb  or
bullet which had taken place in Colombo between October  2004  (the  cut-off
point  for  the  'country  guidance'  in  PS  (LTTE  -  internal  flight   -
sufficiency of  protection)  [2004]  UKIAT  297)  and  January  2008,  which
indicated that most of the targets  were  either  high-profile  individuals,
such as politicians, or military personnel and installations.  The  list  is
subdivided into  those  attacks  which  can,  and  those  which  cannot,  be
reliably attributed to the LTTE.  Again,  Professor  Good  agreed  that  the
information was accurate.  He could not  think  of  any  other  examples  of
attacks by the LTTE during the relevant period, but emphasized that  no  one
knew exactly who was responsible for  the  abductions,  and  that  the  LTTE
might well have perpetrated some of  them.   Pressed  on  whether  the  five
bodies found in a swamp in March 2007  belonged  to  low-level  rather  than
high-level members of the Karuna faction, Professor Good  acknowledged  that
little was known about them, but commented  that,  although  the  government
was  shielding  Karuna  supporters  in  Colombo,  the  protection  was   not
necessarily effective.

38.  Miss Richards turned next  to  the  apparent  discrepancy  between  the
information provided by the Airline Liaison Officer, viz  that  the  CID  at
the airport have no computers, and what Professor Good says in  his  report,
namely that there is a  computerized  database  of  wanted  persons  at  the
airport.  Professor Good indicated that there might  not  be  a  discrepancy
after all, in that, while the  immigration  officers  at  the  airport  were
certainly computerized, he could not say  whether  the  CID  had  access  to
computers.  Miss Richards suggested that he was not in a  position  to  know
whether the computers at the airport (whoever had access to them)  contained
information about previous detentions,  and  whether  such  detentions  were
routinely or reliably added to a central  database.   Professor  Good  could
see no reason to doubt what Dr Smith had  reported  about  his  conversation
with the Controller of Immigration, that a 'Stop List' and  a  'Watch  List'
were available at the airport, but could not say for certain  who  would  be
on it, save those for whom an arrest warrant had been issued.

39.  At this point Miss  Richards  sought  leave  to  adduce  an  unreported
determination, which contained a  criticism  of  Professor  Good  and  would
thereby give the Tribunal a more balanced view of his  expertise,  when  set
against the array of unreported cases cited at the  outset  of  his  report,
which praised him highly.  We did not admit  this  determination,  since  it
was both unreported and outwith the normal time limits  for  the  production
of evidence.

Submissions for the Respondent
40.   There  being  no  re-examination  of  Professor  Good,  Miss  Richards
commenced her submissions, highlighting  the  list  of  attacks  in  Colombo
between October 2004 and January 2008, which  indicated  that  neither  low-
level members of the LTTE who had left the party  nor  low-level  supporters
of other Tamil groups were being targeted by the LTTE in  Colombo.   Rather,
the LTTE were concentrating on  high-profile  individuals  like  politicians
and army officers  and  on  military  targets,  as  well  as  some  civilian
infrastructure.  There was no solid evidence that the five men whose  bodies
were found in a swamp in March 2007 were members of the TMVP  who  had  been
killed by the LTTE, rather than casualties of the split  within  the  Karuna
group, and this had  to  be  set  against  what  Dr  Smith  said  about  the
significant reduction in Tamil-on-Tamil violence in Colombo  since  the  end
of the ceasefire.  Since then, security had been very tight and the  freedom
of movement for LTTE cadres had been  greatly  restricted.   The  number  of
killings was now at an historic low in Colombo (1.6% of the  total  for  Sri
Lanka between January and  August  last  year),  and  while  the  number  of
abductions constituted a much higher percentage (14.4%),  these  were  being
carried out by all manner of different groups, with the  LTTE  by  no  means
taking the lion's share.

41.  Miss Richards conceded that, given the current  situation  in  Colombo,
she would not be arguing that the Sri Lankan  authorities  could  provide  a
sufficiency of protection  for  those  whom  the  LTTE  were  determined  to
eliminate, and she accepted Dr Smith's description of  the  LTTE  as  a  far
from emasculated force in Colombo.  Was there, on the other hand,  any  risk
from the government forces themselves?  Miss Richards thought  the  evidence
was very flimsy for Dr Smith's assertion  that  any  detention,  even  going
back 15 years, is likely to be on  a  centralized  database  which  will  be
consulted by the authorities when a failed asylum seeker  returns  from  the
United Kingdom.  She reminded us that Dr Smith had not corrected his  report
template when he was informed about  the  inaccurate  information  which  it
gave about two former asylum seekers who had died in Colombo  in  2006,  and
suggested that his report was lacking in balance.  His  confident  assertion
that the LTTE had an electronic database  containing  details  of  opponents
and deserters was mere speculation, for which there was no  clear  evidence.
He was simply extrapolating from the (limited) evidence of a  database  used
by the LTTE for fundraising purposes to a  database  of  all  those  against
whom the LTTE bear a grudge.  Professor Good, on the  other  hand,  did  not
profess to know about databases and what was on them, but had evidence  more
pertinent to the risk from the LTTE outside Colombo than inside it.

42.  In respect  of  previous  'country  guidance'  by  the  Tribunal,  Miss
Richards submitted that there was less danger from the LTTE in  Colombo  now
than when the Tribunal examined that issue in PS 04-297, and  insisted  that
the evidence before us showed that the conclusions set out  at  (1)-(5)  and
(7) of the italicized headnote in LP (LTTE area - Tamils - Colombo -  risk?)
[2007] UKAIT 76 still held good as 'country guidance'.  For convenience,  we
shall summarize those conclusions below.

   1) Tamils are not per se at risk of serious  harm  from  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities in Colombo, although there are some  twelve  factors  (not
      intended to be a check list) which may increase the risk.
   2) If a person is actively wanted by the  police,  e.g.  by  being  on  a
      'Watched' or 'Wanted'  list  at  Bandaranaike  International  Airport,
      there may be a risk of detention at the airport.
   3) Otherwise,  the  majority  of  failed  returning  asylum  seekers  are
      processed  through  the  airport  relatively  quickly  and   with   no
      difficulty beyond some possible harassment.
   4) While Tamils in Colombo are at risk of being stopped at  a  checkpoint
      or in cordon-and-search operations, or of being caught up  in  a  raid
      upon the lodge where they are staying, this does not in general amount
      to more than harassment, and should not cause any lasting  difficulty.
      But Tamils who have recently returned to Sri Lanka and  have  not  yet
      renewed  their  identity   documents   will   be   subject   to   more
      investigation, and the risk factors in (1) may then come into play.
   5) Returning Tamils should be able to establish the fact of their  recent
      return during the short period necessary for new identity documents to
      be procured.
   6) ...
   7) The weight to be given  to  expert  evidence  and  country  background
      material depends upon the quality of the raw data  from  which  it  is
      drawn and the quality of the filtering process  to  which  those  data
      have been subjected.

43.  Miss Richards now turned to the individual  circumstances  of  the  one
appellant whose substantive appeal still required to be  determined  by  us.
She drew our attention to passages from the Country  of  Origin  Information
Report of November 2007, which it will convenient to summarize below,  along
with the relevant paragraph numbers.

      There are about 250,000 Tamils in the Colombo area,  out  of  a  total
population of roughly 2,250,000 (20.13).
      There are an estimated 40,000 war widows in Sri Lanka, and as many  as
a quarter of all households in Jaffna are now female-headed.  Women  in  Sri
Lanka have traditionally enjoyed better levels of literacy, life  expectancy
and access to economic opportunities than  in  other  parts  of  South  Asia
(23.01-23.02).
      According to its website, the local NGO 'Home for  Human  Rights'  has
created a Women's Desk.  "We provide social  services  and  counselling  for
survivors of sexual and domestic violence.  We  have  also  organised  self-
help groups for single mothers in the Northern and Eastern provinces  ...  "
(23.26).
      According to the Mental Health Policy for Sri Lanka, published by  the
Sri Lankan government in 2005, "Mental illness is extremely common.  It  has
been estimated that  some  376,000  Sri  Lankans  suffer  from  debilitating
mental  illnesses  including   bipolar   illness,   major   depression   and
schizophrenia at any given time. ... About 10% of the population is  thought
to suffer from other mental  illness  such  as  phobic  states,  obsessional
disorders,  somatoform  disorders,  mood  disorders  and  other   forms   of
delusional disorders."  The documents notes that more  than  90%  of  mental
health services are concentrated in Colombo and  a  few  other  major  urban
centres, with treatment taking place mostly in large hospitals, such as  the
National Hospital in Colombo.  "All the  patients  receiving  mental  health
services from the government sector receive the services and drugs  free  of
charge."  There are, however, severe  shortages  of  skilled  mental  health
staff, with only 41 psychiatrists available for the  whole  country,  a  few
psychologists, and no psychiatric nurses.  On the  other  hand,  "There  are
several important  NGOs,  including  Sahanaya  in  Colombo"  which  "provide
psychiatric  assessment  and  treatment,  psychological  interventions,  and
rehabilitation for both  individuals  and  families."   The  document  fears
that, in the wake of the tsunami on 26th December 2004, between 5%  and  10%
of those affected by  it  "are  likely  to  develop  a  recognizable  mental
disorder." (26.13-26.16)
      According to the Canadian High Commission in  Colombo,  "forged  birth
certificates can be obtained for as  little  as  US$5,  while  genuine,  but
improperly issued, birth certificates can  be  acquired  for  as  little  as
US$20 each.  With these types of birth certificates,  genuine  NICs  can  be
issued  ..."   There  are  no  security  features  in   Sri   Lankan   birth
certificates (32.07).

44.  Miss Richards next referred us to the Hotham Mission field trip to  Sri
Lanka, whose report was published in November 2006.   At  page  41  we  read
that "awareness of mental health issues  has  increased  somewhat  following
the 2004 tsunami and the devastating grief  and  loss  impact  felt  by  the
entire country."  But the report highlights the shortage  of  mental  health
practitioners, with only 35 psychiatrists in the  whole  country,  and  only
limited facilities available for mental health  in-patients.   An  exception
to this, however, is "the Angoda Mental Hospital in  Colombo"  which  "is  a
leading service provider, offering a comprehensive range of psychiatric  and
psychosocial support services to patients."  The report goes on at  page  52
to  give  the  following  information  obtained   from   the   International
Organisation for Migration.

      "A brief overview of the support provided by  IOM  includes  smoothing
      the re-entry process by  liaising  with  Sri  Lankan  immigration  and
      capacity building with  airport  officials  and  staff  prior  to  the
      return, and provision of a comprehensive package of support  for  five
      years after arrival.  This includes provision of  five  years  shelter
      guaranteed (a reflection of and necessitated by the difficult  housing
      situation in Sri Lanka), assessing capacity for livelihood, competency
      and vocational training ... IOM were aware of returnees  not  assisted
      by their program being arrested and harassed on or soon after arrival,
      particularly in cases where the returnee no longer  holds  a  National
      Identity Card."

45.  On this last point,  the  British  High  Commission's  letter  of  25th
January 2008 adds more recent information :

      "The International Organisation for Migration (IOM) have  advised  the
      High Commission that whilst they monitor the persons who  return  from
      the UK under the Voluntary Assisted Return Programme (VARP) for up  to
      2 years, they do not monitor those who are forcibly returned.   I  was
      advised that even among the VARP returnees there were 2 cases  in  the
      last year where individuals have  been  arrested  and  detained.   The
      first was a young Tamil male from  Jaffna  who  was  going  through  a
      reintegration programme in Colombo.  Some six months after his return,
      he was stopped at a  police  checkpoint  and  detained,  as  he  could
      provide no evidence of family in the capital.  He was held  at  Boossa
      prison  for  one  month  before  release,  but  is  now  back  in  the
      reintegration programme.  The 2nd case also involved a Tamil male  who
      was in the reintegration programme in Colombo.  The  circumstances  of
      his arrest were somewhat different, in that he had travelled to  India
      on forged documentation and was apprehended by CID on  his  return  to
      Colombo and detained.  It could therefore be argued that  there  might
      have indeed been justification for this.

      "IOM have also become involved with returnees who have  forcibly  been
      removed from the UK, providing post-arrival  assistance.   Ostensibly,
      this is to provide travel assistance to a chosen address.  At the time
      of writing, IOM had been informed of 32 potential removals under  this
      arrangement, of which  they  received  only  8  returnees.   Whilst  a
      majority of the ones that did  not  arrive  undoubtedly  earned  last-
      minute reprieves in the UK by one means or another, IOM could  not  be
      100% certain that  some  were  not  detained  on  arrival  at  Colombo
      Airport."

46.  The BHC letter goes on to note that on 7th  January  2008  the  Supreme
Court ordered the  Defence  Secretary  to  stop  the  security  forces  from
searching residential premises between 9 p.m.  and  6  a.m.,  although  this
prohibition does not extend to the police.  An official from the Centre  for
Human Rights and Development is quoted for the following information -

      "approximately 1500 persons have been arrested at  street  checkpoints
      in Colombo recently and most of them were released after 2-3 days.  Of
      the rest about 103 were sent to Boossa detention centre near Galle and
      a few were kept in [the]  Terrorists  Investigation  Department  (TID)
      office at Chaiyttaya Road, Colombo 1.  Most have been  released  after
      investigation as ordered  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  response  to  a
      Fundamental Rights Case filed by  the  Ceylon  Workers  Congress.   We
      understand the general population  of  prisoners  detained  at  Boossa
      detention camp and TID office in Colombo is about 550 at present."

47.  Relying on the above information, Miss Richards now set  out  her  case
that AN faces neither a real risk of persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment
in Colombo, nor undue harshness in adapting to life there  with  her  child.
She reminded us first of the twelve 'risk factors' listed at the end  of  LP
07-76, which it will be convenient to recapitulate here.

     i) Tamil ethnicity;
    ii) Previous record as a suspected or actual LTTE member or supporter;
   iii) Previous criminal record and/or outstanding arrest warrant;
    iv) Bail/jumping and/or escaping from custody;
     v) Having signed a confession or similar document;
    vi) Having been asked by the security forces to become an informer;
   vii) The presence of scarring;
  viii) Returned from London or other centre  of  LTTE  activity  or  fund-
        raising;
    ix) Illegal departure from Sri Lanka;
     x) Lack of ID card or other documentation;
    xi) Having made an asylum claim abroad; and
   xii) Having relatives in the LTTE.

48.  Of those twelve factors, five - (iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (xii) -  had
no application to Miss  AN.   Whether  (ii)  had  any  application  was,  of
course, in dispute before us, and Miss Richards  reiterated  her  contention
that  the  evidence  simply  did  not  establish  any  likelihood  that  the
appellant's detention  in  1998,  after  which  the  authorities  showed  no
interest in her, would appear in records available  to  the  authorities  in
Colombo.  The appellant did admittedly have some scarring, but  it  was  not
prominent, and Miss Richards did not think that, even  in  combination  with
factors (i), (viii), (ix) and (xi), it would create a real risk for her.

49.  The remaining factor was the lack of an  ID  card,  but  Miss  Richards
reminded us that the appellant had left her ID card in Sri Lanka, and  there
was no reason to suppose that she could not get it back, or at least  obtain
the relevant information to be found on  it,  such  as  the  serial  number,
which would enable her to get a replacement in Colombo.  The  original  card
would either be at home, in which case the appellant could get hold  of  the
necessary information through her parents' neighbours, with whom she was  in
regular contact, or it would be with the EPDP, who had provided a haven  for
her in Vavuniya and then in Mankulam after she left Jaffna.   Miss  Richards
also mentioned the alternative route of getting a  replacement  ID  card  in
Colombo  through  production  of  the  appellant's  birth  certificate,  and
alluded to the possibility of buying a  false  one  -  something  which  the
appellant had shown, through her willingness to travel to the UK on a  false
passport, that she had no objection to  in  principle.   Miss  Richards  did
not, however, rely on the availability of forged  documents  in  Sri  Lanka,
and submitted that if all else failed, an  'unofficial'  ID  card  could  be
obtained from the UNHCR.

50.  It would  not  be  unduly  harsh,  Miss  Richards  continued,  for  the
appellant to relocate to  Colombo.   The  EPDP  had  shown  themselves  very
considerate towards her in the past, providing  her  with  accommodation  in
Vavuniya and Mankulam, and arranging for an agent to take  her  out  of  the
country.  There was no  reason  to  suppose  they  would  not  help  her  in
Colombo.  Besides, the background evidence showed  that  a  number  of  non-
governmental organisations were operating in Colombo  with  the  objects  of
assisting women, including  lone  women  with  children,  and  of  assisting
people with mental health problems.  Best of all, the  IOM  was  offering  a
very  generous  support  package  to  those  who  returned   from   the   UK
voluntarily.  There was no reason to suppose that the  appellant  would  not
choose  to  make  a  voluntary  departure  if  her  appeal  were  ultimately
unsuccessful, especially given the  appropriate  feeling  of  responsibility
which  she  was  displaying  towards  her  child.   Indeed,  this  sense  of
responsibility  had  mitigated  any  suicidal  ideation  which  might   have
afflicted the appellant in the past, while  according  to  Dr  Harrison  her
depressive disorder  was  now  also  in  abeyance,  and  she  was  currently
receiving no other treatment save medication.  Similar drugs were  available
free of charge in Colombo, and although psychiatric services were scarce  in
Sri Lanka, those that did exist were largely concentrated in the capital.

51.  Miss Richards reminded us  of  the  very  high  threshold  set  by  the
'health cases' such as N at the House of Lords and Bensaid v United  Kingdom
at the European Court for the engagement of either Article 3 or  Article  8,
and drew attention to the evidence that  large  numbers  of  people  in  Sri
Lanka were suffering from mental health  problems,  particularly  after  the
tsunami.  This would make whatever  mental  health  problems  the  appellant
suffered from much less likely  to  excite  surprise  and  disapproval.   Dr
Harrison had predicted that the appellant would  become  distressed  if  she
were stopped and questioned at a checkpoint, and would not be able  to  give
an account of herself.  But it was a common experience for people to  become
distressed under interrogation.  That would not in itself arouse  suspicion,
and besides, if a newcomer to Colombo needed a valid  reason  to  be  there,
the appellant could cite treatment for her mental  illness,  which  was  not
readily available outside the capital.

52.  Nor would being an unmarried mother make life in Colombo unduly  harsh.
 The background evidence showed that a large number of households  were  now
female-headed, and while being an unmarried mother was not  the  same  thing
as being  a  widow  with  children,  Miss  Richards  reminded  us  that  the
appellant had for several years lived in an unmarried  relationship  with  a
man in Jaffna, and had shown thereby that she was willing  to  put  up  with
any stigma attaching to such a break with convention.

Submissions for Miss AN
53.  In response, Mr Mackenzie  argued  that,  contrary  to  Miss  Richards'
suggestion that the worsening security situation made it  less  likely  that
the LTTE would target someone like Miss AN, it was now more likely that  the
appellant would be at risk also from state agents, for example  because  she
was more likely to be interrogated on return.  Indeed, Mr Mackenzie  invited
us  to  add  the  following  two  categories  to  the  twelve  risk  factors
identified in LP :

    . Serious mental health problems making one  behave  suspiciously  under
      interrogation [and Miss Richards did not deny  that  AN  would  become
      distressed in those circumstances];
    . Living in Colombo but originating in the north or east  of  Sri  Lanka
      [which would not be a matter of concern  to  the  authorities  at  the
      airport, but would concern those manning the checkpoints  or  carrying
      out cordon-and-search operations].

54.  Mr Mackenzie also took issue with Miss Richards'  suggestion  that  the
expert witnesses before us had been indulging  in  speculation  when  giving
their opinion about the records that might be kept by the LTTE  and  by  the
state authorities.  Their opinions were not the product of speculation,  but
of their experience and judgment.  Mr  Mackenzie  disagreed  with  the  view
expressed at paragraph 18 of LP that "the role of a 'country expert'  in  an
appeal before the AIT is ... to  assist  with  the  provision  of  the  'raw
data',  in  terms  of  providing  the  comprehensive  and  balanced  factual
information relating to the issues the Tribunal must resolve."  This was  to
make  an  artificial  distinction  between  'objective'  facts  ands   their
'subjective' interpretation.  An expert was entitled - on the basis  of  his
knowledge, expertise and experience - to go  beyond  his  sources  and  form
opinions.  Dr Smith's opinions had often turned out  to  be  right,  as  the
panel in LP had themselves acknowledged at paragraph 217 :  "We  agree  with
the comments in Dr Smith's report that the issue of scarring was  considered
by the police to be a very serious indicator of whether a Tamil  might  have
been involved in the LTTE."  Similarly, the panel accepted that  records  on
returnees would be available at the airport, finding at paragraph  228  that
"there is a reasonable likelihood that records  relating  to  [LP]  will  be
held either on computer or other records  at  the  airport  because  of  the
acceptance that his case  has  been  before  the  courts  and  he  has  been
released on formal bail."

55.  Set  against  that,  it  was  difficult  to  see  where  Dr  Smith  had
overstated his case  or  reached  speculative  conclusions,  as  alleged  at
paragraph 198 of the determination.  At paragraph 41 he was  criticised  for
saying that the appellant "will automatically have been  placed  on  one  of
the two lists that are provided to immigration services at  the  airport  by
the security forces", because it became apparent  to  the  panel  on  closer
examination that "there was no basis for saying that at all."   This  called
in question "Dr Smith's ability to give expert opinion evidence  impartially
and objectively."  And yet the panel ended up  at  paragraph  227  accepting
that LP was indeed  likely  to  be  detained  at  the  airport,  because  of
computer records about him.  In fact, the only criticism of Dr Smith  in  LP
which stood up was his  failure  to  mention  that  the  two  failed  asylum
seekers who had died in Colombo in 2006 had been  removed  from  the  United
Kingdom several years before - not a huge flaw in his report.

56.  Mr Mackenzie regretted that  a  more  collaborative  approach  was  not
taken in country guidance cases, with the Home Office  instructing  its  own
expert witnesses, as it had been encouraged to do by the Court of Appeal  in
AH (Sudan) [2007] EWCA Civ 297.  When AH (Sudan) came before  the  House  of
Lords ([2007] UKHL 49), the Tribunal was itself found to  have  lapsed  into
infelicities of expression, but it was still accorded the respect due to  an
expert tribunal.  That too should be the attitude of  the  Tribunal  towards
an expert witness.

57.  There followed a digression in which Mr Mackenzie argued  that  experts
ought not to be prevented from citing unreported AIT  cases.   The  mischief
sought to be avoided by the President's Practice Direction 17.6 was the  use
by advocates of unreported cases to support their  arguments.   That  was  a
different matter from expert witnesses bringing  up  facts  from  unreported
cases.  Miss Richards was of the opposite view, and urged us not to drive  a
coach and horses through the Practice Direction.  We can say at  this  point
that Practice Direction 17.7-17.8 already makes provision  for  the  use  of
unreported determinations where an important point cannot  be  substantiated
in any other way, and it is open to a party to apply for permission to  cite
such determinations.  But  it  would  be  quite  artificial  to  distinguish
between a lawyer's use and an expert's use of an  unreported  determination,
and the Practice Direction will have to be rewritten if experts are to  have
carte blanche to use unreported determinations.

58.  Returning to AN's case, Mr Mackenzie asked us to take as  our  starting
point the three categories identified in PS 04-297 as likely to be  at  risk
from the LTTE, namely

   1) prominent present or past supporters of Tamil political parties  which
      have aligned themselves with the government against the LTTE ;
   2) LTTE defectors (particularly those who have  aligned  themselves  with
      the Sri Lankan Army military intelligence units); and
   3) Those closely associated with the internal LTTE schism  as  supporters
      of Colonel Karuna.

59.  These categories are said at  paragraph  59  of  PS  to  have  "a  high
profile which makes them particularly  likely  to  be  the  object  of  LTTE
reprisals",  while  at  paragraph  61  the  panel  refers  to  these   three
categories as comprising "high level activists or opponents."  Mr  Mackenzie
would understand the syntax of this phrase  as  linking  "high  level"  with
"activists"  but  not  with  "opponents".   He  finds   support   for   this
interpretation  in  the  panel's  conclusion  at  paragraph  71  that  those
targeted in Colombo by the LTTE since the  ceasefire  have  all  been  "high
profile opposition activists" or those whom the LTTE  regard  as  "renegades
or traitors."  This suggests to Mr Mackenzie that defectors  from  the  LTTE
have per se a high profile, and that Miss AN, who qualifies  as  a  defector
by virtue of having left the TRO and joined the EPDP, therefore has  a  high
profile and comes within the ambit of the risk categories in PS.

60.  We have to say at this point that such  linguistic  sleight-of-hand  is
ingenious rather than helpful.  It is as  plain  as  a  pikestaff  that  the
adjectival phrase "high level" at paragraph 61  qualifies  both  "activists"
and "opponents", which is confirmed by the linking of  the  two  notions  in
the phrase "high profile opposition activists"  at  paragraph  71.   On  the
other  hand,  there  is   no   necessary   connection,   linguistically   or
practically, between someone whom we may describe as a 'defector' and  those
whom the LTTE "would see as renegades or traitors."  Thus, someone who  lost
her job as a library assistant with the  Tamil  Rehabilitation  Organisation
and became a development officer with  the  EPDP  three  years  later  would
certainly be a person who had once helped  an  outfit  affiliated  with  the
LTTE and had later supported a group opposed to the LTTE.  But whether  that
would be enough to make her  a  "renegade  or  traitor"  whom  the  LTTE  in
Colombo would seek to punish is another question.  We do not understand  the
IAT in PS to be making a distinction between opposition activists, who  have
never assisted the LTTE and must therefore be 'high  profile'  in  order  to
risk elimination by them, and opponents who once helped the LTTE in  however
lowly a capacity, and who will be terminated if they  have  since  helped  a
rival  organisation.   The  degree  of  support  given  to  the   LTTE   and
subsequently to another Tamil group cannot, we think, be  left  out  of  the
reckoning.

61.  Mr Mackenzie's next point  was  that  there  was  no  suggestion  of  a
general risk to the majority of Tamils in Colombo.  The focus was rather  on
the much smaller group of Tamils who had come to the capital from the  North
and East, a group to which Miss AN would be assimilated if she  got  through
the airport.  In assessing the risk to them, one had to distinguish  between
the mass of unfiltered "facts" set out in  the  list  of  incidents  between
October  2004  and  January  2008,  which  was  the   centrepiece   of   the
respondent's evidence, and the expert reports which gave such facts  context
and focus.  One could not in any event tell  how  truly  comprehensive  this
list was, as the news items were all taken from the Internet  and  were  all
in English.  But one could certainly infer from the murder of five rank-and-
file members of the  Karuna  faction  that  the  LTTE  maintains  an  active
hostility to all who support that faction.

62.  How likely was it that opponents of the LTTE would be  on  a  database?
The Human Rights Watch report, Funding the "Final War" :  LTTE  Intimidation
and Extortion in the Tamil Diaspora certainly showed that the LTTE  maintain
a database of contributors outside Sri Lanka,  and  that  such  people  have
been asked for more contributions  while  visiting  Sri  Lanka  itself.   It
would  be  surprising  if  such  a  sophisticated,  brutal   and   efficient
organisation as the LTTE did not  have  a  central  record-keeping  facility
which included information on its opponents.

63.  As for the issue of internal flight, the dictum in LP  that  relocation
to Colombo would not in general be unduly harsh for  Tamils  was  pronounced
at a time when mass round-ups were not prevalent.  The BHC  letter  of  25th
January 2008 gave 550 as the current population  of  Boossa  detention  camp
and the TID office in Colombo - too  high  a  figure  for  them  all  to  be
serious suspects - and  also  quoted  the  secretary  of  the  Human  Rights
Commission as saying that "there were a few reported cases of torture  under
detention."  There were likely to be many more  that  went  unreported.   Mr
Mackenzie accepted that awareness of mental health  problems  had  increased
in Sri Lanka, but insisted that there was still a stigma.

64.  Any doubt that the Tamil Rehabilitation Organisation was  a  front  for
the LTTE was, Mr Mackenzie continued, dispelled by pages 202 and 233 of  the
November 2007 COIS Report, which refer to raids by French  counter-terrorist
personnel on three LTTE organisations in Paris, including the  TRO,  and  to
the LTTE's  insistence  that  international  NGOs  operating  in  the  Vanni
channel funds to be used for development purposes through the TRO.

65.  Returning to the theme of record-keeping, Mr Mackenzie referred  us  to
32.08 of the COIS Report for what a Home Office delegation  was  told  at  a
meeting on 21st March 2002 with the Director of the CID, namely  that  there
were computerized records in  the  South  of  the  country  only,  and  that
details of arrests etc. which were sent from the North would be  transferred
to computer.  As for the international airport, "There  are  no  photographs
of  wanted  persons  at  the  airport,  only  computerised  records."   This
suggested that the CID at the airport did have computers, contrary  to  what
the Airline  Liaison  Officer  had  observed.   That  there  was  a  central
database was confirmed at  32.16  of  the  COIS  Report,  which  quotes  the
finding of the Hotham Mission in October 2006  that  "Sri  Lanka's  National
Intelligence Bureau keeps records on people dating back more than ten  years
and, since 2004, has been using  a  national  computerized  database."   The
Hotham Mission also found that "persons returning to Sri Lanka who have  had
previous problems with the government of Sri Lanka may be  detained  by  the
police upon their arrival."   More  specifically,  "persons  who  have  been
detained or questioned  in  the  past  are  more  likely  to  be  arrested."
Putting the two together, Mr Mackenzie inferred that people  who  have  been
detained in the past will be on the national computerized database.

66.  As for the  reasonableness  of  relocation  to  Colombo,  Mr  Mackenzie
reminded us of the medical evidence that AN's  psychiatric  condition  would
deteriorate if she were forced to live  there.   Her  family  could  not  be
expected to move down from  Jaffna,  even  if  this  were  possible  in  the
current circumstances, and share her difficulties in finding  accommodation,
employment, etc.  She would not go back voluntarily under  the  auspices  of
the IOM.  Internal flight would simply not be an option.

Reply for the respondent
67.  Responding to the  criticism  of  her  list  of  violent  incidents  in
Colombo between October 2004 and January 2008, Miss Richards  insisted  that
it was comprehensive.  Neither expert had been able to add anything  to  it.
As for the two extra 'risk categories' which Mr  Mackenzie  proposed  adding
to the twelve listed in  LP,  Miss  Richards  thought  that  serious  mental
health problems might in rare cases, such as that of Mr SS,  create  a  real
risk.  But this would be too rare to constitute  a  general  category.   Nor
should Tamils originating from the North and East form a  separate  category
from Tamils long settled in  Colombo.   There  were  a  great  many  of  the
former, and they were not necessarily more likely  to  be  working  for  the
LTTE than the latter.  A report in The Lanka Academic of  27th  August  2006
told of the thwarting of a bomb plot and the arrest of 17  Tamils,  most  of
whom had been living on the outskirts of Colombo for nearly 15 years.

68.  Going on to the reasonableness of internal  relocation,  Miss  Richards
referred to a letter of 31st January 2008  from  Dr  Ganesan,  a  consultant
psychiatrist at the  Teaching  Hospital  in  Batticaloa,  who  deplores  the
absence of treatment for detainees with  mental  health  problems,  and  the
difficulties faced  by  Tamils  who  are  not  in  detention  and  who  need
treatment, since most  mental  health  personnel  speak  only  Sinhala.   In
Colombo, mental health services are based mainly in "the two  large  asylum-
type mental hospitals", to which people tend not  to  come  voluntarily  for
treatment as "the quality of service here is poor."  But Miss AN would  not,
we were reminded, have to depend on this rather forbidding  regime  for  any
mental  health  problems  which  might  afflict  her   in   Colombo.    Non-
governmental organisations such as Sahanaya provided support both for  women
and for those with mental health  problems,  while  the  IOM  could  provide
accommodation and the basic necessities for as long as  five  years.   There
was no reason to suppose that the appellant would refuse  to  avail  herself
of such assistance.  Indeed, she had shown  herself  able  to  cope  in  the
past, getting a job after her terrible experiences in 1998,  living  with  a
partner in Jaffna, having a child in London, and so forth.

Reply for Miss AN
69.  In his final submissions, Mr Mackenzie  decried  the  possibility  that
Miss AN would be supported in Colombo by either the IOM or  the  EPDP.   The
fact that she might have coped in the past did not mean that she could  cope
now, indeed the medical evidence went the other way.  As  for  the  risk  to
Tamils generally in Colombo, Mr Mackenzie thought there was  no  statistical
basis for Miss Richards' confident assertion that there  are  large  numbers
of Tamils from the North and East in Colombo.  What  was  certain,  however,
was that thousands of Tamils had been detained for  no  better  reason  than
that they could not give a satisfactory explanation for  being  in  Colombo.
This was  an  aspect  of  the  unduly  harsh  treatment  which  awaited  the
appellant there.

The 'Exclusion Clause'
70.  When we reached the end of oral submissions on 13th February, the  case
was adjourned so that written submissions could  be  prepared  on  an  issue
which had arisen in the course of proceedings, namely whether Mr  SS,  whose
return to Sri Lanka  was  precluded  by  his  serious  mental  illness,  was
excluded from the Refugee Convention because of his activities while he  was
a member of the LTTE.   A  letter  of  15th  February  from  the  Presenting
Officers  Unit   at   Angel   Square   cited   both   "individual   criminal
responsibility", in  that  SS  had  participated  in  the  assassination  of
civilians, and "complicity in international crimes" in that SS  had  for  14
years been an active combatant for an  organisation  which  was  responsible
for widespread and systematic war crimes and crimes  against  humanity.   In
the written submissions which  followed,  Miss  Richards  reminded  us  that
Article 1F is  mandatory,  in  that,  if  there  are  "serious  reasons  for
considering that" a person has done any of the things listed at (a), (b)  or
(c) of that Article, he must be excluded from the Convention, as  emphasized
in paragraph 38 of Gurung* [2002] UKIAT 4870.  In the appellant's  case,  he
was condemned out of his own mouth for the assassinations he had  helped  to
carry out, which were war crimes under the terms of the Rome Statute of  the
International  Criminal  Court  (which  includes  "intentionally   directing
attacks ... against civilians not taking a  direct  part  in  hostilities").
Furthermore, it could be readily inferred that  the  appellant  had  a  full
understanding of the aims, methods and activities of the LTTE  and  that  he
was therefore complicit in them.  These included persecution  on  religious,
ethnic and political grounds, torture and the murder of  prisoners  of  war,
which were "acts contrary to the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United
Nations."

71.  Rebutting this submission, Mr Morris adduced a report by a  Californian
attorney, Dr Karen Parker, who specializes in human rights and  humanitarian
law and in international law.  The main thrust of her report  is  to  debunk
the notion that the LTTE is predominantly a terrorist organisation.  On  the
contrary, it is said to be engaged in a war  of  national  liberation  or  a
civil war, and is thus a combatant force in an armed  conflict.   The  Tamil
Tigers cannot legally, it is asserted, be both  combatants  and  terrorists,
and the appellant is not to be regarded as a terrorist simply  for  being  a
combatant member of the LTTE.  Mr Morris asks us not  to  make  the  present
case the basis  for  general  guidance  on  the  approach  to  be  taken  to
exclusion, and reminds us that the issue of whether LTTE combatants are  per
se excluded from the Refugee Convention is to be the subject of  a  separate
reported case.

72.  We readily accede  to  that  request,  and  confine  ourselves  to  the
question whether SS's individual acts while serving  as  an  LTTE  combatant
bring him within  Article  1F(a)  and  (c).   Mr  Morris  submits  that  the
evidence given by SS himself in his asylum interview and witness  statements
"does not establish to the requisite standard of  proof  that  there  was  a
direct nexus between his behaviour and a grave violation  of  the  laws  and
customs of war", for the following reasons :

   a) there is insufficient evidence that he  had  prior  knowledge  of  the
      purpose of the combatants that he taxied;
   b) it does not appear that he had any role  in  planning  or  forming  an
      intent to carry out the acts in question;
   c) he was not a driver exclusively for this type of operation; and
   d) he did not personally fire at or kill the MPs.

73.  In response to Mr Morris, Miss Richards regards the  Parker  report  as
viewing the LTTE with rose-tinted spectacles, when all the  evidence  points
to their being an extremely nasty bunch.  But as to whether a member of  the
LTTE is to be regarded as "complicit" in all the atrocities  perpetrated  by
the LTTE, simply by virtue of being  one  of  the  'Tigers'  himself,  is  a
matter which has been listed for separate 'country guidance', and is  to  be
heard by the Tribunal on 23rd-25th June.  We need therefore make no  comment
of our own  on  whether  the  Tigers  merit  the  appellation  "terrorists".
Suffice to say that  we  agree  with  Miss  Richards  that  the  attempt  to
minimize the appellant's involvement in acts which  clearly  were  terrorist
in nature will not stand scrutiny.  If the appellant  had  just  driven  the
assassination squad once, he could perhaps  claim  not  to  have  understood
fully what he was getting himself into.  But he took part  repeatedly,  over
a period of  years,  in  missions  to  eliminate  civilians  -  politicians,
businessmen and members of rival Tamil groups -  who  were  opposed  to  the
Tigers.  It matters not that he did not plan the missions himself,  or  that
he did not pull the trigger himself, or even that  this  was  not  the  only
thing he was doing for  the  Tigers  during  the  period  1998-2002.   In  a
mission of this sort, the driver of the getaway car is just as  necessary  a
part of the team as the marksman  who  takes  aim  at  the  target.   It  is
ludicrous to suppose that the appellant did not understand  the  purpose  of
the missions he was going on, and there is no hint in his evidence  that  he
was acting under duress.   On  the  contrary,  so  impressed  was  the  LTTE
leadership with his enthusiasm that they awarded him a medal.

74.  Although the evidential burden rests, as explained  in  Gurung  and  KK
[2004] UKIAT 101, on the Secretary of State, the standard  of  proof  as  to
"serious reasons for considering" is lower than both the  criminal  and  the
ordinary civil standards.  We find, on the account  of  his  activities  put
forward by the appellant and  accepted  by  the  immigration  judge  on  his
appeal,  that  he  has  indeed  committed  war  crimes  and  crimes  against
humanity, and is guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and  principles  of
the United Nations, thus warranting his exclusion  from  the  protection  of
the  Refugee  Convention.   Similarly,  he  is  excluded  from  a  grant  of
humanitarian protection by virtue of  paragraph  339D(i)  and  (ii)  of  the
Immigration Rules.  But because of its  absolute  nature,  SS  is  protected
from removal by Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Further evidence and submissions
75.  It is sometimes necessary, but it is never  desirable,  to  invite  the
parties to send in further written  submissions  after  the  hearing  of  an
appeal.  It was necessary in the instant  case  because  the  issue  of  the
'exclusion clauses' arose in the course  of  proceedings.   But  along  with
Karen Parker's report and Mr Morris's submissions, dealing with that  point,
Birnberg Peirce & Partners also raised three different matters,  which  they
asked the Tribunal to take into account.

76.  First came passages in the COIS Report which had not been drawn to  the
panel's attention during the  hearing.   The  entry  for  1st  January  2007
announces the issuance of "the first high-tech identity card with  a  Social
Security Number, by which a person is identified in a computer  network,  to
LTTE chief Velupillai Prabhakaran."  This was done by  the  Commissioner  of
the Tamil Eelam Department of Registration of Persons, the idea  being  that
civilians living in areas under LTTE control should get ID cards  issued  by
that organisation.  In response, the Sri  Lankan  government  announced  the
next day that it  would  "take  legal  action  against  any  institution  or
organization that is issuing bogus identity cards."  Then comes a  reference
to 31.08 of the COIS Report, about an article dated 20th August 2004 in  the
Daily News.  This describes a visit to the Department  for  Registration  of
Persons ('DRP') by a security  official,  who  found  it  in  "an  appalling
condition."  He was also "surprised to learn that identity  cards  had  been
issued on the production merely of photocopies of birth certificates,  while
the original certificate should be shown."

77.   From  this   information   the   solicitors   derive   the   following
propositions.  The LTTE "has a database which is  maintained  in  Sri  Lanka
and which goes beyond mere fundraising records."  This shows  the  technical
sophistication of the LTTE and lends support to Dr Smith's view that "it  is
also likely to maintain  databases  of  its  opponents."   The  government's
reaction to the notion of ID cards issued by the LTTE is  said  to  call  in
question the usefulness of ID cards issued by the UNHCR, while  the  article
about the DRP is said to indicate that it is not possible to obtain  new  ID
cards without original documentation.

78.  In response to this, Miss Richards protested that the  solicitors  were
seeking to make submissions on material that was available at  the  time  of
the hearing and to adduce further evidence following the conclusion  of  the
hearing.  But regarding the  passages  cited  from  the  COIS  Report,  Miss
Richards did not think that the inclusion of social security  numbers  in  a
computer network meant that the LTTE had a database of its  opponents.   Nor
did she think that the government would regard ID cards issued by the  UNHCR
as "bogus" in the way that it would the ID cards issued by  the  authorities
of a pseudo-separate state.  She did not understand the Daily  News  article
to mean that ID cards could not  be  obtained  without  original  documents.
The article was saying the opposite.

79.  The second matter raised by Birnberg Peirce & Partners was  FK  (Kenya)
[2008] EWCA Civ 119, in which the Court  of  Appeal  examined  the  'country
guidance' in FK (FGM - risk and relocation)  [2007]  UKAIT  41.   Sedley  LJ
made the point that an expert was entitled to reach views on  the  basis  of
his experience without having to give specific sources.  This  showed,  said
the solicitors, that "giving an opinion which is  properly  based  on  broad
experience does not constitute speculation."  In reply,  Miss  Richards  did
not take issue with this general point, but said that it did not affect  her
submissions on the expert evidence in the present case.

80.  The third matter raised by the solicitors  concerned  the  continuation
of PR (medical facilities) CG [2002] UKIAT 4269 as  country  guidance.   Its
antiquity is said to make it  out  of  date,  and  it  should  therefore  be
expunged from the list of 'country guidance' cases.  Miss Richards  contends
that, while the panel in the instant case has considered evidence about  the
availability  of  psychiatric  treatment  in  Colombo,  PR  deals  with  the
availability of medical treatment generally  throughout  the  whole  island,
and still provides useful guidance on this.  It seems to us, looking at  the
long list of country guidance cases promulgated in 2002 and 2003 which  were
deleted in LP, and of which two  concerned  medical  matters,  that  PR  may
simply have been overlooked.  The evidence taken into account in  that  case
will now be at least six years old and, the ceasefire having come  and  gone
since then, can hardly be the starting point for an up-to-date assessment.

81.  Miss Richards was much more concerned about  the  request  by  Birnberg
Peirce to adduce a report  on  Miss  AN  by  Sunila  Abeysekera,  a  leading
feminist and human rights activist in  Sri  Lanka,  who  received  a  United
Nations Human Rights Award in 1998.   The  late  admission  of  this  report
(which Birnberg Peirce had commissioned well before the hearing) is said  to
be justified  by  the  late  arrival  (just  before  the  hearing)  of  Miss
Richards' skeleton argument, which contained virtually nothing  on  internal
flight.  Miss AN was thus, say the solicitors, taken by  surprise  regarding
several of the points raised by Miss Richards in the course of the  hearing,
such as the assertions that she  could  obtain  the  assistance  of  women's
groups and the EPDP in Colombo, and that she would not be stigmatized  as  a
single mother because of the large number of 'war widows' in the country.

82.  Miss Richards contends that this new expert report does not  deal  with
these specific  points  but  rather  with  wider  issues  which  were  fully
explored by Dr Smith and Prof. Good.   She  also  objects  to  the  report's
being put before the Tribunal in circumstances where  it  cannot  be  tested
and challenged.  But if it is to be  admitted,  Miss  Richards  asks  us  to
exclude those general issues - such as arrival at the  airport,  cordon-and-
search operations, and identity cards - and to  treat  with  scepticism  the
sweeping remarks of Sunila Abeysekera about the complete  unavailability  of
any  assistance  for  the  appellant  in  Colombo,  whether   in   providing
accommodation,  helping  with  employment,  or  anything  else.   This,  she
submits, ignores the assistance given by the IOM.

83.  The Tribunal had not given leave for this report  to  be  adduced  when
Birnberg Peirce replied to Miss Richards' objections  by  arguing  that  the
report had to be read as a whole  and  could  not  have  parts  artificially
excised.  The solicitors regretted the late arrival of the report, but  they
were doing their best to help the Tribunal in its task  of  giving  possible
country guidance.  With that in mind, it was necessary for the  Tribunal  to
pay particular attention to the following points made by Ms Abeysekera.

    . It is  extremely  uncommon  to  find  unaccompanied  women  living  by
      themselves.   War  widows  are  to  be  distinguished  from  unmarried
      mothers, who are regarded as "immoral" women.
    . While there is one women's shelter in Colombo providing  accommodation
      for victims of domestic violence, the appellant does not  come  within
      that category.  There is no in  fact  no  institution,  government  or
      private, that can offer the appellant any protection or assistance  as
      a  single  mother  without  family  support  and  with  mental  health
      problems.
    . There is a series of checkpoints  along  the  road  from  Bandaranaike
      International Airport to Colombo, which Miss AN would have  difficulty
      in negotiating without a National Identity Card.  This would also be a
      problem in Colombo itself.
    . Tamil women have fallen under suspicion because of the female  suicide
      bombers who have carried out missions in Colombo, such as the  attempt
      to assassinate the EDPD leader, Devananda, in November  2007  and  the
      blast at a railway station in January 2008.
    . The LTTE's intelligence and surveillance is so thorough that,  whether
      or not they have a computer database of  their  opponents,  they  will
      know all about Miss AN's detention in 1998, her  subsequent  work  for
      the EPDP and her relationship with an EPDP cadre.
    . In 2004 Ms Abeysekera personally handled a case in which a woman  with
      a burn scar was held at a police station on the road from the  airport
      to Colombo on the basis that she could have got the scar  during  LTTE
      training.

84.  As will have been observed, quite a number of matters have been  raised
on behalf of AN,  and  responded  to  by  Miss  Richards,  which  are  quite
separate from the question of  whether  SS  is  excluded  from  the  Refugee
Convention, that being the only matter on  which  further  submissions  were
required after the hearing.   Apart  from  this  unsolicited  material,  the
Tribunal has itself added  to  the  post-hearing  complexity  by  informally
inviting the parties to comment on three topics :

     i) a report from Human Rights Watch  ('HRW'),  Recurring  Nightmare  -
        State Responsibility for "Disappearances"  and  Abductions  in  Sri
        Lanka, which was published just after the hearing;
    ii) the fact that international observers have just pulled out  of  Sri
        Lanka, now that the ceasefire is officially at an end; and
   iii) the letter of 23rd October 2007 from the European  Court  of  Human
        Rights  (publicized  in  the  ILPA  mailing)   adverting   to   the
        application of Rule 39 to Sri Lankan cases pending  at  Strasbourg,
        and requesting Her Majesty's Government to defer the removal to Sri
        Lanka  of  any  Tamil  asylum  seekers,  until  there  has  been  a
        substantive ruling by the Court on the safety of return.

85.  Miss Richards response to the first of these topics  is  that  the  HRW
report is largely consistent with what the Tribunal has  already  seen  from
the Law & Society Trust report about abductions and  disappearances,  namely
that they have predominantly occurred in the North and East of  the  island,
that the LTTE's involvement in them is low, that in Colombo  various  groups
(including the Karuna faction and the EPDP, as well as criminal gangs)  have
used them as a means of extorting funds, and that in  Colombo  many  of  the
victims have been businessmen or people who have  come  to  the  capital  in
order to arrange their onward  travel  abroad.   None  of  this,  says  Miss
Richards, reinforces AN's claim to be at risk.  Insofar as HRW  regards  the
response of the  Sri  Lankan  government  to  these  abductions  as  grossly
inadequate, the Secretary of State "has not sought to  raise  a  sufficiency
of protection argument in these appeals", although she "reserves  the  right
to raise arguments as to sufficiency of protection in other cases."

86.  On the second topic, Miss Richards notes that on  6th  March  2008  the
International Independent Group of Eminent  Persons  ('IIGEP'),  a  team  of
eleven foreign judicial and forensic  experts,  announced  the  end  of  its
observation of the work of the Commission of Inquiry which  the  Sri  Lankan
government had appointed to investigate certain  high-profile  human  rights
abuses.  This decision, contends Miss Richards, was not a  response  to  any
deterioration in the security situation, and has no relevance to  Miss  AN's
case.

87.  Thirdly, Miss Richards notes  that  the  request  from  the  Strasbourg
court was prompted by the plethora of applications which it  was  receiving,
and  invites  the  Tribunal  to  read  the  judgment   of   Collins   J   in
Thangeswarajah  &  ors  [2007]  EWHC  3288  (Admin),   dealing   with   five
applications for judicial review by Tamil asylum seekers and  commenting  on
the letter  from  Strasbourg.   Although  permission  applications  are  not
normally to be cited, Miss Richards thinks his Lordship's view is  pertinent
to this third matter, which the Tribunal itself  raised.   What  Mr  Justice
Collins says is that the Rule 39 applications in Strasbourg have  tended  to
be completely one-sided - no mention being made,  for  example,  of  adverse
credibility findings reached in previous appeals by  the  applicants  -  and
that a blanket ban on return to Sri Lanka simply because an individual is  a
Tamil cannot be supported.  If that is the approach of the  European  Court,
it is not in accordance with what is required by the Convention.

88.  Miss Richards also invites us to take note of Collins J's  observations
on the country guidance in  LP.   Setting  out  the  twelve  'risk  factors'
identified by the Tribunal, his Lordship takes the view that  some  of  them
are better characterized as 'background factors', in that "they  do  not  in
themselves indicate a real risk, but they are matters which, if there  is  a
factor which does give rise to a real  risk  that  the  individual  will  be
suspected of involvement in the LTTE, add  to  the  significance  of  that."
The factors which are properly to be regarded as  'background  factors'  are
(retaining the Tribunal's numbering) :

         i) Tamil ethnicity;
        ii) ...
       iii) ...
        iv) ...
         v) ...
        vi) ...
       vii) The presence of scarring;
      viii) Return from London;
        ix) Illegal departure from Sri Lanka;
         x) Lack of ID card (unless it goes beyond the period in which  the
            individual might  be  expected  to  obtain  an  ID  card  after
            return);
        xi) Having made an asylum claim abroad;
       xii) ...

89.  The remaining factors are the ones which are properly  to  be  regarded
as risk factors per se, these being :

    ii) previous record as a suspected or actual LTTE member or supporter;
   iii) previous criminal record and/or outstanding arrest warrant;
    iv) bail jumping and/or escaping from custody;
     v) having signed a confession or similar document;
    vi) having been asked by the security forces to become an informer;
      ...
      (xii)      having relatives in the LTTE.

90.  Having regard then both to the 'risk factors' properly  so  called  and
to the 'background factors', his Lordship says this at paragraph 16  of  his
judgment :

      "The test therefore, as I see it, is whether there are factors  in  an
      individual  case,  one  or  more,  which  might  indicate   that   the
      authorities would regard the individual as someone who may  well  have
      been involved with the LTTE in a sufficiently significant  fashion  to
      warrant his detention or interrogation."

91.  Birnberg Peirce & Partners now responded  in  turn  to  Miss  Richards'
submissions on the three topics which had been raised by the  Tribunal.   On
the withdrawal of the IIGEP from its scrutiny of the Commission of  Inquiry,
they submitted that this indicated a lack of  genuine  commitment  to  human
rights on the part of the Sri Lankan government.  On  the  letter  from  the
ECtHR,  they  submitted  that  this  confirmed  the   seriousness   of   the
deterioration in the human rights situation in Sri  Lanka.   The  solicitors
had more to say on the  new  HRW  report,  which  revealed  a  further  risk
arising mainly (though not exclusively) to young Tamil men, in  addition  to
official detention and the possibility of torture while in  such  detention.
This was abduction of Tamils suspected of supporting the  LTTE,  even  at  a
low level, by members of paramilitary groups operating with  the  connivance
of the security forces.  Low-level supporters who had  not  previously  been
detained might be identified now  by  the  examination  of  photographs  and
video footage from the ceasefire period, when  the  LTTE  organized  parades
and demonstrations in the North  and  many  people  openly  participated  in
them.

92.  Birnberg Peirce criticized the stance taken on behalf of the  Secretary
of State in respect of sufficiency of protection, namely that she would  not
rely on such an argument in the present case,  but  reserved  the  right  to
raise it in the future.  This was not  acceptable  in  a  potential  country
guidance case.  "If the SSHD considers there is  sufficiency  of  protection
available, she ought to say so now or not at all."  In the  absence  of  any
argument or evidence to the contrary, the Tribunal was invited  to  conclude
that there was no sufficiency of protection.

93.  Finally, the solicitors comment on the report for the year 2007 by  the
US Department of State, which was published on 11th March  2008.   This  was
said to confirm the disastrous state of human  rights  in  Sri  Lanka,  with
gross violations of human rights being perpetrated by both  sides.   In  its
summary, the report highlights the oppressive rule  of  the  LTTE  in  those
areas of the North which it controls, while in those  areas  which  it  does
not control it "carried out at least one politically  motivated  killing  in
Trincomalee, a politically motivated suicide attack in  Colombo,  a  suicide
attack against  a  government  army  base  near  Batticaloa,  a  bombing  of
civilian shoppers in a suburb of Colombo, and bombings of civilian buses  in
the south."

Comments on procedure
94.  It will be apparent from paragraphs 75  to  93  of  this  determination
that a considerable quantity  of  evidence  and  submissions  has  been  put
before the Tribunal since the hearing of this appeal  was  completed,  quite
apart from the matter of the exclusion clauses  which  had  to  be  deferred
until after the hearing.  We have already remarked  that  this  is  never  a
desirable state of affairs, and in  the  instant  case  there  is  a  strong
argument for not admitting the new expert report on AN  which  was  sent  in
with the submissions on the exclusion of SS, even  if  the  highlighting  of
further passages in the COIS Report, which was before us all the  time,  may
not be liable to the same  objection.   On  the  other  hand,  the  Tribunal
itself invited further comments on three other topics, including  a  country
report which had been published after  the  hearing.   We  can  hardly  then
object to comments on yet another country report which was  published  after
the hearing.  As for the admissibility of Ms Abeysekera's  report,  we  have
now been invited to consider another document whose admissibility  may  seem
questionable, namely a High Court judgment in a leave application, which  in
accordance with a Practice Direction of Lord Woolf CJ  should  not  normally
be cited in other proceedings.

95.  What is to be done with all this material?   Apart  from  the  comments
which we solicited ourselves, we have not yet given permission  for  any  of
it to be adduced.  In the circumstances, we do not think it  appropriate  to
admit some of it, and not the rest.  To exclude  some  might  give  rise  to
'satellite litigation' and an unnecessary expenditure  of  time  and  public
money.  We are conscious too of Lord Justice Laws' desiderandum in S  &  ors
[2002]  INLR  416  that  country  guidance  cases  should  be   "effectively
comprehensive."  But we would not want the procedure adopted in the  present
case to create any kind of precedent.   Country  guidance  cases  take  long
enough as it is to be written and promulgated.  The hearing should  normally
be the cut-off point.  If the Tribunal is bombarded  with  further  evidence
and arguments after the  hearing  but  before  the  determination  has  been
written up, it may be an unconscionably long time before  the  determination
is complete.  We hope that this determination has  not  been  delayed  over-
long.

Risk from the LTTE
96.  We shall deal first with the question on which these appeals have  been
listed with possible country guidance in mind, so as  to  establish  whether
the current guidance in PS, which was promulgated in October 2004,  requires
any adjustment.  There was no italicized  headnote  for  reported  cases  in
those days, but the central finding of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in
PS is encapsulated at paragraph 71 of their determination :
      "As we have already observed, those whom the LTTE has on the objective
      evidence targeted in Colombo since the ceasefire have  all  been  high
      profile  opposition  activists,  or  those  whom  they  would  see  as
      renegades or traitors to the LTTE.  Whether it could  be  successfully
      argued that even those of so high a profile would not be provided with
      a sufficiency of protection in Colombo in the Horvath  sense,  may  be
      doubted, but what seems to us quite clear on the  background  evidence
      is that there is no arguable basis for  saying  that  the  Sri  Lankan
      state does not provide a sufficiency of protection to  the  generality
      of Tamils having a localised fear of the LTTE in their home  area  who
      do not reach a similar high profile."

97.  The background evidence which so impressed the  panel  in  PS  was  the
list provided by Miss Richards of all the killings  which  had  occurred  in
the Colombo region between July 2002 and September 2004.  Miss Richards  has
now gone one better by providing a list of all the attacks which took  place
in Colombo between October 2004  and  January  2008,  whether  or  not  they
resulted in casualties, garnered from the websites of the Sri  Lankan  press
and from the pro-LTTE website, TamilNet.  Dr Smith suggests that some Tamil-
on-Tamil violence may have gone unreported, but  we  think  that  the  great
majority of incidents of any significance are likely  to  have  found  their
way into news items which have subsequently been posted on  one  website  or
another.  Sri Lanka has a flourishing and vociferous press, and  any  action
taken by the LTTE against opponents or defectors is likely to be  publicized
on TamilNet  pour  encourager  les  autres,  rather  than  being  concealed.
Neither Dr Smith nor Professor Good knows of a single item  to  add  to  the
list, which we regard as effectively  comprehensive.   It  fully  bears  out
Miss Richards' contention that the  LTTE  in  Colombo  are  targeting  high-
profile individuals, such as politicians, as well as the uniformed  services
and some civilian infrastructure.  No incident is known in  which  the  LTTE
have attacked low-level members of the EPDP, although a suicide  bomber  did
try to assassinate the EPDP leader, Douglas Devananda.  In July  2004  eight
top aides of Colonel Karuna were assassinated in Colombo as well  as  an  MP
who supported his faction, one 'PLOTE Mohan'.   Since  then,  however,  only
one incident has been reported in which the LTTE are thought to have got  at
members of the Karuna group (or TMVP), this being  the  discovery  in  March
2007 of five bodies in a  swamp.   That  so  much  has  been  made  of  this
discovery (initially, in promoting Mr SS's case) is testament to the  dearth
of other hard evidence that people like him are at risk.

98.  Further solid evidence pointing the other way comes in the form of  the
report by the Law & Society Trust, in conjunction  with  other  local  NGOs,
analysing the deaths and disappearances which had been  recorded  throughout
the island between January and August 2007.  The statistics for this  eight-
month period show that eleven people came to a violent  end  in  Colombo,  a
city of some two and a quarter million souls.  That figure does not  compare
unfavourably with the murder rate for English  cities  of  comparable  size.
The figure for the 'disappeared' is higher,  at  78,  but  although  no  one
knows for certain who is responsible for the abductions  in  Colombo,  there
is general agreement that the LTTE are not carrying  out  as  many  as  pro-
government militias and criminal gangs.  On this evidence,  the  chances  of
someone who is not regarded by the LTTE as  a  high-profile  enemy  actually
being abducted or killed by them in Colombo are low  indeed.   Add  to  that
the heightened security in Colombo since the end of the ceasefire, which  Dr
Smith acknowledges has reduced the capacity of the LTTE to  operate  in  the
capital, and Miss Richards' contention is borne  out  that  the  risk  there
from the Tigers is less now than it was in October 2004, when PS  was  heard
and the ceasefire was in full swing.

99.  Set against the  statistical  data,  the  question  whether  the  Tamil
Tigers have an electronic database containing the names of  their  opponents
runs up against the riposte that, even if they do, they are not  making  use
of it to target low-level opponents in  Colombo.   Mr  Mackenzie  essayed  a
stylistic or syntactic analysis of the  language  in  PS  in  an  effort  to
establish that anyone who has given support to the LTTE in the past and  has
then supported one of the other Tamil groups must  be  equated  to  a  "high
level opposition activist".  But the expression "renegades  or  traitors  to
the LTTE", used in paragraph 71 of PS, itself  implies  that  those  tainted
with such opprobrious  epithets  enjoy  a  'high  profile',  in  that  their
activities are perceived as serious enough to deserve punishment.  We  have,
however, already deprecated too nice a linguistic analysis of this  wording.
 Whether somebody is likely to be regarded by the  LTTE  as  a  renegade  or
traitor deserving punishment will have to  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case
basis, being careful not to apply the standard of 'the  reasonable  man'  in
this country, but at the same time  remembering  that  the  Tigers,  however
ruthless, are by-and-large not crazy.  By any standard, a woman  who  worked
as a librarian with a Tamil relief organisation for three  months,  who  was
then  a  development  officer  doing  social  work,  albeit  for   a   rival
organisation, and who now has a young child to look after, is not  going  to
be regarded by the Tigers as deserving of punishment.

100.  Thus we do not find that Miss AN is at risk of serious harm  from  the
LTTE in Colombo, even  if  they  know  all  about  her.   Sunila  Abeysekera
confidently asserts that they will,  even  if  she  is  not  on  a  computer
database, but does not condescend to particulars.  The weight  to  be  given
to Ms Abeysekera's report must obviously be reduced by  its  late  adduction
and the lack of any opportunity to challenge  it  during  the  oral  hearing
before the Tribunal and,  in  particular,  to  test  it  by  way  of  cross-
examination.  Whilst we attach much more weight to the evidence of Dr  Smith
and Professor Good, we think it significant that the latter has no  evidence
of his own as to how the Tigers in Colombo might know  about  AN's  history,
while the former relies on what he has been told by  a  former  intelligence
officer and on an  inference  which  he  draws  from  the  existence  of  an
electronic database of those who contribute to the  LTTE's  finances.   That
is the only identified basis of Dr Smith's opinion that, in  addition  to  a
database for  fund-raising  purposes,  the  Tigers  are  likely  to  have  a
database of their opponents, against which  they  can  check  the  names  of
newcomers  to  the  lodges  in  Colombo.   On  this  key  matter,  while  we
acknowledge the expertise of both Dr Smith  and  Professor  Good,  and  give
weight to their opinions, we think we are justified, on the evidence  before
us, in taking a different view from theirs.

101.  In his submissions, Mr Mackenzie emphasized  the  ruthless  efficiency
of the Tigers  and  the  fact  that  for  years  they  have  controlled  and
administered much of the island, which implies that they possess,  and  make
use of, an electronic database.  We have now had our attention drawn to  the
fact that  last  year  the  LTTE  started  issuing  identity  cards  to  the
inhabitants of the areas which they control,  which  certainly  implies  the
existence of a database of records.  Why should they not  have  built  up  a
database of their opponents?  Mr Mackenzie has also  urged  us  to  hold  in
high regard the carefully-considered opinion of an expert, who is sure  that
such a database exists, and not to require that opinion to be backed  up  by
'hard' evidence in order to be given weight.

102.  There are, we think, two problems with this argument.   First,  it  is
very tempting - and one does not need to be an expert - to reason along  the
following lines : "We know (i) that the LTTE keep a database  of  supporters
for fund-raising purposes, and  (ii)  that  they  have  started  issuing  ID
cards, which also requires a database.  It would (iii) be in their  interest
to keep a database of their opponents.   Ergo  (iv)  they  must  have  one."
Such a contention, however, rests on an unproven  generalisation  about  how
people in far-off lands with very different cultures are likely  to  behave.
Secondly, while we do not disagree with the proposition that  an  expert  is
entitled to form an opinion based on his experience and  expertise,  without
necessarily having a panoply of 'objective' facts to back up  that  opinion,
we think that the weight to be given to the opinion even of a  distinguished
expert will diminish in inverse  proportion  to  the  amount  of  observable
facts which he  can  marshal  in  support  of  his  opinion.   Lord  Justice
Sedley's analysis in FK (Kenya) was not,  in  our  view,  intended  to  give
approval to  experts  not  sourcing  their  reports,  but  to  warn  against
disregarding the expertise of a report's author when assessing the value  of
his report.  In the  instant  case,  Dr  Smith  has  only  the  word  of  an
informant to add to the inference he draws  from  the  fact  that  the  LTTE
already have a database for  other  purposes.   We  do  not  know  who  that
informant was, or how  he  came  by  that  information,  or  whether  it  is
reliable.  We do, of course, appreciate that  Dr  Smith  must  preserve  the
confidentiality of his sources when they have  requested  it.   But  against
this information emanating from a former Sri Lankan intelligence officer  we
must set the dearth of  evidence  that  opponents  of  the  LTTE  have  been
targeted in Colombo (or anywhere else) because they came  up  positive  when
checked against a database of the LTTE's opponents.

103.  Miss Richards says that  Dr  Smith  has  been  speculating,  while  Mr
Mackenzie  says  that  he  has  legitimately  been  exercising  his   expert
judgment.  We have to say that  the  evidence  before  us  simply  does  not
establish that an electronic database of the LTTE's  opponents  exists.   So
we do not have to take the next step and consider whether Miss AN is  likely
to be on it.  But if we had to do so, we would not think it likely that  the
social work which the appellant did under the aegis of the  EPDP  in  Jaffna
has earned her a place in the catalogue of the LTTE's enemies.

104.  For the reasons we have already given, we do not think  it  reasonably
likely that Miss AN will come to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  LTTE  in
Colombo.  People like Miss AN, whose past  involvement  with  the  LTTE  and
with other Tamil groups is not such as to excite the wrath of  the  LTTE  in
Colombo, are not at real risk of persecution by the LTTE in Colombo, so  the
question of whether  the  government  offers  a  sufficiency  of  protection
against the LTTE does not arise  in  such  cases.   Miss  Richards  has  not
actually sought to argue, in the present case, that there is  a  sufficiency
of protection in Colombo, but wishes to reserve  the  Secretary  of  State's
position for future  cases.   Birnberg  Peirce  &  Partners  have  protested
vigorously against this stance,  and  it  does  seem  to  us  that  one  can
reasonably draw the inference, from  the  absence  of  any  contention  that
there is a sufficiency of protection, that the Secretary  of  State  accepts
that those whom the LTTE are determined to  eliminate  cannot  look  to  the
government for a reasonable degree of protection.   But  that  is  not  this
case.

Risk from the Sri Lankan authorities
105.  Although country guidance has not been sought  regarding  this  aspect
of the appeal, we need also to address the issue of the  risk  to  returnees
from the authorities.  We have been asked in particular to give our view  on
whether the second of the risk factors identified in LP applies to Miss  AN,
namely whether she has a "previous record as  a  suspected  or  actual  LTTE
member or supporter."  Much energy was initially expended  on  the  question
whether the CID at the airport have computers or not, but as Professor  Good
observed, even if the CID do not, the Immigration  Service  certainly  does,
and when incoming passengers are being checked, a 'Stop List' and  a  'Watch
List' on the computer will alert the immigration officer to anyone  in  whom
the CID would have an interest.  The Tribunal in LP accepted  that  this  is
so, and found that the appellant in that  case  would  be  on  the  computer
record because he had been formally brought before  a  court  and  had  been
granted bail before absconding.  He therefore came within the fourth of  the
risk categories, namely "bail jumping."  We note also that the head  of  the
CID told a Home Office mission in 2002 that photographs  of  wanted  persons
were not available at  the  airport,  but  that  their  names  were  on  the
computer.

106.   The  background  evidence  clearly  supports  the  existence   of   a
centralized national database accessible  by  the  security  services.   The
National Intelligence Bureau is said to have records going  back  ten  years
or even longer, and to have had a central  database  since  2004.   Although
there is a lack of computer facilities in the north  of  the  island,  paper
records are sent south and are transferred onto the computer database.   The
question for us then is not whether,  as  in  the  case  of  the  LTTE,  the
database exists at all, but who would be  on  the  database.   In  his  oral
evidence, Professor Good did not venture to surmise who  was  likely  to  be
stopped at the airport, save those for  whom  an  arrest  warrant  has  been
issued, although in his written  report  he  expressed  the  view  that  the
authorities have every incentive to maintain official  records  of  suspects
who have been  arrested,  even  if  they  have  subsequently  been  released
without charge.  Dr Smith was less  cautious,  asserting  that  the  central
database contains the names of all those who have  ever  been  detained  and
subsequently released as "unacquitted suspects."

107.  We think that Dr Smith has allowed himself, as he did  with  the  LTTE
database, to slip from the idea that it would  be  useful  to  have  certain
information on a database to a prediction that the information must be on  a
database.  We think it intrinsically unlikely that  everyone  who  has  ever
been detained by the authorities in the course of the Sri  Lankan  conflict,
or at least in the last 10-15 years, is now on a computer database which  is
checked by the Immigration Service when failed asylum seekers arrive at  the
airport, and is checked by the police or army when people are picked  up  at
road-blocks or in cordon-and-search operations.  The evidence  suggests,  on
the contrary, that the database is far narrower than that.  When Tamils  are
picked up in Colombo the authorities want to know why  they  have  come  and
what they are doing, if they  are  not  long-term  residents  of  the  city.
There are no reports of people being detained and  perhaps  sent  to  Boossa
camp at Galle because they were once  held  for  questioning  in  Jaffna  or
Batticaloa years before.  As  for  arrivals  at  Bandaranaike  International
Airport, the 'Watch List' and the 'Stop List' clearly contain the  names  of
people who are 'seriously' wanted (to use a phrase of  Mr  Justice  Collins)
by the authorities.  Equally clearly, the evidence does  not  indicate  that
they contain the names of  everyone  who  has  ever  been  questioned  about
possible knowledge of, or involvement in, the LTTE.   The  majority  of  Sri
Lankan asylum seekers coming to this country claim to have been detained  at
some time by the  authorities,  but  there  are  no  reports  of  any  being
detained  at  the  airport  on  return  because  they  were  once  held  for
questioning years ago and then released.

108.  In Miss AN's case, we regard it as highly unlikely that the record  of
her detention in 1998 is on  a  database  which  may  be  consulted  by  the
authorities in Colombo, should they ever have cause  to  question  her,  and
will reveal her as an LTTE suspect.  The authorities in  the  north  of  the
island took no further interest in her after  she  was  released  in  August
1998, and indeed she went on to work for several years for  an  organisation
which is on the government side.  Dr Smith surmises that  the  EPDP  is  too
disorganized  to  have  passed  on  to  the  Sri  Lankan   authorities   the
information that Miss AN was working for them.  But he  also  surmises  that
another  pro-government  organisation,  the  TMVP,  has  passed  on  to  the
authorities the fact that their member, Mr SS, was detained by the LTTE  and
may have disclosed information about the Karuna group.  It is not  clear  to
us that there is any sustainable basis for supposing that  one  organisation
would, while the other would  not,  pass  on  relevant  information  to  the
authorities.  Once again, we fear Dr Smith is  going  beyond  his  expertise
and simply speculating.

109.  We can therefore discount  the  second  of  the  twelve  risk  factors
listed in LP, namely previous record as an LTTE suspect.  At this  point  we
would respectfully endorse the distinction made in the recent  judgement  of
Collins J, who as  President  of  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  gained
considerable experience of  Sri  Lankan  cases,  between  the  risk  factors
properly so called, one or more of which may be enough to cause  a  returnee
to be detained and ill-treated, and the 'background factors'  which  do  not
themselves, singly or cumulatively, give rise to such a risk, but which  may
increase the risk when one of the 'risk factors' per se is  present.   Apart
from previous record as an LTTE suspect,  the  latter  comprise  a  criminal
record or outstanding arrest warrant, having jumped  bail  or  escaped  from
custody, having signed a confession  or  having  been  asked  to  become  an
informer, and having relatives in the LTTE.  None of those factors  impinges
upon Miss AN.

110.  All of the 'background factors' are, on the  other  hand,  present  in
AN's case.  But as we have observed, even all of them together do  not  give
rise, without one of the risk factors per se, to a reasonable likelihood  of
detention and ill-treatment by the authorities.  To take an example  of  one
of these factors, we note that Sunila Abeysekera, after many years as a pro-
Tamil activist in Colombo, has only  brought  up  one  instance  within  her
personal knowledge of a Tamil being detained because of scarring  (this  was
at a police station rather than at the airport), and we may infer  from  the
absence of any mention of  ill-treatment  that  the  detainee  was  released
unharmed.  To take another example, Dr Smith postulated  that  AN  would  be
detained at the airport simply because she was  arriving  from  London,  but
when asked if he knew of any passengers having been detained  in  this  way,
he did not.  All he could say was that, if he were a Sri Lankan  immigration
officer, he would be suspicious of passengers returning from London.

111.  The one background factor which comes with a caveat is  (x)  "lack  of
ID card."  Mr Justice  Collins  adds  the  qualification,  "unless  it  goes
beyond the period in which the individual might be expected to obtain an  ID
card after return", while the Tribunal in LP has this to  say  at  paragraph
240 about Tamils who are found -  at  a  checkpoint,  during  a  cordon-and-
search operation or when their  lodge  is  raided  -  to  have  no  identity
document :

      "If the appellant asserts that he would be at risk  for  that  reason,
      then he or she will need to show why it is he or she cannot obtain  an
      identity document within a reasonable time of returning to Sri  Lanka.
      They would not be expected to carry an identity card at the airport if
      they are being returned on temporary  documentation  obtained  in  the
      United Kingdom.  For a short time, while new documents are obtained, a
      returnee should be able to establish the fact of  his  recent  return,
      with little difficulty."

112.  What has to be done in order to procure a new National  Identity  Card
in Colombo?  The  evidence  is  conflicting,  but  the  item  most  recently
brought to our attention indicates that the Department for the  Registration
of Persons will issue one to an applicant who produces a birth  certificate,
even a photocopied one.  Registration of births has  long  been  routine  in
Sri Lanka, unlike other parts of South Asia, and if  one's  birth  has  been
registered, one should be able to obtain a copy of one's  birth  certificate
in Colombo.  If there is no record of one's birth, then one has to  ask  the
headman of one's native village to confirm one's  identity,  although  there
is the alternative of bribing an  employee  at  the  Registry  to  issue  an
'official' birth certificate, or of buying a  forged  certificate.   If  all
else fails, the UNHCR will issue an identity document.

113.  It is likely that Miss AN can get a copy of her birth  certificate  in
Colombo, rather than having somehow to make her way to  Jaffna  and  present
herself to the grama seveka.  We also think  it  likely,  as  Miss  Richards
suggests, that she can either get her old ID card back, or at least get  the
information which appears on it,  such  as  the  serial  number,  so  as  to
facilitate the issue of a new one.   The  appellant  is  not  likely  to  be
without an identity document in Colombo for so long after arriving from  the
UK as to arouse suspicion.

114.  Sunila Abeysekera highlights the recent use of females by the LTTE  as
suicide bombers, but we do not  think  we  are  applying  the  standards  of
'reasonableness' in the country of adjudication when we say  that  a  mother
with a 2-year old baby is far less likely to  be  regarded  as  a  potential
suicide bomber than a woman who is without  dependants.   Indeed,  the  fact
that the appellant is a single mother with a child will greatly  reduce  any
suspicion which may fall upon her as a Tamil originating from the  north  of
the island.  We should say at this point that the evidence does not  support
Mr Mackenzie's submission that having one's origin in the north or  east  of
the island should be added to the list in LP as a risk factor, or even as  a
separate 'background factor'.

Internal relocation to Colombo
115.  For a Tamil living in Colombo, there is undoubtedly  the  prospect  of
being stopped and questioned by the security forces or the police, and  some
of those who get stopped are detained  for  further  questioning.   But  the
evidence shows that the great majority are released within a short time.   A
good example comes from an official at  the  Centre  for  Human  Rights  and
Development, who relates how, after an LTTE bombing in Colombo,  some  1,500
persons were arrested at street checkpoints, but most  were  released  after
two or three days.  Of the rest, about 103 were  sent  to  Boossa  detention
centre, and a few more were held at the Terrorist  Investigation  Department
('TID') in Colombo.  But most  of  those  were  then  released  through  the
intervention of the Supreme Court.  Indeed, the  judicial  activism  of  the
Supreme Court has done much to mitigate the harshness of the tight  security
regime.  In June  2007  the  expulsion  of  Tamils  from  their  lodges  was
declared illegal, and those expelled were brought  back  at  state  expense.
In December 2007 the permanent checkpoints were declared  illegal,  although
the authorities got round that  by  setting  up  "mobile"  checkpoints.   In
January this year, the security forces were  told  they  could  not  disturb
people's residences between 9 p.m. and 6 a.m.

116.  The official mentioned above put the current number  of  detainees  at
Boossa and the TID at around 550, which Mr Mackenzie thinks is too high  for
them all to be "serious" suspects rather than  the  unfortunate  victims  of
discrimination and harassment.  But with a Tamil population in Colombo of  a
quarter of a million, we do not think this number of detainees represents  a
real risk to Miss AN of prolonged detention.  Nor is she  at  real  risk  of
'disappearance' or abduction.  The great majority of the victims  are  young
men, and the numbers involved (78 in the eight months  between  January  and
August 2007) are not so great as to make abduction a real  risk  for  Tamils
in Colombo generally.

117.  Much has been made of the undue harshness which  AN  will  face  as  a
single mother without accommodation or employment  and  without  friends  or
family to turn to in Colombo, but this is to leave out of account what  even
Dr Smith acknowledges to be the very generous  support  package  offered  by
the IOM to voluntary returnees.  After "smoothing the re-entry process"  the
IOM provides "a comprehensive  package  of  support  for  five  years  after
arrival", which includes "five years shelter guaranteed."  We do  not  think
it is open to the appellant to say that, if she loses her appeal,  she  will
not take advantage of this package, and to argue from that refusal that  she
will face destitution in Colombo which,  accordingly,  is  not  a  place  to
which she can reasonably be expected to relocate.

118.  We note the concern of IOM that some of those  returned  involuntarily
may have got into trouble through not having ID cards, and that  even  being
enrolled on  the  IOM's  reintegration  programme  is  not  a  guarantee  of
immunity from trouble, as evidenced by the young  man  from  that  programme
who was picked up at  a  checkpoint  and  detained  for  a  month.   But  we
reiterate that, as most detainees are released after a short time, there  is
not a real risk to Tamils in Colombo, even young  Tamil  men,  of  detention
leading to ill-treatment.

119.  As well as the accommodation and maintenance available from  the  IOM,
the appellant is likely to get a sympathetic reception from the EPDP to  any
request for help.  After all, she worked for them for six  years,  and  they
were concerned enough about her safety to move her, first to Vavuniya,  then
to Mankulam, and finally out of the country.  Her uncle in  Canada  actually
paid for that final journey, and  is  someone  to  whom  she  may  look  for
financial support for her sojourn in  Colombo.   The  EPDP  clearly  had  no
objection to the appellant "living in sin" with another of their  operatives
in Jaffna, and it seems that the couple would have had a baby  together,  if
her partner had lived.  That the appellant was prepared  to  do  this  shows
that the stigma of unmarried motherhood is not so great in Sri Lanka  as  to
make life intolerable.

120.  Having found that the material needs of Miss AN and her child will  be
taken care of in Colombo, we turn finally to her  mental  state.   This,  we
find, is not nearly as bad as has been submitted  on  her  behalf.   Despite
her horrific experience in 1998, she has clearly  been  able  to  cope  with
life since then.   Until  the  beginning  of  2005  she  had  a  job  and  a
boyfriend, and was hoping to have his baby.  Shortly after  coming  to  this
country she formed a sexual  relationship  with  another  man,  and  is  now
looking after his child, whom he comes to see on  a  regular  basis.   There
has been no suggestion that the appellant is unable  to  care  properly  for
her child.  She has apparently not needed, and has certainly  not  obtained,
psychiatric treatment.  She  has  twice  been  for  a  consultation  with  a
psychiatrist, the first lasting for three hours in  July  2005,  the  second
lasting for one-and-a-half hours in January 2008.  Both  consultations  were
arranged so that a report could be written for a forthcoming appeal.   Apart
from that, the appellant has been on anti-depressant  medication  (something
which a vast number of people in this  country  are  prescribed),  and  last
year had some counselling sessions.  We have not heard from the  person  who
conducted those sessions.  The evidence does  not  actually  show  that  the
appellant is likely to need  access  to  psychiatric  services  in  Colombo,
whereas psychotropic medication is freely available - and indeed free.

121.  Dr Harrison predicts that the appellant will be unable  to  render  an
account of herself if she is detained in  Colombo,  but  we  simply  do  not
accept that after a consultation lasting an hour  and  a  half,  carried  on
through an interpreter, such a prediction can be relied on.  The  very  fact
that the appellant will be looking after a young child is likely  to  reduce
any suspicion which she might attract as a  newcomer  to  Colombo,  and  she
will have the IOM to monitor her and provide assistance.  Her  mental  state
is not such that, whatever her present fears of return, she will  be  unable
to make a realistic assessment of the situation on the ground when she  gets
to Colombo.  Indeed, her mental condition is a million miles  from  that  of
Mr SS, whose psychosis is so severe  that  he  cannot  function  at  all  in
society.  He certainly would not be able to render an account of himself  if
stopped at a checkpoint.  But that is not a real risk for Miss AN.

Summary of general conclusions
122.  It will be useful here to set out  in  summary  form  the  conclusions
which we have reached on the general issues raised in the  course  of  these
proceedings.  We give these under three headings.

                    RISK IN COLOMBO FROM THE TAMIL TIGERS

         a) Although PS (LTTE - internal flight - sufficiency of protection)
            CG [2004] UKIAT 297 is  now  out  of  date  in  respect  of  the
            background evidence upon which  it  relied,  we  make  the  same
            general assessment of the risk from the LTTE  to  failed  asylum
            seekers in Colombo, namely that there is no real risk  to  those
            who are not "high profile opposition activists,  or  those  whom
            they would see as renegades or traitors to the LTTE."

         b) The background evidence indicates that, with tighter security in
            Colombo since the breakdown  of  the  ceasefire,  the  operating
            capacity  of  the  LTTE  has  been  restricted,  and  they   are
            concentrating  their  attacks  upon  individuals  with  a   high
            political or military profile, as well as upon  members  of  the
            security forces generally and upon military  installations,  and
            to some extent upon civilian infrastructure.


         c) There is scarcely any evidence that low-level opponents  of  the
            LTTE or low-level supporters who have left their ranks have been
            targeted in Colombo since October 2004.

         d) There is no solid evidence that the LTTE maintain a computerized
            database of opponents and defectors, against which a  check  may
            be run when a person comes to their notice.

                  RISK IN COLOMBO FROM THE SECURITY FORCES

         e) The country guidance in LP (LTTE  area  -  Tamils  -  Colombo  -
            risk?) CG [2007] UKAIT 76 remains valid, and  we  would  endorse
            the suggestion made by Collins J that the twelve 'risk  factors'
            listed at paragraph 238 of that determination  may  usefully  be
            divided into risk factors per se and 'background factors'  which
            do not in themselves create a real risk to failed asylum seekers
            in Colombo, but which may exacerbate  the  situation  when  they
            combine with risk factors per se.


         f) The National  Intelligence  Bureau  in  Sri  Lanka  maintains  a
            computerized database of persons  who  are  thought  to  pose  a
            threat, while immigration officers at Bandaranaike International
            Airport use a computer system which can flag up whether a newly-
            arrived passenger is on the 'Wanted List' or 'Stop  List'.   The
            CID at the airport will be alerted when this happens.  But there
            is no firm evidence to support the contention that everyone  who
            has ever been detained by the police or army is likely to be  on
            the database.

         g) Failed asylum seekers who arrive in Colombo without  a  National
            Identity Card should be able to get a new one on production of a
            birth certificate, which is usually easy to obtain.  If  an  NIC
            cannot be issued, the UNHCR will issue  a  substitute  which  is
            generally acceptable.  Those newly arrived in Colombo who do not
            yet have an ID card should, if questioned  about  their  ID,  be
            able to establish that they have recently come from abroad.

         h) Roadside checkpoints,  cordon-and-search  operations  and  raids
            upon  'lodges'  do  not  in  general  create  a  real  risk   of
            persecution or serious ill-treatment.  Most of  those  held  are
            released within a fairly short time, and the Supreme  Court  has
            intervened to curb the excesses of the security forces.

         i) Abductions and kidnappings have been carried out by a variety of
            groups, mostly pro-government militias and criminal  gangs,  but
            the scale of these disappearances does not create a real risk to
            failed asylum seekers arriving in Colombo.

                       INTERNAL RELOCATION TO COLOMBO

         j) For a person at risk in his home area  but  not,  in  accordance
            with (a)-(i), at risk in Colombo, relocation to the capital will
            not  in  general  be  unduly  harsh.   Young   Tamil   men   are
            particularly likely to be stopped at checkpoints or  rounded  up
            in cordon-and-search operations or in raids upon  'lodges',  but
            most  detainees  are  released  within  a  fairly  short   time.
            Abductions and kidnappings have tended to focus  on  businessmen
            and those about to leave the country, although there  is  recent
            evidence of LTTE supporters  being  abducted  by  pro-government
            paramilitaries.


         k) Failed asylum seekers with no relatives or friends to turn to in
            Colombo may be expected to avail themselves  of  the  assistance
            afforded by the International Organisation for Migration,  which
            provides accommodation and the necessities of life for voluntary
            returnees.  Other  NGOs  also  offer  support,  particularly  to
            women.

         l)  For  returnees  with  mental  health   problems,   psychotropic
            medication is freely available in Colombo, which  also  has  the
            bulk of the psychiatric facilities available in Sri Lanka.  Most
            of the practitioners being Sinhalese, there  may  be  linguistic
            and  cultural  barriers  for  Tamils  with  serious  psychiatric
            disorders.  But mental health problems  are  widespread  in  Sri
            Lanka.


Conclusion in these appeals
123.  Having found that internal relocation  to  Colombo  would  be  neither
unsafe nor unduly harsh for Miss AN, we can briefly add  that  removal  will
not contravene her human rights.  She has not put forward family  life  with
the father of her child as a barrier to removal, or  sought  to  argue  that
her private life in the United Kingdom is of such a  quality  as  to  engage
the operation of Article 8.  She and her child can, on the other hand,  live
in safety and without undue harshness in Colombo.  Mr SS, of course,  cannot
be removed to Sri Lanka without breach of his human rights, but is  excluded
from the Refugee Convention and from humanitarian protection.


DECISION


The appeal of AN is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
rights grounds.

The appeal  of  SS  is  dismissed  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
grounds, but is allowed on human rights grounds.


Richard McKee
                                                              10th June 2008
