

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

          AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Between 3rd and 7th July 2006                 |2nd August 2006              |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                   The Hon Mr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                        Senior Immigration Judge Warr
                      Senior Immigration Judge Southern


                                   Between

                                     AA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Henderson, instructed by The Refugee Legal
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kovats, instructed by The Treasury Solicitor


   A failed asylum seeker returned involuntarily to Zimbabwe does  not  face
   on return a real risk of being subjected to persecution or  serious  ill-
   treatment on that account alone.


   SM and Others (MDC - internal flight-  risk categories) CG  [2005]  UKIAT
   00100 is reaffirmed. Two further risk categories are  identified:   those
   whose military  history  discloses  issues  that  will  lead  to  further
   investigation by the security services upon return to Harare Airport  and
   those in respect of whom there are outstanding  and  unresolved  criminal
   issues.

   A deportee from the United Kingdom who,  having  been  subjected  to  the
   first stage interview at the airport, is  allowed  to  pass  through  the
   airport is likely to be the subject of some monitoring in his  home  area
   by the local police or the CIO but the evidence does not indicate a  real
   risk of persecutory ill-treatment  for  those  who  are  being  monitored
   solely because of their return from the United Kingdom.

   The  general  country  conditions  are  extremely  difficult  but   those
   difficulties will not generally  be  sufficiently  severe  to  enable  an
   appellant to rely upon article 3 to resist removal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. This reconsideration comes before us by order of the Court of  Appeal
      (AA [2006] EWCA Civ 401). That Court set aside the determination of a
      panel of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (AA [2005] UKAIT  00144)
      ("the first Tribunal"). The first Tribunal, following  a  hearing  in
      October 2005, found there to be  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
      determination  of  the  immigration  judge  who   had   allowed   the
      appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  to  remove
      him as an illegal entrant. The first  Tribunal  substituted  a  fresh
      decision to allow the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  The
      appellant's appeal was remitted to this  Tribunal  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal to be heard de novo. But we do refer where appropriate to  the
      determination of the first Tribunal. It  is  important  to  recognise
      that we have before us much evidence that was not  before  the  first
      Tribunal and that this is not a review of the decision of  the  first
      Tribunal.


   2. Over a five day period commencing on 3rd July 2006 we  heard  from  a
      number of witnesses who gave oral evidence. We  received  submissions
      from both counsel who have  each  provided  skeleton  arguments.  The
      scale of the material before us is  so  extensive  that  it  was  not
      realistically possible for  all  the  evidence  to  be  discussed  in
      submissions. The documentary evidence is  arranged  in  six  volumes.
      Volume one contains the evidence in judicial review proceedings  that
      now stand adjourned pending the completion of  the  process  of  this
      Tribunal giving country guidance in relation to the issues with which
      this reconsideration is concerned. Volumes two and three contain  the
      evidence that was before the first Tribunal in AA [2005] UKAIT 00144.
      Volumes four and five contain the additional evidence  filed  by  the
      respondent  and  the  appellant  respectively.  Volume  six  contains
      further evidence and it is into this volume that further  documentary
      evidence has been inserted as it emerged during the hearing. When  we
      refer to this documentary evidence it is by volume  and  page  number
      (volume number/page number).

   3. After the hearing had concluded we received a document from Mr Kovats
      headed "Note on Statistics". Some  days  later  we  received  a  much
      longer note from Mr Henderson in  which  he  objected  to  us  having
      regard to Mr Kovats' note. He argues that it  is  inappropriate  that
      additional evidence be introduced in this  way.  Mr  Henderson  then,
      over thirteen pages, responds to the material in Mr Kovats' note.  We
      have  decided  to  have  no  regard  to  the  additional  information
      contained in any communication received after the hearing.  We  reach
      our conclusions upon the evidence, both written and oral, put  before
      the Tribunal during and prior to the hearing alone.

   4. We have had regard to all of the documentary evidence listed  in  the
      schedule to this determination as well as the many witness statements
      and other material  listed  in  the  index  to  the  six  volumes  of
      documentary evidence. We cannot discuss it  all  specifically  within
      this determination. We have decided, at the request of and  with  the
      consent of the parties that the  identity  of  the  majority  of  the
      witnesses and organisations is to be kept anonymous.  This means that
      many of the documents in the schedule are also anonymised.


   Background


   5. AA, who was born on 8th April 1975, is  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.  He
      arrived at London City airport on 6th November 2002, having travelled
      via South Africa and France. He travelled on his own passport,  which
      remains valid. He was granted temporary admission but  absconded  and
      next came to notice when he came to the attention of police two and a
      half years later. At first he gave a false name, that of his  brother
      who had been granted leave. But checks  showed  that  the  leave  had
      expired. AA then gave  his  correct  name,  and  was  detained  under
      immigration powers. He then claimed asylum.


   6. AA's asylum claim was refused on 27th July 2005 and he appealed to an
      immigration judge who rejected as untrue his claim to be at  risk  on
      account of anything he had done  in  Zimbabwe.  But  he  allowed  the
      appeal on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.   He  found  that  the
      appellant would face, on return to Zimbabwe, a  real  risk  of  being
      subjected  to  persecutory  ill-treatment  at  the   hands   of   the
      authorities simply because he would be seen to be a  person  who  was
      being returned to Zimbabwe after having made an  unsuccessful  asylum
      claim  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  reaching  that  conclusion  the
      immigration judge had relied upon a  recent  news  report  concerning
      country conditions in Zimbabwe which he had  found  on  the  internet
      after the hearing.

   7. Reconsideration of  that  decision  was  ordered  because  it  was  a
      material error of law for the immigration judge to rely upon evidence
      not adduced at the hearing. If the immigration judge wished  to  rely
      upon such material he should have reconvened the hearing to give each
      party the opportunity to comment upon it.

   8. That reconsideration  hearing  came  before  the  first  Tribunal  in
      October 2005. It was listed before a  legal  panel  of  the  Tribunal
      because this was seen as a suitable case  to  give  country  guidance
      upon the issue of risk on return to those  removed  involuntarily  to
      Zimbabwe after having made an unsuccessful asylum claim in the United
      Kingdom. A moratorium on compulsory returns to Zimbabwe in respect of
      all those having no right to remain, including those who had not made
      an asylum claim,  had  been  introduced  in  January  2002.  Removals
      recommenced on 16th November  2004.   But,  on  7th  July  2005,  the
      Secretary of State suspended the involuntary return of failed  asylum
      seekers once more after reports in the  press  of  accounts  of  such
      returnees being mistreated and after judicial review proceedings  had
      been brought in the High Court.

   9. The first Tribunal found there to be a material error of law, for the
      reasons given above. This meant that the decision of the  immigration
      judge was set aside and  the  Tribunal  was  to  substitute  a  fresh
      decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.

  10. The first Tribunal agreed that  the  immigration  judge  was  plainly
      correct to reject the factual basis of AA's claim to be at risk  upon
      return to Zimbabwe on account of his association with  the  MDC.  The
      first Tribunal said this:

           "There is no doubt in our mind that  the  Appellant's  claim  to
           asylum was, in all its substantive parts, fraudulent,  and  that
           the Appellant himself has been deliberately dishonest in  almost
           all his dealings with the authorities in this country."

      That finding of fact is not challenged before us and we adopt it.

  11. We heard oral evidence from a  number  of  witnesses.  They  included
      Professor Ranger who gave country expert evidence on  behalf  of  the
      appellant, two witnesses from the Home Office, Mr  Walker  who  is  a
      senior executive officer in the Country Specific Asylum  Policy  Team
      of the Asylum and  Appeals  Directorate,  Mr  Walsh,  who  is  Acting
      Director of the Asylum Policy Directorate, and  three  witnesses  who
      had personal experience of procedures at Harare airport. Those  three
      witnesses had not given oral evidence before the first Tribunal.

  12. Thus the issue in AA's appeal is whether the evidence  establishes  a
      real risk of serious ill-treatment for a person who had been found to
      have no objectively well founded fear of being  so  treated  for  any
      reason other than that he was being forced to return to Zimbabwe  and
      would be regarded as a failed asylum seeker when he  arrived  at  the
      airport. If he was able to get through the airport there needed to be
      an assessment of his position generally, again on the basis of  being
      returned in these circumstances.

  13. Before considering  the  evidence  in  detail  we  set  out  a  brief
      overview.


   Overview of the evidence


  14. As mentioned above,  since  January  2002  the  respondent  has  only
      carried out involuntary returns of failed asylum seekers to  Zimbabwe
      between 16th November 2004 and 7th July 2005. The evidence  indicates
      that during that period 210 "principal applicants" were  removed.  We
      sought to enquire whether this means that if dependants were  removed
      with the  principal  applicant  the  figure  might  increase  in  any
      significant  way.  This  information  was  not  available.  Both   Mr
      Henderson and Mr Kovats  accepted  at  the  hearing  that  we  should
      proceed on the basis of the figure  of  210  removals.   It  appeared
      probable that when selecting candidates for removal  from  the  large
      pool available the respondent had been unlikely to select individuals
      with dependants as that might complicate the removal process.

  15. At the hearing before the first Tribunal the main evidence  available
      of what became of those returned to  Zimbabwe  was  provided  by  the
      London based Zimbabwe Association.  They  sought  to  monitor  twenty
      eight such removals and had information as to what  had  happened  in
      fourteen of them. There  was  also  information  from  press  reports
      concerning other persons removed.  Taken  together  this  represented
      only a small number of those removed. The  first  Tribunal  had  also
      information obtained by the  respondent  in  the  form  of  a  "field
      report" prepared by a team of persons of which Mr Walker was a member
      that  had  visited  Harare  for  that  purpose.  The  first  Tribunal
      criticised the respondent for not doing more to find out  about  what
      had happened to those returned.   The  respondent  was  reluctant  to
      follow up individual citizens  of  Zimbabwe  once  returned.  It  was
      considered inappropriate for embassy staff  to  monitor  citizens  in
      this way but also there was concern that to do so might give rise  to
      a risk that would not otherwise exist.

  16. The respondent sought to obtain for this hearing more  evidence  from
      NGOs in Zimbabwe as to whether they knew of a systematic  pattern  of
      ill-treatment of involuntarily returned asylum  seekers  and  if  not
      whether they would expect to have been  aware  of  it  if  such  ill-
      treatment was going on. These enquires were made  on  behalf  of  the
      respondent by the British Embassy in Harare.  The  response  received
      to these enquiries, broadly, was that the  NGOs  were  not  aware  of
      involuntarily returned failed asylum  seekers  being  ill-treated.  A
      number also said they would have expected to have been aware if there
      was a pattern of such  ill-treatment  in  fact  going  on.  We  shall
      examine this evidence and how the respondent went about collecting it
      in more detail below.

  17. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that this evidence is  of  no
      value. The methodology is criticized.  It  is  said  that  the  views
      expressed  were  not  those  of  the  organisations  but  simply  the
      individuals contacted. In any event, it is said that as the number of
      involuntarily returned failed asylum seekers is so small and  because
      the NGOs are not "set up" to monitor such individuals it  is  not  at
      all surprising that the NGOs did not pick up  this  information.  The
      NGOs had other matters to deal with, not least the massive  scale  of
      the problems caused by "Operation Murambatsvina"  which  had  led  to
      hundreds of thousands of people being displaced and being  in  urgent
      need of assistance. The Refugee Legal Centre  ("RLC")  has  contacted
      the people concerned within some of the NGOs. It is argued that  what
      they discovered casts further doubt  upon  the  reliability  of  this
      evidence. The appellant agues also that such is the climate  of  fear
      generated by the ruthlessness with which the authorities  respond  to
      any form of dissent that most  Zimbabweans  do  not  seek  to  report
      abuses perpetrated by the authorities. This, it is said, explains why
      nothing was heard from returnees who had expressed  an  intention  to
      contact The Zimbabwe Association following removal but did not.


  18. As mentioned above, we heard from Professor Ranger.  We  discuss  his
      evidence in more detail below. We had written evidence  from  another
      country expert, Dr McGregor. Her  evidence  was  concerned  with  the
      ability of the Harare based NGOs to monitor returnees from the United
      Kingdom and the reasons why persons mistreated in Zimbabwe  would  be
      reluctant to seek help from the NGOs. She had seen Professor Ranger's
      first report and agreed with what he said.

  19. We heard oral  evidence  at  length  from  three  witnesses  who  had
      personal experience of working at Harare airport. Two had  been  with
      the Central Intelligence Organisation ("CIO") in Zimbabwe.  Each  had
      kept in contact with colleagues who work at the airport today.  These
      witnesses told us that they were in a position to give  evidence  not
      just about procedures  at  the  airport  when  they  were  there  but
      procedures in place today. Importantly we had evidence about a number
      of individual returnees. This  evidence,  in  the  appellant's  view,
      supported the case that involuntarily returned failed asylum  seekers
      faced a real risk on return to Zimbabwe.  We  analyse  that  evidence
      below.

  20. Mr Walker and Mr Walsh gave evidence about  the  respondent's  policy
      and procedures relating to involuntary returns. They  also  described
      what had been done to gather as much information  as  possible  about
      what had become of those who had been returned between November  2004
      and July 2005. Mr Walsh gave evidence about the draft  Memorandum  of
      Understanding agreed with  the  International  Office  for  Migration
      ("IOM").

  21. The respondent proposes to put in place a new  initiative  to  assist
      with the collection of information as and when it returns  people  to
      Harare  if  it  is  permitted  to  do  so.  A  draft  Memorandum   of
      Understanding has been negotiated with  the  IOM  since  the  hearing
      before the first Tribunal.  This  is  an  international  organisation
      funded by states including the  United  Kingdom  that  assists  those
      returning to their home country. The IOM has provided assisted return
      and resettlement packages to voluntary returnees to Zimbabwe for some
      years. It has now agreed to provide similar assistance, for the first
      time,  to  those  being  returned  involuntarily  after   making   an
      unsuccessful asylum claim  in  the  United  Kingdom,  if  the  person
      concerned wishes  to  avail  himself  of  the  reintegration  package
      offered. There would then be contact between the returnee and the IOM
      for a period of some months after return.  This  will,  it  is  said,
      provide further information of what became of returnees.  IOM  agreed
      to report to the respondent if any returnee,  for  example,  did  not
      emerge from the airport upon being returned to Zimbabwe. On behalf of
      the appellant it is argued that this does nothing at all  to  prevent
      any ill-treatment to returnees.  IOM is said by the appellant not  to
      be a suitable body to conduct such a monitoring exercise  because  of
      its links with the Zimbabwean government.  The respondent  says  this
      arrangement has nothing to  do  with  the  safety  of  an  individual
      return, which is assessed before removal takes place. The exercise is
      simply  to  enhance  the  ability  of  the  respondent   to   collect
      information to inform future decisions.

  22. The first Tribunal had said that it was possible that they might have
      taken a different view if removals  could  be  made  in  a  way  that
      ensured, as far as possible, that those  who  returned  involuntarily
      were indistinguishable from those who were returning voluntarily from
      the United Kingdom, who they did not consider to be at risk  on  that
      account  alone.  We  heard  evidence   from   the   respondent   that
      consideration had been given to this. It had  been  decided  that  no
      changes could at present be made to  the  system  used.  Thus,  where
      there was an escorted  removal  the  escort  would  hand  the  travel
      documents to immigration  officials  at  Harare  airport.  Where  the
      involuntary returnee is not escorted the travel  documents  would  be
      handed to the airline staff who had some discretion in the matter but
      who, in the main, would pass them on to the immigration  officers  at
      Harare airport. In both cases this would identify  the  traveller  as
      someone who was being returned involuntarily  but  it  would  not  be
      disclosed whether or not an asylum claim had been made.

The key issues


  23. The respondent considers it is safe  to  recommence  the  involuntary
      return of failed asylum seekers to  Zimbabwe  via  flights  from  the
      United Kingdom to Harare  airport.  It  is  said  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant that any such person would be at real  risk  on  return  of
      persecution or article 3 ill-treatment merely as a result of being an
      involuntarily returned failed asylum seeker.


  24. Both counsel assisted  us  with  their  skeleton  arguments.  In  his
      skeleton argument Mr Henderson suggests that there are two  questions
      before us:

           "This case is concerned firstly with  whether  it  is  presently
           safe for the SSHD to re-commence  expelling  asylum  seekers  to
           Zimbabwe by the same route and  method  as  he  adopted  between
           November 2004 and July 2005 (the only  period  during  the  last
           four and a half years that such removals have been effected), ie
           whether there is now "no real risk" that such persons will  face
           any treatment contrary to Article 3.


           A second issue arises as to what risks AA would face if he  were
           hypothetically to return to Zimbabwe voluntarily (there being no
           evidence that he would actually be willing to  do  so,  and  the
           Immigration Judge having found as a fact that he had  a  genuine
           subjective fear).  This  question  determines  whether  AA  (and
           others  in  the  same  position)  are  entitled  to  the  rights
           conferred by the Refugee Convention while in the UK."


      Mr. Kovats puts it more specifically:
           "There are four principal issues,  namely  whether  any  of  the
           following classes  of  returnees  from  the  United  Kingdom  to
           Zimbabwe have as such (i) a well founded fear of persecution for
           reasons  of  imputed  political  opinion  or  membership  of   a
           particular social group or (ii) are as  such  at  real  risk  of
           torture or of inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment:
              1. failed asylum seekers whose return is enforced by the  Home
                 Office ("involuntary FAS");
              2. failed asylum seekers who  return  voluntarily  ("voluntary
                 FAS");
              3. all Zimbabweans, whether or not they have  claimed  asylum,
                 whose return is enforced by the Home  Office  ("involuntary
                 returnees");
              4. all Zimbabweans, whether or not they have  claimed  asylum,
                 who return voluntarily ("voluntary returnees")."

The correct test for assessing "real risk"

  25. There is some evidence that some persons being returned involuntarily
      to Zimbabwe after having made an unsuccessful claim for asylum in the
      United Kingdom have been subjected to serious ill-treatment. This  in
      itself does not mean that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed.
      Neither Convention seeks to provide a guarantee  of  safety.  It  is,
      then, essential to identify the correct test to  apply  in  assessing
      the level of risk.


  26. Mr Henderson submits that we should adopt the approach taken  by  the
      first Tribunal, not least because this was considered specifically by
      the Court  of  Appeal  who  did  not  suggest  that  approach  to  be
      inappropriate. The first Tribunal directed themselves as follows:

           "The Appellant's claim succeeds if he shows  a  real  risk:   he
           does not need to prove a certainty.  As  we  have  attempted  to
           explain  above,   the   claim   that   every   person   returned
           involuntarily is at real risk of ill-treatment is  not  a  claim
           that every one will in  fact  suffer  ill-treatment.   Likewise,
           looking at the past, the Appellant does not need  to  show  that
           all those who have been returned involuntarily did  suffer  ill-
           treatment.  He is entitled to rely,  as  he  does,  on  evidence
           pointing to a substantial number of  cases  in  the  context  of
           general evidence showing the source or reason for the risk."


  27. This appellant is within a class of persons,  failed  asylum  seekers
      facing an involuntary return. So here we are concerned with risk said
      to arise not because of individual characteristics of this particular
      appellant but because the appellant says he faces risk as he will  be
      perceived to fall within a  class  of  persons.  This  class  in  our
      judgement therefore is to be considered in the context of the  "gross
      and systematic test" approved by the Court of Appeal in Hariri v SSHD
      [2003] EWCA Civ  807.  Where  the  personal  characteristics  of  the
      appellant do not give rise to risk,  there can be  no  real  risk  of
      relevant ill-treatment unless the situation in the receiving  country
      for the class of persons concerned is one in which the level of abuse
      amounts  to  a  "consistent  pattern  of  gross,  flagrant  or   mass
      violations of human rights". Laws LJ said at paragraph 8:

           "..."In those circumstances, as it seems to me, the 'real  risk'
           ... could not be established without its being  shown  that  the
           general situation was one in which ill-treatment of the kind  in
           question generally happened:  hence the  expression  "gross  and
           systematic".  The point is one of  logic.   Absent  evidence  to
           show that the appellant was at  risk  because  of  his  specific
           circumstances, there could be no  real  risk  of  relevant  ill-
           treatment unless the situation to which the appellant  would  be
           returning was one  in  which  such  violence  was  generally  or
           consistently happening.  There is nothing else in the case  that
           could  generate  a  real  risk.   In  this  situation,  then,  a
           "consistent  pattern  of  gross  and  systematic  violation   of
           fundamental human rights", far from being at variance  with  the
           real risk test is, in my judgment, a function or application  of
           it."


  28. This point is illustrated clearly by Sedley  LJ  in  Batayav  v  SSHD
      [2003] EWCA Civ 1489:
           "37. I want to add a word,  however,  about  the  evaluation  of
           conditions which are alleged to create a real  risk  of  inhuman
           treatment. The authority of this court has  been  lent,  through
           the decision in Hariri, to the  formulation  that  ill-treatment
           which is "frequent" or even "routine" does not  present  a  real
           risk to the individual unless it is "general" or "systematic" or
           "consistently happening": see paragraphs 9 to 10 in the previous
           judgment.
           38. Great care needs to be taken with such  epithets.  They  are
           intended to elucidate the jurisprudential concept of real  risk,
           not to replace it. If a type of car has a  defect  which  causes
           one vehicle in ten to crash,  most  people  would  say  that  it
           presents a real risk to anyone who drives it, albeit crashes are
           not generally or consistently happening. The  exegetic  language
           in Hariri suggests  a  higher  threshold  than  the  IAT's  more
           cautious phrase in Iqbal,  "a  consistent  pattern",  which  the
           court in Hariri sought to endorse.
           39. There is a danger, if Hariri  is  taken  too  literally,  of
           assimilating risk to probability. A real risk is in language and
           in law something distinctly less  than  a  probability,  and  it
           cannot be elevated by lexicographic stages into  something  more
           than it is."
  29. This does not mean, then, that the assessment of real risk  in  these
      circumstances strays into a requirement of probability. The point  is
      that where risk is said to arise based upon the perception  that  the
      appellant falls within a class of persons he  will  not  be  able  to
      demonstrate that he faces a real risk unless the evidence shows  that
      the abuse is consistently applied to that class of persons.


  30. Mr Henderson submits that the question should be as was posed by  the
      first Tribunal

  31. It seems to us that there is in fact  no  real  tension  between  the
      approach of the first Tribunal, impliedly accepted by  the  Court  of
      Appeal, and that Court's approach as set out in Hariri or in Batayav.
      The issue is whether  the  evidence  establishes  a  real  risk.  The
      appellant does not need to show a certainty or a probability that all
      failed asylum seekers returned involuntarily will face  serious  ill-
      treatment upon return.  He  needs  to  show  only  that  there  is  a
      consistent pattern of such mistreatment such that anyone returning in
      those circumstances faces a real risk of coming to harm  even  though
      not everyone does. So is there is evidence pointing to a  substantial
      number of cases in the  context  of  general  evidence  showing  that
      involuntarily returned failed asylum seekers, are  at  real  risk  of
      being subjected to serious ill-treatment, on that account alone? That
      requires a careful analysis of the evidence as to what  has  happened
      to returnees  and,  of  course,  of  the  country  information  which
      provides the background.
The existing country guidance:
SM and Others (MDC - internal  flight-  risk  categories)  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
00100
  32. The starting point for the first Tribunal, as indeed it  is  for  us,
      was the country guideline case SM which was heard  on  15th  February
      2005. The IAT in that case considered a wide range  of  evidence  and
      also heard from the respected country expert, Professor  Ranger.  The
      first Tribunal found the evidence established that  those  identified
      to the Zimbabwe authorities as persons who had been deported from the
      United Kingdom would be subject to  interrogation  upon  return.  The
      Tribunal in SM said this:

           "41.  The Tribunal accepts from  (Professor  Ranger's)  evidence
                 and from the news reports in Zimbabwe that  those  deported
                 to Zimbabwe from the United  Kingdom  will  be  subject  to
                 interrogation on return.  In the light of the interest  and
                 comment  the  resumption  of  returns  has  raised  in  the
                 government  press  in  Zimbabwe  it  seems  to  us  to   be
                 inevitable that this will be the  case.   If  it  is  being
                 asserted by the Zimbabwe government that returns are  being
                 used as a cloak for British  agents  and  saboteurs  to  be
                 smuggled into the country, it is likely that those  returns
                 will be carefully monitored whether for that reason  or  to
                 identify and intimidate  opponents  to  the  regime.    The
                 reports in the newspapers in Zimbabwe are  consistent  with
                 there being an atmosphere of suspicion to  those  returned.
                 The returnee  in  the  New  Zimbabwe  report  was  released
                 following a telephone call made to an uncle serving in  the
                 army but only after an intimidating  interview.    We  take
                 into account that before returns were suspended  there  was
                 some evidence that returnees were  investigated.   We  have
                 our doubts about the story of the returnee in  the  article
                 from January 2002 and his escape out of an airport lavatory
                 window at Harare and his subsequent travel to South Africa,
                 but in any event we  are  concerned  with  returns  at  the
                 present time.  We also approach with  caution  the  reports
                 that a number of recent returnees  have  never  re-appeared
                 once they were taken from the plane by CIO agents and  that
                 others have disappeared.   No names or  details  have  been
                 provided and if, as Professor Ranger says the returns  have
                 been  carefully  monitored,  we  would  have  thought  such
                 details would be available.


           42.   Nonetheless the Tribunal is satisfied in the light of  the
                 statements  made  by  the   Zimbabwean   authorities   that
                 returnees are  regarded  with  contempt  and  suspicion  on
                 return and do face a very  hostile  atmosphere.    This  by
                 itself does not indicate that all  returnees  are  at  real
                 risk of persecution but that returnees are liable  to  have
                 their background and circumstances carefully scrutinised by
                 the authorities.  We  are  satisfied  that  those  who  are
                 suspected of being politically active with the MDC would be
                 at real risk.  We agree with Professor Ranger that  if  the
                 authorities have any reason  to  believe  that  someone  is
                 politically active the interrogation will be  followed  up.
                 There is a reasonable degree of likelihood that  this  will
                 include  treatment  sufficiently  serious  to   amount   to
                 persecution."


      The first returnee referred to in paragraph 41 who escaped through the
      lavatory window has been identified by name  by  Professor  Ranger  as
      Witness 8 whose statement was considered by the first Tribunal and who
      is returnee 26 in the list of cases we analyse  below.  His  case  was
      considered by Professor Ranger in his first report as was  the  second
      individual who was released upon intervention by her uncle, a  serving
      soldier. This individual, identified as "Ratizo" is returnee 31 in our
      list of returnees.

  33. In SM the Tribunal identified the risk categories which are  set  out
      at paragraph 51:


         a) There does continue to be a real risk of persecution  for  those
            who are or are perceived to be politically active in  opposition
            to and for this  reason  of  serious  adverse  interest  to  the
            present regime.  This can  potentially  include  the  categories
            identified in paragraph 43 but none of these factors  by  itself
            is determinative.  Each case  must  be  looked  at  on  its  own
            individual facts.  Some categories are more likely to be at risk
            than others such as MDC activists and  campaigners  rather  than
            supporters but  we  do  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  in
            exceptional cases those with very limited political  involvement
            could in their particular circumstances find themselves at  real
            risk.


         b) The risk to political opponents is  increased  both  before  and
            immediately  after  elections  but  this  fact  is  of   limited
            importance and is only likely to have any  material  bearing  in
            borderline cases.


         c) There does continue to be a risk for teachers with an actual  or
            perceived political profile of support for the MDC.


         d) Records are kept by various groups and authorities including the
            CIO, local police and Zanu-PF party organisations  and  the  war
            veterans but the existence of these records does not  materially
            add  to  the  assessment  of  the  risk  of  persecution  in  an
            individual case which depends on  the  applicant's  profile  and
            background. It seems to us unlikely that someone  who  has  been
            caught up in random and intimidatory violence would without more
            be regarded  as  of  continuing  interest  to  the  authorities.
            However, the fact that these records exist may indicate that  an
            applicant found to be at risk is unlikely to be able to relocate
            in safety.  In this context it will also be  important  to  take
            into account whether the risk is from the authorities or from  a
            local branch of Zanu-PF or locally based war veterans.


         e) The current atmosphere of hostility  to  the  return  of  failed
            asylum seekers does not of itself put at risk  those  who  would
            otherwise not be at real risk but does serve  to  reinforce  the
            fact that asylum claims must be considered with care  and  where
            there is any uncertainty, any doubts must  be  resolved  in  the
            applicant's favour.


         f) The fact of being a white Zimbabwean does not of itself  put  an
            applicant in danger


         g) Where an applicant is at risk in his home area,  the  assessment
            of internal relocation must take  into  account  the  fact  that
            there is a network of information available to the  authorities,
            ZANU PF and war veterans. An applicant who  is  regarded  as  an
            active political opponent in his home area may not to be able to
            relocate in safety but this is a question of fact to be assessed
            in the circumstances of each case.


         h) The use of grain distribution  as  a  way  of  taking  reprisals
            against political opponents does not arise in this  appeal.   We
            do not rule out the possibility of a  case  succeeding  on  this
            ground alone but  the  evidence  would  have  to  be  clear  and
            compelling.  In so far as this was an  issue  in  Ndlovu  [2004]
            EWCA Civ 1567, the case turned on the findings of fact  made  by
            the Adjudicator.  The Court of Appeal held that the Tribunal was
            wrong to find that the Adjudicator had erred  in  law  but  also
            emphasised that the adjudicator's decision did not and could not
            create a factual precedent of any kind.


         i) There is no general risk for failed asylum seekers of  a  breach
            of article 3 as a result of the current hostility  towards  such
            returnees.


      And for the sake of completeness we set out also paragraph 43  of  SM,
      referred to in sub paragraph (a) above:


           "In his submissions Mr Huffer argued  that  those  suspected  or
           perceived of being associated with the opposition have  included
           activists, campaigners, officials and election  polling  agents,
           MDC candidates for local and national government,  MDC  members,
           former MDC members, MDC supporters, those who voted or  believed
           to have voted for the  MDC  and  those  belonging  to  the  MDC,
           families of the foregoing, employees  of  the  foregoing,  those
           whose actions have given rise to suspicion of  support  for  the
           opposition such as attending an MDC rally or wearing a  T-shirt,
           attending a demonstration,  teachers  and  other  professionals,
           refusal to attend a ZANU-PF rally or chant a ZANU-PF  slogan  or
           not having a ZANU-PF membership card.  The Tribunal accept  that
           these categories illustrate those who might be at risk but  each
           case must depend upon its own circumstances.   In  a  number  of
           cases the Tribunal has drawn a distinction between low level and
           high level political activities.   The situation in Zimbabwe  is
           arbitrary and unpredictable and in these  circumstances  such  a
           distinction  is  not  determinative.   The  phrase  "low   level
           activities" is sometimes used as a  way  if  describing  someone
           whose background and profile is such that it is thought that  he
           would not be of interest to the authorities  but  someone  whose
           political activities may have been  at  a  low  level  may  have
           become of interest to the authorities.    The  current  position
           taken by the Tribunal that each case  must  be  decided  on  its
           individual facts should be continued.   This approach  has  been
           endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Mhute [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1029
           and Ndlovu [2004] EWCA Civ 1567.    The factors identified by Mr
           Huffer are relevant to the assessment  of  risk  but  cannot  be
           regarded  as  by  themselves  determinative  in  any  particular
           appeal."


The objective country evidence

  34. The country situation in Zimbabwe is poor and is deteriorating.  This
      is acknowledged by  Mr  Kovats  who  provides  this  summary  in  his
      skeleton argument:


           "The population of Zimbabwe is about 12m: April 2006 Country  of
           Origin Information Report on Zimbabwe  ("COIR")  paragraph  2.04
           [p.147].  About 82% are Shona:  COIR  paragraph  6.111  [p.274].
           The Shona are not homogenous  but  comprise  several  clans,  of
           which  the  Zezuru  (President  Mugabe's  clan)  is  the  second
           largest: COIR  paragraph  6.112  [pp.247-248].   About  20%  are
           Ndebele (aka Matabele): COIR paragraph 6.113-114 [p.248].


           The economy  is  in  protracted  decline:  COIR  paragraph  3.02
           [p.148].  Real wages are falling, including  in  the  government
           sector:  COIR  paragraph  3.06  [p.149];   Integrated   Regional
           Information Networks News (IRIN) 27/04/2006 [p.971].   Inflation
           is over 1,000% per annum: IRIN 08/06/2006 [p.944]; Sunday  Times
           09/06/2006 [p.1001].  Unemployment is around 80%: IDMC  [p.496];
           IRIN 27/04/2006 [p.972].


           About 5m people in Zimbabwe, including nearly 3m  (52%  [p.756])
           in  rural  areas,  are  unable  to  meet  their   minimum   food
           requirements without aid: COIR paragraphs 5.94,  6.275  [pp.193,
           290]; IDMC  [p.539].   In  2004/05  the  country  produced  only
           600,000 of the 1.8m tonnes of  maize  required:  COIR  paragraph
           6.278 [p.291].  A  shortfall  of  1m  tonnes  is  estimated  for
           2006/07: Solidarity Peace Trust April 2006 [p.756].   There  are
           reports of villagers being reduced  to  eating  wild  foods  and
           scavenging: COIR  paragraphs  6.281-282  [pp.291-292].   The  UN
           World Food Programme has agreed to feed at least  3m  people  in
           Zimbabwe this year: COIR paragraph 6.294 [p.295].  30% of  water
           systems in rural areas are non-functional: IDMC  [p.499].   Most
           urban water and sewerage systems have broken down: IDMC [p.546].


           Operation Murambatsvina deprived around 700,000 people of  their
           homes and/or livelihoods and affected, directly  or  indirectly,
           some 2.4m people: COIR paragraph 6.302  [p.297].   It  has  been
           estimated that nearly 115,000 are living in  the  open,  that  a
           similar number have gone to rural areas, and that about  170,000
           have been absorbed by  extended  families  and  that  a  similar
           number are in churches and other temporary  accommodation:  IDMC
           [p.527].  But the numbers are uncertain, not least because there
           was no comprehensive UN  registration  of  internally  displaced
           persons: IDMC [p.524]; Human Rights Watch December 2005 [p.726].
            The motives for Murambatsvina remain unclear: IDMC [pp.496-497,
           499, 514-515].  The Attorney General has refused calls for a new
           voters' roll following Murambatsvina (Zimbabweans can vote  only
           in the constituency in which they are registered): IDMC [p.563].


           Operation Garikai ("live well") has done little to remedy  this:
           it is unbudgeted  and  the  eligibility  criteria  favour  State
           employees: COIR  paragraphs  6.312-313  [p.300];  IDMC  [pp.571,
           573]; Solidarity Peace Trust [p.757].  It has been reported that
           it has become harder for deportees to find shelter in Harare and
           Bulawayo: COIR paragraph 6.316 [p.301].  As long ago as 2000 the
           government estimated that there  was  a  shortfall  of  over  1m
           housing units: IDMC [p.513].


           The average life expectancy in Zimbabwe is 34 for women  and  37
           for men.  This is the lowest in the world:  WHO  [p.1001]  (2002
           figures are at COIR paragraph 5.95 [p.193]).  Over  24%  of  the
           population is HIV+: COIR paragraph 5.112 [p.198]; IDMC  [p.496].
           Over 3,000 a week are dying of AIDS: COIR paragraphs 5.95, 5.113
           [pp.193, 198].  There are 1.3m orphans, 75% as a result of AIDS:
           IDMC [p.499].  Child mortality increased  from  59  to  123  per
           1,000 live births  between  1989  and  2004,  and  the  maternal
           mortality ratio nearly  doubled  between  1999  and  2002:  IDMC
           [p.542].  Prison mortality rates are high, due to lack of  money
           resulting in overcrowding and lack of drugs, leading to diseases
           such as AIDS and tuberculosis: ZimOnline 07/02/2006 [p.990].


           Foreign Policy magazine and the Fund for Peace  ranked  Zimbabwe
           fifth out of 148 in  its  index  of  failed  states,  the  worst
           outside a war zone [p.969].


           Ordinary soldiers are deserting in  increasing  numbers,  citing
           low salaries and food shortages, and have been turning to crime:
           IRIN  06/06/2006  [p.979];  International  Crisis  Group   (ICG)
           06/06/2006 [pp.660, 670].  Soldiers have been sent on compulsory
           leave and barracks have been closed  [p.670].   Junior  officers
           are leaving because of poor pay and lack of food:  Sunday  Times
           09/04/2006 [p.1001].   Anti-Mugabe  graffiti  have  appeared  in
           barracks toilets: The Zimbabwean 11/05/2006 [p.1024].   Soldiers
           have  been  sabotaging   army   equipment   in   disgruntlement:
           Solidarity Peace Trust  April  2006  [p.758].   The  police  are
           allegedly now involved  in  smuggling  rings  [p.18].   Further,
           Operation Murambatsvina did not spare the War Veterans, and this
           marked a turning point in the government's relations  with  this
           group: COIR 6.228 [p.276].


           Military officers have taken  senior  positions  in  many  State
           enterprises:  Institute  for  War  and  Peace  Reporting  (IWPR)
           31/05/2006 [p.1007].  The MDC say that all basic foods  are  now
           under military control [p.1007].  Putting the army in charge  of
           food production (Operation Taguta  [p.750]),  as  well  as  food
           distribution (COIR 6.284 [p.292]) may in part be an  attempt  by
           the government to strengthen the loyalty of soldiers: Solidarity
           Peace Trust April  2006  [pp.758-759].   The  soldiers'  farming
           practices have reduced the independence of civilian farmers  and
           consumers: Solidarity Peace Trust [p.749,  753,  761-762,  765].
           The rural population is unhappy with  the  soldiers:  Solidarity
           Peace Trust [pp.759, 768].


           The judiciary is  largely  compliant  and  corrupt,  independent
           judges having been forced out:  IWPR  31/05/2006  [p.1009-1011].
           Moreover, the government has ignored court orders, eg the  Porta
           Farm evictions: Amnesty International 31/03/2006 [p.627].


           Over 3m Zimbabweans live abroad and many  of  them  remit  much-
           needed foreign currency to Zimbabwe: COIR paragraphs 3.08, 6.283
           [p.149].  In September 2004 56% of doctors', 32% of nurses'  and
           92% of  pharmacists'  posts  were  vacant:  IDMC  [p.542].   The
           Government of Zimbabwe has  disenfranchised  Zimbabweans  living
           abroad:  COIR  paragraph  4.20  [p.155].   The  Citizenship  Act
           revokes the citizenship of Zimbabweans who fail to return to the
           country for 5 years, subject to certain  exceptions,  but  there
           are no reported cases of its being applied: COIR paragraph  5.10
           [p.172]."

  35. Mr Henderson referred us to  a  recent  Times  on  Line  news  report
      published on 26th June 2006, and in particular to  the  reference  to
      the "abundant evidence" from the records of  Zimbabwe's  courts  that
      state agents have carried out torture "on a massive scale".  This  is
      because the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum has reported over  15,000
      human rights violations in the last eight years but very  few  indeed
      have made any progress through the court system. It is said  that  of
      the 51 that have been concluded the state was held accountable in  89
      per cent of cases. The Forum had produced a report which it  intended
      to send to the UN and this report:

           "... said that the low number of court cases was attributable to
           the fact that merely reporting human rights violations to police
           carries a high risk of being arrested, beaten up  and  illegally
           detained. The country's economic crisis has also cut the rate of
           court litigation because many ordinary people cannot afford  the
           cost of transport to court or to see lawyers.."

      and:

           "Police were the most common perpetrators.  "People  in  custody
           are likely to be beaten irrespective of  their  alleged  crime",
           political or criminal, and are commonly subjected to  falanga  -
           the excruciatingly painful practice of beating the soles of  the
           feet, which leaves little obvious bruising. Police had  "adopted
           torture as a means to  eliciting  confessions  on  a  widespread
           basis"

   The evidence of Professor Ranger.


  36. We have the benefit  of  three  reports  from  Professor  Ranger.  He
      confirmed in his evidence before the first Tribunal  that  there  was
      little evidence available as to what had happened  to  those  removed
      involuntarily to Zimbabwe since returns had been resumed in  November
      2004. As time has moved on further  information  has  come  to  light
      about the fate of returnees and this  has  led  Professor  Ranger  to
      change his view. He now concludes that returned failed asylum seekers
      do indeed face a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  serious  ill-
      treatment.


  37. There is no doubt about the expertise of Professor Ranger or that  he
      is well placed to express an expert view  on  country  conditions  in
      Zimbabwe. He has more than 45 years of familiarity with the  country.
      He has spent two periods teaching at the University of Zimbabwe, most
      recently between January 1998 and June  2001.  He  has  known  Robert
      Mugabe and other senior leaders of ZANU-PF for forty five years.


  38. The first of the Professor's reports before us  is  dated  28th  July
      2005 and was before the first Tribunal. Professor  Ranger  said  that
      the views of the Zimbabwean regime of those who have sought asylum in
      the  United  Kingdom  could  reliably  be  deduced  from  ministerial
      statements and from comments in the state controlled  press.  He  set
      out the much reported statement by Jonathan Moyo,  then  Minister  of
      Information, published in the Herald newspaper on 17th December 2004:

           "Threats  by  the  United  Kingdom  to   deport   about   10,000
           Zimbabweans could be a  cover  to  deploy  elements  trained  in
           sabotage, intimidation and violence to destabilise  the  country
           before and during next March's parliamentary elections ... There
           was a need for the country to be vigilant ...  There  had  been,
           for some time, a  number  of  media  reports  that  as  part  of
           Britain's illegal regime change agenda,  it  had  been  training
           some Zimbabweans in acts of sabotage and violence. "


  39. Professor Ranger went on to respond  to  the  respondent's  assertion
      that Moyo's statement was contradicted by a statement by the Minister
      for Justice to the Zimbabwean parliament on 16th December  2004  that
      "Zimbabwe will unconditionally take back all those returned from  the
      UK". The Minister for Justice was reported to have  said  that  those
      returned from the United Kingdom  "will  be  welcomed".  It  was  the
      respondent's position that the latter statement represented the  true
      position because Moyo had attracted censure from President Mugabe who
      had made a "withering attack" upon Moyo during  a  Central  committee
      meeting on 1st December 2004. It was reported that Moyo was then  de-
      selected for his parliamentary seat at  the  direct  intervention  of
      Mugabe and removed from ZANU-PF's Central committee.


  40. All this is confirmed to be correct by Professor Ranger who said

           "And in  fact  all  these  disasters  have  befallen  Moyo,  who
           thereafter sat for Tsholotsho constituency  as  an  independent,
           who has now been denounced as a traitor, and who has reverted to
           being an outspoken critic of Mugabe. But the question is whether
           this repudiation  of  Moyo  amounts  to  a  repudiation  of  his
           statement on asylum seekers."

      Because the Minister for Justice, Patrick Chinamasa, was disgraced  at
      the same time as Moyo and because there  is  evidence  that  President
      Mugabe was reluctant to discipline Moyo and sought to resist  pressure
      to dismiss him, Professor Ranger's view is  that  Moyo's  comments  do
      continue to represent those of the regime  and  Moyo's  dismissal  had
      nothing to do with any desire of the  regime  to  disassociate  itself
      with his comments upon asylum seekers. Moyo was not  sacked  from  the
      cabinet until February 2005, some considerable time after his comments
      reported above.

  41. Professor Ranger pointed also to the hostile comments  that  appeared
      in the state controlled press in December 2004.  The Sunday Mail said
      that deportees "are enough to cause  mayhem  in  the  country".   The
      Herald  published  a  report  that   attacked   asylum   seekers   as
      "accomplices in London's campaign  of  destabilisation  against  this
      country over its land policies".  A letter published in the Chronicle
      on 23rd December 2004 said of the deportees "These people are Blair's
      mercenaries. They will cause havoc and sabotage - mark my words. They
      are trained to do this and they will do. I  urge  the  government  to
      look out."


  42. These views, according to Professor Ranger, are to  be  read  in  the
      context of assertions of "British conspiracy" going back  for  years.
      In 2002, for  example,  it  was  alleged  by  the  Sunday  Mail  that
      thousands of Zimbabweans were undergoing secret military training  in
      the United Kingdom and that Britain was  recruiting  former  soldiers
      from Zimbabwe to be deployed in a military offensive against Zimbabwe
      should Britain decide to "execute its plan to topple the government".



  43. The Professor was asked by those who commissioned his report to  deal
      specially with the question of the attitude of the CIO towards asylum
      seekers. The person in charge of the CIO was the  Minister  of  State
      Security,  Didymus  Mutasa.  He  was  responsible   also   for   land
      allocation. Professor Ranger has  known  Didymus  Mutasa,  since  the
      1950's and describes him as a "ruthless and  acquisitive  politician"
      who is notorious for using violence against political opponents.  The
      CIO now has responsibility for food  distribution  and  was  involved
      with Operation Murambatsvina. Mutasa said in November 2002:

           "We would be better off with only six million people,  with  our
           own people who support the liberation struggle.  We  don't  want
           all these extra people."

      Professor Ranger, who states that beatings during interrogation are  a
      "fundamental part" of CIO practice and that the  CIO  was  preoccupied
      with the making of lists, said this:

           "I have personal knowledge through mutual  friends  that  Mutasa
           believes that many British spies have been infiltrated into  the
           country. He told a friend that many Aids workers were spies.  He
           is just as likely as Moyo was to suspect agents among the asylum
           deportees and to expect the CIO to  "protect"  Zimbabwe  against
           them."

      Despite this, when considering the nature of the lists complied by the
      CIO, Professor  Ranger  refers  to  lists  being  made  of  reporters,
      students, school teachers, urban and rural MDC activists  and  suspect
      civil servants but not those who were known to have been to the United
      Kingdom, whether to seek asylum or otherwise.


  44.  Professor  Ranger's  response  to  the  question  posed   by   those
      instructing him in July 2005: what conclusions do you currently  draw
      as to how rejected asylum claimants will be treated  if  expelled  to
      Zimbabwe by the United Kingdom;  is as follows:


           "My answer is once again a development from the evidence I  gave
           to  the  IAT  in  February.  There  I  pointed  to   cause   for
           considerable concern but  was  cautious  given  the  very  short
           period that had elapsed since the suspension  had  been  lifted.
           Since then there has been evidence of violence in several cases.
           The objective situation has worsened in many ways. The effect of
           the clean up operation has  been  to  make  urban  accommodation
           scarce and expensive. People going to the rural areas  from  the
           towns have been excluded from food  relief  lists  drawn  up  by
           headmen. The food shortage is worse than it was. It  is  now  my
           opinion that there is a substantial  risk  that  anyone  removed
           following an asylum claim  will  be  dealt  with  violently  and
           oppressively; some will be detained and tortured; others will be
           released  but  remain  under  surveillance  and  threat.   Their
           families may well be frightened  to  associate  with  them.  The
           urban "clean up" and rural food shortages will make it difficult
           for them to return to their homes or to relocate."

      Two things might be noted about that paragraph.  The  Professor  bases
      his view upon a deterioration in the country situation  generally  and
      the fact that there has been "evidence of violence in several  cases".
      This illustrates the importance in this case of undertaking a  careful
      examination of that evidence  and  reaching  some  assessment  of  its
      reliability. Secondly, the Professor speaks of "substantial risk"  but
      that term, in the context we must consider it, must be used  in  light
      of the discussion set out at paragraphs 25-31 above.


  45. The second of Professor Ranger's reports is dated 2nd August 2005. It
      was prepared in response to evidence served in  the  judicial  review
      proceedings by the respondent in the form of a witness  statement  of
      Mr Walsh, who was then Deputy Director, Asylum Policy  Co-Ordination.
      This report deals mainly with the NGOs, which we consider below,  but
      deals also with  the  compiling  of  lists.  This  is  a  major  pre-
      occupation of the CIO and that there is  evidence  that  people  were
      being identified and followed up in post-election periods and, as was
      suggested in SM, returnees could be added to such lists.

  46. Having been asked to identify any  material  developments,  Professor
      Ranger produced a third report dated 8th June 2006. He said there was
      a  serious  shortfall  of  food  supply  aggravated  by   delays   in
      distribution and the deployment of the military in  the  distribution
      process. Army units had  "hi-jacked"  plots  and  maize  harvests  in
      Matabeleland.


  47. Returning to the issue of the compiling of  lists,  Professor  Ranger
      said that elaborate lists are drawn up to identify MDC supporters and
      new-comers to the area.

  48. He says the political situation remains  tense.  The  government  has
      mobilised  the  army  and  the  police  ready  to   deal   with   the
      demonstrations and challenges promised by the Tsvangarai  section  of
      the MDC. The army has recently been awarded a "very substantial"  pay
      rise. The police force is being remodelled with  war  veterans  being
      promoted to top positions. Recent pay increases for the  police  were
      compelled by fears of a strike by police officers. Further repressive
      legislation was being introduced.  The  Suppression  of  Foreign  and
      International Terrorism Bill will allow for a "further  crackdown  on
      the opposition and dissenters accused of working with  foreigners  to
      destabilise the  country"  and  the  Communications  Bill  will  give
      further powers to intercept all forms of communications.

  49. Professor Ranger reports that his  correspondents  in  Zimbabwe  have
      been telling him that in the previous few weeks intimidation of  NGOs
      has intensified and there have been further arrests of  human  rights
      workers. He concludes as follows:

           "All this in combination reveals  both  a  political  and  human
           rights crisis in Zimbabwe. It is a crisis which  gives  rise  to
           paranoiac fantasies of terrorist plots  and  which  criminalises
           anyone connected to Britain. The state has shown itself ready to
           arrest, beat and torture women, children and students. There are
           attempts to destroy human rights organisations. I am  very  much
           still of the opinions expressed in my previous reports."

  50. In cross-examination Professor Ranger accepted that he went  too  far
      in those conclusions. The evidence is that there continue to be three
      flights each week from the United Kingdom to  Harare,  usually  full.
      This means that something in the region  of  a  thousand  people  are
      travelling  in  and  out  of  the  country  each  week.  It  will  be
      unambiguously clear to immigration officers and the CIO officers  who
      are based at the airport that those passengers who  are  citizens  of
      Zimbabwe are "connected to Britain" in the sense that  they  have  an
      immigration history involving business of one kind  or  another  with
      Britain. There is no evidence at all that these many  people  are  in
      any way "criminalised" on that account. This means that whatever does
      give rise to suspicion or adverse attention at the airport it is  not
      simply the fact of having chosen to visit in Britain or  to  stay  in
      that country for any particular period of time.

  51. The respondent makes clear that there is no suggestion  at  all  that
      Professor Ranger's reports are drawn otherwise than in good faith but
      does challenge his objectivity. Mr Kovats submits that  the  function
      of a "country expert" is not simply to present the Tribunal with  his
      or her opinion as to country conditions with a selection of materials
      that support that opinion.  It is to assist the court.  That involves
      presenting an objectively fair selection of the materials  available.
      It should include any apparently reliable material that tends against
      the expert's own view, demonstrating, as accurately as possible,  the
      range of information available in relation to the up to date position
      in the country concerned, focusing on the matters in respect of which
      the expert has been asked to report.  While  the  respondent  accepts
      much of the factual content of Professor Ranger's reports, he submits
      that the Professor fails to present a balanced view.   The  Professor
      believes that it would be unsafe to return Zimbabweans  to  Zimbabwe.
      His view is demonstrated by an article he wrote on 18  November  2004
      as a trustee of Asylum Welcome (6/1327), criticising  the  resumption
      of enforced returns to Zimbabwe. In  this  article  Professor  Ranger
      said this:


           "The new policy makes no pretence that  Zimbabwe  has  become  a
           safer place since 2002. The Government says that there has  been
           no change "in our opposition to human rights abuses in Zimbabwe"
           and that  it  will  work  "to  restore  democracy  so  that  all
           Zimbabweans can in time return safely to help build a prosperous
           and stable Zimbabwe". In the meantime, however, it  proposes  to
           send many Zimbabweans back to an unstable Zimbabwe in a state of
           economic collapse and with continuing human rights abuses.  What
           has changed since 2002 is not Zimbabwe but the British political
           climate. In 2002 Zimbabwe was much in the news  because  of  the
           take-over of  white-owned  land.  Even  the  Conservative  Party
           supported the suspension of removals. Now Zimbabwe  has  dropped
           out of the news headlines. Few British politicians care much any
           longer about what happens to black Zimbabweans. "


  52. The respondent submits that the very sincerity of Professor  Ranger's
      belief may have led him to  present  an  unbalanced  picture  of  the
      evidence available.


  53. The respondent identifies  two  matters  of  which  Professor  Ranger
      accepts he was aware but did not deal with in his report.  The  first
      is that President Mugabe has been reported as having made  derogatory
      remarks about those who have come to the United Kingdom  only  to  do
      menial jobs. He said they should stay to help  to  rebuild  Zimbabwe.
      The respondent's view is that this indicated that the regime is  more
      concerned to retain labour and to shame people into coming home  than
      to persecute them. The respondent accepts that Professor  Ranger  may
      interpret this information differently  but  argues  that  any  truly
      objective analysis should have included reference to this.

  54. Similarly, the respondent submits it is  significant  that  Professor
      Ranger did not mention that Didymus Mutasa, State  Security  Minister
      and head of the CIO, apparently responding to  the  Court  of  Appeal
      judgment in the present case, when referring to failed asylum seekers
      told The Herald on 14 April 2006 (4/134):

           "The security services have absolutely nothing against them.  If
           they left this country and did not commit any crime, why should
           we be interested in them?  We will look after them very well
           here."

      He added that they should be contributing to economic  development  in
      Zimbabwe instead of wasting time and  money  in  the  UK.   This,  the
      respondent  submits,  is  further   evidence   that   the   Zimbabwean
      authorities are  now  primarily  concerned  to  revive  the  country's
      economy.   Mr  Mutasa's  remarks  are  also  significant  because  his
      rhetoric is usually conspicuously aggressive, e.g. (5/673)  "no  white
      farmer is being invited back" even though commercial farmers  are  now
      being invited to apply for  99  year  leases  in  a  reversal  of  the
      misguided  land  seizures.  It  is  also  directly  contrary  to   his
      "notorious" November 2002 statement, referred to above, that  Zimbabwe
      "will be better off with only six million people, with our own  people
      who support the liberation struggle.  We don't want  all  these  extra
      people."

  55. In cross examination Professor Ranger said he did not mention or deal
      with Mr Mutasa's remarks because he did not believe them to  be  true
      but accepts, with the benefit of hindsight, that it would  have  been
      better if he had mentioned these significant statements, even if only
      to explain why he dismissed them.


  56. Professor Ranger's views command respect. His integrity and knowledge
      of the Zimbabwean regime was unquestioned before the  first  Tribunal
      and the Court of Appeal and we do not seek to suggest anything to the
      contrary. In restricting the scope of his report, as he confirmed  to
      us that he had, to the position of failed asylum seekers returned  to
      Zimbabwe, he has not addressed the  apparently  significant  evidence
      concerning those who travel freely and unhindered between the  United
      Kingdom and Zimbabwe. His conclusions upon failed asylum seekers  are
      based, at least in part, upon the premise that all those  who  travel
      from the United Kingdom are suspected of treachery and, (although  he
      resiled from this in his oral evidence) that anyone  associated  with
      Britain is "criminalised". Since that does not appear to be the case,
      we approach with some caution his view that the failed asylum  seeker
      about whom nothing else is known or suspected is equally at  risk  on
      that account alone.


   Procedures at Harare Airport

  57. The first witness who gave evidence to us about procedures at  Harare
      airport was Witness 5. He adopted his written  statement  dated  29th
      July 2005. Witness 5 was recognised as a refugee after he came to the
      United Kingdom in June 1998. He had been a Lieutenant Colonel working
      with the CIO, attached to the military intelligence branch, known  as
      Branch 3. Between 1991 and May 1998 he was based at  the  school  for
      military intelligence in Harare but from around 1993 until  May  1998
      he was Adjutant  to  the  NCOs  carrying  out  day  to  day  security
      procedures at the airport. This meant that those NCOs were under  his
      command.


  58. Witness 5 left Zimbabwe before the  new  airport  terminal  had  been
      opened but he says that he knows from those still working at the  new
      airport that procedures have changed only in that  security  measures
      have become even more stringent.

  59. Dealing first with "ordinary travellers", Witness  5  explained  that
      the CIO would receive the passenger manifest in advance,  from  which
      they would identify those travellers  they  were  interested  in  and
      these  people  would  be  approached  after  they  had   passed   the
      immigration desk but before they collected their  luggage.  Then,  at
      the old airport, there were no real facilities for interrogations  to
      be carried out and so the  passenger  would  be  taken  away  to  CIO
      headquarters.

  60. Sometimes an immigration officer would refer a passenger to the  CIO.
      When this happened the person would be questioned at the  airport  by
      representatives of the security services present at the  airport.  If
      found to be of interest he or she would be taken either by the CIO to
      headquarters, by the police to the police station or by the  military
      intelligence branch to the barracks on the outskirts of the city.

  61. Witness 5 told us that during the time he was in Zimbabwe they  never
      saw any returned asylum  seekers  from  the  United  Kingdom  but  he
      confirmed what he had said in  his  statement  how  other  deportees,
      mainly from South Africa, were dealt with. After the pilot had handed
      the passport to the immigration officer the deportee would  be  taken
      to a separate room until all the other travellers had been  processed
      after which they would be handed over to the CIO.

  62. Witness 5 has  kept  in  touch  with  an  old  friend  from  military
      intelligence in Harare, Major [    ], who is  based  at  the  airport
      today. When they spoke on the telephone in mid  2005  they  discussed
      the proceedings that had been brought in  the  High  Court.   In  his
      witness statement Witness 5 said this:

           "Major [   ] told me that all the returned  asylum  seekers  are
           questioned because they are all  considered  to  be  a  security
           risk. It is believed by the security services that the  returned
           asylum seekers have been  trained  in  military  procedures  and
           espionage in the UK and are now being sent back  to  destabilise
           the country. He told me they are all handed over to the CIO  who
           carry out thorough questioning and then decide  what  is  to  be
           done. Major [   ] went on to tell me that those  asylum  seekers
           who are released are nonetheless kept under surveillance."


  63. Thus, it is clear that there has always been and continues  to  be  a
      screening process carried out at the airport. All deportees  will  be
      questioned to see if there  is  any  reason  to  pursue  the  enquiry
      further and it is only those in respect of whom something of interest
      arises from this initial interview,  or  from  intelligence  received
      before arrival, who will be taken away for interrogation. We consider
      it significant that this witness, as do others, distinguishes between
      an interview or questioning at the airport  and  the  "interrogation"
      that is conducted of those taken away from  the  airport.  Witness  5
      said that he had never seen anyone being  tortured  at  the  airport,
      although he added that there was limited space at the old airport.


  64. The next witness, Witness 6, who has also been granted refugee status
      in the United Kingdom, was a sergeant  or  section  leader  with  the
      military intelligence branch of the CIO based at Harare  airport  for
      two and a  half  years  until  1996.  His  role  was  to  check  upon
      passengers passing through the  airport.  In  the  witness  statement
      which he adopted as part of his evidence he began by saying this:

           "I set out below in outline, the procedures  that  applied  (and
           that, I believe, still  apply)  when  a  Zimbabwean  citizen  is
           deported back  to  Zimbabwe  from  another  country.  These  are
           standard and longstanding procedures. I am in regular touch with
           former colleagues who still work at the airport, and I  have  no
           reason  to  believe   that   these   procedures   have   changed
           significantly. These procedures would also apply where a  person
           had been identified from  the  passenger  manifest  and  was  of
           interest."

  65. Witness 6 said that the deportee would be  interviewed  initially  at
      the airport by a team comprising representatives of the military, the
      police and the CIO. He explained that in fact each is a branch of the
      CIO but the term "CIO" is used to distinguish the  internal  security
      branch, whereas the nature of the other two  relevant  branches,  the
      police and military  intelligence,  is  obvious  from  its  name.  He
      continued :


           "In the interview room, each agency would interview the deportee
           about any issues of concern they might have.  For  example,  the
           police would interview the deportee about any  criminal  matters
           that might  be  outstanding,  the  military  about  whether  the
           deportee was a former soldier and any issues about being  absent
           without leave or having conducted  military  activities  outside
           Zimbabwe, and the CIO would check for any political activities.


           Once it was decided which  agency  would  have  custody  of  the
           deportee, the  deportee  would  be  taken  by  that  agency  for
           interrogation with the benefit of the report of the agency  that
           had led the airport interview."


       In his oral evidence this witness made clear, as did Witness 5, that
       not all deportees were taken away by one of the three  agencies  for
       interrogation. He said "It  depends  how  valuable  the  subject  is
       whether they were taken away". When a person is  released  that  was
       not the end of it as there would be monitoring in the  persons  home
       area.

  66. This witness said that there was a significant difference between  an
      interview  and  an  interrogation.  He  knew  what  went  on  at  the
      interrogation stage because a former colleague who currently works in
      army counter intelligence central administration had seen reports  of
      such interrogations. In his witness statement he said:

           "It should be understood that there is a significant  difference
           between a  person  being  interviewed  (eg  on  arrival  at  the
           airport), and a person being interrogated. Within the Zimbabwean
           intelligence community, the implication of a person having  been
           interrogated (and hence an interrogation  report)  is  that  the
           interrogated person will have been ill-treated."

      And in his oral evidence:

           "There  is  not  an  interrogation  at  the  airport,  just   an
           interview. I took part. That's why I was  there,  to  interview.
           When the detainee was taken away from the airport he  is  handed
           over to somebody else."

  67. Witness 6 said that the approach to those  being  returned  from  the
      United Kingdom was based not just upon the initial interview but  was
      intelligence  led.  People  working  with  the  London  Embassy  were
      recruited from  the  Zimbabwean  community  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Intelligence was collected and sent back to Harare:


           "People in Harare are well briefed by people in London  so  they
           know who they are interested in. If you do any activities in the
           UK you put yourself in a situation. This is so we have a  record
           to be used - to be a member of this organisation in London - you
           must be monitored. I know that because  that  is  what  happened
           when I worked at the airport."


  68. Finally, this witness made clear  that  the  sifting  nature  of  the
      initial  interview  is  genuine  and  is  conducted   professionally.
      Information that might give rise to suspicion is  not  fabricated  in
      order to justify further enquiry:


           "The questioning at the airport was intelligence  led.  We  knew
           something about it. Our purpose was to produce a true  and  good
           report. We were not trying to cook up a case. We do not cook  up
           intelligence."


  69. The other witness from whom we heard worked in air traffic control at
      Harare airport between 1998 and 2001 but was not  directly  concerned
      with passengers passing through the airport. He  said  that  the  CIO
      were present in air  traffic  control  and  would  sometimes  require
      flights, especially those from the United Kingdom, to be diverted  to
      particular bays so that they could deal  more  effectively  with  the
      passengers. He said that it was "common knowledge" that passengers on
      flights from the United Kingdom were sometimes detained and sometimes
      disappeared. He did not know  whether  these  stories  he  had  heard
      concerned returned asylum seekers or not.


  70. Drawing together this part of the evidence, considered in the context
      of the evidence overall including what  we  say  about  the  evidence
      discussed below, we reach  the  following  conclusions.  Those  being
      returned involuntarily to Zimbabwe will  face  a  two-stage  process.
      Upon arrival all deportees will be separated from ordinary travellers
      and will be interviewed. This is a screening or filtering process. It
      is assisted by having recourse to  any  intelligence  that  might  be
      available. It is designed to distinguish between deportees about whom
      there is nothing else known or suspected to give rise to any interest
      and those who may be of  interest  because  of  a  relevant  military
      history, outstanding criminal issues or who may  have  some  form  of
      political profile, at whatever level.  A  relevant  military  history
      will be one in respect  of  which  enquiries  reveal  aspects  to  be
      followed up such as being absent without leave or being  involved  in
      military activities outside Zimbabwe

  71. Those conducting this initial interview at the airport are likely  to
      prepare a report upon each deportee. If there is nothing  to  suggest
      anything  in  a  person's  military  history  that  requires  further
      investigation or that there are outstanding criminal  matters  to  be
      followed up and if there is no reason to suspect any involvement with
      political activity adverse to the regime the deportee will be allowed
      to pass through the airport.  This process may involve  the  deportee
      being detained at the airport for several hours but carries  with  it
      no real risk of serious ill-treatment. The report  is  likely  to  be
      available to the CIO officers in the deportee's home area  to  inform
      the process of monitoring that is likely to take place thereafter.

  72. Where the screening interview does give rise to  any  suspicion  that
      the deportee has any form of adverse political profile or where it is
      established that  there  is  a  military  history  requiring  further
      investigation or outstanding criminal matters it is likely  that  the
      deportee will  be  taken  from  the  airport  by  the  CIO,  military
      intelligence  or  the  police,  depending  upon  the  nature  of  the
      suspicion  that  has  arisen,  for  the   purpose   of   a   rigorous
      interrogation.  In view of what is know  from  the  country  evidence
      about the CIO that does give rise to a real risk  that  the  deportee
      will be detained for a period  of  time  and  will  be  subjected  to
      serious ill-treatment.

The International Organisation for Migration (IOM)

  73. Since 2002 the IOM has been assisting voluntary returns  to  Zimbabwe
      by providing a return and reintegration package  to  those  voluntary
      returnees who wish to benefit from it. The IOM's  Chief  of  Mission,
      Harare,  Mr  [    ],  has  provided  some  information  about   these
      activities (4/116). To  date,  the  IOM  has  provided  reintegration
      assistance to 117 Zimbabweans. This  assistance  takes  the  form  of
      arranging for training, education or the  establishment  of  a  small
      business for those returning to  Zimbabwe.  Those  assisted  are  all
      voluntary returnees but include failed asylum seekers. Mr [   ] says:


           "Extensive monitoring and evaluation of returned Zimbabweans who
           avail  themselves  of  reintegration  assistance  is   conducted
           throughout the country. With  this  mechanism  in  place,  staff
           would be able to pick up any reports of mistreatment of returned
           failed asylum seekers. In its history of  the  programme,  there
           was only one incident reported in March 2003, which involved the
           CIO and  a  returnee  in  Bulawayo.  The  IOM  Director  General
           immediately wrote a protest letter to the Zimbabwean government.
           In the Government of Zimbabwe's response, they stated  that  the
           activity had been carried out by the  local  CIO  operatives  in
           Bulawayo  acting  without  approval  of  the  government.   They
           apologised and assured IOM that it would not happen again. There
           have been no  further  incidents  of  harassment  to  Zimbabwean
           returnees from the UK. Any future incidents of  mistreatment  or
           harassment of returnees would be reported to the British Embassy
           in Harare."

  74. It must be remembered that these returnees, whether they had made  an
      unsuccessful asylum claim in the United Kingdom or  not,  would  have
      been indistinguishable on return to Harare Airport from the  ordinary
      travellers as the Home Office was not involved  in  the  arrangements
      for their travel. The respondent  has  produced  a  schedule  of  the
      comments made by some of these returnees about their  experiences  at
      the airport (4/117) and these are consistent with what is known about
      the unhindered passage through the airport by those  regarded  to  be
      ordinary travellers.


  75. The first Tribunal observed at paragraph  170  of  its  determination
      that the respondent might reasonably be  expected  to  have  gathered
      more information about what became of failed asylum  seekers  removed
      involuntarily:

           "First, in relation  to  the  evidence  we  have  heard,  it  is
           possible that we might  have  taken  a  different  view  if  the
           Government had  made  any  arrangements  to  ensure  so  far  as
           possible that those  returned  voluntarily  and  those  returned
           involuntarily are not so readily distinguishable on arrival.   A
           part of the risk we have identified arises from the Government's
           apparent disinterest in the  precise  way  in  which  passengers
           documents are dealt with by airline staff.  It is also  possible
           that we might have taken a different  view  if  there  had  been
           evidence - from the field  report  visit  or  otherwise  -  that
           substantial  numbers  of   failed   asylum   seekers,   returned
           involuntarily from the United Kingdom, had passed through Harare
           Airport without any problems.  If the Government is concerned to
           avoid risk to individuals and in making policy  decisions  based
           on fact, it will no  doubt  carefully  monitor  returns  to  any
           country regarded as dangerous, and will  present  the  resulting
           facts as evidence in asylum appeals."


  76. The respondent has concluded that it is not reasonably practicable to
      depart from the  policy  in  respect  of  the  way  in  which  travel
      documents of deportees are held by escorts  or  airline  staff.  This
      policy is applicable to all countries to which failed asylum  seekers
      are removed, not just Zimbabwe. This means that arrangements will not
      be made to  ensure  that  voluntary  and  involuntary  returnees  are
      indistinguishable on arrival at Harare airport.


  77. The respondent has been able to devise a mechanism capable of meeting
      the other suggestion of the first Tribunal to monitor those returned.
      For the reasons set out above the respondent  does  not  consider  it
      appropriate for its Embassy staff to carry out such monitoring.  This
      is why a Memorandum of Understanding has been negotiated with the IOM
      which has agreed to provide a  pilot  project  offering  resettlement
      packages to those involuntary returnees who wish to accept them.  The
      full details of this scheme can be seen  from  the  draft  Memorandum
      (6/107).  This  will  involve  the  IOM   providing   assistance   to
      involuntary returnees which will also enable contact to be maintained
      for the few months following return.

  78. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that  these  arrangements  do
      nothing to secure the safety of the appellant's return. Mr  Henderson
      argues that the IOM is not an appropriate body to rely upon to report
      human rights abuses by the Zimbabwean  regime.  Some  have  suggested
      that the relationship the IOM has with the regime is an inappropriate
      one. There is evidence that the  perception  amongst  the  Zimbabwean
      community is that this is the case. See,  for  example,  the  witness
      statement of Witness  43  (6/1190)  who  expressed  this  view  after
      speaking to a number of Zimbabweans during a day long IOM information
      event in London. A copy of the article she wrote for "the Zimbabwean"
      published after this event records those views (6/1194).

  79. That the IOM has inappropriately  close  links  with  the  Zimbabwean
      government is said to be illustrated by the evidence of  Witness  44,
      who is a senior lecturer with the Department  of  Sociology  of  City
      University, Northampton. Witness 44 acted as a consultant to the  IOM
      in respect of a project to  conduct  research  into  "the  Zimbabwean
      diaspora in the UK and South Africa" and to produce a report. Witness
      44 attended a meeting in January 2005 to discuss the  draft  of  this
      report. Mr [   ] of IOM, who was speaking by video link from  Harare,
      said that the government of Zimbabwe would be interested in  inviting
      the research team to Zimbabwe to discuss the report and asked that  a
      paragraph referring to  human  rights  abuses  be  deleted  from  the
      report. Witness 44 says that a representative from the Department for
      International Development (DFID) intervened and accused Mr [    ]  of
      being "a tool of the Government of  Zimbabwe".  Witness  44  believes
      this demonstrates reluctance on the part of IOM Harare  to  entertain
      criticism of the human rights practices of the Zimbabwean government.
      This, she concludes, means that the IOM is an  inappropriate  partner
      to work with the respondent in  monitoring  the  returnees  from  the
      United Kingdom.


  80. The respondent has produced a letter  from  the  DFID  representative
      (6/1326) stating that the author, who was also at that  meeting,  did
      not share Witness 44's recollection of this. It  is  said  that  DFID
      "has complete confidence in the integrity  and  impartiality  of  IOM
      (Harare)  and  its  desire  to  provide  humanitarian  protection  to
      vulnerable people."

  81. Mr Henderson referred us  to  a  report  from  the  Southern  African
      Migration Project (6/1328). This report says  that  the  IOM  was  to
      assist the Zimbabwean government with the  introduction  of  computer
      technology at Harare airport which was  designed  to  "safeguard  the
      country against irregular migration and organised crime". The  report
      continues as follows

           "The Ministry of Home  Affairs  has  long  identified  improving
           border management as a top priority and  requested  the  IOM  to
           provide the technical expertise for the landlocked Zimbabwe.  In
           an interview, Chief Immigration Officer Mr Elasto  Mugwadi  said
           the process of computerisation would  enhance  their  networking
           with other stakeholders and see the country's  security  against
           undesirable elements enhanced,"

  82. Mr Henderson says this shows that the IOM is working  inappropriately
      with the regime to identify people it views  as  opponents  and  that
      this demonstrates why the IOM should  not  be  considered  to  be  an
      appropriate partner for the United Kingdom government in managing its
      removals.


  83. In order to appreciate the  reasons  why  the  IOM  should  associate
      itself with such a project it is necessary to look more carefully  at
      what the rest of this report contains. An information officer for the
      IOM  explained  that  IOM  had   successfully   implemented   similar
      programmes around the world. The new technology would provide  better
      information about who entered and left Zimbabwe  and  would  expedite
      immigration formalities  when  arriving  and  departing  from  Harare
      airport. One can readily understand why an organisation such  as  the
      IOM whose purpose is to aid  resettlement,  would  see  those  to  be
      objectives that should be supported. This is particularly so in  view
      of its own experience in Zimbabwe of dealing with  returnees  and  of
      the government's response  on  the  one  occasion  it  had  cause  to
      complain about the treatment of a returnee.

  84. We set out this evidence because much was made of it before us. We do
      not consider these competing views to be of any real significance  to
      our decision. As Mr Walsh has said,  the  pilot  project  to  provide
      resettlement packages to involuntarily returned  asylum  seekers  has
      nothing to do with the assessment of the  safety  of  return  to  any
      individual. That assessment is made in advance of  removal  and  does
      not in any way at all depend upon  any  monitoring  of  the  returnee
      after removal.  It is important to recognise what this project is and
      what it is not. It is, as can be seen from the  draft  memorandum  of
      understanding, a project to assist the reintegration  of  involuntary
      returnees from the United Kingdom to Zimbabwe.  The  purpose  of  the
      project is not to monitor the safety of the  returnee  or  to  assist
      with his passage through the airport. The purpose of  the  monitoring
      involved in the project is to monitor the progress of  reintegration:
      see paragraph 6.4 of the memorandum. This is a point  understood  and
      explained in a report prepared by Dr  David  Cortlett  at  6/1214  an
      academic who otherwise criticises the IOM for "lacking  a  protection
      mandate". A similar view was expressed by Dr Norma Kriger (6/1224  at
      paragraph 11)

  85. The IOM operates in difficult  conditions  and  seeks  to  provide  a
      valuable and much needed service. It has  an  international  presence
      and has learned how best to deal with different  regimes  around  the
      world. The evidence indicates  that  it  has  established  a  working
      relationship with those parts of the Zimbabwean regime with which  it
      must deal.   It  appears  that  its  pragmatism  has  allowed  it  to
      concentrate on providing its services to those  it  seeks  to  assist
      rather than offering criticisms of the regime. We find  substance  in
      the submission made on behalf of  the  respondent  that  there  is  a
      difference in philosophy between the IOM and those NGOs which seek to
      identify and articulate human rights abuses. It is not  the  role  or
      purpose of the IOM to do so. Mr Walker said in his oral evidence:

           "My perception is that IOM is apolitical  and  so  it  does  not
           criticise the government so it can get on and do its work.  That
           is why it is left alone."

  86. Our conclusion upon the evidence relating to the IOM is that it is an
      appropriate organisation for the respondent to  be  working  with  in
      these areas. We accept that  the  proposed  monitoring  of  returnees
      under  the  pilot  project  described  in  the  draft  Memorandum  of
      Understanding is of no direct relevance to the assessment of the risk
      on return to any particular returnee as the IOM is not in a  position
      to intervene to prevent such abuse should it occur. On the other hand
      there is some reason to  believe  that  the  IOM  has  established  a
      working relationship with the Zimbabwean government which the  regime
      would not wish to disturb. If a consequence of that is to  provide  a
      disincentive, however small, to individual CIO officers acting in  an
      abusive manner to returnees then, clearly, that is to be welcomed.

The NGOs

  87. The respondent sought to obtain further information about how  failed
      asylum seekers, involuntarily returned to Zimbabwe, would be  treated
      upon return. This was done  by  the  preparation  of  what  has  been
      described as a "field report". That evidence is before us also and we
      respectfully adopt the summary of that evidence given by Brooke LJ:
           "The evidence of the Zimbabwe-based NGOs

           53. Evidence about the likely fate of those  who  were  returned
           compulsorily from this  country  was  also  available  from  the
           sources mentioned in the field report and  from  four  witnesses
           who gave evidence which supplemented the evidence that had  been
           given by representatives of their organisation to the delegation
           of which Mr Walker was a member. The evidence of seven of  these
           sources requires particular attention:  the  evidence  from  the
           others was of marginal value.
           54. Source F was a NGO to whom the British Embassy often  turned
           for information about cases like  these.  Their  representatives
           told Mr Walker that if the authorities  were  interested  in  an
           individual it would be because of their political opinions,  and
           not because they had sought asylum in the United  Kingdom.  They
           also said that the fact of being a returned asylum seeker  could
           result in aggressive questioning at  the  airport  in  order  to
           ascertain whether they were opposition supporters, but they felt
           that if they were found not to be they would no longer be of any
           continued interest  to  the  authorities.  They  were,  however,
           unable to discount the possibility that  they  could  remain  of
           interest.
           55. It was their view that those who  distributed  leaflets  for
           the MDC or put up posters and  arranged  meetings  for  the  MDC
           ("the MDC foot soldiers")  were  most  at  risk  of  persecution
           because they were vulnerable, easily picked up and beaten.  Such
           treatment was unlikely to attract adverse comment. In  contrast,
           the higher profile activists were protected to a degree by their
           own profile and the outcry that could follow mistreatment.
           56. A witness from Source F told the AIT  that  he  agreed  with
           Source D's belief that anyone  returning  from  the  UK  or  the
           United States would be liable  to  interrogation  on  return  on
           suspicion of being a spy or  an  agent.  He  believed  that  the
           interrogation would include more than being required  to  answer
           questions, and was likely to include ill-treatment.
           57. Source A was identified as the Human Rights NGO Forum. Their
           representative told Mr Walker that if there were  genuine  cases
           of mistreatment involving failed asylum seekers, this would  not
           occur just because they had sought asylum in the UK  but  rather
           because they had political opinions and  had  been  involved  in
           political activities.
           58. Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights (Source J) told Mr  Walker
           that returnees from the United Kingdom faced questioning at  the
           airport on return to Harare and that the Government of  Zimbabwe
           might regard the  very  act  of  leaving  for  certain  overseas
           countries, including the UK, as  constituting  treachery.  Their
           spokesman cited the example of an enforced returnee (who was not
           in fact a failed asylum seeker) who had  been  questioned  about
           reports to the effect that Zimbabweans  were  being  trained  as
           spies and insurgents in the  UK.  He  said  that  the  CIO  were
           capable of beating  people  at  the  airport,  but  he  did  not
           identify any group as being particularly at risk. He  said  that
           he had once been harassed by CIO officers in the toilets at  the
           airport, but he had been freed when he said he was a lawyer.  He
           believed that someone less articulate might not have got away so
           easily. He did not think that at societal level there  would  be
           any problems for returning failed asylum seekers.
           59. Source D  was  a  church  organisation  in  Zimbabwe.  Their
           spokesman had not heard of any  reports  of  mistreatment  being
           accorded to returning failed asylum seekers or others  returning
           from the UK. He said that the likelihood that  his  organisation
           would hear about such things was restricted by the absence of an
           independent media. He would not rule out  the  possibility  that
           individual returnees might be persecuted. On the other hand,  he
           felt that if there were  any  mistreatment  of  returnees,  that
           could apply to anyone returning to Zimbabwe from the UK  or  the
           USA. He went on to say that anyone returning from the  UK  would
           be liable to be interrogated on return on suspicion of being one
           of "Blair's spies". He felt  that  people  visiting  the  UK  as
           tourists or on business  might  face  some  interrogation  about
           their motives and activities on  return.  Some  business  people
           were reluctant on this account to travel to the UK. He felt that
           returnees from other countries did not encounter these problems.


           60. After he had read the field report, a spokesman for Source D
           made a witness statement in which he confirmed their  view  that
           an asylum seeker removed from the UK was likely  to  be  singled
           out  as  liable  to  suspicion  as  a  spy  and  he   would   be
           interrogated. Someone who had sought asylum from the UK would be
           viewed as a traitor  or  enemy  of  the  state.  Torture  during
           interrogation by the CIO was usual, as was degrading  treatment.
           There was evidence that MPs had been tortured by the CIO, and he
           observed how much worse the position of an ordinary person under
           interrogation on suspicion as a traitor would be.
           61. A senior spokesman for  a  regional  human  rights  NGO  was
           referred to as Source B. He said that he did  not  believe  that
           returning  failed  asylum  seekers   would   be   targeted   for
           mistreatment since it would suit the  Government  to  hold  such
           figures up as examples that this country was not as wonderful as
           others tended  to  think.  He  believed  that  people  who  were
           deported for other immigration offences  would  be  unlikely  to
           face difficulties on return. In his experience they usually  got
           a new passport, saved up, and tried again. He said  that  Source
           B's activities were such that they engaged with a wide range  of
           NGOs and others in the field of human rights. He  believed  that
           they would have heard if there had been systematic  mistreatment
           of returning failed asylum seekers, and he had not.
           62. Source H was identified as the Zimbabwe Peace Project.  They
           had not received reports of any mistreatment  of  failed  asylum
           seekers or other people returned from  this  country,  but  they
           were aware of such allegations in the press, and they were quite
           able to imagine that  such  things  might  be  happening.  Their
           spokesman suggested that one reason why  failed  asylum  seekers
           might be treated differently from other immigration offenders or
           others who had visited the UK was that it was assumed that  they
           must have made disloyal statements in pursuit  of  their  asylum
           claims about the situation in Zimbabwe  and  the  Government  in
           particular. As a result, and based on the treatment that  others
           who were of interest to the Government faced (for  example,  NGO
           activists), they could imagine that  the  treatment  they  might
           face would include having their luggage tampered with as well as
           extended questioning by immigration officials and the CIO.  Once
           picked up by the CIO, it was likely that the line of questioning
           would extend well beyond the issue in  hand  to  general  views,
           connections and background. He imagined that the  treatment  for
           those who were returning from the UK could be  worse  for  those
           from other countries because of the  political  climate  between
           the two  countries.  He  said  that  even  though  the  Security
           Services had access to  sophisticated  intelligence,  they  also
           acted on the basis of suspicion, for  example  because  somebody
           had been away for a while. He did not believe that failed asylum
           seekers were, on the whole, likely to face societal difficulties
           in the area to which they are returned.
           63. The spokesman for another organization (Source  C)  told  Mr
           Walker that if failed asylum seekers who were returned from  the
           UK were identified as such, they could expect to  be  questioned
           by Immigration and the CIO and perhaps even  be  threatened  and
           accused of betrayal before being released. They might be visited
           subsequently at home but the source was not aware that  any  had
           suffered mistreatment at that  stage.  He  felt  that  it  would
           definitely know if there had been any systematic mistreatment of
           returning failed asylum seekers.
           64. The AIT received a good deal of  evidence  on  the  question
           whether it was likely that any of these NGOs would be unaware of
           any systematic ill-treatment of returned asylum-seekers.  It  is
           unnecessary to refer to this evidence because the  Secretary  of
           State does not challenge on this appeal the  tribunal's  finding
           that it was not remotely surprising that they had not  heard  of
           there being any general risk. The tribunal based this finding on
           its belief that Operation Murambatsvina, which may have affected
           up to 1.5 million people, provided much to distract hard-working
           NGO officials from the possible plight  of  a  small  number  of
           claimants returned by the UK Government during the course  of  a
           few months. A much respected representative  of  Source  F  said
           that he believed it was a fantasy that the NGOs would  be  in  a
           position to monitor returns, and Professor Ranger said that this
           evidence persuaded him that he had been wrong at the time of the
           SM hearing to believe that  the  situation  would  be  carefully
           monitored. One of the reasons why the NGOs would be unlikely  to
           hear about these cases was because  the  vast  majority  of  the
           victims of ill-treatment would not wish to approach an  NGO  for
           fear of further harassment by the state."
  88. As Mr Walker has explained in his statement (4/4), from February 2006
      arrangements were put in place to meet with key NGOs and the IOM on a
      monthly basis  to  discuss  issues  relating  to  asylum  seekers.  A
      standard set of seven questions was drawn up for these  meetings  and
      two further questions were added in May in response to the work  that
      was going on for the respondent's preparation for this  hearing.  The
      information received was recorded on what has the appearance  of  pro
      forma questionnaire forms and these are to be found in  volume  4  of
      the documentary evidence, commencing at page 10.


  89. A great deal of energy has been expended by both  parties  to  either
      support or undermine this part of the  respondent's  evidence  which,
      broadly speaking, is to the effect that the NGOs were not aware of  a
      consistent pattern of state sponsored harassment or abuse  of  failed
      asylum seekers removed to Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom but  would
      expect to be if it was going on. There is  a  indication  discernable
      from  these responses that the questioning at the airport is designed
      to identify who is of further interest and that the  monitoring  that
      follows takes place for the same reason.  The RLC has contacted  some
      of these organisations and individuals with whom  the  staff  of  the
      British Embassy in Harare had dealt. They have produced evidence that
      some of the individuals were not authorised to speak on behalf of the
      organisation they work for. Some of these correspondents  asked  that
      the responses be withdrawn.

  90. The appellant attacks the whole exercise as being  misconceived,  ill
      executed  and  unreliable.  Professor  Ranger  said   that   he   was
      unimpressed with the way in which the information had  been  obtained
      and presented.  We are asked to place no reliance upon this  part  of
      the evidence at all.

  91. We do not consider  it  helpful  to  carry  out  a  lengthy  forensic
      analysis into  this  evidence  and  the  competing  submissions.  The
      Embassy was not attempting to conduct an academic  research  project.
      It was seeking to obtain and  record  in  an  accessible  and  easily
      recordable manner the views of those people  working  for  NGOs  with
      whom relationships had been built over a period of time. It is  clear
      to us that the Embassy staff was acting entirely in good faith. While
      they  might  reasonably  have  supposed  that  the  individuals  were
      speaking on behalf of their organisations, even if that were not  so,
      as certainly appears to be the case with at least some of  the  NGOs,
      these responses were still the views of individuals  who  were  in  a
      position to express a view on the issues that carried some weight.

  92. We accept the submission of Mr Henderson,  which  may  appear  to  be
      obvious, that these NGOs would be aware only  of  episodes  of  abuse
      which had come to their attention. It matters not  whether  this  was
      through press reports, contact with individual  returnees  themselves
      or simply because, the NGO community in Harare being, as we heard,  a
      close knit one, through their "networks", were able to  capture  this
      information. The consequence of Operation Murambatsvina  has  created
      overwhelming demands upon these NGOs. Their resources are limited. It
      is not at all surprising that the focus of their attention  was  upon
      matters other than the fate of 210 asylum seekers returned  from  the
      United Kingdom  between  November  2004  and  July  2005.  But  these
      organisations had not heard of a pattern of abuse being meted out  to
      returnees. However, that does not establish that such abuse  did  not
      occur.

  93. Having said that, this evidence forms part of the overall picture and
      we take it into account. We find that  the  evidence  concerning  the
      NGOs does not take the position very far either way.

   Evidence concerning the treatment of individual involuntary returnees.


  94. We turn next to consider  the  important  category  of  the  evidence
      before us  of  the  various  accounts  of  those  who  were  returned
      involuntarily having made unsuccessful asylum claims  in  the  United
      Kingdom. It is necessary to conduct a  detailed  examination  of  all
      this evidence. Before doing so we make these observations.


  95. It must be remembered that most, if not all, of these  returnees  who
      have been refused asylum  have  been  disbelieved  not  only  by  the
      respondent but by an adjudicator or immigration judge  as  well.  The
      fact that someone has given untruthful evidence in support  of  their
      claim or has been found, after a judicial examination of their  case,
      to have exaggerated or embellished their account must be relevant  in
      assessing any subsequent claim of what happened to them on arrival at
      Harare Airport. Having said that we recognise, of  course,  that  the
      fact of having given false or embellished evidence in support  of  an
      asylum claim does not mean that the claimant is not capable of belief
      in respect of what he says happened to him on return. We have  regard
      to this as no more than part of the overall  picture  when  assessing
      the individual accounts in the light  of  the  objective  and  expert
      country evidence and in the light of the evidence generally.

  96. Some of these accounts are taken from newspaper  reports  which,  for
      entirely understandable reasons, do not identify the person concerned
      and in some cases details have been changed precisely to ensure  that
      the subject cannot be identified. This means that the  respondent  is
      unable to  establish  whether  or  not  the  details  given  of  some
      individuals are consistent  with  what  is  known  at  the  point  of
      removal. An example of the potential significance of this is that  in
      one of the cases discussed below the partner in the United Kingdom of
      the person returned relayed an account of  the  difficulties  arising
      after the escorts handed the returnee  over  to  the  authorities  in
      Harare. But the respondent has established that this returnee was  in
      fact an unescorted removal.

  97. In the section that follows we  examine  the  evidence  available  in
      respect of the  accounts  of  involuntarily  returned  failed  asylum
      seekers we have been able to identify from the material before us. It
      will be seen that in a number of these accounts it  is  claimed  that
      the returnee was subjected to ill-treatment of sufficient severity to
      amount to a breach of Article 3. This occurred either at the airport,
      shortly afterwards  while  still  under  detention  or  subsequently,
      having been released but followed up. There may be  some  duplication
      of accounts set  out  both  in  the  newspaper  reports  and  in  the
      individual case papers. It can be seen that  in  a  number  of  these
      cases reasons were identified to excite the interest of the CIO other
      than the single fact alone that the person they were dealing with was
      a failed asylum seeker. An obvious example is the  case  of  Returnee
      27. She was  not  ill-treated  at  the  airport.  But  after  it  was
      discovered from a computer check that there was a warrant outstanding
      for her she was transferred to prison where the abusive treatment she
      described was suffered.

  98. We consider first those involuntary returnees identified by Ms  Sarah
      Harland of The Zimbabwe Association.  In her first witness  statement
      dated 28th July 2005 prepared in  relation  to  the  judicial  review
      proceedings (1/145) Ms Harland describes how The Zimbabwe Association
      made arrangements to monitor 28 involuntary returnees. However,  post
      removal information was received in only 14 cases.


  99. In four of the fourteen cases where no information  was  received  Ms
      Harland says that a high  degree  of  commitment  to  contacting  the
      Association  had  been  demonstrated  before  removal  and  lines  of
      communication had been established with relatives  or  friends  which
      were expected to function. She concludes from this that  the  failure
      to make contact was unlikely to be as a result of apathy and  so  one
      explanation is that the returnee had been detained or otherwise  come
      to harm. It might be observed that another explanation might be  that
      there was no adverse treatment experienced to be reported.

 100. Ms Harland identifies the fourteen returnees monitored as cases A  to
      O. After the appeal of AA had been remitted by the  Court  of  Appeal
      for rehearing further enquires were made  concerning  the  returnees.
      The information obtained is set out in  a  second  witness  statement
      made by Ms Harland on  8th  June  2006  (5/1070).  There  is  further
      evidence concerning some of these cases,  to  which  we  refer  where
      relevant. In that  second  statement  Ms  Harland  gives  details  of
      further involuntary returnees, identified as cases T to Y.

 101. As the evidence concerning returnees is not limited to that  set  out
      by Ms Harland we refer to these individuals by number,  but  also  by
      letter where they have been identified as such by Ms Harland. We have
      taken the order of this numbering from a helpful schedule provided by
      Mr Henderson. The respondent has produced in evidence before  us  the
      determinations of the adjudicators who dismissed the appeals of  many
      of these returnees. But, because it is not possible to  identify  who
      some of the returnees are, it is also not possible in  all  cases  to
      identify the relevant determination.


Returnee 1 (R1); Case A


 102. In summary, R1 gave an account in support  of  his  asylum  claim  of
      being at risk of persecutory ill treatment in Zimbabwe on account  of
      his association with the MDC. He was disbelieved by  the  adjudicator
      who did not accept any part of  his  evidence  to  be  true.  He  was
      removed on 13th December 2004. R1 says he was not ill-treated at  the
      airport but was taken from the airport by a group associated with the
      government, possibly Green Bombers. He was driven to the  bush  where
      he was badly beaten and robbed. Since then he has remained in  hiding
      with a half brother in a rural area.


 103. The adjudicator says in his determination (3/515) that this  was  the
      second time this person had been removed from the United Kingdom.  He
      first arrived as a visitor in May 2001 but was refused leave to enter
      and was returned to Zimbabwe  the  same  day.  He  did  not  on  that
      occasion make  any  mention  of  any  difficulties  in  Zimbabwe.  He
      returned to the United Kingdom on 22nd November 2001. The adjudicator
      noted also that when R1 sought entry in May 2001 it was as "a  family
      friend". He made no mention that his wife was present in  the  United
      Kingdom.


 104. R1 was removed from the United Kingdom in December  2004.  The  delay
      was because  he  presented  his  case  to  an  adjudicator  on  three
      occasions, his appeal twice being remitted by the IAT. His wife,  who
      remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student,  said  she  heard
      subsequently from a relative who had,  coincidentally,  been  on  the
      same flight to Harare as the one on which the appellant was  removed.
      That relative had been asked by R1 to wait for him  at  the  airport.
      But after he had been taken from the plane by  the  escorts  who  had
      travelled with him from the United Kingdom he failed to emerge in the
      arrivals hall. R1's wife heard a few days  later  that  he  had  been
      assaulted upon his return. Exhibited to Ms Harland's first  statement
      is a fax R1 sent to her giving further details of his experiences.


 105. In this fax (1/159) R1 said that on arrival at Harare airport he  was
      taken by three men to an office where he was supposed to collect  his
      passport. He was driven to a rural area, bound  and  blindfolded.  He
      was accused of being a spy sent by Tony Blair. His head was dipped in
      water several times and, after having  been  subjected  to  a  severe
      beating, he was left covered with a  wet  blanket  all  night,  being
      guarded at gunpoint. He was released after his money was  taken  from
      him. He was then in hiding with his cousin.


 106. In respect of Case R1 there is more information. His  wife  has  made
      two statements.  She said that both she  and  her  husband  were  MDC
      members in Zimbabwe. When she left to  come  here  her  husband  left
      their Harare home and went to stay with relatives in the rural  area,
      their son remaining  with  relatives  in  Harare  so  that  he  could
      continue to attend school.

 107. After hearing of her  husband's  abduction  upon  return,  R1's  wife
      contacted The Zimbabwe Association.  They  arranged  for  R1  to  see
      lawyers in Harare about the mistreatment he had experienced. He  said
      they were of no help, even suggesting  that  sometimes  people  cause
      injuries to themselves.


 108. R1's appeal was dismissed following a hearing on  3rd  October  2003.
      The adjudicator described how R1's case was  argued  before  him.  R1
      said that on account of his involvement with the MDC he had  suffered
      persecutory ill treatment in  Zimbabwe.  In  September  2001  ZANU-PF
      received information that he held small informal MDC meetings at  his
      home in the rural area and had burst into the  house  during  one  of
      these meetings. R1 had been detained for four days and  when  he  had
      been released his house had been burnt down. He  said  his  wife  had
      been working as a supply teacher in the United  Kingdom  and  so  had
      been able to send him money so he could come to join her. We note the
      appellant's wife has not mentioned the destruction of  the  house  or
      the appellant's detention by ZANU-PF in her own  statement.  Finally,
      the  adjudicator  set  out  the  appellant's  evidence  of  his   MDC
      activities since arriving in the UK. Although living  in  Walsall  he
      had  travelled  to  London  to  participate  in  vigils  outside  the
      Zimbabwean Embassy in London and said he had been filmed  by  Embassy
      staff.


 109. The adjudicator dismissed the appeal because he did not  believe  any
      of this evidence to be true, other than accepting that the  appellant
      had demonstrated outside the Embassy in order to bolster  his  claim.
      He found that it was not reasonably likely that the  appellant  would
      have been identified even if the demonstration was filmed.

 110. Thus, the evidence of R1 is that he was a person who was known to  be
      an MDC activist and who, upon that account, attracted such a level of
      adverse  interest  that  his  house  was  burnt  down  following  his
      abduction and detention by ZANU-PF. But all of that has been rejected
      by the adjudicator as being untrue. If the appellant's  account  were
      in fact correct it is clear that  he  would  have  been  of  interest
      because he was a known MDC activist and not simply because he was  an
      involuntary returnee. We cannot however, go behind  the  findings  of
      the adjudicator who concluded that the evidence of MDC involvement is
      fabricated. R1 was not  believed  by  the  adjudicator.  That,  taken
      together with the other matters discussed above, leads us to conclude
      that  R1's  account  of  his  experiences  at  the  airport  must  be
      approached with some caution.



Returnee 2 (R2); Case B



 111. The second individual identified by Ms Harland in her first statement
      was removed from the United Kingdom at the end of December  2004.  Ms
      Harland spoke to him on the telephone a few days later and R2 said he
      had  passed  through  Immigration  Control  at  the  airport  without
      difficulty but was then detained by the CIO over a three hour period.
      His documents were examined carefully and his  luggage  searched.  He
      was released after a substantial bribe was paid  by  a  relative.  He
      gave the CIO an old address and told Ms Harland that  he  planned  to
      leave Zimbabwe once more. In her recent witness statement Ms  Harland
      says that her subsequent enquiries suggested that he had in fact  now
      left Zimbabwe.



Returnee 3 (R3); Case C



 112. R3 claimed asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom on  10th  February
      2002 having travelled by direct flight from Zimbabwe  using  his  own
      passport. His claim was based upon his account of being subjected  to
      persecutory ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of  ZANU-PF  and  the  war
      veterans because of his support for  the  MDC.  The  adjudicator,  in
      dismissing his appeal against refusal of that claim, was prepared  to
      accept that he might have been a "low level" supporter of the MDC but
      found that the core of his account was untrue,  being  no  more  than
      "substantial   exaggeration"   (determination   3/499).   That    the
      adjudicator  found  that  R3  had  a  propensity  to  exaggerate  his
      experiences is relevant to our assessment of his account  of  how  he
      was treated upon his return to Zimbabwe.


 113. R3 was also removed in December 2004. The Zimbabwe Association  later
      heard from a relative of R3's that he had passed through the  airport
      without difficulty and  returned  home  but  a  few  days  later  was
      attacked and beaten so badly that  he  required  hospital  treatment.
      R3's family has refused to provide any further information and so  it
      is not known who was responsible.

 114. Witness 1, of Source F, an NGO  operating  in  Harare,  says  in  his
      statement dated 3rd October 2005 (3/802) that  his  organisation  has
      examined hospital documentation confirming that R3  was  treated  for
      injuries and that

           " (R3) was also personally examined by the Medical  Director  of
           (the NGO)   [Witness  20],  who  concluded  that  his  case  was
           genuine. [Witness 20] is an internationally respected figure  in
           the treatment of torture."

 115.  The  overall  effect  of  this  evidence  is,  therefore,  that   R3
      experienced no problems at all in passing  through  the  airport  but
      some days later, on return to  his  home  area  he  was  attacked  by
      unknown people who did not seek to assert any official status. We are
      told by  Witness  1  that  Witness  20,  who  is  a  medical  doctor,
      considered R3's case to be "genuine".  But  since  no  evidence  from
      Witness 20 has been put before us that is unhelpful. We do  not  know
      if his "case" was that he had  been  attacked  because  he  had  been
      returned to the United Kingdom  after  having  made  an  unsuccessful
      asylum claim or for reasons entirely unconnected with that. It  seems
      to us that if the motivation for his attack was his asylum  claim  it
      is likely that some reference would have been made  to  this  in  the
      form of allegations of treachery or disloyalty as  is  said  to  have
      occurred where others have been interrogated on return.


Returnee 4 (R4); Case D



 116. R4 arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor in January 2003 and was
      granted leave to enter for six months. He remained  after  his  leave
      expired and claimed asylum only after he was detained  by  police  in
      respect of an alleged motoring offence on 14th March 2004. His  claim
      was based upon his account of being an active MDC member in Zimbabwe,
      who had been elected as Youth Secretary of his branch of  the  party,
      He claimed to have been  detained  and  tortured  on  five  occasions
      before leaving Zimbabwe to seek safety in the United Kingdom.


 117. The adjudicator dismissed his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his
      asylum claim because he found  most  of  his  account  to  be  untrue
      (determination 3/467). The adjudicator found that he may have been  a
      supporter of the MDC.  But he was not a  member  of  the  party,  let
      alone an office holder.


 118. R4 was removed on 1st January 2005. Ms Harland describes in her first
      statement how R4 spoke on the telephone to a member of  The  Zimbabwe
      Association and said that on arrival  at  the  airport  he  had  been
      "intensively questioned" about his activities in the United  Kingdom.
      He persuaded the CIO that he was an  overstayer  and  not  an  asylum
      seeker and was released after he  had  given  them  an  out  of  date
      address. He then left Zimbabwe for Botswana where he has remained.


 119. In her second statement Ms Harland sets out an  altogether  different
      account. R4 had been spoken to again by  a  member  of  The  Zimbabwe
      Association who had been detained together  with  R4  before  he  was
      removed. We do not know if that person has now been granted leave  to
      remain or whether he too faces removal to Zimbabwe  if  removals  are
      resumed.  That  might  be  a  relevant  factor  in  considering   the
      objectivity of his approach to gathering this  evidence.  It  is  now
      said that R4 was beaten by the CIO during the  intensive  questioning
      at the airport. R4 had now left Botswana  and  returned  to  Zimbabwe
      because his family had been threatened by the  authorities  who  were
      looking for R4 and who had beaten his brother. He returned  "to  ease
      the pressure on the  family".  It  is  said  that  shortly  after  R4
      returned to Zimbabwe his home was raided while he himself was not  at
      home and as a result he has gone into hiding.

 120. There are a number of difficulties about this account. If R4 had been
      beaten at the airport it is not easy to understand why he should  not
      have given some account of  this  when  he  telephoned  the  Zimbabwe
      Association in the United Kingdom after his removal.  He  was,  after
      all, not then in Zimbabwe but in Botswana. Further, it  is  difficult
      to understand how returning to Zimbabwe would "ease the  pressure  on
      his family". It is not being suggested that he  gave  himself  up  to
      those who he said were responsible for the harassment of  his  family
      in order to discover his whereabouts. Further still, if  R4  had  now
      gone into hiding it is difficult to  see  how  the  position  of  his
      family was in any way improved as against the situation when  he  was
      safely in Botswana.

 121. We should make clear that in reaching these conclusions we have borne
      in mind the evidence which we have considered concerning the  reasons
      why some might not report experiences of ill-treatment.

 122. The first account given by R4 is consistent with the evidence we have
      received concerning procedures at the airport. This,  taken  together
      with the fact that the  appellant's  account  of  being  in  need  of
      international protection was rejected, leads us to conclude that  the
      second account given is not one upon which we feel able to  rely.  We
      see no reason to reject the first account given by R4.  We  conclude,
      therefore, that R4 was subjected  to  intensive  questioning  at  the
      airport but, having satisfied the officer that there was no reason to
      believe him to be of further interest, he was allowed  to  leave  the
      airport to return home.

   Returnee 5 (R5); Case E

 123. R5 claimed asylum two days after having been granted leave  to  enter
      the United Kingdom as a visitor in November 2001. His claim was based
      upon his account of being  persecuted  in  Zimbabwe  because  of  his
      association with  the  MDC.  The  adjudicator  dismissed  his  appeal
      against the refusal of his application (3/532) because  she  did  not
      believe any part of the appellant's account to be true.


 124. R5 was removed on 6th May 2005. The  Zimbabwe  Association  has  been
      told by relatives of R5 who remain in the United  Kingdom  that  they
      have spoken to him.  He said that on arrival at Harare Airport he had
      been handed over to the CIO in handcuffs and ill-treated to  such  an
      extent that he could barely walk. He has  now  gone  into  hiding  in
      Zimbabwe.

 125. In her more recent statement Ms Harland says that R5's family has now
      agreed to provide some further information. In June or July  2005  R5
      went to South Africa but was returned by the authorities to Zimbabwe.
      There is no account of any difficulties arising from that return.


Returnee 6 (R6); Case F


 126. The adjudicator who dismissed R6's appeal  accepted  that  he  was  a
      supporter of the MDC and was involved with a Christian charity  as  a
      driver  but  did  not  find  credible  his  account   of   attracting
      persecutory ill-treatment as a  consequence  of  this  (determination
      3/560). The adjudicator found that R6 had exaggerated his account and
      that he would be of no interest on return  on  account  of  what  was
      found to be his very limited involvement with these organisations.


 127. After R6 was removed in June 2005, The Zimbabwe Association was  told
      by R6's cousin in the United Kingdom that R6 had been  questioned  at
      the airport but released without incident after his address had  been
      recorded. He was subsequently visited by the police who required  him
      to report to the police station. When he attended as required he  was
      "aggressively interrogated" by the  CIO  and  required  to  give  the
      addresses of four members of his family.  He  was  released  with  an
      obligation to return for further questioning by the CIO in a few days
      later but he left Zimbabwe and went to South Africa.

 128. Ms Harland telephoned R6 in South Africa and he told her that he  had
      been accused of being "a spy for Blair". The police appeared to  know
      a good deal about him and the history of his family. He believed that
      being questioned by the CIO was likely to carry with it the  risk  of
      serious ill-treatment.

 129. R6 has now returned to the United  Kingdom  and  his  renewed  asylum
      claim is being considered by the respondent. R6 was the subject of an
      article in The Observer newspaper of 10th July 2005 (1/527).  In  the
      article  his  name  has  been  changed,  presumably  to  protect  his
      identity, to "Zuka Kalinga" It is, frankly,  difficult  to  reconcile
      the account given in the  article  of  his  experiences  in  Zimbabwe
      before he came to claim asylum in the United  Kingdom  with  that  he
      gave in evidence before the adjudicator.

 130. Although it is claimed that he left Zimbabwe for South Africa because
      he feared that future interrogations would lead to ill-treatment, the
      evidence is that he had no difficulties at the airport and,  although
      there was a follow up to  his  arrival  in  that  he  was  questioned
      aggressively by the CIO he was not physically harmed in any way.  The
      assertions in the witness statement he has made for these proceedings
      (5/826) that the CIO have returned to his home asking after  him  and
      threatening the lives of relatives  if  they  did  not  disclose  his
      whereabouts must be viewed in the light of the fact that he has  been
      found by the adjudicator to have given exaggerated  accounts  of  his
      experiences in Zimbabwe in pursuing his original asylum claim.

Returnee 33 (R33)

 131. We consider this account next because it seems probable  that  it  is
      the same  person  as  R6  whose  account  we  have  just  considered.
      Information  concerning  R33  is  to  be  found   in   the   Observer
      International news report at 1/527 which itself is a  report  of  the
      article published in the Observer newspaper on Sunday 10th July 2005.




 132. R33 left Zimbabwe and came to the United Kingdom  in  2003  where  he
      claimed asylum because he said he had  suffered  persecution  at  the
      hands of the authorities because of his support for and activities on
      behalf of the MDC. He said he was also targeted because he worked for
      a Christian charity working to help widows of  men  murdered  by  the
      agents of the regime. The offices of this charity regularly attracted
      adverse attention and it was after a raid during which he was knocked
      unconscious that R33 decided to leave Zimbabwe.

 133. The news report does not deal with the reasons why the  asylum  claim
      was unsuccessful. R33 was detained for removal and  was  returned  to
      Zimbabwe but there is no indication of the date of either  event.  It
      is said that on arrival at Harare  airport  he  was  interrogated  by
      officials but there is no suggestion  that  he  was  physically  ill-
      treated. He was allowed to leave the airport and he returned home  to
      Bulawayo where he was required to report to the police station.  When
      interrogated at the police station he was asked about his father  who
      was "murdered by Mugabe' troops" in 1982. There is no suggestion that
      R33 was physically  ill-treated  during  this  interrogation  either,
      although it was conducted in a hostile and threatening manner.

 134. Not wishing to return again to the police station R33 went  to  South
      Africa where he is now living in hiding.


Returnee 7 (R7); Case G


 135. R7 applied for asylum  on  her  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
      December 2002. She gave an  account  of  being  persecuted  and  ill-
      treated by ZANU-PF because she and  her  boyfriend  were  active  MDC
      members. When her boyfriend went missing people from ZANU-PF abducted
      her in an attempt to discover his whereabouts but  did  her  no  real
      harm and she was released the next day. After this she went to  South
      Africa and with the help of the MDC office there arranged to come  to
      the United Kingdom.


 136. The adjudicator dismissed her appeal because,  although  he  accepted
      that she was a member of the  MDC,  he  did  not  find  her  evidence
      concerning the  difficulties  experienced  as  a  consequence  to  be
      credible. He found that she had "told deliberate untruths".

 137. R7 was removed on  9th  December  2004.  She  subsequently  told  the
      lawyers who had assisted her in the United Kingdom that she had  been
      questioned at the airport for about five hours but released upon  the
      intervention of relatives who had come to the airport  to  meet  her.
      Having returned to her  home  in  Bulawayo  she  was  under  constant
      surveillance by local ZANU-PF members who questioned her about  where
      she had been and were verbally abusive towards her. She  was  accused
      of being a sell-out and of being a British spy.

 138. In her recent statement Ms Harland says that R7's family are refusing
      to facilitate any further contact with R7. Thus, there is no evidence
      that this returnee came to harm on account of it being known that she
      was an involuntary returnee.

 139. It will have been noted that the evidence concerning R7 discussed  so
      far does not involve any claim that she was ill-treated on return. In
      the "schedule of enforced removal cases" submitted by Mr Henderson it
      is said that R7 was  "detained  and  beaten  on  arrival"  at  Harare
      airport. This information is taken from the witness statement  of  Mr
      Walsh (1/269) who records that such an  allegation  was  reported  in
      Hansard on 27th June 2005. It is extraordinary, if  this  beating  in
      fact took place, that there is no mention at  all  about  it  in  the
      first report of R7's experiences on return to Harare contained in  Ms
      Harland's first statement (1/154) or in her  second  statement  dated
      8th June 2006 (5/1077).

Returnee 8 (R8); Case H

 140. Having overstayed his leave as  a  working  holidaymaker  R8  claimed
      asylum after he was arrested in August 2002 for causing a  breach  of
      the peace. He said he had been repeatedly attacked and persecuted  by
      ZANU-PF members because  of  his  membership  of  and  activities  in
      support of the MDC. The  adjudicator  dismissed  his  appeal  against
      refusal of the application for asylum because she did not believe any
      part of his account to be true (determination 3/590).


 141. R8 was removed on 9th  December  2004.  In  her  first  statement  Ms
      Harland says that information was received from relatives that  after
      being removed to Zimbabwe he went  missing  and  when  he  reappeared
      several days later "his missing days were not  explained  ".  In  her
      recent statement Ms Harland described a  conversation  she  had  with
      R8's sister in the United Kingdom  after  the  Court  of  Appeal  had
      remitted this appeal. She said that R8 had left  Zimbabwe  in  August
      2005 but had returned and had experienced further,  but  unexplained,
      problems as a result of which his family had sent him away again  and
      so it appears he has once again left Zimbabwe.

 142. Thus there had been no specific assertion that R8 had been  subjected
      to any ill-treatment upon return  to  Zimbabwe.  It  seems  that  The
      Zimbabwe Association were unwilling to  leave  it  at  this.  In  her
      second statement Ms Harland says  that  she  called  the  appellant's
      sister in the UK again recently "to see if she would simply  indicate
      whether or not R8 was  ill-treated  upon  arrival".  This  time  R8's
      sister "confirmed that he had been ill-treated while detained  for  a
      number of days (she did not say how many) on his  arrival  at  Harare
      Airport and also said that he was still out of the country".

 143. It can be seen that  the  persistence  of  The  Zimbabwe  Association
      eventually secured an indication in the vaguest terms that some  form
      of ill-treatment had been inflicted. As R8 is no longer  in  Zimbabwe
      it is difficult to understand why, if this were true, his  sister  in
      the United Kingdom should be unwilling to  provide  more  information
      than she did. It may well be that what was said was  not  unconnected
      with the persistence of the enquiry by The Zimbabwe Association.

 144. We are not satisfied that the first response, that while there was  a
      report of unexplained "missing days" there was no assertion  of  ill-
      treatment, can be brushed aside so easily.

Returnee 9 (R9); Case J

 145. R9 was removed in December 2004 after which  she  made  contact  with
      friends with whom she had been at the detention centre in the  United
      Kingdom. Ms Harland obtained  from  them  R9's  telephone  number  in
      Zimbabwe and spoke to her. Ms Harland said in her first statement:

           "She told me that she was alright. However, it was obvious that
           she did not want to speak in any detail over the telephone, and
           was fearful of saying anything that might be overheard."

      Although this was Ms Harland's interpretation of the conversation, the
      only information that she obtained from R9 was that she "was alright".
      There was, then, no evidence that R9  experienced  any  difficulty  in
      getting through the airport or that anyone has sought to harass her in
      any way subsequently.



 146. In her recent statement Ms Harland describes  having  exchanged  text
      messages with R9 more recently and she interprets the absence of  any
      complaint of ill-treatment or other difficulties as evidence  of  the
      climate of fear existing  in  Zimbabwe.  Ms  Harland  is,  of  course
      perfectly entitled to express that view but the  fact  is  that  this
      account does not provide any support for  the  assertion  that  those
      returned involuntarily are thereby at risk on that account alone.


Returnee 10 (R10); Case K


 147. R10 was removed in  December  2004  or  January  2005.  The  Zimbabwe
      Association heard subsequently from R10's cousin that  R10  had  been
      questioned at the airport on arrival by the CIO for two hours and was
      allowed to leave after explaining that he was HIV  positive  and  had
      gone to the United Kingdom only to access medical treatment. There is
      no suggestion that he was subjected to ill-treatment at any  time  or
      that anyone expressed any interest in him  after  he  went  home.  Ms
      Harland says in her second statement that she contacted R10's  family
      recently but "they will not co-operate with us".


Returnee 11 (R11); Case L


 148. In her first statement Ms Harland says that R11, who was  removed  in
      March 2005, returned safely, this having been confirmed by relatives.
      She went on to say:

           "They have since said that (R11) was in fact detained on arrival
           for several nights and has since left Zimbabwe."



 149. In her more recent statement Ms Harland says that she has heard  from
      R11's aunt in the United Kingdom that she  has  in  turn  heard  from
      R11's wife that he had left Zimbabwe and  was  now  in  Sudan  but  a
      request for contact details was refused.  R11's  aunt  and  his  wife
      refused  also  to  confirm  whether  L  was  ill-treated  during  his
      detention.


 150. When examined, it can be seen that this is  another  example  of  the
      persistence of  the  enquiry  pursued  by  The  Zimbabwe  Association
      securing an amended account. The initial  report  was  that  R11  had
      "returned safely". Put another way, there is no evidence  to  suggest
      that R11 suffered any mistreatment upon return to Zimbabwe.




Returnee 12 (R12); Case M


 151. All that is known about R12, who was removed in May 2005, is that The
      Zimbabwe Association heard that he had arrived back in  Zimbabwe  but
      no more. His wife remains in the United Kingdom.


Returnee 13 (R13); Case N


 152. R13's aunt in the United Kingdom has told  The  Zimbabwe  Association
      that following R13's escorted return to Zimbabwe she  was  questioned
      at the airport and is now "in hiding" in Zimbabwe. There has been  no
      account of detention or ill-treatment at the airport or any  problems
      encountered subsequently. In her recent  statement  Ms  Harland  says
      that neither R13 nor R14, who share  the  same  aunt  in  the  United
      Kingdom, was physically ill-treated on return. This was because  they
      have a relative working in a managerial role at the airport  who  had
      links to ZANU-PF and who was  able  to  intervene  on  their  behalf,
      having been warned in advance of their arrival.

 153. Because of her family links with ZANU-PF R13 was able to enrol  on  a
      training course as a nurse, although she was required, following  her
      passage through the airport, to  report  with  her  passport  to  the
      Immigration Department.


Returnee 14 (R14); Case O


 154. R14 was also removed in May 2005. Her removal from the United Kingdom
      was escorted to Nairobi from where she was allowed  to  complete  the
      onward journey without escorts. She was questioned at Harare  Airport
      but was released upon the intervention of the relative who worked  at
      the airport. She gave an old home address to the CIO but has remained
      in hiding because people came looking for her  at  that  address.  Ms
      Harland has discovered from her more recent enquiries that  R14  then
      went to South Africa where she obtained a false identity after  which
      she returned to Zimbabwe where she has re-established  herself  using
      this false identity. She has not reported any other difficulties.


Returnees 15, 16, 17 and 18 (R15, R16, R17, R18); Cases P, Q, R and S.


 155. In  her  second  statement  Ms  Harland  ascribes  these  letters  of
      identification to the four returnees she had expected to contact  The
      Zimbabwe Association but did not. The only information  available  to
      Ms Harland is that relatives of R15 have not heard from her following
      removal  and  so  she  is  referred  to  by  Ms  Harland  as   having
      "disappeared".


 156. We do  not  agree  that  such  a  conclusion  is  the  inevitable  or
      justifiable consequence of the information available.


Returnee 19 (R19); Case T


 157. R19 and the remaining cases referred to by Ms  Harland  in  her  more
      recent statement, are returnees about whom The  Zimbabwe  Association
      became aware only after AA's case came before the  Court  of  Appeal.
      R19's claim was based upon his account of being at risk  in  Zimbabwe
      because he had no political associations and had declined to  support
      ZANU-PF. Because of this he was suspected of supporting the MDC.  The
      adjudicator dismissed R19's appeal because he did not  find  credible
      the appellant's account of his difficulties in Zimbabwe and  did  not
      accept that he had been detained in Harare as he had claimed.

 158. A Reverend [   ] informed The Zimbabwe Association that she was  told
      by a member of her congregation in the United Kingdom  that  R19  had
      experienced problems in Zimbabwe following his  forced  removal  from
      the United Kingdom. The nature of those problems is not known because
      R19 refused to discuss  them  when  speaking  on  the  telephone.  Ms
      Harland received the same response  when  she  telephoned  T  on  his
      mobile phone.

 159. This evidence is extremely vague and is of little assistance. We have
      no statement or letter from either Rev. [   ] or the  member  of  the
      congregation who provided this information. There is no indication at
      all of the nature of the "problems" and so we do not  know  if  those
      were said to be in some way related to R19's return or  whether  they
      related to the difficult general country conditions  which  certainly
      do give rise to problems for very many people in Zimbabwe.


Returnee 20 (R20); Case U


 160. R20, who was removed on 30th April 2005, was put in contact  with  Ms
      Harland by a friend who remained in the United Kingdom. He said  that
      he had been detained at the airport and held for three months  during
      which time he was ill-treated. It was agreed that  Ms  Harland  would
      put him in touch with a human rights NGO with  a  view  to  obtaining
      further details.

 161. At page 6/1187 is  a  medical  report  prepared  by  Witness  20  who
      examined R20 on 7th June 2006. Witness 20 concludes that scars  found
      on his body could be consistent with R20's account of being assaulted
      during his detention but:

           "Because of the length of time (nine months) between injury  and
           examination, it cannot be stated with certainty that these scars
           are a direct result of his assault."

      Witness 20 recorded also that:

           "On   the   first   examination   he   admitted   to    auditory
           hallucinations, and a constant feeling of persecution,  in  that
           people are following him all the time, and that he cannot remain
           in one place for more than one night.


           In view of his extreme  anxiety  he  was  commenced  upon  anti-
           psychotic treatment, and placed in a place of safety, and  after
           five days  his  anxiety  levels  had  decreased,  but  he  still
           displayed signs of paranoia. He was  reviewed  by  a  specialist
           psychiatrist.


           The clinical  diagnosis  of  his  psychiatric  state  remains  a
           differential diagnosis until he has settled  on  his  treatment,
           but is highly probable to  be  that  of  a  reactive  psychosis,
           secondary to his prolonged detention and torture."

 162. R20 has refused to speak  to  the  British  authorities  unless  they
      promised to arrange his departure from Zimbabwe which the  respondent
      cannot agree to. Although Witness 20 cannot confirm  that  the  scars
      were caused by torture and although the account was given by a person
      being treated for a mental condition involving  persecutory  feelings
      arising from psychosis this is, clearly, evidence that  supports  the
      assertion that some people are detained and  mistreated  by  the  CIO
      upon return to Zimbabwe.


 163. As can be seen from the  determination  of  the  IAT  dismissing  his
      appeal against the adjudicator's dismissal of his appeal, R20's claim
      to have been abducted and  beaten  in  Zimbabwe  on  account  of  his
      activities for the MDC was found not to be  a  truthful  one  by  the
      adjudicator, although there was no  finding  of  fact  rejecting  his
      claim  to  be  a  supporter  of  the  MDC   (determination   6/1129).
      Interestingly, the IAT recorded at paragraph 12 of its determination:

           "When pressed by the Tribunal as to what was his submission (the
           appellant's representative) said, and we consider  that  he  was
           right to say, that he was not suggesting that there was  a  risk
           to all failed  asylum  seekers  which  would  be  sufficient  to
           justify a favourable finding under the Refugee Convention or  in
           relation to Article 3 of the Human Rights  Convention.   He  was
           saying that  the  appellant  would  be  viewed  with  heightened
           suspicion because of his membership of the MDC  and  because  of
           his previous activities."

      That was in December 2003.


Returnee 21 (R21); Case V


 164. The Zimbabwe Association was told by  R21's  partner  in  the  United
      Kingdom that he was removed forcibly from the United Kingdom  at  the
      end of 2004. It is known from relatives that went to meet him at  the
      airport that he never emerged. R21 contacted his partner in  2006  to
      tell her that he had been detained at the airport and  held  for  six
      months during which time he had been ill-treated. He is now in  South
      Africa but as R21's partner has changed her mind about assisting  The
      Zimbabwe Association no further information is available.

 165. This is difficult to  reconcile  with  the  respondent's  information
      concerning this claimant. At 6/1148 is a  letter  from  the  relevant
      Home Office minister confirming that R21 made a voluntary return with
      the assistance of the Assisted Voluntary Returns Programme.

 166. The adjudicator who dismissed R21's appeal found that he was  "a  low
      level  party  member  (of  MDC)  and  not   a   prominent   activist"
      (determination 6/1138) and found also that he  had  "embellished  and
      exaggerated  his  story."  This  propensity  to   embellishment   and
      exaggeration, taken together with the incorrect  characterisation  of
      the nature of his return reported by his partner and the  absence  of
      any explanation why, now that R21  is  no  longer  in  Zimbabwe,  the
      appellant's partner refuses still  to  provide  any  further  details
      leads us to conclude that we are unable to rely upon this account  as
      evidence of an episode of mistreatment of an involuntary returnee.


Returnee 22 (R22); Case W


 167. R22's friend who remains in the UK told The Zimbabwe Association that
      following his removal to Zimbabwe in January 2005 R22 was detained on
      arrival at Harare Airport and  was  not  released  until  some  weeks
      later. He was treated so badly during this detention  that  upon  his
      release he could not walk. He was required to report to police weekly
      but he went missing in July 2005 and has not been heard of since.

 168. The adjudicator had dismissed  his  appeal  against  refusal  of  his
      asylum claim saying (determination 6/1149):

           "The appellant claims persecution by the state in the sense that
           he was detained by police for no good reason and beaten by ZANU-
           PF youths who act with the tacit approval  of  the  authorities.
           However, I have rejected all of the appellant's evidence that is
           relevant to his claim as being untruthful and fabricated."

 169. Thus this account adds to the overall picture but must be  viewed  in
      the context of a very brief assertion  from  someone  who  has  given
      false evidence in support of his asylum claim which is relayed to The
      Zimbabwe Association by an unknown person whose own  nationality  and
      immigration status is also  unknown.  For  the  friend  to  be  in  a
      position to pass on this information there must have been  some  form
      of communication between them. It  is  extraordinary,  given  that  a
      decision must have been made to enter into some form  of  contact  in
      order to divulge this account of abuse, that further details of  this
      dreadful experience were not made available. For example,  one  might
      reasonably expect the  informant  to  have  been  told,  or  to  have
      enquired,  of  the  nature  of  the  injuries  sustained,   who   was
      responsible for the ill-treatment and what was being alleged  against
      R22. This was, after all, not one  of  the  cases  in  which  it  was
      decided to make no report to anyone at all in order to avoid  a  risk
      of attracting further difficulties.


Returnees 23 and 24 (R23 and R24); Cases X and Y


 170. R23 and R24 are brothers. It is not clear from  Ms  Harland's  second
      statement, in which they are first mentioned, whether their return to
      Zimbabwe was a voluntary or an involuntary return. Relatives  in  the
      United Kingdom have told The Zimbabwe Association that on  return  to
      Harare Airport they were both detained for a few  days  during  which
      they were questioned before being handed  over  to  police  in  their
      local area. Ms Harland says that the relative did not know whether or
      not they had been ill-treated during this detention because  she  did
      not feel able to  ask  about  this  when  speaking  to  them  on  the
      telephone. R23 and R24,  presumably,  did  not  describe  being  ill-
      treated but they did say during the telephone conversation that  they
      had  been  required  to  report  regularly,  had  been  placed  under
      surveillance and had been given warnings.

 171. The brothers said also that they were subsequently detained and taken
      to Chikurubi Prison but were released upon payment of  a  substantial
      bribe after which they both went to South Africa. Because  they  left
      Zimbabwe, their uncle, who had raised money for the bribe by  selling
      cattle, had been placed under a weekly reporting obligation.

 172. It seems to us that if the brothers  felt  able  to  discuss  on  the
      telephone the  initial  detention  at  the  airport,  the  giving  of
      warnings and the surveillance and reporting as well as the subsequent
      detention in prison and the payment  of  a  large  bribe  it  is  not
      reasonably likely that they would  have  felt  unable  to  make  some
      reference to ill-treatment in detention had it occurred.


Returnee 25 (R25); Witness 7


 173. This witness gave oral evidence before the  first  Tribunal  but  not
      before us. His undated witness statement is  at  3/627.  R25  was  an
      active member of the MDC in Zimbabwe, having joined in January  2000.
      He helped to organise  rallies  and  with  the  distribution  of  MDC
      literature. His problems  began  in  March  2002  when,  having  been
      assaulted and injured by ZANU-PF members who attacked an MDC meeting,
      he was arrested by police and taken to Harare Central Police  Station
      where he was released ten hours later having been fined for  engaging
      in political violence. In August 2002 his home was attacked by a ZANU-
      PF mob after which he decided to  leave  Zimbabwe  and  come  to  the
      United Kingdom.

 174. R25 first arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  1st  October  2002  and
      sought entry as a visitor. He was not granted  leave  but  was  given
      temporary admission but he did not report back as required.

 175. R25 did not claim asylum. After he heard that  removals  to  Zimbabwe
      had been resumed in November 2004 he thought this indicated that  the
      situation must have improved so he decided to return. He went to  the
      Zimbabwe Embassy but  they  would  not  provide  him  with  a  travel
      document because he did  not  have  a  passport.  They  suggested  he
      approach the police but when the  appellant  went  to  Charing  Cross
      police station he was arrested and taken to  Harmondsworth  where  he
      was detained for removal.

 176. R25 was returned to Zimbabwe on 2nd December 2004. At Harare  airport
      he was escorted from the plane by a member of  the  aircrew  who  had
      handed him over to people in plain clothes together with the envelope
      containing his  documents.  The  appellant  says  they  were  clearly
      expecting him. R25 was taken to an office where  four  men  in  plain
      clothes identified themselves  as  from  the  Criminal  Investigation
      Department. He was accused of being a British agent  and  of  working
      for the MDC. He was kicked and punched. His nose was bleeding.

 177. R25 describes how, some hours later, he was blindfolded and taken  by
      truck to a building about forty five minutes drive away where he  was
      stripped naked and left without food or water for about  a  week.  He
      was subjected to beatings and humiliated in various ways. After  this
      he remained in detention but was allowed his clothes and  given  food
      and water. On 21st December 2004 he  was  spoken  to  by  people  who
      included two of those who had dealt with him at the airport.  He  was
      again accused of being a spy and was beaten with  batons  and  kicked
      when he fell to the ground. He was hit in the face with a rifle  butt
      as a result of which he lost some front teeth.

 178. R25 was released on 23rd December 2004 and his parents  took  him  to
      get treatment for his injuries.

 179. Despite this experience, R25 describes remaining active on behalf  of
      the MDC although his activities were at a  lower  and  less  frequent
      level than before. On 16th March 2005 R25 was arrested  at  home  and
      was told that his activities had been monitored. He  was  taken  from
      the police station to a farm in Bindura where,  together  with  about
      sixty other MDC detainees he was made  to  work.  He  remained  there
      until 20th April 2005 when he was  released  but  was  instructed  to
      report to  the  police  station  on  a  weekly  basis  but  when  the
      demolitions began this was changed to a daily  reporting  obligation.
      As soon as arrangements could be made  R25  returned  to  the  United
      Kingdom, arriving in July 2005.

 180. The RLC, who are assisting him in respect of his asylum  claim,  have
      commissioned a medical report (3/637) which supports R25's account of
      the ill-treatment to which he was subjected.

 181. It can be seen that R25's history would be likely to excite interest.
      He is known to be an MDC  activist  and  has  a  criminal  conviction
      recorded against him. He approached the Embassy in  London  who,  for
      reasons that are not known, decided to refuse his request for  travel
      documents.

Returnee 26 (R26); Witness 8

 182. This returnee gave evidence before the first Tribunal in October 2005
      but not before us. His witness statement is at 3/837. R26 was an  MDC
      activist who came to the United Kingdom to claim asylum but when this
      was refused he was removed to Zimbabwe on 17th January 2001. This was
      an escorted removal and R26 was handcuffed when he was handed over to
      the authorities at Harare Airport.

 183.  R26 gave  a  detailed  account  of  his  treatment  upon  return  to
      Zimbabwe:

           "After the escorts left me with the CIO's they  initially  asked
           me why I had gone to the UK. At first I said that I had gone  to
           visit. Then one of the CIO's looked at my  passport  which  they
           had been given by the escorts. The CIO then asked me why it  had
           taken the UK so long to return me to  Zimbabwe  as  my  passport
           showed that I had been refused entry on 19.02.01. When I did not
           reply one of CIO's went through a small pouch  bag  that  I  had
           with me and found in the bag documents that indicated that I had
           claimed asylum in the UK. In the bag there was an IND  document,
           an IS96, and copies of UK newspaper articles about the detention
           of Zimbabwean asylum seekers, including myself, and our attempts
           to resist return to Zimbabwe.


           The CIO's then started to mock me. They seemed already aware  of
           the incidents described in the  newspaper  articles.  They  were
           saying that they  knew  political  activists  were  fleeing  the
           country  to  report  lies  abroad   about   the   situation   in
           Zimbabwe..... They said that they had sources  in  the  UK  that
           informed them about the activities of people like me in  the  UK
           and the chaos we were causing. They said that  now  I  would  be
           punished. The CIO's seemed to know about me and the  others  who
           had tried to resist return to Zimbabwe. They said  a  number  of
           times that they were expecting me. I do not know if  they  meant
           me personally or just people like me who had claimed asylum  and
           then tried to resist return to Zimbabwe."

 184. R26 described being beaten during this  interrogation,  which  lasted
      for more than an hour. He was then taken to the police station  where
      he was to be held pending his transfer to  Chikurubi  prison.  Before
      that could happen he was able to escape through a small toilet window
      and then he made his way back to the United Kingdom where he  renewed
      his asylum claim. This time he was recognised to be a refugee and has
      been afforded that status.  At page 3/847 is a copy  of  the  article
      published in the Observer newspaper on 13th January  2002  concerning
      R25's experiences at Harare Airport.


 185. Whether or not this is the same case considered at paragraph 41 of SM
      we also have our doubts about this account of an escape from a toilet
      window. In any event, what distinguishes this account  from  that  of
      the unexceptional forcibly returned failed asylum seeker is that  the
      CIO found in his possession press reports  naming  this  returnee  as
      playing a significant part in a campaign of resistance to removal  to
      Zimbabwe. It seems probable that in those circumstances the CIO would
      have regarded this returnee as personally  associated  with  whatever
      criticism of the Zimbabwean regime was contained  in  those  articles
      which would seem to us to be more  than  sufficient  for  him  to  be
      regarded not as simply a failed asylum seeker  but  someone  with  an
      adverse political profile to be investigated further.

Returnee 27 (R27)

 186. R27 claimed asylum after her application for further leave to  remain
      as a student was refused in  2003.  Her  claim  was  based  upon  her
      membership of and activities  on  behalf  of  the  MDC  and  that  of
      relatives in Zimbabwe. Local ZANU-PF  youths  believed,  incorrectly,
      that her son's sports scholarship in Denmark had been financed by the
      MDC. R27 described how she had been abducted  and  beaten  by  ZAN-PF
      members and her house burnt down. An adjudicator dismissed her appeal
      against refusal of her claim because he found her claim to have  been
      fabricated and she was refused permission to appeal to the IAT.

 187. On 11th May 2005 R27 was detained when reporting as  usual  at  Luton
      police station and she was removed to Zimbabwe on 18th May 2005.  Her
      passport was given to the airline staff  who  refused  R27's  request
      made immediately before disembarkation that the passport be  returned
      to her. The envelope containing the passport was handed to a security
      officer waiting at the door of the plane and R27  was  taken  to  the
      immigration office where CIO officers were called.

 188. R27 says that the CIO officers checked her name  on  a  computer  and
      discovered that there was a warrant out for her arrest,  this  having
      been issued in respect of her alleged fundraising for the MDC.

 189. She was then transferred to Goromonzi Prison,  a  detention  facility
      operated by the CIO, where she was detained until 31st July 2005 when
      she was able to escape with the help of  an  officer  who  knew  that
      R27's brother was a  police  officer  who  had  been  this  officer's
      superior officer in the past. She then returned to the United Kingdom
      and again claimed asylum.

 190. During her detention R27 describes being subjected to consistent ill-
      treatment whilst being interrogated. She was raped on her first night
      in the prison. She was beaten,  held  tightly  around  the  neck  and
      shaken and on two occasions hung upside  down  with  her  head  in  a
      bucket of water while electric shocks were  applied.  There  are  two
      medical reports that support her account of being subjected  to  this
      abusive treatment, the first from the Helen Bamber Foundation (5/890)
      and the second from the Medical Foundation (5/899).

 191. The asylum claim made by R27 upon her return to  the  United  Kingdom
      remains outstanding.

 192. It appears that it  was  the  discovery  of  the  outstanding  arrest
      warrant that led to R27 being transferred to  prison  where  she  was
      subjected to the abusive treatment that she describes.

Returnees 28 and 29 (R28 and R29)

 193. At 5/931 is a statement from Witness 32. He is someone  known  to  Ms
      Harland of The Zimbabwe Association but little  else  is  know  about
      him. In his statement he says that he has two friends, R28  and  R29,
      who were detained in the United Kingdom for the purpose of removal to
      Zimbabwe after both had applied unsuccessfully for asylum. They  both
      decided to co-operate with arrangements  for  removal  and  so  their
      return was not escorted.

 194. Witness 32, who has spoken to  both  on  the  telephone  since  their
      removal, says that they were  both  detained  on  arrival  at  Harare
      airport and held for about a week by the CIO  at  Goromoinzi  and  he
      says that both were tortured during this detention. Both  have  scars
      or black marks from electric shock treatment. They were then released
      without any reporting or other conditions and they went to stay  with
      a cousin.

 195. Witness 32 wanted to obtain a letter from R28 and R29  to  assist  in
      these proceedings. Having consulted with Ms  Harland  it  was  agreed
      that a trusted associate who was to travel to  Zimbabwe  should  meet
      with them and bring the letters back with her. R28 and R29 were  told
      of these arrangements by telephone and  were  given  the  address  to
      which the letters should be delivered.

 196. Witness 32 says that on the day that they were due to meet the person
      concerned they were stopped by CIO officers who told  them  that  the
      telephone call had been monitored and so the CIO officers were  aware
      of the plan to deliver the letters to be taken back to  the  UK.  R28
      and R29 were searched but, fortunately, they did not have the letters
      on them as they had been left for safety at  a  friends  address  and
      were to be picked upon on their way to the meeting.

 197. What is not disclosed by these two accounts  is  the  nature  of  the
      asylum claim made by R28 and R29. Thus we do not know  whether  there
      was some feature other than the fact that  these  two  returnees  had
      been removed as failed asylum seekers that might have  made  them  of
      interest to the authorities in Harare. What we do know is that  these
      two returnees discussed with Witness  32  the  possibility  of  their
      returning to the United Kingdom and that it was  thought  helpful  to
      have a record of being subjected to ill-treatment on return.  Witness
      32 said, at paragraph 17 of his witness statement:

           "When I spoke to them, I thought that doing  this  would  assist
           them, either by claiming asylum  again  at  some  point  in  the
           future, or in some other way. I just  thought  that,  if  people
           outside Zimbabwe knew about what was actually happening - and in
           particular what had happened to (R28 and R29) - then they  would
           be in a stronger position in the long run."

Returnee 30 (R30); Vincent.

 198. Details of what happened to R30 are provided by the Times  newspaper,
      5th July 2005 (1/184). Having suffered persecutory  ill-treatment  on
      account of his work for the MDC in Zimbabwe the charity for  whom  he
      worked provided the resources to finance his journey  to  the  United
      Kingdom. The article gives no details of what happened in respect  of
      his asylum claim but says he was returned to Zimbabwe in  June  2005.
      As this person is included in the schedule of  involuntary  returnees
      submitted by Mr Henderson it is said that his  return  was  a  forced
      one.

 199. The article says that upon arrival at Harare airport R30 was arrested
      and detained for three days during which time he was beaten. Upon his
      release he went to Bulawayo where police were waiting for him. It  is
      said that "two periods of brutal detention followed and his relatives
      were threatened and so he escaped to South Africa".

 200. R30 was detained by police in South  Africa  who  were  intending  to
      deport him back to Zimbabwe. We do not know what became of him.

Returnee 31 (R31); Ratidzo

 201. This individual is not a failed asylum seeker  but  we  consider  the
      account because it is relied upon by the appellant.


 202. At 1/429 is a news report from "New Zimbabwe" published on 2nd  March
      2005. This has the appearance of an internet news report.

 203. Ratidzo (not her real name) is said to be one of three deportees  put
      on a flight to Zimbabwe although  the  date  of  the  flight  is  not
      identified. She was being removed after her application to extend her
      leave as a student was unsuccessful. There is no indication  in  this
      report that she made an asylum claim in the United Kingdom.

 204. The report says that on arrival at Harare Airport Ratidzo and the two
      others were taken to recently constructed CIO interview  rooms  where
      two officers conducted a hostile interview to establish what she  had
      been doing in the United Kingdom. She  was  struck  once  across  the
      mouth when she asked why they  would  not  believe  she  was  just  a
      student. The report continues:

           "Ratidzo said her interrogation continued for about three hours.
           And only stopped when she  remembered  that  she  had  an  uncle
           serving in the Zimbabwean national army. "I told them about  him
           and asked that they make a phone call so they could  confirm  my
           story. They did and my uncle asked them to let me go,  promising
           that he would keep me in check. .....
           .....


           As I left the building I could still hear the shouts and  groans
           from the other two deportees."

 205. The treatment to which this witness claims to have been subjected did
      not amount to serious ill-treatment such as to engage article 3.  The
      way in which this article is written demonstrates that its purpose is
      not to set out an objectively balanced assessment of the account  but
      is clearly intended  to  fulfil  a  journalistic  point.  It  is  not
      possible to identify the true identity of  this  person  and  so  the
      respondent has no opportunity of establishing that such a person  was
      removed at all.

Returnee 32 (R32); Usher

 206. Information concerning this returnee  is  from  The  Times  newspaper
      published on 4th July 2005 (1/523). There is insufficient information
      to ascertain the background to this case. The report states only that
      R32 fled to  Britain  in  November  2002  after  police  in  Bulawayo
      tortured him in an attempt to discover the whereabouts of  his  uncle
      who was an MDC activist. It is said that R32  was  given  exceptional
      leave to remain but at the end of  April  2005  "without  warning  or
      explanation" he was detained and taken to Harmondsworth where he  was
      held until being removed to Zimbabwe nine days later.

 207. On arrival at Harare airport his  escorts  handed  him  over  to  the
      immigration authorities who assaulted him before calling CIO officers
      who conducted an interrogation over a two day period during which R32
      was beaten. He was then taken to Harare Central Prison where, over  a
      period of three weeks he was subjected to  electric  shocks  and  was
      beaten on the soles of his feet.

 208. It is said that R32 managed to escape at a court hearing  because  an
      official mistakenly thought he had been granted bail. Since  then  he
      lived in hiding in the bush until he was taken in by  an  old  school
      friend.

 209. The fact that this returnee found himself involved in court  hearings
      indicates that there were outstanding and unresolved criminal matters
      concerning  him.  There  is  no  evidence  at  all  to  suggest  that
      involuntary returnees are produced at court hearings  for  any  other
      reason.

Involuntary returnees identified by the respondent

 210. In the next category of involuntary returnees about whom  information
      is available to us are the two persons  who  gave  details  of  their
      experiences upon being returned to Zimbabwe to staff at  the  British
      Embassy in Harare. Entry Clearance Officers were  asked  to  identify
      potential interviewees from those who had come to  apply  for  visas.
      Clearly, this evidence has to be approached with some caution because
      Mr Henderson argues, entirely properly,  that  such  persons  may  be
      tempted to say  what  they  believed,  correctly  or  otherwise,  the
      Embassy wanted to hear in the hope that it might  assist  their  visa
      applications.

 211. This exercise identified the following two persons who had  been  the
      subject of an involuntary return from the United Kingdom to Zimbabwe.



Returnee 34 (R34)

 212. R34 has signed an affidavit, a copy of which is to be found at  4/65.
      He had travelled to the United Kingdom to claim asylum on  the  basis
      of difficulties from ZANU-PF members and war veterans on  account  of
      his active support for the MDC. That claim was refused in  May  2005.
      There is no mention of an appeal to an  immigration  judge.  R34  was
      detained for removal.

 213. On arrival at Harare airport R34 was asked  whether  he  had  claimed
      asylum in the United  Kingdom  and  why  he  had  arrived  without  a
      passport. He was  also  asked  why  he  had  joined  the  MDC,  which
      surprised R34 as he had not said that he had. This  interview  lasted
      two hours after  which  the  "Residence  Officer"  said  he  was  not
      satisfied with the answers given and R34 was handed over to two other
      men who took him to the Central Police Station where he was told that
      they knew he was a deportee and suspected that he had claimed asylum.
      He was asked about what he had been doing in the United Kingdom.  R34
      maintained his account and  was  released  later  that  day  and  his
      documents were returned to him. He said he  had  remained  handcuffed
      throughout but had not been physically mistreated and  there  was  no
      follow up of any kind after he left the police station.

Returnee 35 (R35)

 214. R35 has also provided an affidavit  in  which  he  describes  how  he
      entered the United Kingdom as a visitor but overstayed that leave  in
      order to access medical treatment which would  not  be  available  in
      Zimbabwe. In February 2005 he  was  arrested  when  found  to  be  in
      possession of a forged passport and then detained for the purpose  of
      removal. He was put onto a British Airways flight to  Harare  and  on
      arrival a member of  the  air  crew  handed  his  genuine  Zimbabwean
      passport to the immigration official thereby identifying  him  as  an
      involuntary returnee.

 215. R35 was questioned for about an hour by  plain  clothes  officers  he
      assumed to be from the CIO. He was allowed to leave. He was not  ill-
      treated in any way. Some weeks later three men came to his  home  but
      these were from the UN and were undertaking research  on  people  who
      had been removed to Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom. R35 declined to
      help them.

Voluntary departure cases

 216. In the schedule  of  removal  cases  submitted  by  Mr  Henderson  he
      includes also reference to five individuals in respect of whom  there
      are reports of ill-treatment following a voluntary return  to  Harare
      airport. As he has raised these accounts we consider them as well.

Returnee 36 (R36); Case Z

 217. In her second statement (5/1087) Ms  Harland  says  this  information
      comes from Z's sister. Z, who had retired from the Zimbabwean army on
      health grounds, had come to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  but
      overstayed his leave. He returned voluntarily to Zimbabwe to see  his
      son who had fallen ill. Z's  sister  said  that  on  arrival  he  was
      detained and tortured. He was accused of being a spy.  He  then  went
      into hiding but has  since  been  admitted  to  hospital  because  of
      illness.


 218. As Z was not forcibly returned and it was not suggested to  him  that
      he was a failed asylum seeker we do not know what it was  about  this
      individual that attracted attention. It is  not  suggested  that  the
      mere fact of being a person who had travelled from the United Kingdom
      was the cause of his difficulties.

Returnee  37 (R37); Case A1

 219. R37 is said to be the sister of R36. All that is  known  is  what  is
      said by Ms Harland in her second statement. After having  been  found
      working illegally in the United Kingdom A1 made a voluntary return to
      Zimbabwe. Ms Harland says:


           "Her troubles with the authorities started on her  arrival  back
           in Zimbabwe, when she was severely mistreated. She has  been  in
           hiding since her release from detention.  My  information  comes
           from the same sister in the UK as for Case Z."


 220. We do not have any details of the nature of the alleged mistreatment,
      for how long she was detained or where or by whom.  We  do  not  know
      whether any reason was given for  holding  her.  We  have  almost  no
      information concerning her background.

Returnee 38 (R38); Case B1

 221. Again, the only information we  have  is  from  Ms  Harland's  second
      statement. It is said that R38 returned to Zimbabwe voluntarily after
      his asylum claim was refused. On arrival at  Harare  airport  he  was
      detained by the CIO for a few days during which  time  he  was  "ill-
      treated by the CIO and robbed of money he had brought with  him  from
      the UK". After his release his home  was  raided  on  more  than  one
      occasion but  he  was  somewhere  else.  Ms  Harland  says  that  the
      information has been provided by B1's sister who has now "changed her
      mind about co-operating  with  ZA  as  she  says  it  may  make  B1's
      situation worse".


 222. There has been no attempt to provide Ms Harland with  even  the  most
      basic details of this alleged mistreatment and so we have no means of
      assessing its seriousness or the credibility of this account.


Returnee 39


 223. There is rather more information about this individual  who  returned
      to Harare airport on an emergency travel document in October 2003. He
      had gone to the embassy himself to obtain that document. R39 had been
      a teacher in Zimbabwe and said he had been active in student politics
      in opposition to the government. He played a part in the formation of
      the MDC and was active in support of this organisation.  He  remained
      politically active during his career as a teacher,  speaking  at  MDC
      rallies. He came to the United Kingdom  in  2001  after  experiencing
      arrests and ill-treatment at the hands of the police and  others.  He
      was granted leave to enter as a visitor for three weeks.  He  applied
      for asylum some time later, in August 2003 but returned  to  Zimbabwe
      in October 2003 to visit his sick mother.


 224. R39 said he was detained on arrival by the CIO  who  accused  him  of
      being a spy and of having undergone military training in  the  United
      Kingdom with a view to carrying out violent acts in Zimbabwe. He said
      that he later confirmed to the CIO, under torture, that he had indeed
      sought to join the British army while in the United Kingdom.  Further
      detention followed during which  he  was  subjected  to  severe  ill-
      treatment.

 225. It can be seen that the  circumstances  of  this  individual  can  be
      distinguished readily from those of an  unexceptional  failed  asylum
      seeker. R39  describes  in  a  witness  statement  how  when  he  was
      interrogated by the CIO he was told that they were  aware  he  was  a
      "known activist" and a founding member of the MDC. They  had  records
      of his activities while  he  was  working  as  a  teacher.  They  had
      "reliable information" that R39 was involved  in  MDC  activities  in
      London.

 226. The experiences of this returnee do not support the assertion that  a
      person is at risk of ill-treatment upon return simply on  account  of
      being an involuntarily returned failed asylum seeker.

Returnee 40

 227. Finally, Mr Henderson's schedule refers to R40  whose  asylum  appeal
      was allowed in 2003 by a determination which appears  at  5/910.  R40
      first came to the United Kingdom in 2001,  having  left  Zimbabwe  to
      escape from the difficulties he had experienced  on  account  of  his
      activities in support of the MDC. After his appeal against refusal of
      his asylum claim was dismissed he returned voluntarily to Zimbabwe in
      December 2001. He did not experience any problems passing through the
      airport and returning home but five days later was abducted by youths
      from ZANU-PF and was beaten badly  during  the  three  hours  he  was
      detained. He returned to the United Kingdom, arriving on 28th January
      2002.


 228. The adjudicator found that the appellant was indeed  a  supporter  of
      the MDC but had  not  had  time  to  become  involved  with  the  MDC
      following his return.  The adjudicator found that  his  parents  were
      MDC activists as well. Thus, this is an individual who, having passed
      through the airport at Harare without difficulty faced  ill-treatment
      at the hands of ZANU-PF youths after he had returned to his home area
      where he was known to be a supporter of the MDC and of a  family  who
      were MDC activists. It was because of this political profile that  he
      attracted adverse attention, not because he had made an  unsuccessful
      claim for asylum in the United Kingdom. It is because the adjudicator
      accepted all this that his appeal was allowed.

Conclusions upon the individual accounts of failed asylum  seekers  returned
involuntarily

 229. We  find  that  the  individual  accounts  of  those  who  have  been
      involuntarily returned to Zimbabwe, considered together and evaluated
      with care in the context of the evidence overall, do not establish or
      demonstrate a consistent pattern of such returnees being subjected to
      ill-treatment upon being involuntarily returned simply on account  of
      being regarded as someone who has made an unsuccessful  asylum  claim
      in the  United  Kingdom.  At  its  highest  this  evidence  can  only
      demonstrate that a very small  minority  of  the  210  failed  asylum
      seekers returned  involuntarily  may  have  been  subjected  to  ill-
      treatment. Put another way, this does  not  point  to  a  substantial
      number of cases in  the  context  of  the  available  evidence  being
      subjected to ill-treatment  simply  on  account  of  a  person  being
      identified as an involuntarily returned failed asylum seeker.


 230. An examination of those accounts that survive scrutiny in any form at
      all reveals that there is only a very small handful of cases in which
      it is said that there was no reason other than the mere  fact  of  an
      involuntary return and the perception on the part of the  authorities
      of being a failed asylum seeker that gave rise to these difficulties.
      Of those, some were bare assertions of that being the  case  with  no
      real detail of the nature or severity of  the  ill-treatment  or  the
      circumstances in which it was inflicted. In our  judgement,  and  for
      the reasons we have set out, little  weight  can  be  given  to  such
      accounts. We have explained why we approach the accounts with caution
      and why these accounts cannot be  relied  upon  to  demonstrate  that
      returnees face a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  serious  ill-
      treatment on account only  of  being  involuntarily  returned  failed
      asylum seekers.


 231. This is in accordance with the evidence of procedures at the  airport
      which suggests that while all deportees will be questioned, often  in
      a hostile fashion, it is only  in  those  cases  where  some  further
      suspicion arises, above and beyond the asylum  claim  in  the  United
      Kingdom, that the deportee is moved on  to  the  next  stage  of  the
      process which involves interrogation which carries  with  it  a  real
      risk of serious ill-treatment.


 232. In reaching these conclusions we have had regard  to  the  submission
      advanced on the appellant's behalf that one reason why there  are  so
      few reports of mistreatment is because those who have suffered at the
      hands of the authorities have a disincentive to  make  any  complaint
      for fear of bringing upon themselves and their  families  retaliatory
      action from the CIO or others.

 233. There is a good deal of evidence which can be considered  to  support
      that submission. First, The Zimbabwe Association have repeatedly made
      this point in seeking to explain  why  no  more  information  can  be
      obtained than has been from those it has monitored  at  the  time  of
      removal. Ms Harland says at paragraph 15 of her statement (1/145):

           "Our experience has been that, regardless of the  care  that  we
           take, removees and their relatives in Zimbabwe and  the  UK  are
           fearful  of  communicating  with  us  in  the  UK,  directly  or
           indirectly. They feel that any publicising of the removee's case
           - to anyone - may endanger them."

 234. In her second statement (1/161) Ms Harland said:


           "Over the years the ZA has observed that a surprising number  of
           asylum seekers with whom we have come into contact, either  have
           no knowledge of human rights organisations in  Zimbabwe,  or  no
           trust in them."

      It has to be said that this is difficult to  reconcile  with  what  is
      said in the Times Online news report to which our attention  has  been
      drawn. This says that Zimbabwe Human Rights  NGO  Forum  has  reported
      15,000 alleged human rights abuses over the last eight years.


 235. On the other hand, there is evidence from the Source  F,  a  founding
      member of the Zimbabwe Human Rights Forum, that appears to contradict
      the news report (1/195):

           "In addition [Source F] is aware that Zimbabweans who have  been
           mistreated by  the  state  and  its  organs  are  likely  to  be
           extremely reluctant to contact  the  NGOs  for  assistance.  The
           reason for this is that Zimbabweans are well aware that:
              a) the act of making contact with an NGO will  likely,  if  it
                 comes to the regime's attention, itself attract reprisal;
              b) many NGOs, notably those involved  in  the  protection  and
                 promotion of human rights, are under constant  surveillance
                 by the Zimbabwean Central Intelligence Organisation (CIO);
              c) there is a risk that  the  NGOs,  like  other  elements  of
                 Zimbabwean society, have been infiltrated by CIO agents. It
                 is a risk that ordinary Zimbabweans are  only  too  acutely
                 aware of, and the  present  campaign  of  repression  under
                 Operation Murambatsvina can only heighten paranoia in  this
                 regard."

 236. Further support still for  this  argument  is  to  be  found  in  the
      statement of Witness 52, who is a well known politician in the United
      Kingdom  (1/198).   Witness  52  has  a  longstanding   interest   in
      Zimbabwean affairs and has visited Zimbabwe, in a  private  capacity,
      twice since 2003, the last visit being in June 2005. At paragraph  19
      of her statement she says this:


           "I also believe, again based on the statements and behaviour  of
           the Zimbabweans I met, that failed asylum  seekers  returned  to
           Zimbabwe would be very reluctant  to  report  in  Zimbabwe  harm
           caused to them by the regime on their return to Zimbabwe."


 237. It is also the  view  of  another  country  expert,  Dr  J.  McGregor
      (1/249), that there are good reasons why Zimbabweans  might  consider
      it unsafe to report any difficulties to an NGO. There have been "well
      documented politicized raids" on NGOs by the police and  other  state
      agents who have removed records. Dr McGregor says also that the  NGOs
      ate "totally overwhelmed with the demands of monitoring and following
      up on Operation Murambatsvina, which is currently taking up all their
      time and resources".


 238. For these reasons we accept that  there  is  evidence  that  ordinary
      Zimbabweans may well be reluctant or unwilling to seek help  from  an
      NGO if subjected to abusive mistreatment by the state or its  agents.
      This does not mean, of course, that any  inference  of  ill-treatment
      can be drawn from the absence of a  report,  simply  that  a  careful
      approach needs to be taken to the statistical analysis of the numbers
      of complaints in the context of the number of returnees.

 239. It is of  relevance  also  to  note  that  a  significant  number  of
      returnees took the trouble to pass on to The Zimbabwe Association the
      information  that  they  had  passed  through  the  airport   without
      experiencing any difficulties other than being delayed for  interview
      at the airport.



Involuntary returnees who have not made asylum claims

 240. There is nothing to indicate that the authorities at  Harare  Airport
      have any means of distinguishing  between  deportees  who  have  made
      unsuccessful asylum claims and those who have not claimed asylum  but
      who are being removed because they have no leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom. The evidence suggests that all deportees  are  likely
      to face questioning as to what they have been  doing  in  the  United
      Kingdom. This is likely to include an enquiry as to  whether  or  not
      they claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.


 241. This means that "immigration deportees" will also  face  the  initial
      screening interview on arrival at Harare Airport. They will  then  be
      allowed on their way unless that interview gives rise  to  suspicions
      of an  adverse  political  profile,  some  additional  feature  to  a
      military  history  that  demands   further   investigation   or   any
      outstanding criminal issues. If such suspicions arise there is a real
      likelihood that they also will be taken from  the  airport  for  more
      rigorous interrogation and so will be in the same position as  failed
      asylum seekers who find them selves subjected to this second stage of
      the process.

Voluntary returnees

 242. "Voluntary returnees" include those who  are  returning  to  Zimbabwe
      because they have no leave to remain in the United Kingdom  or  whose
      leave has expired. This category includes also  those  who  face  the
      prospect of a compulsory return either because an  asylum  claim  has
      been refused or because they have no leave to remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom but whose return to Zimbabwe is  not  arranged  by  the  Home
      Office after enforcement action has been  commenced.   This  includes
      also those who return with the assistance of IOM. The option of  such
      a voluntary return remains open even after  all  appeal  rights  have
      been exhausted and this voluntary return option lapses  only  when  a
      person is detained for the purposes of removal. When that  happens  a
      person cannot make a voluntary return even if he  agrees  to  travel.
      This is because the respondent will not allow the person detained  to
      have possession of their travel documents which will be  handed  over
      by the airline staff to the authorities at Harare airport.


 243. The evidence regarding voluntary returnees is clear.  There  continue
      to be three flights a week from the United Kingdom to Harare Airport.
      These are generally fully booked with ordinary travellers, very  many
      of whom will be citizens of Zimbabwe, who  pass  freely  and  without
      difficulty in and out of Zimbabwe. Anyone  who  is  indistinguishable
      from the ordinary traveller will not have any difficulty  in  passing
      through the airport. A person who has made an unsuccessful claim  for
      asylum but  who  makes  a  voluntary  return,  with  or  without  the
      assistance of an IOM reintegration package, will be indistinguishable
      from the ordinary traveller.

Summary of conclusions:


 244. A person who is returned involuntarily to  Zimbabwe  having  made  an
      unsuccessful asylum claim in the United  Kingdom  does  not  face  on
      return a real risk of being subjected to persecution or serious  ill-
      treatment on that account alone.  That  is  so  whether  or  not  the
      removal is escorted. Each case must be considered on its  own  facts.
      We reaffirm the country guidance in SM and  Others  (MDC  -  internal
      flight-  risk categories) CG [2005]UKIAT 00100. The  evidence  before
      us demonstrates that those at risk upon return to  Zimbabwe  continue
      to fall into the risk categories identified and set out in SM.   This
      is subject  to  what  we  say  about  those  whose  military  history
      discloses issues that will  lead  to  further  investigation  by  the
      security services upon return to Harare Airport and those in  respect
      of whom there are outstanding and unresolved criminal issues.


 245. There continue to be three flights a week from the United Kingdom  to
      Harare Airport.  These  are  generally  fully  booked  with  ordinary
      travellers who pass freely and  without  difficulty  in  and  out  of
      Zimbabwe. Anyone who is indistinguishable from the ordinary traveller
      will not have any difficulty in passing through the airport. A person
      who has made an  unsuccessful  claim  for  asylum  but  who  makes  a
      voluntary  return,  with  or  without  the  assistance  of   an   IOM
      reintegration package, will be indistinguishable  from  the  ordinary
      traveller  unless  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  he  will  be
      identified on return as falling within one of the risk categories  we
      have identified.

 246. A person who has made an unsuccessful asylum claim and has  exhausted
      his rights of appeal will still be able to arrange a voluntary return
      until he is detained for the purpose of removal. After  he  has  been
      detained for removal his travel documents will be held by the airline
      staff even if the person being removed is co-operative and compliant.




 247. All those returned involuntarily to Zimbabwe will  be  identified  as
      deportees as the respondent has no plans  to  change  the  method  of
      removal. This will mean that the returnee will either be escorted, in
      which case the escort will hand the passport over to the  authorities
      at Harare Airport or, if not escorted, the travel documents  will  be
      retained by airline staff who will hand them over to the  authorities
      at Harare Airport. Although the airline  staff  has  discretion  with
      regard to the travel documents the evidence does not indicate that in
      any significant number of cases the deportee is allowed possession of
      the documents before disembarking.


 248. All persons identified as deportees will be diverted for  questioning
      by CIO officers who are required to produce a report  in  respect  of
      all persons who have been  forcibly  removed  to  Zimbabwe  from  the
      United Kingdom, whether escorted on the plane or  not.  There  is  no
      indication that  the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe  have  any  means  to
      distinguish between deportees who have made  an  unsuccessful  asylum
      claim in the United Kingdom and those who have  been  removed  simply
      because they have no leave to remain.

 249. The purpose of the initial interview  is  to  establish  whether  the
      deportee is of any interest to the CIO or the security services.  The
      deportee will be of interest if questioning reveals that the deportee
      has a political profile considered adverse to the Zimbabwean  regime.
      Further interrogation away  from  the  airport  may  also  follow  if
      enquiries reveal aspects of a military history to be followed up such
      as  being  absent  without  leave  or  being  involved  in   military
      activities outside Zimbabwe. Also, the CIO will refer to  the  police
      any issues of outstanding criminal matters such as  arrest  warrants.
      There is  no  evidence  that  the  fact  alone  of  a  past  criminal
      conviction, as  opposed  to  an  unresolved  allegation  of  criminal
      activity or an outstanding arrest warrant, will give rise to such  an
      interest.   There is also no evidence that the  simple  fact  that  a
      returnee has in the past served in the Zimbabwean army  will  prevent
      the passage of a returnee through the airport after this first  stage
      enquiry.

 250. If such a political or relevant military profile is suspected, or  if
      there are outstanding criminal matters to be resolved,  the  deportee
      will  be  taken  away  by  the  relevant  branch  of  the   CIO   for
      interrogation. The evidence does not suggest that  the  CIO  has  any
      interest in manufacturing or fabricating evidence to create suspicion
      that is otherwise absent.

 251. This second stage interrogation  carries  with  it  a  real  risk  of
      serious mistreatment sufficient to constitute a breach of article  3.
      If the reason for suspicion is that  the  deportee  has  a  political
      profile considered to be adverse to the  Zimbabwean  regime  that  is
      likely to be sufficient to give rise to a real  risk  of  persecutory
      ill-treatment  for  a  reason  that  is  recognised  by  the  Refugee
      Convention. That will not necessarily be  the  case  where  the  only
      matter of interest is a  relevant  military  history  or  outstanding
      criminal issues. Each case  must  be  considered  on  its  particular
      facts.

 252.  A deportee from the United Kingdom who, having been subjected to the
      first stage interview at the airport, is allowed to pass through  the
      airport is likely to be the subject of some monitoring  in  his  home
      area by the local police or the CIO. This  monitoring  may  take  the
      form of being required to report to  the  local  police  station  for
      questioning or may be significantly lower key such that  the  subject
      may not even be aware of it. If nothing untoward  is  discovered  the
      authorities will lose interest and the monitoring will cease. It  may
      take some considerable time, certainly a period of months, before the
      monitoring ceases.

 253. The objective evidence does suggest that the police and the  CIO  are
      capable of acting in a seriously abusive manner  towards  those  they
      perceive to be dissident or in some way an enemy of the state but the
      evidence does not support the assertion that there is a real risk  of
      persecutory ill-treatment for those who are  being  monitored  solely
      because of their return from the United Kingdom.

 254. The general country conditions are extremely difficult. There is some
      evidence  that  newcomers  to  an  area,  and  not  necessarily  just
      newcomers from abroad, are watched and might attract  some  interest.
      That evidence does not establish a real risk  that  persecutory  ill-
      treatment will follow as a result. There is no evidence  of  societal
      disapproval of those who have been abroad, whether to claim asylum or
      not. The returnee may or may not have a home to which he  can  return
      and relatives to whom he can turn for support. Very many Zimbabweans,
      perhaps most, have to deal as best they can with food  shortages  and
      other  difficulties  arising  from  the  collapsed  economy.    Those
      difficulties will not generally be sufficiently severe to  enable  an
      appellant to rely upon article 3 to resist removal.

 255. A failed asylum seeker can chose to return to  Zimbabwe  voluntarily,
      with or without the assistance of IOM and where he will face no  real
      risk of harm because he will be indistinguishable from  the  ordinary
      traveller. It might be argued that a person may face a real  risk  of
      persecutory  ill-treatment  on  an  involuntary  return  to  Zimbabwe
      because of what might emerge from the interview that would take place
      following an involuntary return but would not following  a  voluntary
      return. In those circumstances he will not be able to succeed  in  an
      asylum appeal unless he can demonstrate that a  similar  risk  exists
      should he agree to return voluntarily.  This was  considered  by  the
      Court of Appeal in this case who said at paragraph 99 that:

           "...a person who can voluntarily return in safety to the country
           of his nationality is not a refugee, notwithstanding that  on  a
           forced return he would be at risk. Such a person is not  outside
           his home State owing to  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
           Neither s 84(1)(g) of the Act of 2002  nor  Article  33  of  the
           Convention can begin to demonstrate the contrary, since  neither
           enlarges the "refugee" definition; and a safe voluntary returnee
           is outside the definition."

 256. The Court of Appeal did not deal  with  the  question  of  whether  a
      person who can voluntarily return in safety can rely upon  article  3
      to resist an involuntary return. It is not  necessary,  in  order  to
      decide this appeal, for us to address that either.  It  may  be  that
      such a person cannot succeed under article 3. He has chosen in  those
      circumstances to expose himself to a claimed risk  unnecessarily.  It
      would be his decision to do so that would expose him to that risk and
      not the act of the United Kingdom in returning him compulsorily as  a
      consequence of his refusal to return voluntarily.  In  any  event,  a
      refusal to exercise a voluntary return option, in the knowledge  that
      the only alternative is a forced return,  may be cogent evidence that
      the returnee himself is satisfied that no such real risk exists on  a
      compulsory return.


Decision upon AA's appeal

 257. The immigration judge rejected as  untrue  much  of  the  appellant's
      account, and in particular found that he had not been  involved  with
      the MDC at all.  The   immigration  judge  also  made  the  following
      findings of fact, which have not been challenged:

        a) It was "entirely plausible" that the appellant was arrested on a
           charge of violent behaviour and held on remand  for  six  months
           before being released without being prosecuted further. This was
           because the appellant displayed in his  evidence  a  familiarity
           with such matters as arrest, charge and imprisonment on remand;
        b)  The  homes  of  his  siblings  have  been  demolished  but  the
           appellant's wife and child now live with his father who  retains
           his rural home where he keeps cattle although  it  has  suffered
           some damage. His wife's father also has a rural home  where  the
           appellant could reside;
        c) The appellant has a genuinely held fear  of  facing  persecution
           and abuse upon return solely as a failed asylum seeker.

 258. We have found that  the  appellant's  genuinely  held  fear  of  been
      subjected to ill-treatment simply because he would be identifiable as
      a failed asylum seeker not to be objectively well founded. He is  not
      a refugee simply because of that misplaced subjective fear: R v  SSHD
      ex parte  Sivakumuran [1988] 1 All ER 193 per Lord Goff of Chieveley:


            "For the true object of the Convention is not just  to  assuage
           fear, however  reasonably  and  plausibly  entertained,  but  to
           provide a safe haven for those unfortunate people whose fear  of
           persecution is in reality well-founded."


 259. We are satisfied that if the appellant is subjected to an involuntary
      return to Zimbabwe there is no reasonable likelihood that he will  be
      considered to be  someone  who  should  be  interrogated  further  on
      account of his previous arrest and detention. The  immigration  judge
      found that this was a formal arrest by police and, although no  court
      proceedings followed, he was released after being  held  in  official
      detention for six months. There was no prosecution and  it  is  clear
      that he was released because the authorities had no further  interest
      in him. This is an experience that has been shared by many people  in
      Zimbabwe.  We have heard evidence of computer  checks  being  carried
      out at the airport that revealed outstanding arrest  warrants.  There
      is no reason to suppose that such a computer check  would  reveal  an
      arrest that was not followed by a prosecution. Even if  the  security
      staff at the airport were somehow aware of this incident it would not
      give rise to any suspicion that there were unresolved and outstanding
      criminal issues.

 260. That being the case we find there to be no reasonable likelihood that
      the appellant would be prevented from  passing  through  the  airport
      after the initial screening interview.  He  would  then  be  able  to
      return unhindered to live at one of the two rural homes available  to
      him and his family. It is reasonably likely that  his  arrival  would
      give rise to some interest and he might be subject to monitoring  for
      a period of time in his home area.  In view of the findings  of  fact
      made by the immigration judge that would not give  rise  to  anything
      being discovered that would cause any difficulties for the appellant.


 261. This means that the appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  of
      demonstrating  that  there  is  a  real  risk  that  he  would   face
      persecution for a reason recognised by the Refugee Convention or that
      he would be subjected to ill-treatment such as to infringe any rights
      protected by ECHR.

 262. For the avoidance of  any  possible  doubt  the  appellant  does  not
      succeed on  the  basis  of  general  country  conditions  either.  Mr
      Henderson did not seek to  advance  such  an  argument.  This  is  so
      whether the position of the appellant on return is considered on  the
      basis of someone returning to his home area as a failed asylum seeker
      or simply on the basis of returning at all. Conditions are  extremely
      difficult and resources, including food supplies  and  accommodation,
      are  scarce.  But,  assertions  that  newcomers  are   excluded   are
      speculative and not made out.  This appellant has accommodation and a
      family network of support available to him on return. This  appellant
      has a rural home to which he can return and relatives to whom he  can
      turn for support. He will share  in  the  experiences  of  very  many
      Zimbabweans in relation to  food  shortages  and  other  difficulties
      arising from the  collapsed  economy.   Those  difficulties  are  not
      sufficiently severe to enable the appellant to rely upon article 3 to
      resist removal.

 263. For these reasons we substitute  a  fresh  decision  to  dismiss  the
      appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.


Summary of Decision.

 264. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.


 265. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


Signed





                                             Date
Senior Immigration Judge Southern.
                                  APPENDIX

     List of Objective Evidence Considered by the Panel of the Tribunal

        1.  Expert  reports  of  Professor  T.  Ranger  dated   28/07/2005,
           2/08/2005 and 8/06/2006

        2. Expert report of Dr J. McGregor dated 2/08/2005

        3. Commentary upon April 2005 C.I.P.U. Report by Dr McGregor

        4. Expert report by Dr David Cortlett dated 26/06/2006

        5. Expert Report by Dr N. Kriger dated 26/06/06

        6. C.I.P.U. Report April 2005

        7. C.O.I.R. April 2006.

        8. F.C.O. Report 2005 (Extract)

        9. Extracts from Hansard - Parliamentary comment  upon  returns  to
           Zimbabwe

       10. Correspondence from UNHCR, 2005

       11. Letter Amnesty International to Rt Hon Charles  Clarke  MP  July
           2005

       12. Amnesty International Report 10/05/2005

       13. Collection of 31 news reports December 2004 to July 2005

       14. Report of Joint Home Office and Foreign and Commonwealth  Office
           Delegation to Zimbabwe - September 2005


       15. C.I.P.U Report October 2005

       16. HRW Report  11/09/2005

       17. International Crisis Group Report 17/08/2005

       18. Home Office OGN August 2005

       19. Collection of 19 news reports February - September 2005

       20. Newspaper articles concerning  Returnee 26

       21. Collection of papers prepared by British Embassy staff in Harare
           following contact with anonomised NGOs

       22. Zimbabwean news reports April- May 2006

       23. Harare NGO Forum Reports February to April 2006.

       24. Report of Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre 5/05/2006

       25. Amnesty International /  Zimbabwean  Lawyers  for  Human  Rights
           report 31/3/2006

       26. Amnesty International Report 2006

       27. International Crisis Group Report 6/06/2006

       28. HRW Report December 2005

       29. HRW Reports 9/02/2006, 18/1/2006

       30. HRW statement 20/11 - 02/12/2005

       31. Solidarity Peace Trust Report April 2006

       32. BBC News Reports 8/12/2005, 18/04/2006 and 31/05/2006

       33. Amnesty International press release 31/05/2006

       34. Amnesty International statement 20/11/2003

       35. IRIN news reports 7/06/2006,19/05/2006,  27/04/2006,  25/04/2006
           and  8/06/2006,  6/04/2006,  5/04/2006,  28/11/2005,  7/06/2006,
           5/04/2006,  6/04/2006,   23/03/2006,   14/06/2006,   16/06/2006,
           21/06/2006, 26/06/2006

       36. Civic Action Support Group Report 10/02/2006

       37.   Zim  On  line  reports   18/05/2006,  19/04/2006,  19/04/2006,
           20/03/2006,   15/03/2006,   7/02/2006,   6/12/2005,   5/11/2005,
           2/06/2006, 22/05/2006, 25/04/2006, 6/04/2006, 1/04/2006

       38. Voice of America news reports 15/05/2006, 8/05/2006, 14/11/2005,
           23/06/2006

       39. Zimbabwean Lawyers for Human  Rights  news  reports  10/05/2006,
           6/05/2006, 3/05/2006, 15/02/2006

       40. SW Radio Africa (UK) reports 22/03/2006,  6/06/2006,  2/06/2006,
           15/06/2006(2),  26/06/2006

       41. The Independent (Zimbabwe) news report 16/06/2006

       42. Institute for  War  and  Peace  Report  22/03/2006,  13/12/2005,
           31/05/2006 (2), 19/05/2006, 21/04/2006, 21/04/2006, 21/03/2006

       43. Sunday Times World 9/04/2006

       44. ZW News.com report 1/01/2006, 26/06/2006

       45. AllAfrica.com report 15/05/2006, 18-19/06/2006

       46. ReligioScope report 24/03/2006

       47. Christian Aid Report 18/05/2006

       48. Council for World Mission report 2/06/2006

       49. Zimbabwe Trades Union report 7/06/2006

       50. Report by Zimbabwe Torture Victims/Survivors Project 26/06/2006

       51. Times on Line reports 11/06/2006, 26/06/2006, 27/06/2006

       52. Geneva Statement of Mr Chinamasa 19-22/06/2006

       53. Africa Reports 23/06/2006 (2)











