
Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal

     RD (Cessation - burden of proof - procedure) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 00066

                           THE  IMMIGRATION  ACTS


|Heard  at  Field  House                       |                             |
|On  17 October  2006                          |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

 Mr  C  M  G  Ockelton  Deputy  President  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
                                   Tribunal
                     Senior  Immigration  Judge  Freeman
                     Senior  Immigration  Judge  Perkins

                                   Between

                                RD                                 Appellant

                                     and

            THE  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For  the  Appellant:   Mr  C  Lam,  Counsel  instructed  by  David  Tang
                    and  Co  Solicitors
For  the  Respondent:  Mr  K  Norton,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer

i    If  an  appellant  challenges  a   decision   of   the   Secretary   of
    State  to  revoke  a  refugee's  indefinite  leave  to  remain  because
     he  has  ceased  to  be  a  refugee  for  one  of  the  reasons  given
     in  section  76(3)  of  the  Nationality,   Immigration   and   Asylum
    Act  2002  then  the  Secretary  of  State  must  prove  that  such   a
    reason  existed  and  in  so  doing  must  rely  only  on   an   action
    that  took  place  after  the   section   came   into   force   on   10
    February  2003.
ii   If  an  appellant  seeks  to  argue  that  the  action  relied  on   by
     the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  have  its  presumed  or    likely
     effect  the  Immigration  Judge  is  entitled  to  look  at   evidence
    tending   to   illuminate   the    appellant's    conduct,    including
    evidence  of  actions  before  the  section  came  into  force.
iii  An  appellant  can  rely  on  a  ground   of   appeal   alleging   that
    he  is  in  fact  a  refugee  when  the  Immigration  Judge  hears   an
    appeal  even  if  the  respondent  establishes   that   the   appellant
    had  ceased  to  be  a  refugee.


                         DETERMINATION  AND  REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Algeria.     He   was   born   on   17
    February  1966  and  so  is  now  40   years   old.     On   20   March
    2000  he  was  given  indefinite  leave  to  remain   in   the   United
    Kingdom  because  he  had  been  recognised  as  a  refugee.

 2. This  determination  is  about   the   proper   approach   to   appeals
    arising   from   a   decision   of   the   respondent   to   revoke   a
    person's  indefinite  leave   to   remain   in   the   United   Kingdom
    because  that  person  has  ceased  to  be  a  refugee.

History

 3. On  19   January   2006   the   respondent   decided   to   cease   the
    appellant's  refugee  status  with  reference  to  Article   1C(1)   of
    the  1951  Geneva  Convention.    On  the  same  day   the   respondent
    decided  to  revoke  the  appellant's  indefinite   leave   to   remain
    in   the   United   Kingdom   under    Section    76(3)(a)    of    the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002.     The   appellant
    appealed   that   decision   and   his   appeal   was   dismissed    by
    Immigration  Judge  Easterman  on  asylum  and  human  rights   grounds
    in  a  determination  dated  26  May  2006.    The appeal comes  before
    us at the appellant's instance.

 4. It  came  to  the  attention  of  the  respondent  that,  sometime   in
    2004,  the  appellant   had   obtained   a   new   Algerian   passport.
    The  respondent  decided  that  the  appellant  had   availed   himself
    of  the  protection  of  the  State   of   Algeria   and,   acting   in
    reliance  of  Article  1C(1),  decided  that  the   Convention   ceased
    to  apply  to  the   appellant   because   he   had   voluntarily   re-
    availed  himself  of   the   protection   of   the   country   of   his
    nationality.

 5. Additionally  the  appellant  had  previously  renewed   his   Algerian
    passport  in  Alicante  and  travelled  to  Algeria   in   2001   where
    he   stayed   for   a   week.     The   respondent   had   contemplated
    revoking  the  appellant's  refugee  status  on  account  of  this  act
     but  considered  himself  constrained  by   Section   76(6)   of   the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.    This  shows  that
     power  exercised  under   Section   76(3)   to   revoke   a   person's
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  can   be   exercised   in   respect   of
    leave  granted  before  the  section  came  into  force  but  only   in
    reliance  on  action  taken  after  the  section   came   into   force.
    Section   76(6)   came   into   on   10   February   2003   (see    the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   (Commencement   No.
    3)  Order   2003).   The   respondent   relied   upon   the   appellant
    acquiring  a  new  Algerian  passport  in  2004.  This  is  plainly  an
     event  that  occurred  after  the  section  came  into  force.

Grounds for Reconsideration

 6. We  set  out  below  the  grounds  supporting   the   application   for
    reconsideration.

        1. The  learned  Adjudicator  has  made   a   material   error   of
           law  in  paragraph  59  and  60  of   the   determination   that
           he  was  entitled  to  look   into   the   appellant's   actions
           pre  or  post-2003.    Section  76(6)(b)   specifically   states
           that  Section  76(3)  only  applies  to  anything   done   after
           the  section  came  into  force.    The   NIA   did   not   come
           into   force   until   2003,   some   six   months   after   the
           appellant's  action  under  Article   1C   therefore   his   ILR
           could  not  be  revoked  under  Section  76  on   the   singular
           fact  and  evidence  available  to   the   respondent   at   the
           time.     This   particular   point   was   accepted   by    the
           respondents  of   10   November   2005   (enclosed).     It   is
           submitted  that  the  only  action  which  the  judge  was  able
            to  consider  was  the  appellant's  acquisition  of  the   new
           Algerian  passport  in  London  in  November  2004.     If   the
           learned  judge  were  entitled  to  look  into  the  appellant's
            actions  before  the  NIA  came  into   effect   then   Section
           76(6)  would  be  of  no  legal  force.

        2. In  paragraph  52  of  the  learned  judge's  determination   he
           cited  paragraph  121  of  the  UNHCR  handbook,   which   draws
           the   distinction   between   the   actual    re-availment    of
           protection  and  occasional  incidental  contact  with  national
            authorities.    If  a  refugee  applies  for  and   obtains   a
           national  passport  or  is  renewal  (sic)   it   will   be   in
           the  absence  of  proof  to  the  contrary  presumed  and   that
           he  intends  to  avail  himself  of  the   protection   of   the
           country   of   his   nationality.     However   the    appellant
           himself  at  the  hearing  categorically  states  that  he   has
           no   intention   of   travelling   back   to   Algeria.      The
           hearing  was  part-heard  in  order   for   the   appellant   to
           produce  his  passport  to  prove  that  since   obtaining   his
           passport  in  March  2004  he  had  not  returned  to   Algeria.
             At  the  time  of  the  hearing  it   has   been   more   than
           two  years  since  he  obtained  this   document   and   it   is
           accepted  that   he   has   never   used   it   to   return   to
           Algeria   with   it.     It   is   submitted   that   this    is
           compelling  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption  of  intention
            of  his  returning  to  Algeria.

        3. In  paragraph  53  of  the  learned  judge's  determination   it
           is  submitted  that  he  has  interpreted   paragraph   121   of
           the  UNHCR  handbook  wrongly  in  relation  to  the  issue   of
           occasional   and   incidental   contact    with    a    national
           authority.    It  is  unreasonable  for  the  Immigration  Judge
            to   conclude   that   the   appellant's   contact   with   the
           Algerian  authority  was  anything  other  than  occasional   or
           incidental,  the  reason  being  that  his  only  action   after
           the  NIA  came  into  force  in  2003  was  the  acquisition  of
            a  passport  and  nothing  else.    The   learned   judge   has
           failed  to  explain  adequately  or  at  all  about  the   issue
           of  occasional  and  incidental   contact   of   the   appellant
           with  the  Algerian  authority.

        4. In  paragraph  65  of  the  determination  the   learned   judge
           proceeded  to   consider   the   appellant's   original   asylum
           claim.    It  is  submitted  that  he  has  made  an  error   of
           law  in  this  respect.    Section   76(3)(a)   or   76(6)(a)(b)
           does  not  give   any   scope   for   the   learned   judge   to
           consider  the  appellant's  original  asylum  claim.    If   the
           learned  judge's  approach  in   considering   the   appellant's
           asylum  claim  then  the  hearing  would  be   indistinguishable
           between  an  ordinary  asylum  claim  and  the  present  hearing
            under  Section  76(3)(a).

        5. Even  if  the   learned   judge   was   entitled   to   consider
           facts  before  the  NIA  came  into  force  (which  is  strongly
            denied)  the  learned  judge  has  failed   to   consider   the
           fact  that  the  appellant  was  in  Algeria  on  one   occasion
           for  only  one  week.    According  to  McDonald's   Immigration
           Law  and  Practice  Sixth  Edition,  12.86  a  temporary  visit,
            however  usually  falls  far  short  of  re-establishment,  and
             before   any   inference   of   voluntary   reacquisition   of
           protection  is  drawn  ...  .

        6. It  is  submitted  that  the  learned   Adjudicator   has   made
           an   error   of   law   for   the   reasons   mentioned   above.
           Application  for  reconsideration  is  humbly  requested""

 7. In  his  submissions  to  us  Mr  Lam  expressly   adopted   both   the
    grounds  supporting  the  application  for  reconsideration   and   the
    skeleton  argument  before  the  Immigration  Judge.

Section 76

 8. Although  the  Refugee  Convention  provides  for  the   cessation   of
    refugee  status  in  a  variety  of  circumstances,   there   is   only
    power  under  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and   Asylum   Act   2002
    to  revoke  indefinite  leave  to  remaining  given  to  a  person  who
     had  been  recognised  as  a  refugee  if  that   person   ceases   to
    be  a  refugee  for  one  of  the  four  circumstances   set   out   in
    Section  76(3)  of  the  2002  Act  applied.  These  are:
    (a)  voluntarily  availing   himself   of   the   protection   of   his
country  of  nationality,
    (b)  voluntarily re-acquiring a lost nationality,
    (c)  acquiring  the  nationality  of   a   country   other   than   the
         United  Kingdom  and  availing  himself  of  its  protection,  or
    (d)  voluntarily  establishing  himself  in  a   country   in   respect
         of  which  he  was  a  refugee.

 9. The  section  needs  to   be   studied   for   its   full   terms   and
    effects  but  the  four  conditions  are  each  examples  of  a  person
     who  has  been  given  indefinite  leave  to  remain  ceasing  to   be
    a  refugee  by  reason  of  his  re-engaging  in   particular   defined
    ways  with  the  country  of  which  he  was  a  refugee.

Grounds of Appeal to the Immigration Judge

10. Section  82(2)(f)  provides  that  revocation   of   indefinite   leave
    to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  Section  76  of
     the  2002  Act  is  an  appealable  immigration  decision.

11. It  is  therefore  plain  beyond  argument  that  the   appellant   has
    a  right  to  challenge  before  an  Immigration  Judge  the  Secretary
     of  State's  decision  to  revoke  his  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
       He  can  rely  on  the  usual   statutory   grounds   set   out   in
    Section  84  of  the  Act including (e) that the decision was "...  not
    in accordance with the law" and (g) that his removal in consequence  of
    the decision would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
    refugee convention.    The  grounds  of  appeal  in   the   notice   of
    appeal  to  the  Immigration  Judge  refer  to:

        "Asylum decision (A)

        It  was  decided  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on   10   November
        2005  that  it  would  not  pursuit   (sic)   with   cessation   of
        refugee  status  action  against  the  appellant  (A).    The   A's
        circumstances  had  not  changed  between  10  November  2005   and
        11  January  2006.

        It  is  therefore  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of   State   is
        stopped  from  reneging  on  his  recent  assurance  given  to  the
         A."

12. There is plainly no merit in this point.  The  letter  of  10  November
     2005  was   not   an   unequivocal   promise   not   to   revoke   the
    appellant's  refugee  status  but  a   notification   of   a   decision
    not  to  "pursue  with  cessation  of  refugee  status  action  against
     you  on   this   occasion"  (emphasis  added).     The   letter   also
    referred  to  the  appellant  having  obtained  an  Algerian   passport
    in   July   2000.     A   letter   from   the   respondent   dated   21
    December  2005  said  at  paragraph  11  "You  have  applied  for,  and
     received,  an  Algerian  passport  on  two  occasions.  You  had   one
    passport  renewed  in  August   2002   and,   more   importantly,   had
    another   issued   in   March   2004."   In   short   the    respondent
    identified  the  appellant  obtaining  an  Algerian  passport  in  2004
     as  the  basis  of  his  decision  to  revoke.

13.  The   skeleton   argument   used   before   the   Immigration    Judge
    explains  these  grounds  to  a  limited   extent.     It   begins   by
    drawing  attention  to  the  restriction  of  the   power   to   revoke
    under  Section  76(3)  imposed  by  Section  76(6).    This  states:

        "Power   under   sub-Section   (3)   to   revoke   leave   may   be
        exercised  -  (A)  in  respect  of  leave   granted   before   this
        Section  comes  into  force,  but   (B)   only   in   reliance   on
        action  taken  after  the  Section  comes  into  force."

14. The  skeleton  argument  acknowledges  that  the

        "main  issue  here   is   whether   the   appellant's   action   in
        renewing  his  Algerian   passport   in   March   2004   would   be
        sufficient  for  the  respondent  to  justify   his   decision   to
        revoke  the  appellant's  indefinite  leave  to   remain   in   the
        United  Kingdom".

15. The  skeleton  argument  then  emphasises  the  care   that   must   be
    taken  before  refugee  status  can  be  taken  away  and  argues  that
     the  appellant's  conduct  in  renewing  his  Algerian   passport   in
    March  2004  could  not  be  described  properly   as   the   appellant
    "voluntarily  availing  himself  of  the  protection  of  his   country
    of  nationality".

Refugee Status

16. Nevertheless  in  his  supplementary  statement   of   7   April   2006
    the  appellant  asserted  "It  is  my  belief   that   I   would   face
    persecution  if  they  discover  my  presence  in  Algeria"   and   the
    Immigration  Judge  says  at   paragraph   3   of   his   determination
    that  the  appellant:

        "appeals  on  the  grounds  that  he  is  a  refugee  and  that  to
         return  him  to  Algeria  would  place  the  United   Kingdom   in
        breach  of  its  obligations  under   the   1951   United   Nations
        Convention  and  the  1967  Protocol  relating  to  the  status  of
         refugees  ('the  1951  Convention')".

17. Clearly  the  Immigration  Judge   was   right   to   decide   if   the
    appellant   needed   international   protection   even    though    the
    appellant  raised  the  issue  somewhat  obscurely.  Even  if   it   is
    established  that  the  respondent  has  revoked  for  proper   reasons
    a  person's  refugee  status  that  person  can  still  claim   to   be
    a  refugee.  He  may  have  changed   his   mind   about   taking   the
    protection  of  the  state  from  which  he  fled  or   conditions   in
    the  country  may   have   changed   during   the   progress   of   the
    appeal. If he has a right of appeal he is  entitled  to  raise  Refugee
    Convention grounds in that appeal.

18. The  appellant  also  claims  that  to  return  him  to  Algeria  would
     constitute  a  breach  of  his  human  rights   under   the   European
    Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights   and   Fundamental
    Freedoms  ('The  1950  Convention').

Burden and Standard of Proof

19. In  so  far  as  the  appeal  relates  to  the  cessation  of   refugee
    status,  the  burden  of  proof  rests  on   the   respondent.     This
    derives  from  the  fundamental  common  law  principle  that  a  party
     that  alleges  must  prove.    It  is  consistent  with  the  approach
     taken  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Arif   v   SSHD   [1999]   EWCA
    Civ  808.    That  appeal  concerned   a   person   who   applied   for
    asylum  in  about  July  1992.    His  application   was   refused   in
    October  1994   but   allowed   by   a   Special   Adjudicator   in   a
    determination  promulgated  in  March  1997.    In  December  1997  the
     Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  overturned  the  Special  Adjudicator's
     decision.    There  were  two  grounds  raised  by  the  Secretary  of
     State  in  his  attack.    The  first   was   that   the   Immigration
    Judge   had   reached   perverse   conclusions.     That  was   rightly
    rejected.    The  second  was  that   the   appellant   was   in   fact
    safe  because  the  government  had  changed  at  the   end   of   June
    1996,  that  is  after   the   appellant   had   claimed   asylum   and
    before  the  Special  Adjudicator  heard  and   decided   the   appeal.
    The  Tribunal  was  attracted  to  that  argument  but  the  Court   of
    Appeal   said   that   the   Tribunal   was   wrong.     The    Special
    Adjudicator  had  quoted  with  approval  the  editors  of  MacDonald's
      Immigration   Law    and    Practice    that    "proof    that    the
    circumstances  of  the  persecution  have   ceased   to   exist   would
    fall  upon  the  receiving   State".     As   the   Court   of   Appeal
    explained,  on  the  facts  of  that  case,  there  was  an  evidential
     burden  on  the   Secretary   of   State   to   establish   that   the
    appellant  could  safely  be  returned  home.  Establishing a change of
    circumstance was not enough.

20. The respondent produced a  skeleton  argument  before  the  Immigration
    Judge.    At  paragraph  17  the  writer  of  the   skeleton   argument
    purported  to  distinguish  Arif.    The  respondent  asserted:

        "The  burden  on  the  respondent  is  that  he  must   show   that
        circumstances  exist  where  those  sections  are   applicable   to
        the  evidence  provided.    The  burden   on   the   appellant   is
        then  to  show  that  he  has  not  voluntarily   availed   himself
        of  protection  or  nationality  and  even  if  the   circumstances
        reflected   in   sub-Sections   1-4   exist,   he   is   still    a
        refugee."

21. This is not a correct analogy.    The  ratio  in  Arif  was  not  about
     taking  away  status  but  about  what  tests  had   to   be   applied
    at  a  particular  time.    The  point  in  Arif  is  that   a   person
    had  shown  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Special  Adjudicator   that
    he  had  a  need  of  international  protection  and   the   Court   of
    Appeal  decided  that  if  the  respondent  wanted  to  say  that   the
    appellant  no  longer  needed  protection  because  conditions  in  the
     country  were  safe  then  that  is  something  the   respondent   had
    to  prove.

22. The respondent's case is not about the appellant's  safety.     It   is
    about  his  voluntary  acquisition  of  the  protection   of   Algeria.
     The  fact  that  a  person  volunteers  to  avail   himself   of   the
    protection   of   the   country   of   his   nationality    does    not
    necessarily  mean  that  he  considers  himself  to  be  safe  in  that
     country,  although  obviously  his  safety,  or  likely  safety,   may
    be  a  guide  to  his  real  intentions.

23. We  are  quite  satisfied  that  the  Immigration  Judge  should   have
    required   the   respondent   to   prove   that   the   appellant   had
    voluntarily  availed  himself  of  the  protection   of   his   country
    of  nationality.    If  the  respondent  could  not  show  that,   then
    the   respondent   had   no   cause   to   revoke    the    appellant's
    indefinite  leave  to  enter  or  remain.    If  the  appellant  wanted
     to  argue  that  he  was,  nevertheless,  a  refugee  he  could   aver
    a  ground  of  appeal  that  his  removal   in   consequence   of   the
    immigration   decision   would   be   in   breach   of    the    United
    Kingdom's  obligation  under  the  Refugee  Convention.

Immigration Judge's Decision

24. It  is  quite plain what  the   Immigration   Judge   did.   His  self-
    direction at paragraph 55 is particularly clear.    He  says:

        "There  is  no  appeal  to  me  against  his  decision  to   revoke
        refugee  status.     It   is   clear   and   agreed   between   the
        parties  that  the  only   evidence   which   I   may   take   into
        account  in  relation  to  whether  or   not   the   appellant   is
        entitled  to  revoke   the   ILR   is   the   evidence   that   has
        arisen  after  10  February  2003,  with  the  coming  into  effect
         of  Section  76(3)(a)  and  76(6).    Thus  for  the  purpose   of
        considering  whether  the  appellant  had  re-availed  himself   of
        the  national  protection  of  the  Algerian  State  I  ask  myself
        on  what   evidence   does   the   respondent   rely?     And   the
        answer  is,  the  appellant's  acquisition  of   a   new   Algerian
        passport  in  London  in  March  2004."

25. The  Immigration  Judge  then  reminded   himself   of   the   guidance
    given   in   the   handbook   and   in   particular   the   words    at
    paragraph  121:

        "If  a  refugee  applies  for  and  obtains  a  national   passport
        or  its  renewal  it  will  be  in  the   absence   of   proof   to
        the  contrary  presumed  that  he  intends  to  avail  himself   of
        the  protection  of  the  country  of  his  nationality".

26.  It   is   clear   that   the   Immigration   Judge   considered    the
    appellant's  explanation  for  taking  a  passport  because   he   sets
    it  out  with  some  care.    Whilst  it  may  be  the  case  that  the
     appellant  had  not  thought  through  his  position   and   had   not
    appreciated  the  possible  implications  of  obtaining   an   Algerian
    passport  it  is  undeniably  the  case  that  he  obtained   one   and
    whilst  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  has  used   it   to   travel
    to  Algeria  or   otherwise   call   upon   the   assistance   of   the
    authorities  in  Algeria,   there   was   nothing   in   the   evidence
    beyond  the  appellant's  protestations   to   support   a   conclusion
    other  than  the  one  reached  by  the   Immigration   Judge,   namely
    that  the  presumption  set   out   in   handbook   applies   and   the
    appellant  took  his  passport  voluntarily  and  so  availed   himself
    of  the  protection  of  Algeria.

27. It  was  the  appellant's  case  that  the  passport  was  handed   out
    by  the   Algerian   Embassy   in   London   in   2004.   The   embassy
    encouraged  him  to  take  a  passport  and  he  agreed.  This  is  not
     evidence  that  by  taking  the  passport   the   appellant   intended
    to  do  anything  other  than  the  normal,  presumed  consequence   of
    such  a  step,  namely  to  avail  himself   of   the   protection   of
    the  country  that  issued  the  passport.

28. As is invariably the case, the discharge of the burden of proof may  be
    assisted by a presumption of fact. It  follows  from  this   that   the
    Immigration  Judge  was  plainly  entitled  to  conclude,  as  he  did,
     that  the  respondent  had  shown  that   the   facts   necessary   to
    empower  the   Secretary   of   State   to   revoke   the   appellant's
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  in   the   United   Kingdom   had   been
    established.    Whilst  it  is  right  to  say  that  the   Immigration
    Judge  considered  all  the  circumstances  of   the   case   including
    the  appellant's  conduct  before  he  applied  for   a   passport   in
    2004,  there  is  nothing   here   to   show   that   the   Immigration
    Judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the  respondent  had  used   his
    powers  in  reliance  solely  on  things   done   after   the   Section
    came  into  force.

29. The  Immigration  Judge  also  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  no
     longer  a  refugee  because  he  did   not   need   protection.     He
    found  that  the  appellant's  conduct   in   obtaining   an   Algerian
    passport  on  a  previous  occasion  and  returning  to  Algeria   were
    incompatible  with  that  of  a  person  needing  protection  from  the
     authorities  there  and  he  did  not  believe   the   appellant   had
    ever  needed  international   protection.     That   is   a   secondary
    issue  and  is  not  relevant  to  his   primary   determination   that
    the  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to  revoke   the   indefinite
    leave  to  remain  consequent  upon  recognising  the  appellant  as  a
     refugee. We refer to it again below.

30. In  his  argument  before  the  Immigration  Judge  Mr   Lam   referred
    to  the  case  of  Thevarayan  (Conseil d'Etat,  France,  No 78.55,  13
     Jan  1989) (UNHCR  Refworld)   to   say   that   the   renewal   of  a
    national  passport  without  more  does  not  automatically  give  rise
     to   a   presumption   that   a   person   has   voluntarily   availed
    himself  of  the  country  of   his   nationality.     That  is  not  a
    decision that binds us and it did not bind the Immigration  Judge  when
    he decided the appeal. If  Mr  Lam's  summary  is  accurate   then   we
    disagree   with   it.   Passports  are  not  ornamental  adornments  or
    collectors' items.    Rather a passport is very  strong  evidence  that
     a  person  is   a   citizen   of   the   country   that   issued   the
    passport  under  consideration.    Even   in   the   absence   of   the
    very  plain  terms  of  paragraph  121  of  the  UNHCR   Handbook   the
    respondent  would  be  entitled   to   assume   that   a   person   who
    obtains  a  passport  intends  to  invoke   the   protection   of   the
    issuing  country  and  make  his  decisions  in  the  light   of   that
    assumption. The Immigration Judge cannot be criticised for  making  the
    same assumption.   Where  a  person  obtains  a  passport  it  will  be
     assumed  that  he  or  she   intends   to   avail   himself   of   the
    protection  of  the  state  that  issued  the  passport.   It   is   of
    course  open  to  the  appellant  to  rebut  the  inference  but   that
    has  not  happened  here.

31. The Immigration Judge also had in mind the appellant's earlier conduct.
    When  considering  the  appellant's  case  that   the   appellant   did
    not  intend  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection   of   the   state
    of  Algeria  just  because  he  obtained  an  Algerian   passport   the
    Immigration  Judge,  and  the  Secretary  of   State,   was   perfectly
    entitled  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the   appellant   had
    obtained  a  passport  for  Algeria  on   an   earlier   occasion   and
    had  used  it  to  visit  the  country.    This  is  not  in  any   way
    contrary  to  the  requirements  of  Section  76(6).    In  this   case
    an  act  was  done  after  the  commencement  of   the   Section   upon
    which  the  Secretary  of  State  relied  to   support   his   decision
    that  the  appellant   had   voluntarily   availed   himself   of   the
    protection  of  his  country   of   nationality   and   therefore   the
    Secretary  of  State  revoked  that  person's   indefinite   leave   to
    remain.    In making that decision the Secretary  of  State,  like  the
    Immigration Judge when  he  decided  the  appeal,  considered  all  the
    available evidence including the appellant's  previous  conduct.     It
    is  completely  wrong  for  the  grounds  to  assert,  as  they  do  at
     paragraph  1,  that:

        "if  the  learned   judge   was   entitled   to   look   into   the
        appellant's  actions  before  the  Nationality,   Immigration   and
        Asylum  Act  2002  came  into  effect  then  Section  76(6)   would
        be  of  no  legal  force."

32. In  this  case  the  respondent  has   decided   that   the   appellant
    has  voluntarily  availed  himself  of  the  protection  of  the  state
     of  which  the  appellant  is  a  national,  that   is   Algeria.   He
    has  decided  this  because  of  an   act   done   by   the   appellant
    after  section  76  came  into  force  that  was   presumed   to   have
    that  effect.  The  respondent  could  only  use  his   power   if   he
    acted  "only  in  reliance  on  action   taken   after"   the   section
    came  into  force.   The  word  "only"  must  be  given  meaning.   The
    respondent   could   not   use   his    powers    properly    if    the
    appellant's  actions  after  the  section  came  into  force  did   not
    show  that  the  appellant  had  availed  himself  of  the   protection
    of  Algeria  without  reference  to   events   that   occurred   before
    the  section  came  into  force.  The  conduct  relied  upon,  that  is
     the  conduct  necessary  to  support   the   conclusion,   must   have
    taken  place  after  the  section  came  into   force.   Actions   that
    illuminated  or  explained   pre-commencement   acts   would   not   be
    enough   unless   there  were   post    commencement    actions    that
    satisfied  section  76(3).  Here  the  action   relied   upon,   namely
    the   acquisition    of    the    passport,    occurred    after    the
    commencement  of  the  section.  The   Immigration   Judge   recognised
    that  at  paragraph  58  where  he  said

        "...it  is  plain  that  once  the  appellant  has  voluntarily  re-
        availed   himself   of   the   protection   of   the   country   by
        seeking  a   passport,   that,   of   itself   according   to   the
        Refugee  Convention  will  cease  his  refugee  status,  unless  he
         shows  that   the   actions   do   not   carry   with   them   the
        presumed  intention;"

33. As   the   Immigration   Judge   explained   quite   clearly   in   his
    determination   the   decision   to   revoke   was   based    on    the
    appellant  obtaining  his  passport  after  the   Section   came   into
    force.    There is no error there.

34.  The   decision   that   the   appellant   had   not    rebutted    the
    presumption   that   he   intended   to   avail    himself    of    the
    protection  of  the  State   of   Algeria   had   to   be   made   with
    reference  to  all  of  the   evidence,   including   the   fact   that
    since  being  recognised  as  a  refugee  the  appellant  had  obtained
     an  Algerian  passport  and  used  it  to  travel  to   Algeria.   The
    use  of  the  word  "only"  in  section  76(6)  is  not   intended   to
    exclude  consideration  of  evidence  about  matters  other  than   the
    meaning   and   purpose   of   the   action   relied   upon   if   they
    occurred   before   the   act   came    into    force.    Indeed    the
    construction  urged  by  the  appellant  could,  in  some  cases,  lead
     to  the  disturbing  suggestion  than  the  Secretary  of  State,   or
    an  Immigration  Judge   should   ignore   conduct   helpful   to   the
    appellant's  contention  that  he   did   not   intend   the   presumed
    consequence  of  his  action  if  it  occurred   before   the   section
    came  into  force.

35. In short, ground 1 cannot be right.   A   decision   maker   can   only
    revoke  properly  refugee  status   in   reliance   only   on   conduct
    that  took  place  after  section  76   came   into   force,   but   in
    deciding  the  significance  of  that  conduct  the  Immigration  Judge
     can  have  regard  to  evidence  of   conduct   before   the   section
    came  into  force.

36. Ground 2 does not help the appellant.    It  accepts  that:

        "If  a  refugee  applies  for  and  obtains  a  national   passport
        or  is  renewal  it  will  be  in  the  absence  of  proof  to  the
         contrary  presumed  that  he  intends  to  avail  himself  of  the
         protection  of  the  country  of  his  nationality."

37. In   other   words   the   grounds   accept   the   analysis   of   the
    Immigration  Judge.    The  grounds   complain   that   the   appellant
    stated  categorically  he  had  no  intention  of  travelling  back  to
     Algeria.    That is not the point.    A  person  does  not   need   to
    travel  to  a  country  to  avail  himself   of   the   protection   of
    the  authorities  of   that   country.     Countries   have   embassies
    throughout  the  world  and  a   passport   can   be   used   to   seek
    protection  anywhere  in  the  world.  Furthermore  a  witness  is  not
     entitled  to  be   believed   just   because   he   states   something
    categorically.

38. We  find  no  merit  in  ground  3  of  the  grounds  suggesting   that
    the  Immigration  Judge  had  wrongly  interpreted  paragraph  121   of
    the  UNHCR  handbook  "In  relation  to   the   issue   of   occasional
    and  incidental  contact  with  national  authority".    It  is   quite
    right   that   even   a   short   visit   to   a   country   does   not
    necessarily  mean  that  a  person  intends   to   avail   himself   of
    the  protection  of  that  country   and   some   superficial   contact
    with  the  authorities   of   that   country   does   not   necessarily
    amount  to  availing  the  protection  of  that  country.     Paragraph
    121  makes  it  perfectly  clear  that   a   person   who   obtains   a
    passport  will,  in  the  absence  of  proof   to   the   contrary   be
    presumed  to  have  intended  to  avail  himself  of   the   protection
    of  the  country  of  his  nationality.

Other Grounds

39. Paragraph 4 is also wrong.    This  criticises  the  Immigration  Judge
     for  determining  the  original  asylum  claim.    That is not what he
    did.    The  Immigration  Judge  asked   himself   if   the   appellant
    needed  international  protection  when  he  decided  the  appeal   and
    he  concluded  that   the   appellant   did   not.   In   making   that
    finding   the   Immigration   Judge   disbelieved    parts    of    the
    appellant's   account   that   had   been   accepted   previously.   He
    reached  this  conclusion  on  the  totality  of  the  evidence  before
     him  including  the  appellant's  evidence  that   he   had   returned
    to  Algeria  after  being  given  refugee   status.   The   Immigration
    Judge  was  entitled  to  do  that   and   his   findings   about   the
    appellant's  past  conduct  do  not  undermine  his  finding  that  the
     appellant  had  voluntarily  re-availed  himself  of  the   protection
    of  the  state  of  Algeria  by  obtaining  an  Algerian  passport.

40. Ground 5 is without merit.    This  complains  that   the   Immigration
    Judge  should  have  had  regard  for  the  fact  the  appellant   only
    stayed  in  Algeria  for  a  short  time  when   he   returned   there.
    The  Immigration  Judge  did  not   decide   the   case   because   the
    appellant  had  on  a  previous  occasion  returned  to  Algeria.    He
     decided  the  case  because  the  appellant  had,  in  2004,  obtained
     an  Algerian  passport.    He  concluded,  as  he  was   entitled   to
    do,  that  the  appellant  did  that  because  he   wanted   to   avail
    himself  of  the  protection  of  Algeria.

41. In  the   circumstances   there   is   no   material   error   of   law
    disclosed.

Summary

42. In  summary  we  say  as  follows:

i    If  an  appellant  challenges  a   decision   of   the   Secretary   of
    State  to  revoke  a  refugee's  indefinite  leave  to  remain  because
     he  has  ceased  to  be  a  refugee  for  one  of  the  reasons  given
     in  section  76(3)  of  the  Nationality,   Immigration   and   Asylum
    Act  2002  then  the  Secretary  of  State  must  prove  that  such   a
    reason  existed  and  in  so  doing  must  rely  only  on   an   action
    that  took  place  after  the   section   came   into   force   on   10
    February  2003.

ii   If  the issue is whether the  action  relied  on   by   the   Secretary
    of  State had its  presumed  or     likely   effect   the   Immigration
    Judge  is  entitled  to  look  at  evidence   tending   to   illuminate
    the  appellant's  conduct,  including  evidence   of   actions   before
    the  section  came  into  force.

iii  An  appellant  can  rely  on  a  ground   of   appeal   alleging   that
    he  is  in  fact  a  refugee  when  the  Immigration  Judge  hears   an
    appeal  even  if  the  respondent  establishes   that   the   appellant
    had  ceased to be a refugee.



DECISION

The original Tribunal did not make a material error of law and the  original
determination of the appeal shall stand.









|Signed                               |                                     |
|Senior Immigration Judge Perkins     |26 June 2007                         |


