
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Mushtaq (s 85A(3)(a): scope; academic progress) [2013] UKUT 00061 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 January 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                               kamran mushtaq

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Malik, Counsel, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1)   The effect of section 85A(3)(a) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 is such that Exception  2  can  apply  where  an  appeal  is
brought against an immigration decision  of  a  kind  specified  in  section
82(2)(a) or (d), whether or not  the  appeal  includes,  or  is  treated  by
section 85(1) as including, an appeal against another immigration decision.

(2)   The requirement  in  former  paragraph  120A  of  Appendix  A  to  the
Immigration Rules for the Sponsor to  confirm  that  a  proposed  course  of
study "represents academic progress from previous  study  undertaken  during
the last period of leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a  Student"  is
not displaced where the last period of leave granted to  the  applicant  has
been for some other reason  than  as  such  a  Student.  The  benchmark  for
assessing academic progress is the last course of study.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of India  born  in  1985,  first  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 15 January 2004, with entry clearance as  a  student.
    He was subsequently granted leave to  remain  in  that  capacity  until
    March 2010, when he was granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant.

2.   On 1 March 2012, two days before the expiry  of  that  last  period  of
    leave, the appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)
    Student.

3.   On 15 June 2012, the respondent refused  the  appellant's  application.
    She did so by reference to paragraph 245ZX(c) of the Immigration Rules.
     The letter of refusal explained that, amongst other things, a  Tier  4
    (General) Student applicant must  score  30  points  under  Appendix  A
    (attributes)  and  score  10  points  under  Appendix  C   (maintenance
    (funds)).  Although the appellant  scored  the  claimed  10  points  in
    respect of maintenance (funds), the respondent awarded him no points in
    respect of attributes.  The reason given was this:-

         "For points to be awarded for a valid CAS issued on or after 4 July
         2011, the Sponsor must confirm that the course for  which  the  CAS
         has been assigned represents academic progress from previous  study
         undertaken during the last period of leave as a Tier 4 student.


         The CAS that you  submitted...  was  issued  by  Shepherd  Business
         School Limited.  As your  CAS  does  not  state  that  your  course
         represents academic progress, you fail to meet the requirements and
         no points have been awarded for your CAS."


4.   With his notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal of 28  June  2012,
    the appellant enclosed a  letter  dated  26  June  2012  from  Shepherd
    Business  School,  to  the  effect  that  that  school  considered  the
    appellant's proposed graduate diploma course  in  Hospitality,  Tourism
    and Management represented academic progression from his "Advance [sic]
    Diploma in Business Management from Union College".

5.   It is clear from the determination that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    considered that the Immigration Rules did indeed contain a requirement,
    the effect of which was that the appellant was entitled to no points in
    respect of attributes.  At [6] of the determination, the judge set  out
    these provisions of Appendix A to the  Rules  (as  they  stood  at  the
    relevant time):-

          "113.     An applicant applying for entry clearance  or  leave  to
               remain as a Tier 4  (General) Student must score  30  points
               for attributes.


         114. Available points are shown in Table 16 below...


              Table 16


                 Criterion                                            Points
               awarded


              Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies                 30...


         120A.    Points will only be awarded for a  valid  Confirmation  of
               acceptance for Studies (even  if  all  the  requirements  in
               paragraphs 116 to 120A above are met)  if  the  Sponsor  has
               confirmed that the course  for  which  the  Confirmation  of
               Acceptance for Studies has been assigned represents academic
               progress from previous  study  undertaken  during  the  last
               period of leave as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  or  as  a
               Student...".


6.   Section 85A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides as follows:-

         "Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions
         E+W+S+N.I.
         (1)  This section sets out  the  exceptions  mentioned  in  section
             85(5).


         (2)  Exception 1 is that in relation to  an  appeal  under  section
             82(1) against an immigration decision of a kind  specified  in
             section 82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal  may  consider  only  the
             circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision.


         (3)  Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if-


             (a)  the appeal is against an immigration decision of  a  kind
                  specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),


             (b)  the immigration decision concerned an  application  of  a
                  kind identified in immigration rules as  requiring  to  be
                  considered under a "Points Based System", and


             (c)  the appeal relies wholly or partly on  grounds  specified
                  in section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).


         (4)  Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may  consider  evidence
             adduced by the appellant only if it-


             (a)  was submitted in support of, and at the time  of  making,
                  the application to which the immigration decision related,




             (b)  relates to the appeal in so far as it relies  on  grounds
                  other than those specified in subsection (3)(c),


             (c)  is adduced to prove that a document is genuine or  valid,
                  or


             (d)  is adduced in connection with the  Secretary  of  State's
                  reliance on  a  discretion  under  immigration  rules,  or
                  compliance with a requirement  of  immigration  rules,  to
                  refuse an  application  on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                  acquisition of "points" under the "Points Based System.


         (5)  Tribunal Procedure Rules may make provision, for the  purposes
             of  subsection  (4)(a),  about  the  circumstances  in   which
             evidence is to be treated, or not  treated,  as  submitted  in
             support of, and at the time of making, an application."


7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge held that section 85A operated so  as  to
    prevent him from taking account of the letter  of  26  June  2012  from
    Shepherd Business School:-

         "15. The problem for the Appellant is that I am unable to take  the
             letter from Shepherd Business School into  account.   This  is
             because  I  am  not  entitled  to  because  of  the  statutory
             restriction  in  so  doing  in  s.85A  of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which, in the case of  points-
             based system  appeals,  provides  that  I  can  only  consider
             evidence from the Appellant where it  had  been  submitted  in
             support of and at the time of the making of the application.


         16.  Self-evidently because of its date, the letter  from  Shepherd
             Business School was not and could not have  been  provided  by
             the Appellant with his application which had been made on  1st
             March 2012."


8.   The judge accordingly found that the appellant could  not  satisfy  the
    relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He therefore concluded
    that the appeal against the decision to refuse to vary the  appellant's
    leave to remain fell to be dismissed.  It is relevant to observe  that,
    although the judge focussed on the date  of  1  March,  the  letter  in
    question post-dated the respondent's decision and so could not  in  any
    sense be regarded as having  been  made  at  the  time  of  making  the
    application.

9.      At  [20]  the  judge  correctly  identified  that  two   immigration
    decisions had been made in respect of the appellant.  As  well  as  the
    decision to refuse to vary leave, the respondent had purported to make,
    at  the  same  time,  a  removal  decision  under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Following  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in  Ahmadi  (s.47  decision:  validity:  Sapkota)
    [2012] UKUT 00147 (IAC), the First-tier Tribunal Judge  held  that  the
    contemporaneously made section 47 decision could not, in fact, lawfully
    be made; but that, as was made clear from "paragraph 24 in Ahmadi, this
    does not mean that the substantive decision to refuse leave to  remain"
    was  itself  unlawful  [24].   The  judge  accordingly  dismissed   the
    appellant's  appeal  against  what  he  regarded  as  "the  substantive
    decision of the respondent to refuse further leave to remain" [25].

10.  Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  on  three
    grounds.  The second of these was that the requirement to show academic
    progression was effectively invalid, since  that  requirement  was  not
    contained in Immigration Rules but, rather,  "incorporated  by  way  of
    reference from the guidance".  The judgments of the  Supreme  Court  in
    Alvi v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33 were relied upon.

11.  Although the First-tier Tribunal granted permission in  general  terms,
    its decision of 4 October 2012 shows that it was particularly attracted
    by this second ground.  At the hearing on 3 January 2013,  however,  Mr
    Malik (who did not draft the grounds) conceded that the  second  ground
    was hopeless.  Paragraph 120A does not exist  in  guidance  but  in  an
    Appendix, which is part of the Immigration Rules themselves.

12.  Mr Malik also did not  seek  to  rely  upon  the  third  ground.   This
    contended that section 85A(4) did not have the effect of precluding the
    First-tier Tribunal from considering the letter from Shepherd  Business
    School, on the basis that that letter was "not related directly to  the
    acquisition of points under the points-based system" and was  therefore
    covered by section 85A(4)(d).  That ground is manifestly misconceived.

13.  Instead, Mr Malik submitted that section 85A did not apply for a  quite
    different reason.  His submission (which I  permitted  him  to  advance
    insofar as it amounted to an addition to  the  grounds)  was  that  the
    effect of section 85A(3)(a) was such that Exception 2 applied  only  if
    the appeal was against "an immigration decision of a kind specified  in
    section 82(2)(a) or (d)" and that the present appeal  was  against  two
    immigration decisions: namely, the  refusal  to  vary  the  appellant's
    leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  (section  82(2)(d))  and  the
    decision under section 47 of the 2006 Act that the appellant should  be
    removed from this country (section 82(2)(ha)).

14.  In support of his submission, Mr Malik relied  upon  section  85(1)  of
    the 2002 Act:-

         "(1) An appeal under section 82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1)".


15.  Mr Malik also  sought  to  rely  on  the  determination  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Adamally and Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions: Tribunal
    Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC), which held that the  structure  of
    the 2002 Act is  such  that  there  is  only  "one  appeal  before  the
    Tribunal" [23] but that such an appeal can be brought against more than
    one immigration decision, with the result that an appeal can be allowed
    in part, either in respect of a particular  ground  of  appeal  brought
    against a single immigration decision, or in respect of one of two such
    decisions appealed.

16.  I do not accept Mr Malik's submission on this issue. I do not  consider
    that it finds any support  in  Adamally.  As  Mr  Deller  pointed  out,
    section 85(1) far from supporting Mr Malik, has  the  opposite  effect.
    If a person appeals against, say, a refusal of leave to enter  (section
    82(2)(a)), where a decision has also been made to  remove  that  person
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions (section 82(2)(g) or (h)),
    the effect of section  85(1)  is  automatically  to  treat  the  appeal
    against the refusal of leave to enter as including  an  appeal  against
    the decision to remove.  That this is so does not mean that the  appeal
    is not, or is no longer, an appeal "against an immigration decision  of
    a kind specified in section 82(2)(a)". The  appeal  remains  an  appeal
    against such a decision.  The  fact  that  the  appeal  is  treated  as
    including some other challenge is, for these purposes, immaterial.

17.  There is no reason why, as a matter of logic or  policy,  the  position
    should be different, where a person expressly appeals against a section
    82(2)(a) decision and a section  82(2)(g)  or  (h)  decision.   On  the
    contrary, to draw such a distinction would be perverse.

18.  Taken on its own terms,  Mr  Malik's  submission  does  not  serve  any
    discernible purpose.  It is difficult to see why person A,  in  respect
    of whom both a variation decision and  a  removal  decision  have  been
    made, should be in a better position, as regards proving on appeal that
    he or she meets the "points-based" Immigration Rules, than person B, in
    respect of whom no such removal decision has been taken,  merely  as  a
    result of person A appealing against both of the immigration  decisions
    in question.

19.  For these reasons, I reject the proposition that one  has,  in  effect,
    to read section 85A(3)(a) as if the word  "only"  appeared  immediately
    before the words "against an immigration decision...".

20.  I therefore turn to Mr Malik's second submission.  This  also  concerns
    an issue of legislative interpretation and is the first of the  grounds
    of appeal.

21.  As I have already indicated, the appellant's last period of  leave  was
    as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  Mr Malik submitted that,  as  a
    result, paragraph 120A of Appendix A did not apply  to  the  appellant.
    This was because the words "during the last period of leave as a Tier 4
    (General) Student or as a student" in that  paragraph  meant  that  the
    last actual period of leave granted to the person concerned had  to  be
    as such a student.  Since this was not the  case  with  the  appellant,
    there had been no need for him to show academic progress in the form of
    a confirmation from his sponsor institution.

22.  I also reject this submission.  To do otherwise would be to ignore  the
    plain meaning of the phrase  in  question  and  to  impose  upon  it  a
    strained construction, for which there is no justification.  It  is,  I
    consider, manifest that paragraph 120A requires academic progress to be
    shown, as between the proposed new  course  and  the  study  undertaken
    during the person's last period of leave as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
    or as a student.  That last period of leave may or may not be the  last
    period of leave actually granted to that person; but  it  matters  not.
    The benchmark for assessing progress is the last course of study.

23.  Mr Malik submitted that the fact that  a  person  may  have  enjoyed  a
    period of leave in the United Kingdom as (as here) a worker meant  that
    it was illogical to look back before  that  period,  in  order  to  see
    whether a new proposed course represented academic  progress,  compared
    with a course that the person had undertaken in the past. Mr Malik said
    that, having worked here, the appellant should be able to choose to  do
    a postgraduate diploma in a  different  subject  from  that  previously
    undertaken,  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  experiences  or  new
    interests gained during his period of leave as a worker.  It  seems  to
    me, however, that essentially the  same  could  be  said  of  a  person
    seeking to undertake a new  course  of  study,  who  has  not  had  any
    intervening period of leave as a worker, but whose interests  may  have
    changed during his or her time as a student.

24.   Other things being equal, a  person  who  is  not  subject  to  United
    Kingdom immigration controls is free to study what he  or  she  wishes,
    whether or not the proposed course represents  academic  progress  from
    previous  study.  But  that  does  not  mean  the   respondent   cannot
    legitimately impose a requirement of academic progression upon  persons
    who are subject to immigration control.

25.  I find that none of the attacks mounted upon the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge disclose any legal error on his part.   So  far  as
    the appeal against the refusal to vary leave to  remain  is  concerned,
    the judge's decision to dismiss was entirely open to him.  No Article 8
    grounds were raised.

26.  Although Mr Malik did not seek to make anything of it, the judge  ought
    to have allowed the  appeal  in  respect  of  the  section  47  removal
    decision.  That was an error of  law.   I  re-make  that  part  of  the
    judge's decision by allowing the appellant's appeal against the section
    47 decision.  The rest of the judge's decision shall, however, stand.






                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
