
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


 ML (student; "satisfactory progress"; Zhou explained) Mauritius [2007]
      UKAIT 00061

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing:  19 June 2007

                                   Before:

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P Morris instructed by IAS
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) The Court of Appeal in Zhou v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 51 was not  concerned
with the proper construction of para 60(v) of HC  395;  (2)  The  Tribunal's
decision in TY [2007] UKAIT 00007 on the meaning of "his  course  of  study"
in para 60(v) is correct; (3) However, it follows from the analysis in  Zhou
that "satisfactory progress" has to be established in the "course of  study"
for which leave as a student was last granted because there is no  mechanism
for the Secretary of State to approve transfer to another  course  of  study
during the period of that leave.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius who was born on 1  July  1983.
     On 13 February 2007, the respondent  refused  to  vary  her  leave  to
     remain as a student under paragraph 62 (with  reference  to  paragraph
     60(v))  of  Statement  of  Changes  of  Immigration  Rules,  HC   395.
     Following  a  hearing  on  29  March  2007,  Immigration  Judge  Price
     dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   On  23   April   2007,   Senior
     Immigration Judge Perkins ordered reconsideration.  As a  result,  the
     matter comes before us.

  2. The facts of this appeal are as follows.   On  8  September  2004  the
     appellant was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as  a  student
     until 31 October 2005.  During that time she successfully completed an
     IATA Diploma in Travel and Tourism at the London School of Management,
     Ealing London.  Thereafter, she was granted  further  leave  until  30
     November 2006 to study the IATA-UFTAA Consultant Diploma in Travel and
     Tourism at the same institution.  She undertook  the  course  but,  in
     April 2006, failed a component of one of the course's two modules.  As
     a result, in order to pass the Diploma, she was required to retake the
     examinations for both components of the failed module.  The  appellant
     did not retake the examinations, she says,  because  she  was  advised
     that to do so  would  interfer  with  her  studies  on  the  BTEC  HNC
     Hospitality Management (Leisure and Tourism) course  at  St  Patrick's
     College, London for which she enrolled on 27 September 2006.

  3. On 14 November 2006, the appellant applied for  an  extension  of  her
     leave as a student to undertake the BTEC HNC course  at  St  Patrick's
     College.  On 13 February 2007 the respondent refused the  application.
     His reason was that the appellant  had  failed  to  show  satisfactory
     progress because she had failed the IATA-UFTAA Consultant  Diploma  in
     Travel and Tourism.

  4. At the hearing before the Immigration Judge, the appellant argued that
     she had shown "satisfactory progress"  in  her  BTEC  HNC  course  and
     produced a "Progress Profile"  from  St  Patrick's  College  dated  23
     February 2007.  It showed that she had taken  three  examinations  and
     had passed two of them and been referred in another.  The  Immigration
     Judge rejected the appellant's argument that that course was relevant.
      Relying on the Tribunal's  decision  in  TY  (Student;  "satisfactory
     progress"; course of study) Burma [2007] UKAIT 00007, the  Immigration
     Judge held that the only relevant course of study was that  for  which
     she had been  last  given  leave,  namely  the  IATA-UFTAA  Consultant
     Diploma, which he held on the facts it was clear that she had  failed.
     He, therefore,  dismissed  her  appeal  as  she  had  not  established
     "satisfactory" progress in her course of study  as  required  by  para
     60(v) of HC 395.

  5. We begin with the relevant Immigration Rule which is para 60(v) of  HC
     395 which provides as follows:

           "60. The requirements for an extension of stay as a student  are
           that the applicant:...
           (v) can show evidence of satisfactory progress in his course  of
           study  including  the  taking  and  passing  of   any   relevant
           examinations;..."

  6. In TY, the Tribunal considered the meaning of the  phrase  "course  of
     study" and the issue of which "course of  study"  was  relevant  to  a
     decision under para 60(v) when an individual had undertaken more  than
     one during his time in the UK.  In deciding that it was the course  of
     study for which the individual had most recently been  granted  leave,
     the Tribunal reasoned as follows:

           "19.  It seems to us, taking that as an  underlying  feature  of
           the student rules  read  together,  "his  course  of  study"  in
           paragraph 60(v) also focusses on the "course of study" for which
           leave to enter or remain was  last  granted.    We  see  nothing
           unfair  or  surprising  in  requiring  the  applicant  to   show
           'satisfactory progress' in that "course of  study"  rather  than
           any other.  Why should the individual's progress be assessed  by
           reference to any other "course of study" when further  leave  is
           requested?  It is the one for  which  leave  was  most  recently
           granted  or,  if  appropriate,  for   which   a   transfer   was
           subsequently approved by the Secretary of State.   Any  previous
           course(s) of study will have been taken into account in  earlier
           decision(s) to extend the individual's leave.   It is the course
           of study which the individual either wishes to continue  or,  at
           least in leave terms, is the most immediate, against which it is
           most  appropriate  to  assess  progress.    Indeed,  we  do  not
           consider there to be any  justification  for  an  individual  to
           obtain leave for a course of study and then  switch  to  a  less
           difficult one because it proves too difficult but claim,  as  is
           proposed in this case, 'satisfactory  progress'  in  the  lesser
           course.  Usually such an individual will have shown, in reality,
           that the leave granted to undertake the  more  difficult  course
           was in retrospect mistaken."

  7. Before us, Mr Morris accepted that the Immigration Judge had correctly
     applied TY when he restricted  his  consideration  to  the  IATA-UFTAA
     Consultant Diploma.  It was not suggested that it  formed  part  of  a
     single "course of study"  with  the  BTEC  HNC.   However,  Mr  Morris
     submitted that TY was wrongly decided and we should not follow it.  He
     submitted that it was appropriate to look at the appellant's  progress
     more 'globally' taking account of her progress in the BTEC HND  course
     she was now following as well, perhaps,  as  that  in  the  IATA-UFTAA
     Consultant Diploma.  Mr  Morris  relied  upon  a  number  of  detailed
     submissions made in his  skeleton  argument.   The  substance  of  his
     submissions was as follows.

  8. First, Mr Morris submitted that in TY, by limiting the enquiry to  the
     course of studies for which  the  individual  had  last  been  granted
     leave, the Tribunal had erroneously read words into para  60(v)  which
     were simply not there.  The Tribunal's  approach  amounted  to  a  re-
     drafting of the rule.  Secondly, he submitted that the  effect  of  TY
     was to require that  all  previous  courses  embarked  upon  had  been
     successfully completed.  Had the Secretary of State wished to  achieve
     that, the rule could have said so - it did not.  Thirdly, there was no
     basis for the Tribunal to say that  the  relevant  "course  of  study"
     could include one to which the Secretary of State had,  subsequent  to
     the grant of  leave,  given  permission  to  transfer.   There  is  no
     provision for this is the rules.  Fourthly, the approach in TY  denied
     a student the opportunity to change from a course upon  which  he  was
     not succeeding,  perhaps  for  good  reasons  such  as  illness,  poor
     teaching or lack of ability, to a more suitable one.   In  support  of
     his submissions, particularly the final two, Mr Morris relied upon the
     Court of Appeal's decision in Zhou v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 51 which, he
     pointed out, the Tribunal in TY had not been referred to.

  9. We can deal with  the  first  and  second  submissions  of  Mr  Morris
     briefly.  There is no doubt that para 60(v) requires consideration  of
     an individual's progress on "his course of study".   That  is  phrased
     unambiguously in the singular.  It does not say "any" course of  study
     and it does not allow for consideration of more  than  one  course  of
     study.  In a case where an individual has  undertaken  more  than  one
     course of study, the Tribunal in TY was required to  decide  precisely
     which one should be considered.   In  anchoring  the  decision-maker's
     attention firmly on the course of study for which  the  appellant  was
     last given leave,  the  Tribunal  was  not  adding  words  but  merely
     interpreting the  existing  words  to  indicate  the  scope  of  their
     application: no more and no less.   As regards the suggestion that the
     interpretation in TY requires proof that all previous courses embarked
     upon have been successfully completed, that is patently not the  case.
     The decision-maker's focus is, of course, on the "course of study" for
     which leave was last given.  That will include all courses  which  are
     part of that "course of study" some of which may predate the grant  of
     leave.   It will depend when this course of study was commenced but it
     does not require consideration of any previous courses  of  study  or,
     indeed, any current course of study if a new  one  has  been  embarked
     upon since leave was last granted.

 10. In dealing with Mr Morris' third and fourth submissions it is  helpful
     to look first at the decision in Zhou relied upon by  him.    In  that
     case, the applicant ('Z') sought judicial review of the  Secretary  of
     State's decision to remove him as an immigration offender under s.  10
     of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  Z was given  leave  to  enter
     the UK as a student to study English.  A condition of his  leave  was,
     as is usual, that he would not take up employment except as  permitted
     by the Secretary of State.  The  IDIs  permitted  a  student  (without
     specific authorisation) to take part-time employment providing it  did
     not exceed 20 hours a week during term time.  During  his  studies,  Z
     worked 12 hours a week for a supermarket.  For a variety of reasons  -
     some of which were disputed -  the  appellant  stopped  attending  the
     course he was studying.  The Secretary of State considered that he was
     no longer a student and therefore in breach  of  a  condition  of  his
     leave not to take employment - the  IDI  permission  only  applied  to
     individuals who continued to be students.

 11. The Court of Appeal rejected the Secretary of State's argument that  Z
     ceased to be a student because he no longer fulfilled the requirements
     of the Immigration Rules as a student.  Z was a 'student' as  long  as
     he had leave to enter (or remain) as such.  The  Court  saw  practical
     difficulties in adopting a fact-specific approach.  Lord  Phillips  MR
     (as he then was) said this at [30]:

           "30. One can  foresee  many  circumstances  in  which  a  person
           admitted as a student who embarks on  a  course  which  complies
           with the requirements of paragraph  57  may  find  that  he  is,
           perhaps  temporarily,  unable  to  maintain  15  hours  a   week
           attendance on the course. The college may, because of unforeseen
           circumstances find that  it  cannot  provide  15  hours  a  week
           tuition  in  the  chosen   subject.   The   course   may   prove
           unsatisfactory and the student may wish to transfer  to  another
           teaching institution - as happened  in  this  case.  We  do  not
           understand it to be  suggested  that  such  events  would  place
           someone admitted as a student in breach of a condition  attached
           to the leave to enter, so as to render  that  person  liable  to
           removal under section 10  of  the  1999  Act.  It  seems  to  us
           patently unsatisfactory that such an event  should  render  that
           person in breach of Code 2, and  quite  possibly  guilty  of  an
           offence under section 24 of the 1971 Act,  if  he  continues  in
           temporary employment, particularly as  the  earnings  from  this
           might be necessary to supplement income needed for subsistence."

 12. Those practical concerns led the Court to conclude as follows at [32]:

           "32....Leave to enter 'as a student' determines an  individual's
           student status at the  moment  of  entry.  Thereafter,  for  the
           period for which leave to enter has been granted, the basis upon
           which the individual remains within the country is that leave to
           remain here for the period in question has been given to him 'as
           a student'. His  leave  to  enter  is  subject  to  the  Code  2
           prohibition on  unauthorised  employment,  but  that  itself  is
           subject to the standing authorisation  granted  to  students  by
           Chapter 4 [of the IDI] to accept part-time employment. If  those
           who are permitted to enter as students for a period continue  to
           enjoy student status during that period there will  be  no  room
           for doubt that, while they are  subject  to  Code  2,  they  are
           entitled to work part-time under Chapter 4."


 13. And, again, at [34]:

           "34...the natural meaning of the word 'student' in the IDI is  a
           person who has been given leave to enter 'as a  student'.  This,
           coupled with the practical considerations considered above,  has
           led us to conclude that Mr Zhou's first ground of  challenge  of
           the Secretary of State's decision is made good. Mr Zhou remained
           at all material times a 'student' for the purposes of Chapter 4.
           His part-time employment at Waitrose was authorised. He was  not
           in breach of any entry condition, and the decision to remove him
           was unlawful."

 14. The decision in Zhou was strongly relied upon by Mr Morris  which  was
     not cited to the Tribunal in TY.  It does not, in  our  view,  provide
     any support to Mr Morris' submissions on the meaning  of  para  60(v).
     The Court of Appeal was not considering the meaning of para  60(v)  at
     all.  The Court was concerned solely  with  Z's  existing  immigration
     status in the UK.  It was called on to consider whether the "basis  on
     which [Z] remains in the country"- and being subject to Code 2 - could
     be said to have undergone fundamental change  simply  because  of  Z's
     failure to make satisfactory progress.  The  Court  concluded  that  Z
     "remained at all times a 'student' for  the  purposes"  of  the  IDIs.
     The Court's conclusion was that an individual remains  a  person  with
     student status for so long as he has leave in that capacity.  When  it
     comes to an issue of breach of a  condition  of  leave,  all  that  is
     relevant is whether a student has breached those conditions; it is not
     relevant to make an assessment of whether he  continues  to  meet  the
     requirements of the Rules relating to students. One  can  readily  see
     why the Court of Appeal reached the  decision  given  the  immigration
     consequence of removal which otherwise would have confronted Z.

 15. Having said that, Zhou does assist Mr Morris to this extent.  It seems
     that the leave given to a student is not tied to any particular course
     of study although, necessarily the decision  whether  to  grant  leave
     does require consideration of the course of study for which  leave  is
     sought.  In other words, there seems to be no basis for the Tribunal's
     view that the Secretary of State may approve a transfer to a different
     course during extant leave.  It seems, based upon Zhou, that leave  is
     granted simply as a student.  Any transfer is  then  a  matter  solely
     between the student and the proposed educational institution to  which
     transfer is sought.  If that institution or the course (or  course  of
     study) does not satisfy  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules,  then  the
     Secretary of State's remedy is  either  to  curtail  the  individual's
     leave under para 323(ii) of the Immigration Rules because he no longer
     meets the requirements of the (student) rules under  which  leave  was
     granted (see Zhou per Lord Phillips MR at [35]) or, in the event of an
     application for further  leave  as  a  student,  to  decide  that  the
     applicant has failed to show satisfactory progress in  the  course  of
     study for which he was last granted leave.  Mr  Morris'  criticism  of
     the Tribunal's reference to a transfer to a different course of  study
     in TY may well be justified, but it does not, in our view, affect  the
     integrity of the Tribunal's decision which was principally to  require
     the decision-maker to look at the course of study for which leave  was
     last granted. That there can be no approved transfer from that  course
     of study just means that the one for which leave was last granted will
     always be the relevant course of study to consider.

 16. Mr Morris also relied upon Lord Phillips' comments in  para  [30]  set
     out above that there may be good reasons - such  as  illness  or  poor
     teaching -  for giving up a course and that was perfectly possible and
     proper.  Thus, a more flexible approach than in TY is justified.  Lord
     Phillips' comments must, however, be seen  in  context.   As  we  have
     said, they  relate  to  the  legality  of  the  individual's  existing
     immigration status in the UK: that was the sole issue before the Court
     of Appeal.  The decision says nothing, in  our  view,  about  whether,
     having given up  a  course  for  those  (or  any  other)  reasons,  an
     individual should or would be able to satisfy the requirements for  an
     extension of leave in para 60 of the Immigration Rules.  The Court was
     simply not considering that issue and its views cannot directly assist
     Mr Morris in this case.  No doubt in  a  meritorious  case  where  the
     individual has for good reason failed to show "satisfactory  progress"
     in circumstances such as those contemplated by Lord Phillips in  Zhou,
     even if he could not  satisfy  the  requirement  in  para  60(v),  the
     Secretary of State could always grant leave outside the Rules.

 17. Subject to the point we make in para 15 above, nothing in Zhou  or  Mr
     Morris' submissions  leads  us  to  consider  that  the  reasoning  or
     approach in TY is wrong.  Neither Mr Morris nor Mr Saunders  was  able
     to suggest an alternative interpretation of the phrase "his course  of
     study" other than to say  that  a  more  'global'  approach  could  be
     adopted.  In truth, this takes us nowhere and, as Mr Morris  accepted,
     any approach may lead to perceived anomalies.  Certainly in this  case
     the 'global' approach would not assist Mr Morris.   Even  if  it  were
     right to look at the appellant's progress in the IATA-UFTAA Consultant
     Diploma and the BTEC HNC course, the plain truth of the matter is that
     the appellant would  still  not  succeed.   Following  SW  and  Others
     (Paragraph 60(v): meaning of "including") Jamaica [2006] UKAIT  00054,
     the appellant's failure in the Consultant Diploma would mean  she  has
     not shown "satisfactory progress".

 18. In reality  Mr  Morris'  'global'  approach  leads  to  an  impossible
     construction of the phrase "his course of study" -  clearly  expressed
     in the singular form - so as to include more than one such  course  of
     study.  It is simply not right as  a  matter  of  interpretation.   Mr
     Morris can only succeed by persuading us that the only course of study
     that should be considered is the appellant's current BTEC HNC  course.
      Any argument that pleads for consideration to  be  given  only  to  a
     subsequent course of study must,  in  fact,  be  driven  by  the  poor
     progress of the student on the course of study which was the basis for
     the leave.  That was so in TY and  it  is  so  in  this  appeal.   The
     difference between  the  cases  lies  in  the  improvement  that  this
     appellant can claim in her current course of study.  Mr Morris submits
     that TY does not allow for such 'meritorious applicants'.  In that, he
     is correct.  However, as we alluded to above, the appellant may have a
     good basis for persuading the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise  his
     discretion outside the Rules in such a case.  It  would  be  wrong  to
     consider the Immigration Rules to be a comprehensive and  hermetically
     sealed system for the grant of leave in student or other  cases:  they
     are not.

 19. In TY at para [29], the Tribunal gave cogent reasons for focussing  on
     the last course of study for which leave was granted.  We  agree  with
     those reasons.  TY was correctly decided.  Thus, the Immigration Judge
     correctly applied TY and did not materially err in law  in  dismissing
     the appellant's appeal.

Decision

 20. For these reasons, the decision to dismiss the appeal stands.












                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
                                    Date:
