
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           K and others (FGM) The Gambia CG [2013] UKUT 00062(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|on 20th - 22nd November 2012                  |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                      K
                                      J
                                   Miss K
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                  Appellant

                                     and

                                     AS
                                 Respondent


   1. FGM has been  practised  upon  about  three  quarters  of  the  female
      population of The Gambia historically.   The  most  recent  scientific
      evidence, based on data from 2005, showed no significant change in its
      incidence.  There are  ongoing  campaigns,  principally  by  GAMCOTRAP
      (Gambia Committee on Traditional Practices  Affecting  the  Health  of
      Women and Children), aiming to reduce and eventually to eliminate FGM.
      There has been some  increase  in  published  opinion  in  the  Gambia
      against FGM, and there have been local declarations  of  renunciation,
      but  there  has  been  no   scientific   evaluation   of   GAMCOTRAP's
      effectiveness in establishing a decline.


   2. Incidence of FGM varies by ethnic group. Within the four  main  ethnic
      groups there are subgroups, within which the incidence may vary -  see
      the table below. In no ethnic group is the practice universal; in some
      ethnic groups the practice is absent.  Ethnic  groups  are  thoroughly
      interspersed. The country is small and highly  interconnected.  (Where
      reference is made to ethnic group we  include  sub-groups  save  where
      specified)

   3. The evidence as at November 2012 falls  short  of  demonstrating  that
      intact females in The Gambia are, as such, at real risk  of  FGM.  The
      assessment of risk of FGM is  a  fact  sensitive  exercise,  which  is
      likely to involve ethnic group, (whether  parental  or  marital),  the
      attitudes of parents, husband  and  wider  family  and  socio-economic
      milieu.


   4. There are significant variables which affect the risk:


   (i)  the practice of the kin  group  of  birth:  the  ethnic  background,
   taking into account high levels of intermarriage and of polygamy;
   (ii)  the education of the individual said to be at risk;
   (iii)   her age;
   (iv)  whether she lived in an urban or rural area before  coming  to  the
   UK;
   (v)  the kin group into which she has married (if married); and
   (vi)   the practice of the kin group  into  which  she  has  married  (if
   married).


   Also relevant is the prevalence of FGM amongst the  extended  family,  as
   this may increase or reduce the relevant risk which may  arise  from  the
   prevalence of the  practice  amongst  members  of  the  ethnic  group  in
   general.


   5. In assessing the risk facing an individual, the starting point  is  to
      consider  the  statistical  information  currently  known  about   the
      prevalence of the  practice  within  the  ethnic  group  that  is  the
      relevant ethnic group in the individual's case, as follows:


        a.  If the individual is unmarried  and  given  that  ethnicity  is
           usually taken from the father in The Gambia, the relevant ethnic
           group is likely to be the ethnic group of the father.
        b. If the individual is married to a man from an ethnic group  that
           is different from her father's ethnic group, then  the  relevant
           ethnic is the ethnic group of the husband.

   The statistics from which the prevalence of the practice  of  FGM  within
   the ethnic groups in the Gambia is drawn,  vary  considerably  given  the
   lack of detailed research and analysis undertaken in The Gambia. From the
   material before the Upper Tribunal, those statistics indicate as follows:








   |Ethnic group                         |Prevalence of FGM/C                  |
|Mandinka                             |May be as high as 80-100%            |
|Fula (Overall)                       |30%, although some estimates are as  |
|                                     |high as 84%                          |
|Hobobehs (sub group of Fula)         |0%                                   |
|Jama (sub group of Fula)             |0%                                   |
|Toranks, Peuls, Futas, Tukuleurs,    |Practise but % unknown               |
|Jawarinkas, Lorbehs, Ngalunkas and   |                                     |
|Daliankos (sub groups of Fula)       |                                     |
|Sarehule                             |May be as high as 100%               |
|Serer (overall)                      |May be as high as 64%                |
|Njefenjefe (within the Serer ethnic  |0%                                   |
|grouping)                            |                                     |
|Niumikas (within the Serer ethnic    |Practise but % unknown               |
|grouping)                            |                                     |
|Jola & Karonikas                     |90 to 100%                           |
|Jola Foni                            |Practise but % not known             |
|Jola Casa                            |0%                                   |
|Wolof (overall)                      |May be as high as 20%                |
|Wolof - those who migrated from      |0%                                   |
|Senegal Oriental                     |                                     |
|Wolof - those who migrated from Sine |Practise but % not known             |
|Saloum                               |                                     |
|Others                               |Variable                             |


   6. The next step is to consider the various other  factors  mentioned  in
      paragraph 4 above as some may increase the  risk,  whilst  others  may
      reduce the risk.  Whist each case will  turn  on  it  own  facts,  the
      following are of general application:

        a. In the case of an unmarried woman, parental  opposition  reduces
           the risk. In the case of a married woman,  opposition  from  the
           husband reduces the risk. If the husband has no  other  "wives",
           the risk may be reduced further. However, it should be borne  in
           mind that parental/spousal opposition  may  be  insufficient  to
           prevent the girl or woman from being subjected to FGM where  the
           extended family is one that practises  it,  although  this  will
           always be a question of fact.
        b. If the prevalence of the practice amongst the extended family is
           greater than the prevalence of the practice in the ethnic  group
           in question, this will increase the  risk.  Conversely,  if  the
           prevalence of the practice amongst the extended family  is  less
           than the prevalence of the  practice  in  the  ethnic  group  in
           question, this will reduce the risk.
        c.  If the woman is educated (whether she is  single  or  married),
           the risk will reduce.
        d. If the individual lived in an urban area prior to coming to  the
           United Kingdom, this will reduce the risk.  Conversely,  if  the
           individual lived in a rural area prior to coming to  the  United
           Kingdom, this will increase the risk.
        e. The age of a woman does not affect the risk measurably; it is an
           issue upon marriage. Amongst the Fula, FGM has been carried  out
           on babies as young as one week old.  The average  age  at  which
           FGM is carried out appears to be reducing and this may be due to
           concerns about the international pressure to stop the  practice.
           Although there are statistics about the average age at which FGM
           is carried out on girls and women for particular ethnic  groups,
           the evidence does not show that,in general, being above or below
           the relevant average age has a material effect on risk. It would
           therefore be unhelpful in most cases to focus on the age of  the
           girl or woman and the average age at which FGM  is  carried  out
           for the ethnic group of her father (if unmarried) or that of her
           husband (if married).

   7. Thus, it is possible to arrive at a conclusion that the risk faced  by
      an individual is less than, or more than, the rate of incidence of FGM
      in the ethnic group of the individual's father (if unmarried)  or  her
      husband (if married).  The rate of incidence of FGM in an ethnic group
      must therefore be distinguished  from  the  degree  of  likelihood  of
      infliction on an individual against her will or against  the  will  of
      her  parents.   Some  individuals  from  ethnic  groups  with  a  high
      incidence may not be at  risk,  while  some  individuals  from  ethnic
      groups with a low incidence may be at risk.

   8. State protection: FGM is not specifically criminalised in  The  Gambia
      although it may be covered by the existing criminal law on assault  or
      in The Gambia's Children's Act 2005. However, there are no known cases
      of prosecutions under the general criminal law or under the 2005  Act.
      There is no reliable evidence to suggest that a female who may  be  at
      real risk of FGM can avail herself of effective  State  protection  or
      that her father or husband could invoke such protection on her behalf.

   9. Internal flight: As a general matter, an individual at  real  risk  of
      FGM in her home area is unlikely  to  be  able  to  avail  herself  of
      internal relocation, although this  is  always  a  question  of  fact.
      Cogent reasons need to be given for  a  finding  that  the  individual
      would be able to relocate safely, especially given the  evidence  that
      ethnic groups are thoroughly interspersed, the country  is  small  and
      ethnic  groups  in  different  parts  of  the   country   are   highly
      interconnected.




Representation:

For K, J and Miss K:                Ms S Harrison, of Halliday Reeves,
                  Solicitors
For AS:                                 Ms E Njenga, of Corbans,
                  Solicitors.
For the Secretary of State:  Mr Parkinson, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





      Introduction

   1. This is the determination of the Tribunal, to which  both  members  of
      the panel have contributed.

   2. K, J and Miss K are husband, wife and child, citizens of  The  Gambia,
      born  on  30th  April  1979,  29th  July  1981  and  8th  March   2009
      respectively.  The first Claimant came to the UK as a student in  July
      2005.  His wife joined him in June 2007. On 2nd  November  2009,  some
      time after K's application for further leave to remain  as  a  student
      was rejected, he, his wife and his daughter applied for  asylum.  That
      application was refused and a decision to remove  in  accordance  with
      section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 served. Their appeal
      against that decision came before Judge Fisher on 20th  January  2010;
      he dismissed the appeal.  They  sought  reconsideration  which,  under
      transitional provisions came to  be  treated  as  an  application  for
      permission to appeal.  That was granted by  Senior  Immigration  Judge
      Goldstein on 17th February 2010. This family are  appellants  in  this
      appeal; for ease of reference we refer to them as claimants.

   3. AS is a citizen of The Gambia aged 20. She first came to the UK  as  a
      visitor in December 2009.   She  overstayed  and  subsequently  sought
      asylum. AS's application for asylum was refused on 10 June 2011 and  a
      decision to remove her from the UK  by  way  of  directions  made  and
      served. She appealed and on 19 August 2011  her  appeal  against  that
      decision was allowed by Judge Herbert.  The  Secretary  of  State  was
      successful in obtaining permission to appeal. That grant of permission
      was specifically restricted to "limited grounds", namely "that  it  is
      properly arguable that the judge may have erred  in  relation  to  the
      question of internal relocation and in respect of his finding at  para
      44, where he appears to speculate".  In  response  to  this  grant  on
      limited grounds, the Secretary of State did not apply for the grant to
      be varied. AS is the  respondent  in  this  appeal  but  for  ease  of
      reference we shall refer to her as a claimant.


   Error of law re K and family

   4. Following a hearing on 7 September 2010, Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
      held  that  the  AIT  decision  erred  in  law,  by  failing  to  make
      unambiguous findings on whether Miss K is reasonably  likely  (if  not
      immediately, then in the foreseeable future) to suffer the  infliction
      of FGM against the will of her parents.  The case  turned  on  whether
      the background evidence discloses a real  risk  of  that  nature.  The
      judge's findings of fact (including  credibility)  were  the  starting
      point in re-deciding the appeals.

   Error of law re AS

   5. On 6th January 2012 Upper Tribunal Judge Storey heard submissions with
      regard to whether there was an error of law in  the  determination  of
      the First-tier Tribunal. He found that the First-tier Tribunal judge's
      findings on  internal  relocation  were  not  legally  sound,  firstly
      because in assessing the  viability  of  internal  relocation  it  was
      incumbent  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to  explain  why   he
      considered the claimant's educational background would not  place  her
      in an advantageous position in relation to the  employment  sector  in
      potential places of relocation such as Banjul, which,  on  the  First-
      tier Tribunal judge's own findings, had a  vibrant  tourist  industry.
      Secondly, so far as the First-tier Tribunal judge's finding at para 42
      that the practice of female genital mutilation ("FGM") is  "widespread
      and pervasive in  the  Gambia",  that  was  a  finding  insufficiently
      supported by the background material before  him  which,  inter  alia,
      noted significantly different rates of incidence of FGM in  rural  and
      urban areas  and  also  between  different  tribal  groups.   Thirdly,
      insofar as the First-tier Tribunal  judge  appeared  to  rely  on  the
      evidence  relating  to  the  practice  of  FGM  by  the  Mandinka  (or
      Mandingo), he noted at para 37 that this  ethnic  group  "are  by  and
      large traditional, whatever their status or education within society";
      it was not clear that he took  into  account  his  acceptance  of  her
      evidence that she had a non-Mandinka mother.


   Country Guidance

   6. The appeals of K, J and Miss K were  identified  as  possible  country
      guidance on those identified as being at risk of FGM  in  The  Gambia,
      including the prospect of internal relocation,  and  bearing  in  mind
      that the procedure potentially to be inflicted is upon the 3 year  old
      child, not the mother,  such  risk  amounting  to  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason.


   7. The case of AS was identified as possible country guidance on internal
      relocation, and in particular on whether in The Gambia a woman from an
      educated family can relocate without a real risk of being tracked down
      by non-state actors from her home  area  (family  members,  or  others
      acting at their behest), such risk  amounting  to  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason.


   Hearing

   8. Mr Parkinson stated that he would seek to further cross-examine K  and
      AS's uncle in relation to their situation and, in respect of  AS,  her
      education.


   9. The determinations under appeal made findings  on  the  education  and
      personal situation of the claimants.  The Secretary of State had  made
      no previous challenge to those.   The claimants did not seek  to  lead
      further evidence-in-chief other than from expert witnesses.  We  found
      that the case did not give scope for further oral evidence, other than
      from the experts.

  10. An application was made on behalf of K, J and Miss K for an  anonymity
      order.  An anonymity order had already been made in the  case  of  AS.
      The Secretary of State did not oppose  the  application.   We  decided
      that anonymity should apply to all four claimants.

  11. Mr Parkinson confirmed that the Secretary of State had not objected to
      either expert, or to the instructions given to the  experts,  and  had
      not submitted any  questions  to  the  experts,  as  provided  for  in
      directions made on 11th April 2011.

  12.  Mr Parkinson submitted two bundles of additional  documents  and  his
      skeleton argument. He had already  filed  one  very  large  bundle  of
      documents but of that bundle he relied in submissions  only  upon  one
      item:  Female  Genital  Mutilation  in  the  Gambia,  a  Desk  Review,
      published in 2002 by the National Women's Bureau, Office of  the  Vice
      President,  The  Gambia.  Neither  expert   was   asked   to   comment
      specifically upon that document, either in advance or at the hearing.

  13. The parties agreed that FGM, in any of forms 1-4 (see  paragraph  23),
      is persecution for a Convention reason not only of a  girl  child  but
      also of the parents of a minor child where they  are  opposed  to  the
      procedure and where there is a real risk of its infliction,  and  that
      FGM is prevalent in the Gambia.  The parties also agreed that the live
      issues were -


              i. the significance of ethnic background and ethnic mixing  in
                 the prevalence of FGM;


             ii. the ability of parents to protect a minor girl child  until
                 the age of 18;


            iii. whether the risk ceases at age 18; and


             iv. the  feasibility  of  internal  relocation,  which  was  in
                 reality the question whether there is risk  throughout  the
                 country; it was unlikely that anything turned on whether it
                 would be unduly harsh to relocate.


  14. We heard oral evidence from Professor Barnett and Professor Chant.  We
      have attached a schedule of the documentary evidence before us - Annex
      B.

   Retained Findings of Fact


  15. K is a member of the Mandinka tribe.  The Mandinka make  up  something
      in the region of 42% of Gambia's population. Prior to coming to the UK
      he had worked in the capital for some 11 years. His purpose  on  first
      coming to the UK was to study business management.

  16. Mrs J is Fula, who constitute about 18% of  the  country's  population
      (all estimates vary). J underwent FGM aged about 5.

  17. The child claimant, Miss K, has two loving parents who are opposed  to
      the FGM procedure. Judge Fisher  found  that  she  was  likely  to  be
      subjected to FGM at some undetermined time in the future.

  18. The father of AS is from the Mandinka ethnic group and her mother from
      the Wolof ethnic group.  Her father is a  part-time  lecturer  at  the
      University of Gambia.  Her  mother  conducts  a  small-scale  business
      selling food.  When she was 12 years old her father's  family  members
      went to her parents and informed them that she was required to undergo
      FGM.  On 25 December 2009 AS travelled to the UK to  visit  an  uncle.
      Whilst here she received a phone call to inform her that her status as
      an uncircumcised woman was becoming a big problem  within  the  family
      and that her father had given his word that she would  be  subject  to
      FGM on her return from the UK.   Her  mother  confirmed  this.   Judge
      Herbert accepted the claimant's evidence as  credible,  and  that  she
      would be at real risk of being subjected to FGM on her return  to  her
      home area in Gambia, Dippakunde, which is part of Greater Banjul.

   Background material

   GAMCOTRAP


  19. GAMCOTRAP (Gambia Committee on  Traditional  Practices  Affecting  the
      Health of Women and Children) has this mission statement - "To  create
      awareness about traditional practices in the Gambia. We  aim  for  the
      preservation of beneficial practices as well as  the  girl  children's
      political,  social,  sexual,  reproductive  health   and   educational
      rights".  It was formed in 1984, and was the  first  NGO  to  mount  a
      sensitisation and information campaign aimed  at  eradicating  harmful
      traditional practices. Their project Operations Rescue begun  in  1997
      was funded by UNICEF  and  is  part  of  a  long  term  education  and
      communication strategy to eradicate FGM. That project  is  located  in
      Central and Upper River Regions where the practice is most  prevalent.
      In 1998, following a symposium organised by  GAMCOTRAP  for  religious
      leaders and medical personnel,  the  Banjul  declaration  was  signed.
      This stated that the practice of FGM has neither Christian nor Islamic
      origins nor religious  justifications,  and  condemned  its  continued
      practice. Since 2007  there  have  been  three  'Dropping  the  Knife"
      ceremonies (in 2008 in Upper River Region, 2009  Upper  River  Region,
      2011 Lower River Region) following educative and  training  activities
      carried out by GAMCOTRAP.


  20. The 2011 annual report, the Report of the Dropping of the  Knife  2011
      and the GAMCOTRAP profile of circumcisers from the Lower River  Region
      set out the educational programmes undertaken  culminating  in  public
      ceremonies where circumcisers pledge to cease their  activities  along
      with awareness raising campaigns amongst religious  leaders,  security
      officers, women leaders, youth, circumcisers,  wards  councillors  and
      community leaders. There are a  number  of  testimonies  reported  (in
      translation) of the effect that education and  training  have  had  on
      their  perception  of  FGM  and  their  future  activities.  We   were
      particularly referred to the work done with and  statements  given  by
      district chiefs, community leaders and security officers together with
      the capacity building undertaken to provide  alternative  livelihoods.
      Reference was made to specific testimonies supportive of changed views
      and attitudes to FGM with pledges not to have  daughters  circumcised,
      and by circumcisers to  cease  their  activities.  The  Annual  report
      refers to monitoring and  evaluation  at  national  and  international
      level in the following terms:


         "Monitoring  of  activities  is  at  different  levels.   GAMCOTRAP
         conducts  its  own  monitoring  of  communities  supported  by  its
         community based facilitators.
         The monitoring visits reiterated the importance of reaching out  to
         the individual communities to  gauge  their  understanding  of  the
         issue discussed during the  training  activities.  It  has  created
         opportunity for GAMCOTRAP to know what the issues are and the  need
         to reach out to many more people and help the communities to  reach
         consensus. The monitoring boosts the morale of those who have  been
         trained and shared information  with  their  communities.  It  also
         emphasised the importance of the campaign to  the  communities  and
         seriousness in which it is given. It gave  opportunity  to  capture
         the views of both the trained and those who have not  been  trained
         and thus gives a fair indication of the situation on the ground."


  21.  The annual report goes on to set out the  various  monitoring  visits
      that took place with the various organisations involved in the funding
      of the project. There is no annual report for the years  covering  the
      previous Dropping of the Knife ceremonies or the nature or  extent  of
      evaluation conducted before us. The Report  of  the  Dropping  of  the
      Knife 2011 describes  the  training  activities  undertaken  including
      Alternative Employment Opportunities and health effects.  This  report
      refers to the two declarations in 2007 and 2009 and  to  "gradual  but
      steady success", and says that -


             ".... through  effective  and  efficient  social  mobilisation
             processes and a committed leadership, these  communities  have
             been consistently engaged in dialogue and  consensus  building
             through  our  sensitization  and  training  programmes   .....
             success is associated  with  the  fact  that  communities  can
             understand what is contained in the very instruments signed on
             their behalf, the realities associated with HTPs/FGM  [harmful
             traditional practices/Female  Genital  Mutilation]  and  their
             health and making an informed choice based on clear  knowledge
             of the harmful practices."


   The Gambia Multiple  Indicator  Cluster  Survey  2005/2006  Report  (MICS
Report)


  22. This survey was conducted as part of a  third  round  of  MIC  surveys
      carried out around the world following the  declaration  and  Plan  of
      Action adopted at the World Summit for Children held in  New  York  in
      1990 which established a set of goals for the  decade  1990  to  2000.
      Survey tools utilised were based on the models and standards developed
      by the Global MICS project (produced by UNICEF in  collaboration  with
      other UN agencies  such  as  WHO,  UNFPA  and  the  US  Public  Health
      Services). The report sets  out  details  of  the  sample  and  survey
      methodology, sample coverage and the characteristics of households and
      covers nutrition, child health, the environment, reproductive  health,
      child development,  child  protection  HIV/AIDS.   Appendices  include
      estimates of sampling errors and data quality tables. In  its  summary
      it  states  that  there  is  71.1%   approval   for   female   genital
      mutilation/cutting ("FGM/C"); 78.3% prevalence and  72.9%  would  like
      their daughters to undergo FGM/C. Table CP.7  (attached  as  Annex  A)
      provides a detailed breakdown by  local  government  area,  residence,
      age, education, experience of FGM/C, wealth  index  and  ethnic  group
      head of household. The breakdown provides percentage distribution  for
      women who believe the practice should continue,  be  discontinued  and
      would like their daughter  circumcised.  The  figures  for  those  who
      responded that it depended upon the situation, or who  did  not  know,
      were very small.




   Female Genital Mutilation In The Gambia: A Desk Review


  23. This report (first published in 2002) was  initiated  by  the  Women's
      Bureau in the Office of the Vice President and the Secretary of  State
      for Women's Affairs to analyse the  existing  literature  on  FGM  and
      future strategies and  recommendations  for  action.  It  provides  an
      overview of the  breakdown  of  society  by  ethnic  group  and  draws
      attention to the bonding of ethnic groups by virtue of religion and to
      extended  family  linkages  through  cross  marriage.  It   says   the
      "individual in society is an  integral  part  of  the  community  with
      his/her identity depending  on  his/her  role,  status  and  relations
      within society. Traditional or historical determinants of  status  are
      age, kinship and, in some cases, caste."


  24. The summary of the report states that FGM is "seen both officially and
      by the public as a cultural  issue,  and  thus  a  problem,  which  is
      difficult to deal with, as it is deep-rooted and therefore politically
      sensitive." It refers to the lack of nationwide statistics  on  public
      attitudes to FGM and refers to limited sample size surveys carried out
      by some NGOs which indicate (in one survey) 69%  of  respondents  want
      FGM maintained, while (in another nationwide  survey)  only  15.4%  of
      males and 11.2% of females aged 14-24  were  in  favour  of  FGM.  The
      report sets out the perceived prevalence of FGM in The Gambia  from  a
      community based survey on the "long term reproductive consequences  of
      FGM in  rural  Gambia"  and  to  what  it  describes  as  "other  less
      representative surveys". Thus in the first survey "98%  of  Mandinkas,
      32% of Fulas and 4% of Wollofs had signs of genital  cutting"  whereas
      in the latter surveys practice was estimated "among the Sarahules  and
      Mandinkas at 100%, relatively diminishing among the Jola (96%),  Fulas
      (84%), Sere(64%) and Wollofs (20%). Practice among  the  minor  ethnic
      groups (Aku Marabout, Tilibonka ad  Karonika)  is  also  estimated  at
      100%."


  25. The report considers emerging trends and refers to a GAMCOTRAP  report
      (1999) which observes that some circumcisers who have participated  in
      sensitisation workshops have continued in practice but  have  modified
      their practice "cutting the tip of the clitoris instead  of  the  more
      customary deep cutting to remove the clitoris and part  of  the  labia
      minora".   There is  reference  to  the  younger  age  at  which   the
      procedure is carried  out  possibly  indicating  a  trend  in  part  a
      reaction against campaigns and in part because young girls are seen as
      less capable  of  fighting  back.  There  were  indications  of  fewer
      celebratory rituals, that for those circumcised against their will and
      those of their parents there was no celebration,  and  no  celebration
      follows if the girls are considered 'too old'. There is also reference
      to instances where circumcisers  agreed  to  stop  the  procedure  but
      continued to perform it in secret.

  26. The Desk Review provides some useful information  about  the  societal
      reasons for the practice of FGM  (for example see (vi) below) as  well
      as factors that impact on the prevalence including:


            i.              Age:

                  "...the  studies  that   communities   practice   FGM   as
                  "religious  obligation"  perform  it  during  infancy.  In
                  contrast, when the practice is explicitly referred  to  as
                  an "initiation  rite"  for  entrance  into  womanhood  and
                  preparation for marriage, it is performed later...This  is
                  however dependant  on  whether  the  community  abides  by
                  community arrangements....The studies also  indicate  that
                  Circumcisers will operate on  all  girls  in  a  community
                  during the prescribed period in order to clear  a  backlog
                  of candidates for the operation  if  the  last  initiation
                  rite, for example, took place seven  years  ago.  In  such
                  cases, every child in the community between ages 0-7 years
                  may be subjected to the operation, even if the  baby  were
                  born on the very day the  operation  is  planned  to  take
                  place....  There  are   some   instances,   though,   when
                  adolescents are taken. This is mainly applicable to  girls
                  who are living away from home and on return are  subjected
                  to the practice, the late age notwithstanding."


  ii. Ethnic and Regional Affiliation:


                  "Ethnic origin is an important factor in  the  maintenance
                  of the practice.....some Wollofs who practise FGM migrated
                  to The Gambia from Senegal Oriental while those from  Sine
                  Saloum, also in Senegal do not practice  FGM  even  though
                  they are Muslims....not all categories  of  Fula  practise
                  FGM even though studies have shown that the  ethnic  group
                  generally has about the second highest rate of practice of
                  FGM in  the  country.........[Hobobehs  and  Jama  do  not
                  practice FGM].... All  other  subgroups  within  the  Fula
                  category (Toranks, Peuls,  Futas,  Tukuleurs,  Jawarinkas,
                  Lorobehs, Ngalunkas and Daliankos) practise FGM.
                  Within the Serer ethnic groupings, the Njefenjefe  do  not
                  practice FGM although the Niumikas from  the  same  ethnic
                  group  do.  ....the  Jola  Foni  practise  FGM  the   Jola
                  Casa...do not..."


 iii. Rural and Urban settings:


                  "[there are indications] that the practice of FGM is  more
                  prevalent in the rural areas than in urban settings to the
                  extent that in some rural communities....the entire female
                  population has undergone the  practice  or  are  potential
                  candidates."


  iv. Religion:


                  "The predominantly Muslim population...perceive FGM  as  a
                  "religious obligation" in Islam. However  not  all  Muslim
                  groups in the country practice FGM."


   v. Education:


                  "....educational background does not  have  a  significant
                  bearing on whether people practice FGM or not..."


  vi. Chastity and avoiding shame, rite of passage, marriageability,  social
      standing:


                  "FGM is believed to  be  associated  with  positive  moral
                  values...a means of protecting them against bringing shame
                  upon  the  family   by   avoiding   pre-marital   sex   or
                  abstaining."


                  ""...in some Gambian communities  [FGM]  is  considered  a
                  "rite of passage  to  adult  womanhood  and  represents  a
                  medium for the transmission of long held values, attitudes
                  and norms of behaviour to the effective performance of the
                  role of mother, wife, home manager"... with the  reduction
                  in the age at which the operation is carried out nowadays,
                  some studies  have  concluded  that  FGM  as  a  'rite  of
                  passage' is becoming less important"


                  "From anecdotal accounts it is only after  undergoing  FGM
                  that a girl is rendered marriageable...in the  communities
                  that practice it FGM and virginity are strong requirements
                  for marriage."


                  "[FGM] has become a class phenomenon  ....Those  who  have
                  [undergone FGM] tend to regard themselves as  superior  in
                  all respects to those who have not and there  are  "strict
                  codes of conduct about whom they should mix with....""


 vii. Identity Gender and sexuality:


                  "...FGM is a woman's affair as women  make  the  decisions
                  themselves with little or  no  male  involvement.....  The
                  concern that men's energies  would  be  used  up  if  they
                  married  uncircumcised  women  is   particularly   so   in
                  polygamous relationships. And although women  do  not  see
                  FGM as a means by which men control women's sexuality,  to
                  Gambian men it is an important consideration."


viii. Economic factors:


                  "...economic reasons prevail in different  facets  of  the
                  practice...the conclusions reached in a  number  of  these
                  studies differ...for most Circumcisers,  FGM  is  not  the
                  main source of livelihood although the financial  benefits
                  that accrue from it tempt them to continue the practice."


  27. The report refers to programmes to "compensate the cutters"  initiated
      by almost all the local organisations, but they have not all succeeded
      in reducing the prevalence. A  feasibility  study  of  an  Alternative
      Employment Opportunities programme in 2001 conducted by GAMCOTRAP in 3
      divisions found that the 12 circumcisers identified  were  willing  to
      give up the practice if assisted with an alternative source of income.
      The report also states that "in general paying people to change  their
      attitude does not work".


  28. The report refers  to  a  pro-FGM  lobby  including  Muslim  religious
      leaders who are respected within  their  communities  and  within  the
      Muslim community generally and who hold influential positions  in  the
      country and have access to the media, using religious and  traditional
      arguments to influence people. The report states -

             "As these are a primary source of information for most people,
             the pro FGM lobby has a wide edge over the anti FGM  advocates
             and is therefore a force to be reckoned with."

  29. Amongst its conclusions the report states that there  is  a  need  for
      "Government  to  clearly  define  an  official  position  on   harmful
      traditional practices including FGM". The report states that  "current
      efforts by government  and  non-governmental  organisations  have  had
      little or no significant impact on the magnitude of  the  practice  of
      FGM in the country".

  30. On page 4, Box 2, the Review states:

             "*   Despite being a party to international rights instruments
                  calling on State Parties to eliminate harmful  traditional
                  practices, including FGM, The Gambian Government  has  not
                  yet  defined  and  declared  a  national  policy  on   the
                  practice.
             *     Official  attitudes  continue  to   be   ambiguous   and
             ambivalent.
             *    There is need to  present  key  policy  makers  with  the
                  results of incountry research and documentation studies in
                  order to convince and persuade them about the necessity of
                  adopting and  declaring  an  official  policy  on  harmful
                  traditional practices, including FGM."

   Country of Information Report - The Gambia October 2011

  31. The COI report refers to FGM in two sections. [21.18] states:

             "..... - Domestic violence, female  genital  mutilation  (FGM)
             and forced marriages also happen and seem to  be  one  of  the
             commonest human rights abuses against  women  in  The  Gambia.
             Beyond the said constitutional provisions and sections 24  and
             25 of the Children's Act  that  prohibit  child  marriage  and
             betrothal, there is no legislation specifically  criminalising
             domestic violence, FGM and forced marriage."


  32. [22.14] states:



       A further extract from the Childs Rights Information Network  (CRIN),
       United Nations compilation of National Reports submitted for Gambia's
       Universal Periodic Review, dated 10 February 2010, stated:

       "UNICEF [United Nations  Children's  Fund]  noted  that  social  and
       cultural norms hindered the execution of the 2005 Children's Act, as
       harmful  practices  such  as  corporal  punishment,  female  genital
       mutilation/cutting, early or  forced  marriage,  domestic  violence,
       were still widely  practiced.  CRC  recommended  taking  legislative
       measures to prohibit all forms  of  physical  and  mental  violence,
       including  corporal  punishment  as  a  penal  sanction  within  the
       juvenile justice system, in schools and care institutions,  as  well
       as in families. It also recommended undertaking studies on  domestic
       violence, ill-treatment and abuse, including sexual abuse within the
       family."


  33.  [22.20] of the COI report goes on to say:
             "The USSD Human Rights Report 2010 stated "The  law  does  not
             prohibit female genital  mutilation  (FGM)  and  the  practice
             remained widespread""

   The Gambia Operational Guidance Note ("OGN") v4.0 29 August 2007

  34. The OGN provides guidance on the handling of claims. [3.6.2] states:
             "3.6.2     ....The  law  does  not  prohibit  Female   Genital
             Mutilation (FGM). In 2006, the Government  publicly  supported
             efforts to eradicate FGM and  discouraged  it  through  health
             education;  however  the  practice  remained  widespread   and
             entrenched...."
              3.6.10  .... in June 2004  the  National  Assembly  passed  a
             Children's bill aimed at curbing  violence  against  children,
             that outlaws social and cultural  practices  that  affect  the
             welfare, dignity, normal growth and development of  the  child
             and in  particular,  those  customs  and  practices  that  are
             prejudicial to the health and life of the child ....
             3.6.11   ....Although the authorities do not condone  FGM  and
             publicly support efforts to eradicate it  through  health  and
             education  programmes,  the  practice  remains  legal  and  is
             widespread throughout The Gambia. It is generally considered a
             cultural issue in which the authorities do not  interfere  and
             therefore individuals may not be able to access sufficiency of
             protection.
             3.6.13    ...Although  the  National   Assembly   passed   the
             Children's Bill in 2004, aimed  at  curbing  violence  against
             children, which specifically  outlaws  the  type  of  violence
             against children that is characteristic of FGM,  the  practice
             of FGM is not illegal....the Government's official  stance  is
             that FGM is a cultural issue that the Government cannot forbid
             or interfere  with  and  therefore  any  protection  that  the
             authorities are able or willing  to  offer  will  be  limited.
             However the Gambian authorities publicly supports  efforts  to
             eradicate FGM and discourages it through health and  education
             programmes....."


    The Children's Act of  2005

  35. We were not provided with an actual  extract  of  the  Children's  Act
      (effective since 2 August 2005) but it was agreed between the  parties
      that there was provision in the Act to "prohibit social  and  cultural
      practices  that  affect  the  welfare,  dignity,  normal  growth   and
      development, and life and health of a child or are  discriminatory  to
      the child on the grounds of sex". A summary of the main provisions  is
      set out in a document produced by the Child Protection Alliance  which
      is funded by save the Children Sweden.


   The Expert Evidence

  36. Five expert reports were obtained in advance of the hearing  of  K,  J
      and Miss K.  No expert reports were produced on  behalf  of  AS.   Two
      medical reports have been submitted on behalf of J.

   Professor Tony Barnett

  37. We received reports from Professor Tony Barnett, dated  25  June  2011
      and updated on 16 January 2012.   Our  references  are  to  the  later
      report.

  38. Professor Barnett is Professorial Research Fellow  in  Health  in  the
      Department of Social Policy at the  London  School  of  Economics  and
      Political Science and Honorary Professor in  the  Social  Sciences  of
      Infectious Diseases in the Department of Global Health and Development
      at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.  He has not, so
      far as he is aware, met K, J or the child, Miss K.

  39. In his report he sets out the background to The Gambia in general  and
      in relation to FGM in that country and the wider region.  He describes
      the World Health Organisation's classification of FGM into four  broad
      categories namely -

              i. type 1 involving nicking of, or partial or total removal of
                 the clitoris;


             ii. type 2 involving partial or total removal of  the  clitoris
                 together with  partial  or  total  excision  of  the  labia
                 minora;


            iii. type  3  is  partial  or  total  removal  of  the  external
                 genitalia  and  stitching  or  narrowing  of  the   vaginal
                 opening;


             iv. type 4 is relatively rare and  refers  to  other  forms  of
                 traditional  genital  mutilation  such   as   pricking   or
                 stretching the clitoris and/or surrounding tissues.


  40. He did not include pictorial illustrations in his report but  provided
      a link through to a WHO publication,  "Female  Genital  Mutilation:  a
      Handbook for Frontline Workers Geneva World Health  Organisation  2000
      (WHO/FCH/WMH/00.5 Rev.1)".

  41. The report includes a table which showed an overview of FGM in  Africa
      from the Demographic and Health surveys.  He describes the  source  of
      this as coming from one of the most rigorous  sources  available,  but
      notes that The Gambia does not appear in that table.  He comments that
      the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) are prepared by an -


             "excellent research  organisation  called  ICF  Macro...  [an]
             organisation  that  is  very  rigorous  in  its  methods   and
             particularly careful to evaluate  the  data  they  publish  in
             relation to how it has been collected and  how  carefully  the
             data  collection  methods  have  been  evaluated   for   their
             scientific rigour."


  42. He states that the quality and availability of data on The  Gambia  is
      of some general importance because  it  is  frequently  compiled  from
      "secondary and even tertiary sources".  Data should in some  cases  be
      treated with some caution and there were few dependable  data  studies
      on the prevalence of FGM in The Gambia. As an example he refers to  an
      extract from the Secretary of State's COI report on the Gambia dated 9
      June 2011 which he describes as a "factoid" - "a piece of  information
      frequently repeated and accepted as true when in reality it is  merely
      an unsubstantiated assertion the source  for  which  it  may  be  very
      difficult to trace." The  reference  he  makes  is  to  the  estimated
      prevalence of FGM in girls and women aged 15 to 29  as  78.3%  in  the
      2005/6 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS), a matter referred  to
      in his report and in the MICS  report.  His  reference  to  "factoids"
      appears to refer to the limited reliably sourced data, such  that  one
      must be wary of  placing  too  much  weight  on  information  that  is
      repeated without proper sourcing.

  43. The publication by the WHO "Female genital mutilation: integrating the
      prevention and the management of the  health  complications  into  the
      curricula of nursing and midwifery; a student's manual 2001" refers to
      "fingernails have been used to pluck out the  clitoris  of  babies  in
      some  areas  in  The  Gambia".   Professor  Barnett  states  that  the
      significance of that is firstly that it is from the WHO,  secondly  it
      concerns The Gambia, and thirdly it indicates that  the  operation  is
      performed on very young children including babies.

  44.  Professor Barnett refers also to an unpublished PhD thesis  by  Heidi
      Skramstad "Making and managing femaleness,  fertility  and  motherhood
      within a Gambian urban area"  2008.   Dr  Skramstad  carried  out  her
      research over a period  of  around  twenty  years.   She  speaks  both
      Mandinka and Wolof and is married to a member of a very large extended
      family in the urban part of western  Gambia  within  a  few  miles  of
      Dippakunda.   He  considers  this  to  be  one  of  very  few   theses
      considering FGM in The Gambia and of particular importance because  of
      the author's knowledge and experience. She  states  (page  59  of  her
      thesis) -

             "All Gambian boys and almost all Mandinka girls as well as the
             majority of Foula, Jola and Serahule,  undergo  an  initiation
             that includes genital  cutting  (see  table  in  Appendix  4).
             Mandinka girls are usually initiated between the age of 4  and
             10 but some girls are genitally cut while they  are  babies...
             in the rituals I observed the youngest was 1 and  the  eldest
             was 10 years old".



  45. She also says -


             "...the estimated prevalence of FGM in girls and women  of  15
             to 49 years was 78.3% in 2005-2006.  FGM is  widely  practised
             all over the country and all FGM  types  are  carried  out  at
             infancy, childhood or at adolescence."

  46. Professor Barnett considers issues of relocation, ethnic identity  and
      the differential risk of exposure to FGM in The Gambia.


  47. Professor Barnett  provides  considerable  information  on  issues  of
      ethnic identity, which cannot -


             "be assumed to be internally homogenous with clear  boundaries
             and perhaps consistent customs, structures and  practices...".




      The Mandinka as encountered in The Gambia are -


             "in fact the remnant  of  a  very  large  Islamic  patrimonial
             empire which spanned  a  very  large  area  of  this  part  of
             Sahelian and sub-Sahelian Africa."


       The Fula are-


             "part of a very  extensively  originally  nomadic  confederacy
             which cross-cuts the remnant Mandinka  empire  east  to  west,
             reflecting the ancient migration."


      In The Gambia today what is seen are -


             "nationalities  and  national  boundaries  which   have   been
             superimposed upon a complex sub-structure of these  two  forms
             of ethnicity  along  with  many  others  living  in  the  same
             geographical region".


      The region is -


             "multi-ethnic and so is the  Gambia.   While  people  may  see
             themselves as a Serahule, Jola, Wolof, Foula or Mandinka at  a
             genetic and cultural level, they are  very  mixed  and  inter-
             marriage is and has been common.  The  domestic  and  personal
             practices  adopted  by  people  entering  into  these  'mixed'
             marriages reflect a mixture of  what  is  demanded  by  public
             acknowledgment of the patriarchal principle moderated  by  the
             particular  conjugal  bargain  which  is  struck  within  each
             marriage."

       He further states that -


             "notions of 'pure', 'tribes', of consistent  ethnicity  should
             be questioned  in  relation  to  this  entire  region  and  in
             relation to the Gambia specifically."


      Professor Barnett confirmed in his oral evidence what he says  in  his
      report: individuals generally  trace  their  ethnicity  through  their
      paternal lineage, although their mother's group may have an influence.



  48. In drawing up his conclusions Professor Barnett relies  upon  what  he
      describes as the more dependable sources,  including:  The  long  term
      Reproductive Health Consequences of Female Genital  Cutting  in  Rural
      Gambia (2001);  Tropical  Medicine  and  Reproductive  Health  (2010);
      Contingency and Change in the  practice  of  Female  Genital  Cutting:
      Dynamics of Decision Making  in  Senegambia:  Summary  Report  (1999),
      Listening to the voices of the people: A situation Analysis of  Female
      Genital Mutilation in the Gambia (1999). He concludes  that  from  the
      limited number of sources available -

         a. there are variations in prevalence of FGM as between sections of
            The Gambian female population by urban versus rural, by  age  of
            respondent, by education and by ethnic identity;


         b. it is likely that the mean prevalence of  the  practice  in  the
            total living female population may be around 80%;


         c. among those who claim Mandinka identity this may  rise  to  more
            than 90% and it may fall to around 30% among the Foula;


         d. in some groups the prevalence may approach 0.

  49. So far as relocation is concerned, Professor Barnett referred  to  the
      size of the country (10,500 square kilometres) and to a population  of
      1.75  million  people,  about  a  third  of  whom   live   below   the
      international poverty line of US$1.25 per day, with about 55%  of  the
      total population in the metropolitan areas  of  Banjul,  Kanifing  and
      Brikama.  Banjul is the centre for government,  has  trade,  education
      and relatively good healthcare services by local  standards.   Outside
      of the heavily populated area:

                 "...employment  is  extremely  scarce  and  any   kind   of
                 professional employment would be limited and any  available
                 in government services or major utilities would  be  within
                 the urbanised area, communications are extremely  good  and
                 personal networks  efficient  at  transmitting  information
                 because they are dense and people have  multiple  links  to
                 each other."


  50.  His  oral  evidence  amplified  the  extent   to   which   employment
      opportunities depend upon personal and  familial  contacts,  including
      where individuals are reasonably well qualified, such as K. The formal
      sector is mainly within  the  Greater  Banjul  area  and  consists  of
      government  and  government  associated  organisations  including  the
      tourism industry. It would be "highly unlikely" for someone to find  a
      job in the formal sector without contacts. Outside this formal sector,
      for example in agriculture as a labourer away from the  Greater Banjul
      area, he would have to explain who he was, where he came from, what he
      was doing, who his spouse was, how many children he had and so on. His
      family links would readily be identified.


  51. He confirmed that internal migration to the Greater  Banjul  Area  was
      relatively recent and predominantly  to  take  advantage  of  economic
      opportunities.

  52. In oral evidence Professor Barnett described the nature of housing and
      accommodation in Gambia: people live in what  in  the  UK  are  called
      'compounds', a large series of interconnecting sets of residences with
      shared space, meals, child care etc. The  number  of  people  in  such
      living arrangements can be very large, sometimes as many as 170 people
      all related in  terms  of  the  elder  man  having  his  wives,  their
      children, their sons' wives  and  their  children  all  occupying  the
      space. In response to questioning  on  whether  individuals  or  small
      families might have separate  accommodation,  he  confirmed  this  was
      possible and referred to,  for  example,  expatriates  having  housing
      along the  tourist  coast  (depending  on  income)  although  such  an
      individual would be readily identified because of the  unusual  nature
      of such an arrangement.    He  also  described  the  extent  to  which
      questions of relationship are the basis of initial communication, with
      detailed questioning devoted  to  establishing  the  extent  to  which
      individuals fit within perceived kinship groups, whether there is  any
      relationship, and where the grouping comes from or  is  based  in  The
      Gambia.  He gave a personal example of how quickly he had been able to
      re-establish contact with someone he  had  last  seen  some  35  years
      previously.


  53. Professor Barnett concludes -


                 "The reported  FGM  prevalence  rates  among  the  Mandinka
                 and/or Foula people together with  the  statements  by  her
                 parents provide [him] with sufficient evidence to tell  the
                 Tribunal that there is a risk to  Miss  K...  [he  has]  no
                 doubt that the risk is likely to be considerable  and  that
                 she faces it at her present age."

  54. He goes on to say-

           a. "if this family were to return to the Gambia  they  would  be
              easily traced by their extended families  -  particularly  as
              they would naturally want to make contact with their son  who
              is currently in the care of their extended family;


           b. it is entirely probable that Miss K's intact  genitals  would
              be noticed by neighbours and friends because (as in  our  own
              society) small children's nether regions are often exposed to
              public inspection through nappy changing, potty use,  bathing
              etc and this even more so in a hot climate where people  live
              at considerably greater density and  with  far  less  privacy
              than is generally the case in the UK."


  55. In Professor Barnett's view, the relatives  of  Miss  K  would  go  to
      considerable lengths to ensure that she is cut.  FGM is:

             "surrounded by profound systems of symbolism and  cosmological
             and ontological meanings  ...  concepts of the individual  and
             attitudes  regarding  individual   freedom   of   choice   are
             constrained by a pronounced cultural  perspective  which  sees
             (a) individuals as bearers of the  faith  and  future  of  the
             lineage into which they have  been  born,  and  (b)  women  as
             bearing the  future  of  the  lineage  in  their  reproductive
             capacities which are therefore  of  general  interest  to  the
             entire lineage past, present and future.   Thus,  in  such  an
             environment abduction of a female child for  purposes  of  FGM
             does not appear as a criminal or immoral act in  the  eyes  of
             those who might do it.  Rather, it appears as a  deeply  moral
             and correct act".

  56. Professor Barnett refers to a UN funded news agency  report  in  April
      2010 which reports that the President of The Gambia  backs  a  ban  on
      Female genital mutilation/cutting ("FGM/C"), but is not ready to  pass
      a law banning the practice.

  57. Professor Barnett states that it would be illogical and  incorrect  to
      state that because a very large or  small  percentage  of  one  ethnic
      group practise FGM, then it is necessarily the case that an individual
      will or will not be treated in  that  way.  He  describes  this  as  a
      logical fallacy whereby the characteristics of a group are  attributed
      to  an  individual  member  of  that  group;  a   reported   prevalent
      characteristic of a group  is  not  a  probability  statement  of  the
      likelihood  of  any  individual  member  possessing  that   particular
      characteristic.


  58.  Professor  Barnett  was  questioned  extensively  about  the  various
      GAMCOTRAP reports. He does not accept that  the  reports  reflected  a
      reduction in the prevalence of FGM. He accepts they are indicative  of
      a movement to bring about change, and  that  there  are  a  number  of
      individual  testimonies  stating  an  intention  to   cease   FGM   by
      circumcisers, and statements  by  various  leaders  re-iterating  that
      intention. He points out that there is  no  scientific  evaluation  or
      follow-up of those intentions, no indication what questions  had  been
      asked, by whom, or how, or over what timescale  those  intentions  had
      been carried to fruition.   One  reference  was  to  an  intention  to
      abolish FGM within a generation i.e.  some  30  years.  There  was  no
      indication of the level of educational achievement of those quoted  or
      the extent of the population base covered. The  reports  were  written
      for a particular target audience  -  donors,  government  departments,
      official bodies.  He does not accept that such  reports  provided  the
      same scientific rigour as research reports. He does  not  accept  that
      the GAMCOTRAP report  is  indicative  of  fundamental  change  in  the
      prevalence of FGM.  He prefers the MICS report of 2005/6, as a  robust
      analysis  of  some  10,000  participants  and  subject  to  scientific
      critique.  The lack of scientific analysis and evaluation of  personal
      testimonials in GAMCOTRAP reports is such that little weight could  be
      placed upon them as indicative of fundamental or  sustainable  change.
      He describes the 2011 annual report as a "public relations  document",
      reporting to donors.  Little scientific weight can be placed upon  its
      content. He drew comparison with the MICS  report  which  set  out  in
      detail its methodology, sampling technique and  (comparatively  large)
      number of participants.


  59. Professor Barnett knew of no cases where a person had been  prosecuted
      under The Gambian 2005 Children Act for  serious  assault  or  causing
      harm.


  60. He confirmed that there is  considerable  inter-ethnic  marriage,  and
      that in general ethnic identity flows through the male line. There  is
      considerable ethnic fluidity depending on education,  economic  status
      and personal affection. There are no specific ethnically  identifiable
      areas within Gambia.  The country is small and although there  may  be
      areas where one ethnic identity is prevalent, there are  no  exclusive
      areas.


   Professor Sylvia Hamilton Chant

  61. We received two written reports from Professor Chant,  dated  20  June
      2011 and updated on 22 January 2012.   Our references are to the later
      report.


  62. Professor Chant is Professor of Development Geography  at  the  London
      School of Economics and Political Science, with research experience in
      The Gambia which dates back to 2003.  Her research has covered  women,
      gender,  the  family,  youth  poverty,  female  employment,  sexuality
      (including FGM  and  reproductive  rights)  and  migration.   She  has
      published widely including a recent chapter entitled "Women and Gender
      in the Gambia; Problems,  Progress  and  Prospects"  in  "The  Gambia:
      essays on contemporary issues and  future  direction  1965-2011".   An
      updated version is due to be published as "Gender  in  the  Gambia  in
      retrospect and prospect".

  63. Professor Chant also states that the individual risk  of  FGM  in  The
      Gambia is difficult to determine with  precision  since  there  is  no
      official state source of information  concerning  the  practice.   She
      refers to Female Genital Mutilation  in  The  Gambia:  a  Desk  Review
      ("Desk Review") as indicative of the relegation of FGM to the personal
      and private sphere with no questions on FGM included in  the  National
      Census. She refers to data being "muddied" by the "culture of silence"
      around the practice which has "traditionally involved the  passing  on
      of 'female secrets' to initiates". Notwithstanding the lack of precise
      or official State sources of information she states that a  prevalence
      rate of between 60% and 90% is commonly cited as the general range for
      The Gambia. She bases this  on  a  wide  range  of  sources  including
      primary and/or desk based research conducted by  academics,  NGOs  and
      international agencies such as UNICEF published in 1999,  2002,  2005,
      2007, and 2010. She also refers to the  MICS  report  referred  to  by
      Professor Barnett.  Her report quotes from rather  more  sources  than
      Professor Barnett and refers to  one  of  those  sources  proposing  a
      proportion of less than 60% compared to some of the percentage figures
      quoted in rural areas in other studies.  She  surmises  that  this  is
      possibly accounted for by  "by  the  fact  that  non-practising  Foula
      groups such as the Hobbobeh are found in the North Bank region".

  64. Professor Chant  states  that  there  is  evidence  from  the  Medical
      Research Council and other studies that "the risk of FGM is reportedly
      particularly marked among  the  Mandinka,  Foula,  Jola  and  Serahule
      ethnic groups (four out of the five major ethnic groups in the Gambia,
      the remaining one being the Wolof)."

  65. The most common form of FGM in The Gambia is type 2 (see paragraph  39
      above).

  66. She considers the work done by GAMCOTRAP and Tostan (another, smaller,
      NGO working for the elimination of  FGM)  and  states  that  there  is
      evidence of some decline in some parts of the country but that  it  is
      possible to "presume with  a  reasonable  degree  of  confidence  that
      around 3 in every 5 women have undergone genital cutting".

  67. In paragraph 9 of her report Professor Chant states -

                 "Ethnic group rather than geographic location... appears to
                 be the strongest predictor of FGM in the country... this is
                 due in part to inter-marriage between communities in  rural
                 areas and also on account of  high  levels  of  rural-urban
                 migration in recent years which have been  mainly  directed
                 towards the Greater Banjul area...".


  68. She goes on to say that "in the wake of more than a  doubling  of  the
      urban population in the last two decades, all  ethnic  groups  can  be
      found in greater  or  lesser  number  in  The  Gambia...where  various
      surveys I have conducted have included migrants  of  different  ethnic
      affiliation from different regions of the country."

  69. At paragraph 10 she says that "in the light of the ethnic mixing... it
      is difficult to generalise about the geographically specific risks  of
      FGM within the country even in relation to  rural  and  urban  areas."
      She refers to the contradictions in some reports which  show  a  lower
      incidence of FGM in rural  areas  than  urban  areas  whereas  a  more
      nationally representative figure from MICS data  indicates  the  rural
      level is higher than the urban level.  She comments that some  of  the
      discrepancies may be as a result  of  the  rural  and  community-based
      approach of anti-FGM campaigns and that the focus on  rural  areas  is
      "partly because it is reportedly easier to  penetrate  and  work  with
      more closely-knit rural  communities  on  account  of  greater  social
      cohesion  group  identity  and  receptivity  to  professional   change
      agents".

  70. In referring to internal migration she  comments  that  relocation  is
      theoretically possible but -

                 "in a society in which 60% of people live below the poverty
                 line and where norms of reciprocity and the maintenance  of
                 kinship ties including in the  overseas  diaspora  are  not
                 only integral to the culture but often vital for social and
                 economic support and survival, nationally resident  persons
                 tend to live on their family compounds or in the  immediate
                 environs."


  71. She concludes that K and J are justified in their concern that if they
      return to The Gambia their daughter will be subjected to forcible FGM.
       She refers to a child being commonly classified as belonging  to  the
      father's ethnic group (K being Mandinka).  The risk  of  FGM  for  the
      child of a Mandinka would "conceivably be between 80 and  100%".   She
      comments that the views of the  child's  parents  may  be  taken  into
      account and the father's veto may hold some sway but -

                 "there  is  usually  a  constellation  of   decision-makers
                 involved in the process of determining  whether  or  not  a
                 child should be circumcised... indeed,  rather  than  being
                 seen as the exclusive property of parents, children in  the
                 Gambia  are  customarily  regarded  as  belonging  to   the
                 husband's natal extended family or 'clan'."

  72. She challenges the evidence cited by  the  UKBA  that  Mandinkas  only
      practise FGM on girls aged 10 to 15 (paragraph 3.6.4 Gambia  OGN  v4.0
      29 August 2007 refers to the average age being 12, with 50%  of  those
      undergoing the  procedure  being  aged  between  5  and  18)  because,
      firstly, there appear to be no fixed age boundaries and, secondly, the
      general age at which girls can be or  are  circumcised  is  reportedly
      declining.  She amplifies the flexibility of age boundaries, by way of
      example -

                  "if a community level peer group circumcision takes  place
                  only every  few  years  or  so,  then  all  girls  in  the
                  community  eligible  for  cutting,  which  could  be  from
                  infancy into adolescence, may undergo the procedure".

  73. She refers to the declining age of circumcision having been  noted  in
      several studies (including the Desk  Review)  and  that  Mandinka  and
      Serahule girls in particular "may now be circumcised  as  early  as  1
      week old, at the time of the baby's naming ceremony".  Foula are  also
      reported as normally circumcising their daughters between the ages  of
      1 and 10.

  74.  Professor  Chant  states  that  information  on  the  state   of   an
      uncircumcised girl would be readily discerned by relatives. A girl  is
      likely  to  be  repeatedly  asked  whether  she  has   undergone   the
      'procedure' and may be  subject  to  a  physical  examination  if  the
      response  is  unsatisfactory.   She  refers  to  pressure  through   a
      husband's female kin in later life after marriage.

  75. Professor Chant also refers  to  a  factor  commonly  cited  "for  the
      tendency towards declining age of FGM".  This is the concern  that  it
      may be outlawed, as it has been in  many  other  countries,  including
      neighbouring Senegal (1999).  There is also international pressure  on
      Gambia to comply with International Conventions such as the Convention
      on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against  Women  1979
      ("CEDAW")  and the Convention on the Rights of the Child 1990 ("CRC").

  76. Professor Chant also considers the possibility of internal  relocation
      within Gambia for a family of mixed Mandinka and Foula ethnicity.  She
      gives five main reasons for that option not to be available:

        a. to return to The Gambia and not live with near kin  for  reasons
           other than employment would  constitute  a  major  personal  and
           social slide; it would make it very difficult for K and his wife
           and daughter to earn respect in other social circles;


        b. it is difficult to envisage  how  the  family  could  repatriate
           without the support of their families;


        c. obtaining employment depends far more on who you know than  what
           you  know,  and  K's  comparatively  advanced  educational   and
           professional work experience would probably restrict him to  job
           searches in the greater Banjula area;


        d. in that context, he would be known to people beyond  his  family
           who would spread news of his return.


        e. the family son is being raised by the paternal grandparents  and
           that would undoubtedly cause a major deterrent to remaining  out
           of contact with kin since that would  mean  sacrificing  reunion
           with their son.


  77.  Furthermore  she  refers  to  The  Gambia  being  a   small   country
      geographically, that short physical differences are  made  shorter  by
      the fact that news and gossip travel fast, and there  is  increasingly
      widespread access to mobile phones.

  78. Professor Chant indicates that it is highly probable  that  the  child
      would be subjected to  a  physical  inspection.   She  refers  to  the
      inability of the parents being able to keep a vigil  for  24  hours  a
      day.  She draws attention to FGM not  being  regarded  as  a  criminal
      offence, but as a family matter beyond the purview of the  police  and
      the judiciary.

  79. Professor Chant refers to inter-ethnic marriage being not uncommon and
      that there is also a rising trend in the marriage of Gambians to  non-
      Gambians but she states "unless an inter-ethnic union  is  accompanied
      by  the  promise  of  significant  economic  resource  flows   or   an
      opportunity to obtain overseas residency,  generally  speaking  people
      aim to marry within their ethnic and  religious  group."   She  states
      that whether a woman is circumcised or  not  may  not  be  taken  into
      account and may not be discussed but it is -

                 "likely to become an issue once a woman is taken  into  her
                 husband's family  and  needs  social  acceptance  from  her
                 female in-laws... rather than marrying an individual, women
                 marry into  the  whole  family  group...  women  from  non-
                 circumcising groups who marry  into  circumcising  families
                 may find they have no choice but to  have  their  daughters
                 circumcised and/or to  undergo  the  practice  themselves."




  80. If a child was able to avoid FGM through  childhood,  Professor  Chant
      states that the issue would arise on or after marriage. Around 40%  of
      marital unions are polygamous and FGM is  considered  a  tribal  right
      with the agreement of the family; there is pressure from  co-wives  as
      well as the husband's female kin. The lack of circumcision  keeps  the
      woman out of the social group because she is unclean.  She is seen  as
      "wearing her husband out with insatiable sexual  desires".   Professor
      Chant described these cumulative pressures as tantamount to force.


  81. Although not questioned about the Desk Review, Professor Chant  refers
      to this in her report. She refers  to  the  dispersal  of  all  ethnic
      groups throughout The Gambia although some areas have  a  predominance
      of particular groups.  She draws attention to the Mandinka  (who  make
      up 42% of the  total  population)  being  found  in  especially  large
      numbers in the Lower River and North Bank Regions) and the  Fula  (who
      make up 19% of the overall population) being  mostly  settled  in  the
      Central River and Upper River regions.  She  confirmed  this  in  oral
      evidence. She refers to the  Desk  Review  supporting  a  2010  report
      stating that the level of FGM  is  higher  in  rural  communities  (in
      contrast to one 2010 report which notes a  lower  incidence  in  rural
      areas) which claims that it is especially marked in areas where  there
      is a  high  degree  of  ethnic  homogeneity  "as  among  the  Mandinka
      communities in the Lower River Region and North Bank Region".


  82. She states that intra rural discrepancies may reflect  the  rural  and
      community based approach of anti FGM campaigns where the campaigns are
      focussed on particular  settlements.  She  refers  to  the  number  of
      villages who have pledged to discontinue the practice (over  500)  but
      notes that this is less than a third of all  villages  and  a  "pledge
      does not necessarily mean follow-through or universal  observance  nor
      permanent conformity with the decision".


  83. Although there is provision  in  The  Gambia  2005  Children  Act  for
      prosecution for harmful social  and  customary  procedures,  Professor
      Chant states that FGM is not seen as  a  criminal  offence  but  as  a
      family matter. She refers to an interview with the head of the  Female
      Lawyers Association of the Gambia who says that there has yet to be  a
      case before the courts on FGM practised against the  parents'  wishes.
      Where forced  FGM  takes  place  the  authorities  are  not  asked  to
      intervene, even where a child  dies:  the  child  is  buried  with  no
      investigation by the authorities. In oral evidence she said  that  the
      practice  was  a  secretive  women's  practice  shrouded  in  silence;
      sometimes men are not aware what genital cutting is.   She  was  asked
      whether if undertaken in the face of the  opposition  of  the  parents
      this would not result in intense anger.  She  responded  that  extreme
      secrecy is practised, that it is 'not done' to drag family through the
      courts, and that there is very little recourse for parents to protest,
      particularly because there is no specific law against the procedure.


  84. Professor Chant knows of no organisation able  to  provide  individual
      personal protection.  The various NGOs work  on  strategic  issues  of
      public concern only.


  85. On being asked whether a young intact educated  woman,  aware  of  the
      implications, might reasonably bring up  the  issue  before  marriage,
      Professor Chant said this would not necessarily be so: men  and  women
      do not talk about sex; and the question presupposes that a  woman  has
      an alternative livelihood. For many women, it is essential to marry.

  86.  Professor  Chant  was  questioned  extensively  about  the  GAMCOTRAP
      reports. She said that GAMCOTRAP was a laudable organisation which had
      done and was doing good work in raising awareness and education  about
      FGM.  She  spoke  of  the  serious  and  important  mission  they  are
      undertaking and that they have worked wonders in  being  able  to  get
      some Islamic scholars behind  them  on  the  point  that  FGM  is  not
      fundamental to Islam. But she also  referred  to  the  claims  in  the
      reports as self-proclaimed and not independently  verified.   Some  of
      the material produced by GAMCOTRAP gives rise to a statement that  FGM
      has been nearly eliminated, but that is very far from  the  case.  The
      process was that GAMCOTRAP would provide education and a one-off grant
      to provide alternative livelihood strategies,  roughly  equivalent  to
      three months income. She would want to see evaluation over a period of
      time to ascertain the extent to which any  short  term  reduction  was
      sustainable. She gave the example of Senegal which had previously  had
      an FGM level of around 30-40%.  The majority population in Senegal  is
      Wolof, with a lower rate of FGM.  FGM became  illegal  in  Senegal  in
      1999.  There had been intensive activity in Senegal by Toscan (an anti-
      FGM NGO) along with legislative activity since  then,  and  there  has
      been a reduction in the overall rate to about 13%.   She  referred  to
      disturbing evidence that those who wished their daughters  circumcised
      were taking them to  Gambia;  this  indicated  that  despite  all  the
      rhetoric it is extremely difficult to eradicate a  practice  that  has
      been embedded for centuries. Even if there had been a reduction in FGM
      in some regions of The  Gambia  since  the  "Dropping  of  the  Knife"
      ceremonies and there was thus some support for those who did not  wish
      their daughters to undergo the  procedure,  there  would  remain  many
      opportunities for those within the extended kin group to  perform  it.
      On being  referred  to  specific  testimonials  in  the  reports,  she
      reiterated that such statements were  evidence  of  a  will  by  those
      individuals at that time, but not necessarily of the  community  as  a
      whole.  Reference to large  meetings  did  not  mean  that  all  those
      attending agreed or abided by the  professed  statements.   There  had
      been no  evaluation  of  the  long  term  significance  of  the  three
      ceremonies.  Drawing upon the experience of Senegal,  the  process  of
      abandonment was lengthy and difficult, given the continuing demand.


  87. Professor Chant accepts that the higher up the  social  spectrum,  the
      greater the exposure to education, and that  education  is  likely  to
      turn people against the practice. She refers to about 60% living below
      the poverty line, and the majority of the  population  supporting  the
      practice. She refers both in her written report and in  oral  evidence
      to the numerous studies since the 2005/6 MICS report  quoting  similar
      figures as in the MICS report.  The  Gambia  was  shown  as  the  only
      country where the 15-19 year old group in favour was  as  high  as  35
      year olds; this did not indicate a declining trend, whereas for  other
      countries there is evidence of a  declining  trend.  She  acknowledged
      that the GAMCOTRAP report appears to  indicate  a  political  will  to
      change at that time by those people, but whether  that  had  or  would
      translate into change was another matter.


  88. There has been some media support for the elimination of FGM campaign.
       Professor Chant referred also to statements by some Islamic  scholars
      that they were opposed to Female Genital  Mutilation,  but  that  they
      described what is practised in Gambia as Female Genital  Circumcision,
      which was acceptable.


  89. Professor Chant agreed in oral  evidence  that  migration  to  Greater
      Banjul is primarily for economic purposes.  Although initial migration
      is usually of young males, because of the importance of propinquity to
      family, once single males have established themselves the tendency  is
      for other relatives to join them over time.

   Comfort Momoh

  90. Ms Momoh is an FGM and Public Health Specialist at Guys and St. Thomas
      Foundation Trust and runs the African Well Woman's  Clinic  associated
      with those hospitals.  She  has  published  widely  on  FGM,  has  won
      numerous awards  as  a  nurse/midwife  and  was  awarded  an  Honorary
      Doctorate by Middlesex University.  Her report summarises the practice
      and dangers of FGM.  She refers  to  FGM  being  widely  practised  in
      Gambia -

                 "particularly away from the urban areas and up river.   The
                 estimated prevalence of FGM  in  Gambia  is  80%  affecting
                 women and girls, statistics show that it is  performed  one
                 or two years before their teens, however can  be  performed
                 as a baby or child.  FGM is also practised by an  estimated
                 7 out of 9 ethnic groups in Gambia."


  91. She confirms that there is no law in The Gambia prohibiting FGM as  of
      2007.  (She makes no reference to the current situation, but there was
      no  other  evidence  before  us  which  indicated  that  FGM  was  now
      specifically unlawful.)  She states that she  was  not  aware  of  any
      cases where women or girls had sought protection from the practice.




   Submissions for the Secretary of State


  92. Mr Parkinson relied upon his skeleton argument, and made further  oral
      submissions, as follows.


  93. The risk to the third claimant arose only  from  an  expressed  family
      intention.  It did not realistically reach the level of likely pursuit
      into other parts of the country.  In respect of the  fourth  claimant,
      internal relocation might have disadvantages,  but  it  would  not  be
      unduly harsh.  There was no evidence of adult females being at risk of
      FGM except in cases of marriage into families which carried  out  that
      practice.

  94. It was acknowledged that much of Professor Chant's evidence should  be
      treated as uncontentious.  Paragraph 8 of  her  report  supported  the
      proposition that there has been some decline in the incidence of  FGM.
      In the  context  of  the  availability  of  internal  relocation,  the
      evidence from Professor  Chant  and  other  sources  showed  extensive
      internal migration to  the  greater  Banjul  area,  where  around  one
      million or 58% of the population now lives.  Both  experts  said  that
      The Gambia is a small and interconnected country, but the evidence did
      not support the possibility that the return of any  of  the  claimants
      would become known to their relatives, in such a  highly  and  densely
      populated urban area.

  95. Professor Chant had accepted that there were no reported incidents  of
      a child being forcibly abducted for purposes of  FGM.   GAMCOTRAP  and
      other NGO's were active in the field.  He submitted that if there were
      such incidents, even infrequently, they would be highlighted  in  such
      reports.

  96. There has been a significant change in relation to FGM in  The  Gambia
      since GAMCOTRAP began its activities  in  2007.   There  have  been  3
      "Dropping the Knife" ceremonies at which circumcisers renounced  their
      activities.  The President has made  statements  against  FGM.   Local
      political leaders have  spoken  out.   Significantly,  even  religious
      leaders, Imams, have  publicised  their  changed  views.   GAMCOTRAP's
      activities have already covered  about  one  quarter  of  the  village
      communities of rural Gambia.  The campaigns have clearly had  positive
      results.  There was no evidence on the  other  hand  of  publicity  in
      favour of FGM, or describing a return to the practice of FGM.

  97. There was some evidence that the age at  which  FGM  is  inflicted  is
      declining, but that is another sign of change.  It could  be  inferred
      that this reflects the fear of  parents  that  the  practice  will  be
      stamped out, as in Senegal.

  98. Professor Barnett's report at page 4,  paragraph  10,  criticises  the
      sources used in compiling the respondent's COI report, but in fact the
      statistics in the COI report  are  based  on  scientific  study.   The
      Professor says that the COI report uses figures not  specific  to  The
      Gambia, but the extracts are from the MICS report which was  based  on
      The Gambia.  The making of such an  error  called  into  question  the
      rigour of Professor Barnett's approach.

  99. Professor  Barnett  was  also  wrong  in  saying  that  there  was  no
      prohibition in the law in The Gambia against FGM, because  The  Gambia
      2005 Children Act was clearly intended to make FGM punishable, even if
      it was not specifically mentioned.  Mr Parkinson said  that  he  could
      not point to any reported prosecutions, but that might be attributable
      to the sea change in attitudes which has taken place.

 100. Mr Parkinson made a point based on the report by Comfort  Momoh.   FGM
      represents  a  significant  health  risk  both  at  the  time  of  its
      infliction and through its  long  term  consequences.   The  risks  of
      childbirth double for those who have suffered FGM.  Figures in reports
      such as MICS  showing  a  higher  incidence  of  FGM  in  the  younger
      generation might have another explanation.  Women who  have  undergone
      FGM are more likely to have died at an earlier age.    Higher  non-FGM
      rates in older age  groups  might  not  reflect  an  increase  in  the
      practice.  It might show that women who had not suffered FGM are  more
      likely to have survived into old age.

 101. GAMCOTRAP reports should not  lightly  be  dismissed  as  designed  to
      reflect their successes  and  to  paint  the  best  possible  picture.
      Professor Barnett went too far in describing these as public relations
      documents.    GAMCOTRAP was a long  term  operation  which  would  not
      continue to gain foreign support if  it  was  not  achieving  results.
      Neither expert report had taken proper account  of  all  the  evidence
      from GAMCOTRAP about its activities.  There  was  no  indication  that
      GAMCOTRAP have not succeeded; GAMCOTRAP projects are  not  based  upon
      coercive change following the implementation of specific  legislation,
      but are based upon education and consensus over  a  number  of  years.
      There was no adequate evidence to  show  that  what  was  reported  by
      GAMCOTRAP as happening was not happening.

 102. Given that there have been public declarations by  the  President,  by
      community and religious leaders and by circumcisers themselves, it  is
      highly unlikely that in those areas where FGM has been renounced there
      has been a reversion.

 103. The Desk Review, undertaken in 2002, was indicative of reducing levels
      of FGM and thus added credence to the GAMCOTRAP report.  Although  the
      MICS report post-dated the Desk Review, the  Desk  Review  assessed  a
      very wide range  of  sources.   The  evidence  in  that  report  of  a
      significant decline in support for  FGM  amongst  younger  age  groups
      could be relied upon. The MICS report should not be taken as the  only
      indicator, when there are other indicators which show that the younger
      generation do not appear to be in favour of FGM.

 104. The inference to be drawn from all the evidence was that there are  in
      The Gambia areas safe against the risk of FGM.


   Submissions for the claimants

 105. We heard from the claimants' representatives briefly, further to their
      skeleton arguments.  All  the  salient  points  made  (with  which  we
      broadly agree) are dealt with in our discussion and conclusions.


   Discussion


 106. We do not agree that reliance on Professor Barnett's report should  be
      limited because his comments about sourcing in the COI  report  called
      into question the rigour of his approach. Professor Barnett is correct
      to point out that reliance on some information can masquerade as  fact
      whereas it is simply repetitive  retelling.  We  do  not  accept  that
      Professor Barnett was seeking to undermine the COI report, which is  a
      collation of background material.  He was merely clarifying the extent
      to which differential weight should be placed upon different  elements
      of evidence, particularly given the  paucity  of  rigorous  scientific
      research on the issue of FGM in The Gambia.  To the extent that he may
      have had a  wrong  impression  about  the  source  of  one  particular
      statement, that does not diminish the  value  of  his  evidence  as  a
      whole.


 107. We were impressed by the evidence  from  both  Professor  Barnett  and
      Professor Chant. They did not seek to exaggerate their knowledge,  and
      were careful in their evaluation. They readily agreed with points  put
      by Mr Parkinson where those were supported by evidence, but were  also
      careful to identify exhortation,  reportage  and  information  without
      proper scientifically backed research. Both experts gave  considerable
      credit to GAMCOTRAP for the very difficult  work  they  are  doing  in
      attempting to change embedded practices.

 108. The Desk Review is a literature review the purpose  of  which  was  to
      attempt to identify the "most viable and effective way forward in  the
      campaign to accelerate the elimination of female genital mutilation in
      The Gambia".  It provides a summary of the situation as understood  at
      that time in  the  light  of  the  limited  research  undertaken.  Its
      overriding conclusion is that there are major difficulties in changing
      attitudes to a practice that is deeply embedded and entrenched. It  is
      correct that there is reference to a significant reduction in  support
      for FGM amongst the younger generation, as submitted by Mr  Parkinson.
      It is a review of existing material which, as was made  clear  by  the
      experts, is significantly less reliable than the MICS report some five
      years later. The research and reports referred to in the  Desk  Review
      are based on small sample sizes and limited research. We are satisfied
      that the reliance by Mr Parkinson on one figure  as  support  for  his
      contention that the prevalence  of FGM was going down,  and  that  the
      Dropping of the Knife statements ought to be taken  entirely  at  face
      value,  was not borne out when the whole of the content  of  the  Desk
      Review is considered.

 109.  As a major conclusion the Desk Review states that current efforts  by
      government and NGOs "have had little or no significant impact  on  the
      magnitude of the practice of FGM in the country". The Desk Review does
      not conclude that the evidence they have seen indicates that there  is
      a propensity for major positive change in the future, but rather draws
      attention  to  the  possibility  of  lack  of  change   without   very
      considerable further work being undertaken. When comparing the summary
      of the situation with the more up to date information provided through
      the MICS report and the experts  there  are  some  discrepancies,  for
      example the impact of education on attitude although  the  information
      upon which the Desk review  conclusions  was  based  was  particularly
      circumscribed. Given the more recent provenance  of  the  MICS  report
      information and the extensive research undertaken  by  them,  we  have
      accepted the information in the MICS report that increasing levels  of
      education reduces the risk.

 110.  GAMCOTRAP reports are written largely  to  inform  sponsors.  We  are
      confident that they are  honest  and  well-intentioned  but  they  are
      geared to a particular audience and  a  particular  purpose.   As  the
      expert witnesses explained, the reports have  to  be  read  carefully.
      They do not purport to investigate and analyse the long-term practical
      consequences of the statements and testimonials recorded. Although the
      organisation refers to 'monitoring', under that  heading  the  reports
      deal with  the  benefits  of  continued  support  and  education,  and
      enhanced awareness of participants, not with fieldwork on  the  extent
      to which FGM continues.

 111. The evidence from Senegal, where approximately 40% of  the  population
      is Mandinka, is instructive.  The level of FGM in 1999 was  some  40%.
      After the passing of specific legislation, followed by intense NGO and
      government activity, there has been a fall over more than a decade  to
      about 13%. This is laudable and encouraging, but also  indicates  that
      the extent of such entrenched practices in  the  cultural  make-up  of
      society means that very considerable work  has  to  be  undertaken  to
      reduce  their  prevalence.  Assertion  and  exhortation  are   not   a
      sufficient basis upon which to found  a  conclusion  that  significant
      change has occurred.  That conclusion can come  only  once  there  has
      been rigorous analysis of the extent to which stated new attitudes and
      intentions have been carried through into practice.


 112. Mr Parkinson stressed to us the absence of evidence of  any  instances
      of abduction for purposes of enforced FGM.  While that is a  point  he
      was entitled to make, the absence of such reports has to be considered
      against the reality of a kin-based  society  and  in  the  context  of
      cumulative social pressure and the difficulty of making  and  carrying
      through an official complaint.  We also have to take  account  of  the
      equal lack of evidence of any official action  over  what  must  be  a
      significant ongoing level of injuries and even  fatalities.   To  look
      for a report of an individual kidnapping may be missing the point.


 113. Some of the background materials state that there  is  no  legislation
      against FGM in The Gambia.  We are inclined to doubt if that was  ever
      strictly correct.  It is more likely that in legal theory FGM involved
      offences of assault.  More recently, The Gambia  Children's  Act  2005
      contains provisions which could be used to prosecute in cases of  FGM.
      The more important point is that there has been effectively no will to
      prosecute, and no will to bring in a specific legal prohibition.

 114. Ms Njenga drew our attention to the Secretary of State's  OGN  of  May
      2012, which refers at 3.6.5 to "two FGM court cases recently" (sourced
      in 2006) "one of which was thrown out due  to  the  lack  of  any  law
      protecting those who do not want to circumcise their children".  There
      is a lack of detail about these cases,  and  we  have  seen  no  other
      meaningful references to court proceedings.

 115. Mr Parkinson stressed to us statements by the President of The  Gambia
      against FGM.  We note that in the same statements he has said that the
      time for legislation is not yet.  We also note at 3.6.7  of  the  OGN,
      Presidential  statements  which  are  disturbingly  to  the  contrary,
      including a veiled threat to campaigners reported in February 2010.

 116. We cannot but conclude that FGM continues to be widely practised; that
      it results in serious injuries  and  even  fatalities;  that  although
      legislation  exists  which  could  be  used,  it  is  rarely  if  ever
      prosecuted; and that there  is  such  a  lack  of  effective  official
      intervention as to amount to absence of legal protection.

 117. Although we of course accept that there are villages where there  have
      been pronouncements of an intention to cease the practice of  FGM  and
      there have been pronouncements by circumcisers that they  have  ceased
      that work, we are unable to accept that this amounts, at  this  stage,
      to more than a beginning.  Whilst we accept  there  is  an  increasing
      awareness of the  health  problems  and  the  need  for  change  -  as
      predicated by the Desk Review - we do not accept that the situation in
      The Gambia has improved as markedly as the Secretary  of  State  would
      have us conclude.

 118. At the same time we think it clear that the evidence falls well  short
      of demonstrating that young females in The Gambia in  general  are  at
      real risk of FGM. There are significant  variables  which  affect  the
      risk: the practice of the kin group of birth; the  ethnic  background,
      taking into account high levels of intermarriage and of polygamy;  the
      educational and rural/urban spectrums; and the kin group into which  a
      woman marries.  Risk, as Professor  Barnett  reminded  us,  cannot  be
      shown  by  general  statistics,  but  always  depends  on  a   careful
      evaluation of the circumstances of the individual.

 119. The interconnected nature of Gambian society and the small size of the
      country, despite the existence of a major conurbation, is such that if
      the risk is real, there is in  general  no  safe  internal  relocation
      option.


General conclusions

 120. FGM has been  practised  upon  about  three  quarters  of  the  female
      population of The Gambia historically.   The  most  recent  scientific
      evidence, based on data from 2005, showed no significant change in its
      incidence.  There are ongoing  campaigns,  principally  by  GAMCOTRAP,
      aiming to reduce and eventually to eliminate FGM. There has been  some
      movement in published opinion against FGM, and there have  been  local
      declarations  of  renunciation,  but  there  has  been  no  scientific
      evaluation of GAMCOTRAP's effectiveness in establishing a decline.


 121. Incidence of FGM varies by ethnic group. Within the five  main  ethnic
      groups there are subgroups, within which the incidence may vary -  see
      the table below. In no ethnic group is the practice universal; in some
      ethnic groups the practice is absent.  Ethnic  groups  are  thoroughly
      interspersed. The country is small and highly  interconnected.  (Where
      reference is made to ethnic group we  include  sub-groups  save  where
      specified)

 122. The evidence as at November 2012 falls  short  of  demonstrating  that
      intact females in The Gambia are, as such, at real risk  of  FGM.  The
      assessment of risk of FGM is  a  fact  sensitive  exercise,  which  is
      likely to involve ethnic group, (whether  parental  or  marital),  the
      attitudes of parents, husband  and  wider  family  and  socio-economic
      milieu.


 123. There are significant variables which affect the risk: the practice of
      the kin group of birth: the ethnic  background,  taking  into  account
      high levels of intermarriage and of polygamy;  the  education  of  the
      individual said to be at risk; her age; whether she lived in an  urban
      or rural area before coming to the UK; the kin group  into  which  she
      has married (if married); and the practice of the kin group into which
      she has married (if married). Also relevant is the prevalence  of  FGM
      amongst the extended family,  as  this  may  increase  or  reduce  the
      relevant risk which may arise from  the  prevalence  of  the  practice
      amongst members of the ethnic group in general.


 124. In assessing the risk facing an individual, the starting point  is  to
      consider  the  statistical  information  currently  known  about   the
      prevalence of the  practice  within  the  ethnic  group  that  is  the
      relevant ethnic group in the individual's case, as follows:


        a.  If the individual is unmarried  and  given  that  ethnicity  is
           usually taken from the father in The Gambia, the relevant ethnic
           group is likely to be the ethnic group of the father.
        b. If the individual is married to a man from an ethnic group  that
           is different from her father's ethnic group, then  the  relevant
           ethnic is the ethnic group of the husband.

   The statistics from which the prevalence of the practice  of  FGM  within
   the ethnic groups in the Gambia are drawn, vary  considerably  given  the
   lack of detailed research and analysis undertaken in The Gambia. From the
   material  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  this  time  those  statistics
   (although these do not include all sub groups) indicate as follows:


   |Ethnic group                         |Prevalence of FGM/C                  |
|Mandinka                             |May be as high as 80-100%            |
|Fula (Overall)                       |30%, although some estimates are as  |
|                                     |high as 84%                          |
|Hobobehs (sub group of Fula)         |0%                                   |
|Jama (sub group of Fula)             |0%                                   |
|Toranks, Peuls, Futas, Tukuleurs,    |Practise but % unknown               |
|Jawarinkas, Lorbehs, Ngalunkas and   |                                     |
|Daliankos (sub groups of Fula)       |                                     |
|Sarehule                             |May be as high as 100%               |
|Serer (overall)                      |May be as high as 64%                |
|Njefenjefe (within the Serer ethnic  |0%                                   |
|grouping)                            |                                     |
|Niumikas (within the Serer ethnic    |Practise but % unknown               |
|grouping)                            |                                     |
|Jola & Karonikas                     |90 to 100%                           |
|Jola Foni                            |Practise but % not known             |
|Jola Casa                            |0%                                   |
|Wolof (overall)                      |May be as high as 20%                |
|Wolof - those who migrated from      |0%                                   |
|Senegal Oriental                     |                                     |
|Wolof - those who migrated from Sine |Practise but % not known             |
|Saloum                               |                                     |
|Others                               |Variable                             |


 125. The next step is to consider the various other  factors  mentioned  in
      paragraph 123 above as some may increase the risk, whilst  others  may
      reduce the risk.  Whilst each case will turn  on  it  own  facts,  the
      following are of general application:

        a. In the case of an unmarried woman, parental  opposition  reduces
           the risk. In the case of a married woman,  opposition  from  the
           husband reduces the risk. If the husband has no  other  "wives",
           the risk may be reduced further. However, it should be borne  in
           mind that parental/spousal opposition  may  be  insufficient  to
           prevent the girl or woman from being subjected to FGM where  the
           extended family is one that practises  it,  although  this  will
           always be a question of fact.
        b. If the prevalence of the practice amongst the extended family is
           greater than the prevalence of the practice in the ethnic  group
           in question, this will increase the  risk.  Conversely,  if  the
           prevalence of the practice amongst the extended family  is  less
           than the prevalence of the  practice  in  the  ethnic  group  in
           question, this will reduce the risk.
        c.  If the woman is educated (whether she is  single  or  married),
           the risk will reduce.
        d. If the individual lived in an urban area prior to coming to  the
           United Kingdom, this will reduce the risk.  Conversely,  if  the
           individual lived in a rural area prior to coming to  the  United
           Kingdom, this will increase the risk.
        e. The age of a woman does not affect the risk measurably; it is an
           issue upon marriage. Amongst the Fula, FGM has been carried  out
           on babies as young as one week old.  The average  age  at  which
           FGM is carried out appears to be reducing and this may be due to
           concerns about the international pressure to stop the  practice.
           Although there are statistics about the average age at which FGM
           is carried out on girls and women for particular ethnic  groups,
           the evidence does not show that,  in  general,  being  above  or
           below the relevant average age has a material effect on risk. It
           would therefore be unhelpful in most cases to focus on  the  age
           of the girl or woman and the average age at which FGM is carried
           out for the ethnic group of her father (if unmarried) or that of
           her husband (if married).

 126. Thus, it is possible to arrive at a conclusion that the risk faced  by
      an individual is less than, or more than, the rate of incidence of FGM
      in the ethnic group of the individual's father (if unmarried)  or  her
      husband (if married).  The rate of incidence of FGM in an ethnic group
      must therefore be distinguished  from  the  degree  of  likelihood  of
      infliction on an individual against her will or against  the  will  of
      her  parents.   Some  individuals  from  ethnic  groups  with  a  high
      incidence may not be at  risk,  while  some  individuals  from  ethnic
      groups with a low incidence may be at risk.

 127. State protection: FGM is not specifically criminalised in  The  Gambia
      although it may be covered by the existing criminal law on assault  or
      in The Gambia's Children's Act 2005. However, there are no known cases
      of prosecutions under the general criminal law or under the 2005  Act.
      There is no reliable evidence to suggest that a female who may  be  at
      real risk of FGM can avail herself of effective  State  protection  or
      that her father or husband could invoke such protection on her behalf.

 128. Internal flight: As a general matter, an individual at  real  risk  of
      FGM in her home area is unlikely  to  be  able  to  avail  herself  of
      internal relocation, although this  is  always  a  question  of  fact.
      Cogent reasons need to be given for  a  finding  that  the  individual
      would be able to relocate safely, especially given the  evidence  that
      ethnic groups are thoroughly interspersed, the country  is  small  and
      ethnic  groups  in  different  parts  of  the   country   are   highly
      interconnected.


Conclusions on the present appeals


 129. We now apply our general conclusions to the cases before us.

K, J and Miss K

 130. The AIT dismissed the three connected appeals because the risk of  FGM
      for the third claimant was  remote  in  time,  and  could  be  avoided
      through relocation.  There is error of law in that decision, such that
      it has been set aside and is to be re-made. The practice of FGM can be
      carried out from an early age, and there is evidence that the  age  is
      declining.  The risk to Miss K exists in  the  reasonably  foreseeable
      future - the next few years.  The AIT's primary finding of fact, which
      was not criticised by the Secretary of State, is that there is a  risk
      of FGM to Miss K from non-state agents.  We  find  that  there  is  no
      effective state protection, and that in this case the risk  cannot  be
      avoided by relocating.  We re-make the decision in  the  three  linked
      appeals by allowing them on asylum grounds.


 AS


 131. The First-tier Tribunal found AS to be at risk in  her  home  area,  a
      finding that has not been challenged by the Secretary of State and one
      by which we  are  bound.  We  apply  our  country  guidance  to  these
      undisputed facts. This includes our conclusion that, if an  individual
      is at real risk of FGM in her home area, she is unlikely to be able to
      relocate  safely.  Our  attention  has   not   been   drawn   to   any
      considerations that reduce the risk of FGM to her on relocation. Judge
      Herbert found AS credible. He accepted her evidence that her  father's
      family members had informed her parents that she would be required  to
      undergo FGM, that her father had given his  word  that  she  would  be
      subject to FGM on  her  return  to  The  Gambia  and  her  mother  had
      confirmed this. On these accepted facts  and  given  our  guidance  in
      relation to relocation, we are  satisfied  that  for  this  particular
      individual the risks cannot be avoided by internal relocation.

 132. We do not intend to convey by this finding that  all  single  Mandinka
      women of marriageable age are at risk of  FGM.  Each  appeal  is  fact
      sensitive and will have to be determined on the basis of those facts.

   Conclusion


    K, J and Miss K: The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    involved the making of an error on a point of law.
     We set aside the decision.
         We re-make the decision in the appeals by allowing the appeals on
asylum grounds.

    AS: The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error on a point of law.
     We set aside the decision.
          We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal on
asylum grounds.


  Signed                                Date 28th


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

   Appendix A




   |1    |Rites of Passage Report, BAFROW 1999           |1999            |
|2    |A Handbook for frontline Workers 2000          |2000            |
|3    |Female Genital Mutilation A Student's Manual   |2001            |
|     |2001                                           |                |
|4    |Long term health consequences  December 2001   |2001            |
|5    |Female Genital Mutilation In The Gambia: A Desk|2002            |
|     |Review 2002                                    |                |
|6    |DHS Comparative Report No 7 September 2004     |September 2004  |
|7    |Child Protection Alliance, summary of          |2005            |
|     |provisions of The Children's Act 2005 of the   |                |
|     |Gambia                                         |                |
|8    |The Gambia Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey   |2005            |
|     |report 2005/2006                               |                |
|9    |Contingency Context and Change                 |22 June 2007    |
|10   |HJT Research, 'Seventy-five percent of women   |27 March 2008   |
|     |subjected to FGM in Gambia'                    |                |
|11   |Making and Managing femaleness, fertility and  |March 2008      |
|     |motherhood Skramstad                           |                |
|12   |AFROL News Report                              |6 June 2008     |
|13   |United Nations paper                           |21 May 2009     |
|14   |IRIN News Report                               |18 June 2009    |
|15   |UNICEF Report                                  |23 June 2009    |
|16   |All Africa.Com Report                          |30 September    |
|     |                                               |2009            |
|17   |Female Genital Cutting Education and Networking|12 November 2009|
|     |Project                                        |                |
|18   |GAMCOTRAP Annual Report 2009                   |2009            |
|19   |Dynamics of decision making in Senegambia      |3 January 2010  |
|     |summary report                                 |                |
|20   |Anonomised Report by Prof Barnett              |9 March 2010    |
|21   |Article in The Point by the President Female   |11 June 2010    |
|     |Lawyers Association 11.06.10 on Women's Act    |                |
|     |2010                                           |                |
|22   |Minority Rights Group International            |1 July 2010     |
|23   |Women Living Under Muslim Laws (UK), 'Urgent:  |13 October 2010 |
|     |Gambia: Women's rights defenders Isatou Touray |                |
|     |& Amie Bojang-Sissoho arrested and detained'   |                |
|24   |Equality Now (USA), 'Call on the Government of |19 October 2010 |
|     |The Gambia to release immediately on bail      |                |
|     |women's rights activists, Dr Isatou Touray and |                |
|     |Amie Bojang-Sissoho'                           |                |
|25   |Population Reference Bureau                    |7 February 2011 |
|26   |OHCHR, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the |28 February 2011|
|     |situation of human rights defenders: Summary of|                |
|     |cases transmitted to Governments and replies   |                |
|     |received (Gambia excerpt)                      |                |
|27   |US Department of State report                  |8 April 2011    |
|28   |US Department of State Report                  |22 April 2011   |
|29   |COI report, The Gambia                         |9 June 2011     |
|30   |Prof. Sylvia Hamilton Chant Report             |20 June 2011    |
|31   |Prof. Tony  Barnett Report                     |25 June 2011    |
|32   |GAMCOTRAP press Release                        |4 July 2011     |
|33   |CIA World Fact Book extract                    |30 August 2011  |
|34   |BBC New report                                 |5 September 2011|
|35   |IRIN                                           |5 September 2011|
|36   |United Nations paper                           |5 September 2011|
|37   |Frontline (Ireland), The Gambia: Continuing    |2 November 2011 |
|     |judicial harassment of Isatou Touray & Amie    |                |
|     |Bojang-Sissoho                                 |                |
|38   |COI responses in respect of FGM in the Gambia  |4 November 2011 |
|39   |Assisted Return and Reintegration Programme    |December 2011   |
|     |December 2011                                  |                |
|40   |Dr Comfort Momoh MBE Report, 2011              |2011            |
|41   |Freedom House Document extract 2011            |2011            |
|42   |GAMCOTRAP Annual Report 2011                   |2011            |
|43   |GAMCOTRAP Dropping of the Knife Report 2011    |2011            |
|44   |How the Gambia is fighting female Genital      |2011            |
|     |Cutting 2011                                   |                |
|45   |US State Department 2011 Human Rights Reports: |2011            |
|     |The Gambia                                     |                |
|46   |Report on FGM in The Gambia, Prof. Tony Barnett|16 January 2012 |
|47   |Report on Gambia & Female Genital Mutilation,  |22 January 2012 |
|     |Prof. Sylvia H Chant                           |                |
|48   |GAMCOTRAP Zero Tolerance Speech                |February 2012   |
|49   |BMJ, 344:1-50 No 7848 General Practice         |17 March 2012   |
|50   |The Gambia OGN v5.0                            |May 2012        |
|51   |GAMCOTRAP Training Workshop for Kombos         |July 2012       |
|     |religious leaders                              |                |
|52   |GAMCOTRAP Central River Region AEO support     |August 2012     |
|     |August 2012                                    |                |
|53   |COI responses in respect of FGM in the Gambia  |27 September    |
|     |                                               |2012            |
|54   |GAMCOTRAP Profile of circumcisers from the     |September 2012  |
|     |Lower River Region                             |                |
|55   |Save the Children Sweden UN supported training |October 2012    |
|     |workshops Kombo                                |                |
|56   |Refworld report on The Gambia                  |12 November 2012|
|57   |GAMCOTRAP Officials theft and fraud case: court|13 November 2012|
|     |decision                                       |                |
|58   |Wikipedia extract accessed 19.11.12            |19 November 2012|
|59   |Amnesty International Report 2012: Gambia      |2012            |
|60   |GAMCOTRAP Central River region training        |2012            |
|     |programme 2012                                 |                |
|61   |GAMCOTRAP Executive Committee 2012             |2012            |
|62   |Clinical Review: Female genital mutilation: the|                |
|     |role of health professionals in prevention,    |Undated         |
|     |assessment, and management, Jane Simpson, Kerry|                |
|     |Robinson, Sarah M Creighton, Deborah Hodes     |                |
|63   |FGM a Teachers Guide                           |Undated         |
|64   |FGM Gambia - Access Gambia                     |Undated         |
|65   |FGM Legislation & Other National Provisions -  |Undated         |
|     |www.ipu.org                                    |                |
|66   |FORWARD UK                                     |Undated         |
|67   |Gambia Information Site partial extract        |Undated         |
|68   |IRIN                                           |Undated         |
|69   |Maps of The Gambia and the Greater Banjul Area |Undated         |
|70   |PATH female genital Mutilation - The Facts     |Undated         |
|71   |The Gambia tourist industry information        |Undated         |






