


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SM and MH (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Sent to parties on:          |
|On : 21 May 2015                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE



                                   Between

                                     s m
                                     MH
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C McCarthy, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


1) Save as herein set out, the  existing  country  guidance  in  SN  and  HM
   (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283  and  in
   KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on  return)  Pakistan  CG  [2010]
   UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

2) Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her home  area  for
   a single woman or a female head of household, there may  be  an  internal
   relocation option to one of Pakistan's larger cities,  depending  on  the
   family, social and educational situation of the woman in question.

3) It will not be normally be unduly harsh  to  expect  a  single  woman  or
   female head of household to relocate internally within  Pakistan  if  she
   can access support from family members or a male guardian in the place of
   relocation.

4) It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,  or  older
   women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It helps  if  a  woman  has
   qualifications enabling her to  get  well-paid  employment  and  pay  for
   accommodation and childcare if required.

5) Where a single woman, with or without children, is ostracised  by  family
   members and other sources of possible social support because she is in an
   irregular situation, internal  relocation  will  be  more  difficult  and
   whether it is unduly harsh will be a question of fact in each case.

6) A single woman or female head of household who has no male  protector  or
   social network may be able to use the state  domestic  violence  shelters
   for a short time, but the focus of such shelters is on reconciling people
   with their family networks, and places  are  in  short  supply  and  time
   limited. Privately run shelters may be more  flexible,  providing  longer
   term support while the woman regularises her social situation, but again,
   places are limited.

7) Domestic violence shelters are available for  women  at  risk  but  where
   they are used by women with children, such shelters do not  always  allow
   older children to enter  and  stay  with  their  mothers.   The  risk  of
   temporary separation, and the  proportionality  of  such  separation,  is
   likely to differ depending on the age and sex of a woman's children: male
   children may be removed from their mothers at the age of 5 and placed  in
   an orphanage or a madrasa until the family situation has been regularised
   (see KA and Others (domestic violence risk on return) Pakistan CG  [2010]
   UKUT  216  (IAC)).  Such  temporary  separation  will   not   always   be
   disproportionate or unduly harsh: that is a  question  of  fact  in  each
   case.

8) Women in Pakistan are legally permitted to  divorce  their  husbands  and
   may institute divorce proceedings from the country of refuge, via a third
   party and with the help of lawyers in  Pakistan,  reducing  the  risk  of
   family reprisals. A woman who does so and returns with a new  partner  or
   husband will have access to male protection and is unlikely, outside  her
   home area, to be at risk of  ostracism,  still  less  of  persecution  or
   serious harm.




                            DECISION AND REASONS



The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan from the  Lahore  area,  born  on  12
January 1983. She first entered the  United  Kingdom  on  a  visit  visa  in
September 2004, returning to Pakistan in October 2004.   She  then  returned
to the United Kingdom on a further visit visa on 11 April 2006, but did  not
embark for Pakistan when it expired in October 2006. The appellant  remained
in the United Kingdom as an overstayer.

In April 2010, after living in the United Kingdom unlawfully for  3�  years,
the appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim
was that she had a child (now three  children)  by  a  man  other  than  her
estranged husband, whom she had met in the United Kingdom, and that  if  she
returned to Pakistan, she feared that  her  husband  would  kill  her.   She
asserted that because her estranged husband's family was rich and  powerful,
she could not relocate safely to another part of the country. The  appellant
stated that she had  tried  contacting  two  women's  organisations  to  see
whether she could seek shelter in her home area of Lahore, but they  advised
her that they had no space available and could not help her.

The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim on 10 May  2010  and  on
12 May 2010 decided to remove her from the United Kingdom as an overstayer.

Procedural history

The appellant and her partner appealed the respondent's  May  2010  decision
to refuse them leave to remain: their appeal was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 30 June 2010 and dismissed on 2 July 2010. Although  the  First-
tier Tribunal accepted the core account as it then stood  as  credible,  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that an internal relocation option  was
available to the appellants, away from Lahore, and dismissed the asylum  and
humanitarian protection appeals on that basis.

Counsel for the appellants accepted that arguments under Articles  2  and  3
ECHR must stand or fall with the asylum claim.  As regards Article  8  ECHR,
the appellants' Counsel conceded that as they would be removed together,  he
could not realistically argue that the decision under appeal  represented  a
disproportionate breach of their Article 8  ECHR  family  and  private  life
rights.  No paragraph 395C factors were identified which  could  lead  to  a
different outcome and that argument also was not pressed before  the  First-
tier Tribunal. The appellant's partner did not challenge  the  dismissal  of
his appeal and accordingly that element of the First-tier Tribunal  decision
stands unchallenged.

The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 21  December  2010  after
an out of time application made by the appellant alone, in  September  2010.
The  appellant  contended  that  she  had  been  ill-served  by  her  former
solicitors.  The basis of the grounds of appeal was  that  the  illegitimacy
of her son put both the appellant and the  child  at  risk  on  return.  The
appellant relied on KA and others  (domestic  violence  -  risk  on  return)
Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) which had been published on 14 July  2010.
  On 30 March 2011 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis  dismissed  the  appeal,
finding there to be no material error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision.

The Court of Appeal granted the appellant permission to appeal on  4  August
2011 and the appeal was remitted to the Upper Tribunal, by  consent,  for  a
fresh hearing on the basis that the question of ostracism of  the  appellant
as  a  lone  mother  with  an  illegitimate  child  had  not  been  properly
considered.   On 11 June 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge  Gleeson  formally  held
that there was an error of law in the previous Upper Tribunal  decision  and
gave directions for the decision to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

At a case management hearing on 26 September 2013, the respondent  purported
to withdraw the underlying decision from May 2010, since the  appellant  was
then pregnant with her second child.   The  appellant's  Counsel  relied  on
paragraph 17(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (S.I.
2008/2698) and  argued  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  not  accept  the
withdrawal of the respondent's case in  this  appeal,  particularly  in  the
light of the identification of this appeal as a potential  country  guidance
decision.  On 30 January 2014, a panel of  the  Upper  Tribunal  refused  to
accept the respondent's withdrawal, as no new decision was  available.   The
Upper Tribunal directed that  the  appeal  be  listed  for  a  further  Case
Management Review after 3 months,  and  that  if  by  that  date,  no  fresh
decision was available, the appeal should proceed. No new decision was  made
on the appellant's changed  circumstances  (she  is  now  the  mother  of  3
children by her  partner,  all  born  in  the  United  Kingdom,  after  many
miscarriages).

The Upper Tribunal gave directions for hearing on 3  October  2014  and  the
appeal was heard on 21 May 2015.  In the intervening period,  any  doubt  as
to the appellant's partner being the parent of all  her  children  had  been
resolved and the respondent  no  longer  disputes  either  the  relationship
between them or his status as the children's father.

We therefore proceed to remake the decision afresh.  This  is  the  decision
of the Tribunal, to which we have both contributed.

The country guidance issue

When remitting this appeal, the Court of Appeal indicated that it  might  be
desirable for there to be country guidance on this  fact  set,  that  is  to
say, the risk of ostracism  of  a  mother  with  an  illegitimate  child  in
Pakistan. The Court directed the Upper Tribunal to have regard to  the  case
of SN (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA
Civ 181.

In SN (Pakistan) the Court of Appeal set aside and remitted  a  decision  by
the Upper Tribunal  which  it  considered  insufficiently  reasoned  on  the
ostracism point.  In his judgment at paragraphs  31  and  32,  Lord  Justice
Scott-Baker said this:

    "31. We were referred to a number of documents, in  particular  a  Home
    Office operational guidance note  and  a  US  State  Department  report
    relating to Pakistan, both of  which  documents  were  very  recent  in
    relation to the date of the original hearing before  Immigration  Judge
    Walters. Miss Chan, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  submits  that,  on
    careful reading, these documents take  matters  no  further.  She  also
    observes that there is no country guidance  dealing  with  the  general
    question of single women with children being returned to  Pakistan.  It
    is true that there is no country guidance. Perhaps it would be  helpful
    if there was a country guidance case dealing with issues that arise  in
    such circumstances.

    32.  For my part I am satisfied  that  the  first  Immigration  Judge's
    decision was inadequately reasoned and the matter was not rectified  by
    the second and Senior Immigration Judge. For my part I  am  left  in  a
    considerable state of doubt as to what the realistic risks, if any, are
    to this appellant on her return to Pakistan, in particular  because  of
    the fact that she is a single mother with a child which may or may  not
    be perceived to be illegitimate. It was certainly so perceived  by  the
    first Immigration Judge. ..."

The outcome of the rehearing of SN (Pakistan)  did  not  result  in  country
guidance.  The Court in SN (Pakistan) does not appear to have been  referred
to the country guidance given by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in  SN  and
HM (Divorced women - risk on return)  Pakistan  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00283  at
paragraphs 46-48:
    "46. As was stated as long ago as 1999 in Shah and Islam [1999] Imm  AR
    283,  the  position  of  women  in  Pakistan is  unsatisfactory,  with
    widespread discrimination and insufficient State protection. There  has
    been some progress in the last five years, and  particularly  in  urban
    centres, crisis support may now be available. ...
    48. The same CIPU Country Report accepts that internal  flight  options
    are limited for women, but it does not state that there are no internal
    flight possibilities and each case will depend on  its  own  particular
    factual matrix. We find that some support is available in  the  cities,
    and we also consider the geographical scale of Pakistan   (covering  an
    area of about 307,374 square miles, with a population of  140,470,000);
    the question of internal flight will require careful  consideration  in
    each  case.  The  general  questions  which  Adjudicators  should   ask
    themselves in cases of this kind are as follows -
         (a) Has the claimant shown a real risk or reasonable likelihood  of
         continuing hostility from her husband (or former  husband)  or  his
         family members, such as to raise a real risk of serious harm in her
         former home area?

         (b) If yes,  has  she  shown  that  she  would  have  no  effective
         protection  in  her  home  area  against  such  a  risk,  including
         protection available from the Pakistani state, from her own  family
         members, or from a current partner or his family?

         (c) If yes, would such a risk and lack of protection extend to  any
         other part of Pakistan  to which she could reasonably be  expected
         to go (Robinson [1997] EWCA  Civ  2089,  AE  and  FE  [2002]  UKIAT
         036361), having regard to the available  state  support,  shelters,
         crisis centres, and family members or friends  in  other  parts  of
         Pakistan?"

The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal considered the question  again  in  2006
in FS (domestic violence-SN and HM-OGN) Pakistan CG [2006] UKAIT  00023,  in
which it concluded that:

         "(1) Operational Guidance Notes (OGNs) provided by the Secretary of
         State for the Home Department for the guidance of  his  caseworkers
         are a statement of the position taken by him at the date they  were
         issued but must be considered in the context of subsequent evidence
         about the  situation  in  the  country  of  origin,  including  the
         information summarised in subsequent COI Reports; and

         (2) The background evidence on the position of  women  at  risk  of
         domestic violence in Pakistan and the availability to them of State
         protection remains as set out in SN & HM (Divorced women-  risk  on
         return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283. It appears that the current
         intention of the authorities is to  improve  State  protection  for
         such women, although progress is slow. Every case will  still  turn
         on its particular facts and should be  analysed  according  to  the
         step by step approach set out at paragraph 48 of

The appellant also relies on guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in KA  and
Others (domestic violence - risk on return)  Pakistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  216
(IAC):

         "...iii. The Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act 2006
         ("PWA"), one of a number  of  legislative  measures  undertaken  to
         improve the situation of women in Pakistan in the past decade,  has
         had a significant effect on the operation of the Pakistan  criminal
         law as it affects women accused of adultery. It led to the  release
         of 2,500 imprisoned women. Most sexual  offences  now  have  to  be
         dealt with under the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC)  rather  than  under
         the more punitive Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance
         1979. Husbands no longer have power to register a First Information
         Report (FIR) with the police alleging adultery;  since  1  December
         2006 any such complaint must be presented to  a  court  which  will
         require sufficient grounds to be shown for any charges to  proceed.
         A senior police officer has to conduct the investigation.  Offences
         of adultery (both zina liable to hadd and  zina  liable  to  tazir)
         have been  made  bailable.  However,  Pakistan  remains  a  heavily
         patriarchal society and levels of domestic violence continue to  be
         high.

         iv.  Whether a woman on return faces  a  real  risk  of  an  honour
         killing will depend on the particular  circumstances;  however,  in
         general such a risk is likely to be confined to tribal  areas  such
         as the North West Frontier  Province  (NWFP)  and  is  unlikely  to
         impact on married women.

         v.   Pakistan law still favours the father in disputes over custody
         but there are signs that the courts are  taking  a  more  pragmatic
         approach based on the best interests of the child.

         vi.  The guidance given in SN and HM  (Divorced  women  -  risk  on
         return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283 and FS (Domestic violence  -
         SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan CG [2006] UKIAT 00023 remains valid.  The
         network of women's  shelters  (comprising  government-run  shelters
         (Dar ul-Amans) and private and Islamic women's crisis  centres)  in
         general affords effective protection for women victims of  domestic
         violence, although there are significant shortcomings in the  level
         of services and treatment of inmates in some  such  centres.  Women
         with boys over 5 face separation from their sons.

         vii. In assessing whether women victims of domestic violence have a
         viable internal relocation alternative, regard must be had not only
         to the availability  of  such  shelters/centres  but  also  to  the
         situation women will face after they leave such centres."

We are satisfied that it is right to consider the ostracism question in  the
present appeal and we proceed to do so.

The appellant's account

The appellant's account, which the First-tier Tribunal in  July  2010  found
largely credible, was that she entered into a love marriage in  Pakistan  on
24 May 2003; that both families were against the marriage and that  she  was
disowned by her family, although she later resumed contact with  her  mother
in January 2006, such contact remaining a secret from the  remaining  family
members. The appellant continued to use her parents' address  in  Lahore  as
her address for correspondence, for example for visa applications.

The couple lived together at first in a village outside Lahore, for four  to
five months, but her husband decided to leave Pakistan and live in Oman  due
to family  disputes  over  property.  The  appellant  joined  him  there  in
November 2003 (there is a problem here  with  the  chronology,  but  nothing
really turns on it).  They remained in Oman for a few months, but  then  the
husband came to the United Kingdom.  The appellant visited him for  a  month
in September/October 2004 but  returned  to  Pakistan  to  see  her  mother.
While in Pakistan, she lived in a rented property in a suburb of Lahore,  in
the same area as her husband's family.

In January 2006, her husband asked her to go  and  live  with  his  parents.
Living with her  parents-in-law  was  not  successful:   the  appellant  was
treated badly by her husband's family.  When she told  her  husband  of  her
ill treatment, he arranged for her to join him in  the  United  Kingdom,  at
his address in Nottingham. The  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
April 2006, as a visitor, but this time with the clear intention of  staying
permanently.  The appellant's account is  that  she  gave  her  husband  her
papers and passport to sort out her status and has not  received  them  back
from him.

Shortly after her arrival, the  appellant  realised  that  her  husband  was
drinking alcohol and seeing other women.  They were trying to  have  a  baby
but during the  marriage,  the  appellant  was  unsuccessful  in  so  doing,
although she did have several miscarriages. Her husband became  abusive  and
eventually violent towards the appellant: he accused her of  having  illicit
relationships with other men. In March 2007,  her  husband  ordered  her  to
leave the matrimonial home, after he saw her talking to  a  male  neighbour.
The appellant's estranged husband has not  contacted  her  since  then.  The
appellant's understanding now is that soon after rejecting her, he  returned
to Pakistan: she says her mother  told  her  he  was  back  in  Pakistan  in
November or December 2007.  He was running the appellant  down,  saying  she
was a woman of low moral character.


The appellant had nowhere to go after her ejection from  the  marital  home,
so she approached their landlady (referred to by  the  appellant  under  the
courtesy title of 'auntie').  The landlady gave  the  appellant  a  room  in
another property that she owned, also in Nottingham, and treated her like  a
daughter, reassuring the appellant that her estranged husband was  bound  to
return to her.


There were other lodgers in that property, one of whom  is  the  appellant's
current partner, a Pakistani man with no legal right to  be  in  the  United
Kingdom.  In May 2008,  the  appellant  and  her  current  partner  began  a
relationship.  It is accepted that, after further miscarriages,  she  became
pregnant by  him  and  gave  birth  to  a  son  on  17  January  2010.   The
appellant's relationship with her current partner  was  'on  and  off'  both
before and after the birth: sometimes he was  supportive  and  sometimes  he
rejected her.  He initially saw his son only intermittently.

The appellant learned from her mother that her  estranged  husband  and  her
family were aware that she had had a child out of wedlock.  When  he  became
aware of the pregnancy, her husband went to the appellant's family  home  to
express his anger.  He beat up her brother.   Since  then,  her  husband  is
said to have  been  verbally  abusive  to  the  appellant's  family  members
whenever he saw them, telling  people  that  she  was  a  woman  of  immoral
character and had  been  'having  illicit  relations  with  other  men'.  In
particular,  he  was  hostile  towards  her  mother  whenever  he  saw  her,
repeating his allegations that the appellant was a woman  of  low  character
who had illicit relations with other men. He made  similar  remarks  to  any
member of her family whom he met in a hospital, market or similar.


The appellant's evidence to the First-tier Tribunal was that  she  spoke  to
her mother about once or twice a month, and was always told of further  such
incidents.   Having  become  aware  of  this  situation  in  Pakistan,   the
appellant claimed asylum.  She did not do so until April 2010, three  months
after her eldest son's birth.


That was the situation at the date of hearing in June  2010.   Evidence  for
the present hearing indicates that the relationship  between  the  appellant
and her partner has solidified since then and that  the  appellant  has  two
further children  by  him,  after  a  number  of  further  miscarriages  and
significant medical  intervention:  the  youngest  is  a  daughter  born  in
January 2015. The appellant's account now  is  that  her  partner  lives  in
Nottingham, at an address unknown to her, but that he is very  fond  of  his
three children and sees them every day.  All the children, as  well  as  the
appellant and her partner, are Pakistani citizens only and no member of  the
family has any form of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


The appellant's partner has also  claimed  asylum  unsuccessfully  in  2010.
The respondent's decision to refuse asylum  then  was  unchallenged  and  no
fresh claim has been made.  He has no lawful status in  the  United  Kingdom
and is also a Pakistani citizen.


The respondent's refusal letters

(1)  May 2010 refusal letter

In May 2010, the respondent  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  having
suffered domestic violence from her husband  and  considered  in  any  event
that he would have no further interest in her, having thrown her out of  the
house in Nottingham and then returned to Pakistan. She considered  that  the
appellant could access effective protection in Pakistan and  that,  even  if
there was a real risk of serious harm or a reasonable degree  of  likelihood
of persecution in Lahore, the appellant could also relocate to another  part
of the country where there  would  not  be  such  a  risk.   The  respondent
considered that it was open to the appellant  to  divorce  her  husband  and
regulate her position if she wished.

On 26 September 2013, the respondent withdrew her May 2010 decision  on  the
basis that it did not  deal  adequately  with  the  best  interests  of  the
children pursuant to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
Act 2009 (as amended).

(2)  March 2014 refusal letter

On 31 March 2014, after the birth of the appellant's two  sons,  but  before
her third pregnancy was known,  the  respondent  issued  a  further  refusal
letter, in which she stated  that  she  maintained  her  position  that  the
appellant would not be at  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan.  The  appellant's
partner having no legal right to be in the United  Kingdom,  the  respondent
considered that he could return to Pakistan with  the  appellant  and  their
children, which would provide her with the protection of  a  male  adult  in
Pakistan.

The respondent considered that in a different area of Pakistan their  status
as an unmarried couple would not be known,  and  that,  even  if  it  became
known, any societal ostracism that they may encounter would fall  below  the
Refugee Convention standard and that the appellant would  have  the  benefit
of her partner's  social  and  physical  support  and  protection.  Internal
relocation to a different part of Pakistan was considered  to  be  a  viable
option.

The respondent  also  gave  consideration  to  the  best  interests  of  the
appellant's children and concluded that since they were  Pakistani  citizens
and still of an age where their strongest links were to  their  parents,  in
particular their mother, it would be in their best interests to remain  with
their parents and that the family  could  return  to  Pakistan  as  a  unit.
Removal would not, therefore, be in breach of the appellant's  human  rights
or the best interests of her children.

Country evidence

The country evidence in this appeal is  briefly  summarised  in  Appendix  C
below.  We set out here in more detail the elements  most  relevant  to  the
ostracism question and  to  the  status  of  women  exercising  an  internal
relocation option within Pakistan.

Evidence of Dr Roger Ballard

 Dr Roger Ballard MA PhD FRAI is a Consultant  Anthropologist  and  Director
of the Centre for Applied South  Asian  Studies.   His  report  is  entitled
"Risk on return to  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  a  single  mother  and  her
illegitimate children".  For the purposes of country guidance, the  relevant
parts of Dr Ballard's report are sections 5, 7, 8, 9.3  and  10.    Sections
14.2 and 14.3 deal with ostracism and reconstruction of a family  life,  and
kinlessness, respectively, and section 15 contains his conclusions.

Dr Ballard considered that on return  to  Pakistan,  a  person  in  what  he
perceived to be the appellant's position, that is to say, a female  head  of
household with no husband or family backing, would  be  treated  as  kinless
and a demi-mondaine, because of her inability to explain  her  circumstances
truthfully to new friends and neighbours.  His  opinion  was  that   such  a
person would have little difficulty in finding a room in a five  star  hotel
but that without a respectable male guardian, she would be  unable  to  find
cheaper  accommodation,  and  thus  would  be  at  risk  of   accepting   an
accommodation offer which she realised too late  came  with  sexual  strings
attached.

Dr Ballard accepted that women's shelters  are  available  but  stated  that
they were frequently over-subscribed and entry  was  not  guaranteed.   Only
short term accommodation is available in state run shelters,  which  try  to
reconcile people with their families, and if  that  is  not  possible,  move
them on to make room for new users.  Children over 5 years old would not  be
accepted because the perception was that they should be with their  fathers.
 Women who were not accepted back by their families were at  risk  of  being
further ostracised on  the  basis  that  their  sin  must  be  exceptionally
serious.

There was hostility to the shelters  from  Muslim  families,  who  perceived
them  as  Euro-American  supported  bodies  seeking  to   undermine   family
integrity by encouraging women to leave their husbands.  An  income  support
initiative set up by the previous government,  the  Benazir  Income  Support
Program, appeared  to  be  withering  on  the  vine  under  the  new  PML(N)
government.

Dr Ballard noted that in the latest Human  Rights  Commission  for  Pakistan
report (he did not specify the date or title) concern was  expressed  as  to
the low levels in Pakistan of female  education  and  participation  in  the
work force.  He  stated  that  the  report  recorded  that  in  2013,  women
continued  to  suffer  violence,  discrimination,  inequality,   denial   of
economic rights and lack of control over their bodies and lives.

The Council of Islamic Ideology had rejected the Women's Protection  Act  of
2006 as 'not in line with Islamic injunctions' and stated that  hudood  laws
dealt with all offences against women, making a  separate  law  unnecessary.
Many  civil  society  activists  and  law  makers  were  calling   for   the
dissolution of the CII because of its 'regressive  decrees'.   A  number  of
specific incidents relating principally to the treatment of young women  and
of wives by husbands were cited.

Christine Brown's evidence

Ms Brown is a qualified social worker with almost 30 years' experience,  and
has worked in Trafford, Tameside and Manchester, mainly with children.   She
has worked with  troubled  children  at  risk  of  sexual  abuse,  and  with
children requiring Statements of Educational Need, fostering  and  adoption.
She has a degree in sociology and has contributed to publications on  social
work, asylum and immigration.  Ms Brown confirms that she is  aware  of  her
responsibility as an expert and of the Ikarian Reefer test.

Ms Brown has worked on a number of asylum appeals.  Her  report  deals  both
with the specific family situation between the appellant, her  partner,  and
their children, but also, based on the evidence in Dr Ballard's  report,  Ms
Brown purports to deal with country conditions in  Pakistan.   It  does  not
appear to us that this is within  her  area  of  expertise  and  we  do  not
consider that we can place weight on that aspect of her report.

After setting out the history of the family, Ms Brown gave an  insight  into
the motivation of the appellant's partner, drawn from his witness  statement
and conversations with him. He came from a very poor background and  as  the
eldest of seven siblings, he had been in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2001,
sending money back to support his family, working cash in hand as he had  no
legal status here.  He  had  not  had  a  relationship  before  meeting  the
appellant.  Ms Brown's understanding was  that  he  had  not  exercised  his
right to claim asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  that  appears  to  be
incorrect.

Ms Brown noted the partner's evidence that it was harder for him  to  obtain
'cash in hand' work after  2009,  when  the  United  Kingdom  tightened  its
regulatory regime and employers  began  to  ask  for  proof  of  immigration
status.  He had been finding it increasingly difficult to get  regular  work
and sometimes went two weeks without work, unable to pay rent or  buy  food.
He wanted to enjoy life with his little family and provide for them.

In Pakistan, the appellant's partner considered he  would  not  be  able  to
earn enough money to keep the family safe.  He  feared  reprisals  from  the
appellant's family, putting the whole family at risk.  In Pakistan,  if  one
had money, one could arrange anything, and it would be easy  for  those  who
wished to harm the partner, the appellant, or his children to arrange to  do
so.

The report describes the mutual dependency which has grown  up  between  the
appellant and her partner,  in  which  they  both  care  for  the  children,
particularly if they are ill.  The appellant  often  feels  unwell,  perhaps
because she is tired.  Her partner  takes  responsibility  for  washing  and
dressing the children, feeding them and getting them to school.   He  spends
the day with the appellant,  returning  to  his  own  accommodation  in  the
evenings.  They need to  be  together:  even  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
appellant's partner felt their circumstances were severely  constrained  and
that he could not provide for his children as he would wish.

The children were thriving and the eldest was beginning to make  friends  at
his pre-school.  Their mother had made poor decisions as  an  adult  due  to
being over-protected in Pakistan, Ms Brown thought, and  if  isolated  there
again, might continue  to  do  so.   She  might  not  cope  alone  with  the
children, despite her love for them.

If returned without their father, she was concerned by the risk,  identified
in Dr Ballard's report, that the eldest child  would  be  removed  from  his
mother's care and placed in an orphanage or madrasa as too old for  maternal
care. The rest of the report deals with separation anxiety in  children  and
with the evidence of Dr Ballard, which we have already summarised.

Country background reports and evidence

1.   Respondent's country of origin information

The respondent's position on the situation of women in Pakistan is  set  out
in a report entitled "Country  Information  and  Guidance  Pakistan:  Women"
published on  16  July  2014  and  updated  in  December  2015  as  'Country
Information and Guidance: Women  fearing  gender-based  violence,  Pakistan,
December 2015'.  To a large extent, the July 2014 and December 2015  reports
replicate the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in SN and  HM  and  other
country guidance  decisions.  In  relation  to  internal  relocation,  after
referring to SN and  HM,  the  July  2014  guidance  assesses  the  risk  as
follows:

         "1.3.14 However, taking into account the general position of  women
         in Pakistani society where they:

          . face patriarchal attitudes and deep-rooted stereotypes;
          . may not be educated or even literate;
          . may have to depend on relatives for economic support; and
          . face safety issues and social constraints in living alone,


         then internal relocation is likely to  be  unduly  harsh  for  many
         women.

         1.3.15 Factors such as the social positioning in  terms  of  class,
         religion, education, economic  independence,  region  and  location
         (urban  or  rural),  cultural  and   traditional   values,   caste,
         educational profile, marital status,  number  of  children  of  the
         person should be considered when determining whether relocation  is
         an option. Educated and professional women may find it possible  to
         support themselves in alternative locations.

         1.3.16 In assessing whether women who are fleeing a risk of serious
         domestic violence have a viable  internal  relocation  alternative,
         decision makers must not only have regard to  the  availability  of
         shelters/centres but also to the situation women  will  face  after
         they leave such centres."

 At paragraph 2.4, the report deals with whether a  single  woman  can  live
alone in Pakistan:

         "2.4. Single women

         2.4.1  According  to  a  representative  from  the   Human   Rights
         Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) '... it is "next to impossible" for a
         single woman to live alone in Pakistan due  to  prejudices  against
         women and economic dependence'.  According to a Metropolitan  State
         College of Denver Assistant Professor, most women  in  rural  areas
         lived with  their  families  and  it  was  generally  not  socially
         acceptable for women to live  alone.  In  urban  areas,  especially
         larger cities such  as  Karachi,  Lahore  or  Islamabad,  educated,
         higher class, working women found it easier to live alone, although
         this was still quite a rare occurrence. The  sources  consulted  by
         the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  describe  difficulties
         for single women renting property in urban areas, security concerns
         and social constraints. Divorcees face specific stigmatization  and
         social rejection."

The December 2015 version of the report noted the  gradual  introduction  of
women's police stations in many areas of Pakistan, albeit  understaffed  and
sometimes difficult to reach.  Some cities had a 24-hour helpline for  women
in distress to call and lodge complaints with women police officers.

As regards the availability of  domestic  violence  shelters,  the  December
2015 report says this:


         "10.2 Women's shelters

         10.2.1   The Aurat Foundation in its annual report for  2013  noted
         that 'There are very few shelter homes against the number of  women
         seeking refuge. Going to a shelter home is still  considered  taboo
         and perceived as the last resort of women who have been turned away
         by respectable society'.

         10.2.2   The USSD Human Rights report for 2014 stated:

             'The government  operated  the  Crisis  Center  for  Women  in
             Distress, which referred abused women to NGOs for  assistance.
             A total of 26 government funded Shaheed Benazir Bhutto centers
             for women across the country provided women  with  legal  aid,
             medical treatment, and psychosocial counseling. These  centers
             served women who were victims of  exploitation  and  violence.
             Victims later were referred to a  "dar  ul-aman,"  or  shelter
             house, and approximately 200 such homes for abused  women  and
             children had been established with funds from  the  Provincial
             Women Development Department.  These  shelter  homes  provided
             shelter and access to medical treatment. According to NGOs the
             shelters did not offer other types  of  assistance  to  women,
             such as legal aid or counseling, and primarily served as half-
             way homes for women awaiting trial for zina (i.e.,  adultery),
             even though they were the victims of rape and domestic  abuse.
             Government  centers  lacked  sufficient  space,   staff,   and
             resources. In some cases women were reportedly abused  at  the
             government-run shelters and  found  their  movements  severely
             restricted,  or  they  were  pressured  to  return  to   their
             abusers.'

         10.2.3   The Aurat Foundation reported  in  2012  that  these  same
         Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Crisis Centres 'can only provide shelter  to
         women for a period of 24-72 hours. For  longer-term  accommodation,
         they are either sent to the Islamabad Women's Crisis Centre, or  to
         the provincial governments operated Dar ul-Aman shelter  homes,  or
         encouraged to negotiate an agreement. They may also be  transferred
         to other shelters depending upon  the  nature  of  the  case.'  The
         report identified a number of challenges facing these  shelters  as
         with  all  other  institutions  including  a  shortage  of   staff,
         particularly of properly trained staff, an increase in  the  demand
         for services but  not  enough  resources  are  available,  and  the
         centres are open only for certain hours of  the  day,  which  meant
         that they are not available for emergency situations, or for  women
         seeking shelter after closing hours.

         10.2.4   In a 2014 report, the Aurat Foundation listed  the  number
         of functional  and  on  record  shelter  homes  for  women  in  the
         districts selected. Seven  shelters  were  functioning  in  Karachi
         district; one in Hyderabad; four in Peshawar; one in Islamabad; and
         one in Mardan district. No shelters were cited  for  Swat.  Shelter
         services  in  Peshawar   and   Mardan   were   considered   "highly
         insufficient and unreliable". Dawn reported in September 2014 that,
         according to a consultative meeting 'Dar  ul-Amans  in  Sindh  were
         plagued by lack of skilled staff, poor infrastructure and  security
         issues.'  Reporting  on  the  passing  of  the  Domestic   Violence
         (Prevention and Protection) Bill, 2014, in Balochistan, Dawn stated
         'in Balochistan there is only one functioning  women's  shelter  in
         Quetta which, in the words of a provincial legislator, "is more  of
         a criminal concern rather than any shelter. We  wouldn't  want  any
         woman to go there; she'll come out with her reputation in tatters".
         The condition of most women's shelters, if not all, in the  country
         is  reportedly  not  much  better.'  According  to  a  South   Asia
         Partnership Pakistan report cited in  the  Express  Tribune,  'many
         shelter  homes  lacked  basic  health   facilities.   "Offices   of
         physiologists  and  doctors  at  many  of  the  shelter  homes  are
         vacant".'

         10.2.5   According to representatives of the NGO  Shirkat  Gah  and
         HCRP, privately run shelters (by NGOs) were said to be better  than
         government-run shelters with reports  stating  that  government-run
         shelters were too few, should hold women for longer durations,  and
         that they were overcrowded with poor  facilities  and  inadequately
         trained staff. There were also reports of  abuse  taking  place  at
         shelters. Some shelters, both state and NGO-run, tried to reconcile
         women with their families, due to the difficulties of single  women
         living alone in Pakistan society. Sources provided  information  on
         two NGO-run shelters, one in Lahore; Dastak, and  one  in  Karachi;
         Panah. According  to  'Cause  of  Death:  Woman,  an  investigative
         project of the Swedish Association of Women's  Shelters  and  Young
         Women's Empowerment  Centres',  which  examined  the  situation  of
         violence against women in  10  countries  between  2010  and  2012,
         Dastak accommodates 25 women and 45  children,  but  at  times  has
         housed 70 women and their children, as "no one is turned away". The
         same source also reported that most women stay  at  Dastak  for  at
         least three months, although some have stayed  for  several  years.
         The organisation Shirkat Gah reported that Panah houses 40-45 women
         and children.


         10.2.6   A September 2014 World Bank  report  on  violence  against
         women in South Asia  reports  that:  'Women  'rescued'  from  honor
         crimes also  suffer  abuse  when  remanded  to  safe  houses  where
         conditions  are  abysmal  and   akin   to   a   prison.   Moreover,
         reintegration into family and society of women  who  have  been  in
         custody is made even harder if women are sexually abused,  as  they
         are then regarded as 'dishonored' or 'spoiled,' bringing  shame  to
         their families'."

2.   US State Department Report for Pakistan [2014]

The US State Department Report for  2014  painted  the  same  picture,  with
women often being treated as chattels and  subject  to  discrimination,  and
failure to pursue perpetrators of offences against them:

    "Women
    ...As in previous years, the government did not effectively enforce the
    Women's Protection Act of 2006. ...In 2010  the  FSC  [Federal  Shariat
    Court] declared several clauses  of  the  Women's  Protection  Act  un-
    Islamic and unconstitutional. The verdict sought to  reinstate  certain
    provisions  of  the  1979  Hudood  Ordinance  and  expand   the   FSC's
    jurisdiction in cases of adultery and false accusations of adultery.  A
    reinstatement of these provisions could  permit  the  use  of  adultery
    charges against women in cases of rape, as occurred  in  the  past.  In
    2011 the federal government appealed the FSC's decision to the  Supreme
    Court, which had not set a hearing date by  year's  end.  In  September
    2013 the nongovernmental Council of  Islamic  Ideology,  which  advises
    parliament and the prime minister, rejected the Women's Protection Act,
    saying it was contrary to the spirit of the Quran and sharia. ...


    On May 27, Farzana Iqbal's male family members killed her  outside  the
    Lahore High Court for choosing a "love marriage" without  her  parents'
    consent. According to media reports, Farzana's family shot her and then
    used bricks from a nearby construction site to kill  her.  The  medical
    examination confirmed that she died from severe head wounds. The attack
    on Farzana sparked domestic and international outrage. On November  19,
    a court delivered a death sentence to four men involved in the attack.


    Police in Sindh established karo-kari [honour  killing]  cells  with  a
    toll-free  telephone  number  in  the  districts  of  Sukkur,   Ghotki,
    Khairpur,  and  Nausharo  Feroze  for  persons  to   report   karo-kari
    incidents. Because honor crimes  generally  occurred  within  families,
    many went unreported. Police and NGOs reported increased media coverage
    enabled law enforcement officials to take some action against a limited
    number of perpetrators. ...

    The 2011 Prevention of Anti-Women Practices Amendment Act  criminalizes
    punishes giving a woman in marriage  to  settle  a  civil  or  criminal
    dispute; depriving  a  woman  of  her  rights  to  inherit  movable  or
    immovable property by deceitful or illegal means; coercing  or  in  any
    manner compelling a woman  to  enter  into  marriage;  and  compelling,
    arranging, or facilitating the marriage of  a  woman  with  the  Quran,
    including forcing her oath on the Quran to remain unmarried or  not  to
    claim her share of an inheritance. ...

    The 2012 National Commission on the Status of Women Bill  provides  for
    the commission's financial and administrative autonomy  to  investigate
    violations of women's rights. According to  women's  rights  activists,
    however, the commission lacked resources and remained powerless. ...

    Discrimination: Women faced legal and economic discrimination. The  law
    prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, but authorities  did  not
    enforce it. Women faced discrimination in family law, property law, and
    the judicial system. Family law provides protection for women in  cases
    of divorce, including requirements  for  maintenance,  and  sets  clear
    guidelines for custody of minor children and  their  maintenance.  Many
    women were unaware of these legal protections or unable to obtain legal
    counsel to enforce them. Divorced women often were left with  no  means
    of support, as their families ostracized them. Women are  legally  free
    to marry without family consent, but women who did so  frequently  were
    ostracized or faced becoming victims of honor crimes.

    The 2011 Prevention of Anti-Women Practices Act  makes  it  illegal  to
    deny women inheritance of property by deceitful means. Female  children
    are entitled to  one-half  the  inheritance  of  male  children.  Wives
    inherit one-eighth of their husband's estate. Women often received  far
    less  than   their   legal   entitlement.   Women   faced   significant
    discrimination in employment and frequently were paid less than men for
    similar work."

Divorced women risked being ostracised by their families, leaving them  with
no means of support: the same was the case for  those  who  married  without
family approval and consent.  Women worked, but were paid less than men,  in
urban areas: in rural areas, they often did not work at all.

3.   Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (Canadian IRB)

The Canadian IRB evidence also assessed that laws passed  to  protect  women
in Pakistan had not yet changed  their  underlying  status:  70-90%  of  all
women had experienced domestic violence at the hands of husbands  or  family
members, much of which went unreported. State  protection  was  in  practice
unavailable to women at risk from  their  husband  or  family.   Government-
funded  shelters  provided  housing,  legal  aid,  medical   treatment   and
counselling but were miserably overcrowded, putting women  at  further  risk
of abuse. Honour crimes continued to be a problem, when a woman  had  shamed
her family.  A woman could divorce her husband, but  social  pressures  made
it difficult.  There was  a  sharp  rural/urban  divide,  with  rural  women
regarded as chattels and urban women in a slightly better  position,  though
life remained difficult for single women.

A 2007 Reply by the Canadian IRB  indicated  that  whether  a  single  woman
could live alone in an urban environment would depend  on  her  age,  class,
education and the setting.  Highly  educated  and  economically  independent
women could probably do so, but they were few in number.  Older  women  were
more likely  to  be  able  to  live  alone  than  younger  women.   Internal
relocation required money and resources  of  one's  own,  since  no  housing
benefit and so on was available from the government.

In  2010,  the  Canadian  IRB  published  a  document   entitled   Pakistan:
Circumstances under which a woman has the  legal  right  to  get  a  divorce
through  the  courts  (judicial  divorce)  through   her   own   initiative;
circumstances under which single women can live alone,  which  set  out  the
divorce rights for Muslim women  in  Pakistan,  and  also  the  position  of
single women.  Dealing first with divorce, the report says this:

    "Divorce rights of Muslim women
    A Muslim marriage, says the Sustainable  Development  Policy  Institute
    (SDPI), a Pakistan-based independent non-profit organization founded in
    1992 "to serve as  a  source  of  expertise  for  policy  analysis  and
    development" ... is "a contract and can be  dissolved  like  any  other
    contract". ... Marriage among Muslims  is  similarly  described  as  "a
    civil contract" that "can be the subject of dissolution for good cause"
    by Mian Muhibullah Kakakhel, the founder of Kakakhel Law Associates and
    a senior advocate of Pakistan's Supreme Court (23  Sept.  2008).  As  a
    contract, explains the SDPI, "both wife  and  husband  have  legal  and
    religious rights to dissolve a marriage"

    According to the SDPI, while a man has the "unilateral right of  talaq"
    ...the "absolute and inherent power  to  repudiate  his  wife"  without
    offering any reason (Daily Star 3  July  2010)-women  legally  dissolve
    their marriage under the following three circumstances ..:
        . If the husband has "unconditionally delegated" the right of
          divorce in the nikah nama or marriage contract ....
        . If the wife files suit in family court for khula, which means
          "untying the knot'" ...or "to put off as a man is said to khula
          his garment when he puts it off" (Kakakhel Law Associates 23
          Sept. 2008).
        . If, under the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939, she
          files suit for judicial divorce in family court ...
    In spite of these "pronounced, guaranteed and  statutory  rights,"  the
    Kakakhel lawyer reported that it is "extremely difficult" for  a  woman
    to ask for her right to divorce, not only because Pakistan is "a  male-
    oriented and male-dominated society," but also  because  the  woman  is
    "psychologically debarred from having access" to the laws governing her
    right to divorce  (23  Sept.  2008).  For  an  assistant  professor  of
    political  science  at  the  Metropolitan  State  College   of   Denver
    corresponding with the Research Directorate, the degree  of  difficulty
    depends  on  the  woman's  social  class,   education   and   financial
    independence, as well as the level of support she can expect  from  her
    family (15 Oct. 2010). But in the case of divorce  through  khula,  the
    main difficulty would be the attack on her moral character  that  would
    come under a cross-examining lawyer's questions (Assistant Professor 15
    Oct. 2010).
    Judicial divorce
    Under the Dissolution of  Muslim  Marriages  Act,  1939,  a  woman  who
    "regards the husband [as] at fault" can  initiate  a  judicial  divorce
    through a family court ...,  which  were  established  under  the  West
    Pakistan Family Courts Act,  1964,  to  "adjudicate  upon  ...  matters
    relating to the dissolution of marriage" (Kakakhel  Law  Associates  23
    Sept. 2008). According to the SDPI, unless the couple  reconciles,  the
    family court issues a decree dissolving the marriage and sends it to  a
    Union Council ..., an elected local government body of  13  councillors
    headed by a nazim, or mayor, and a naib  nazim,  or  deputy  mayor  (UN
    HABITANT et al.).
    The divorce does not come into effect until the end of iddat ..., a
    prescribed waiting period during which a woman cannot remarry (Omar
    July 2007); iddat can last either 90 days after the union council has
    received the dissolution decree or, if the wife is pregnant, until the
    birth of a child . ... If the divorce is granted, the Union Council
    issues a divorce certificate and the woman keeps her mehr (ibid.), or
    mahr (Shahid Sept. 2009), a dower given to the wife by the husband
    (Omar July 2007).
    Grounds for judicial divorce
    Section 2 of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 permits
    divorce on any one of the following grounds:
    (i)  that the whereabouts of the husband have  not  been  known  for  a
          period of four years;
    (ii)     that the husband has neglected or has failed  to  provide  for
          her maintenance for a period of two years;
    (ii-A)   that the husband has taken an additional wife in contravention
          of the provisions of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961;
    (iii)    that the husband has been  sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  a
          period of seven years or upwards;
    (iv)     that the husband has failed  to  perform,  without  reasonable
          cause, his marital obligations for a period of three years;
    (v)  that the husband was impotent at the  time  of  the  marriage  and
          continues to be so;
    (vi)     that the husband has been insane for a period of two years  or
          is suffering from leprosy or a virulent venereal disease; ...
    (viii)   that the husband treats her with cruelty, that is to say,
          (a)     habitually assaults her or makes her  life  miserable  by
                cruelty of conduct even if such conduct does not  amount  to
                physical ill-treatment, or
          (b)     associates with women of evil repute of leads an infamous
                life, or
          (c)     attempts to force her to lead an immoral life, or
          (d)     disposes of her property or prevents her  exercising  her
                legal rights over it, or
          (e)      obstructs  her  in  the  observance  of  her   religious
                profession or practice, or
          (f)     if he has  more  wives  than  one,  does  not  treat  her
                equitably in accordance with the injunctions of the Quran,
    (ix)     on any other ground which  is  recognized  as  valid  for  the
          dissolution of marriages under Muslim Law ... (Pakistan 1939)
    Section 2 also  allows  a  woman  to  repudiate  a  marriage  that  was
    contracted by her parents or guardians while she  was  still  a  minor,
    provided that the marriage was not consummated (Kakakhel Law Associates
    23 Sept. 2008) or consummated before she was 16 years old (ibid.).


    Khula divorce
    Female scholar Shagufta Omar, writing in 2007 in Policy Perspectives, a
    biannual  journal  published  by  the  Institute  of  Policy   Studies,
    Islamabad, defines khula as "divorce on the wife's demand,"  the  basis
    of which is the Quran (July 2007). In Islamic or Sharia  law  a  Muslim
    woman has the right to initiate divorce  when  she  feels  she  can  no
    longer live with her husband (Kakakhel Law Associates  23  Sept.  2008)
    because of what the SDPI  calls  "an  irretrievable  breakdown  of  the
    marriage" (ibid.).
    According to Omar, the process for dissolving a marriage on  the  basis
    of khula is through an agreement between  the  woman  and  her  husband
    (July 2007). This marriage dissolution, Omar says,  is  obtained  "only
    through court since out-of-court khula settlements are not  so  common"
    (Omar July 2007). The SDPI also indicates that the wife files suit  for
    khula in a family court ... On the other hand, the Kakakhel lawyer says
    that khula may be obtained either through mutual agreement or by  court
    order (23 Sept. 2008).
    Although a woman can dissolve her marriage through khula, she  does  so
    "by surrendering certain rights given to her," such as dower (Omar July
    2007). A law professor at the University of Warwick who specializes  in
    Islamic  law  and  Pakistani   women's   rights   also   indicated   in
    correspondence with the Research Directorate that, if a woman asks  for
    khula, she must relinquish her mehr or marriage gift  (17  Oct.  2010).
    The SDPI similarly states that, in a case of khula, the wife  "usually"
    has to return the mehr, as well as "other benefits" obtained  from  the
    husband. However, Ayesha Shahid, a lecturer at the University  of  Hull
    in the United Kingdom, summarizes Pakistan Superior Court decisions  on
    the payment of dower to divorced women in a 2009  conference  paper  in
    which she notes that
    The courts have taken a positive and liberal approach  in  interpreting
    Islamic principles relating to dissolution of  marriage  by  khula  and
    payment/repayment of dower. The courts have refused to accept the  plea
    of the husband for recovery of dower in cases where khula was  obtained
    because of the cruelty or any other fault of the husband. (Sept. 2009)"

Dealing next with the circumstances of single women, the  report  identifies
that there are variations across Pakistan, and also in relation to the  age,
prosperity, and educational status of the woman in question:

    "Whether single women can live alone
    For women to live alone and unmarried in Pakistan, it  will  depend  on
    which province and in  what  context  they  are  living,  reported  the
    Metropolitan State College  of  Denver  Assistant  Professor  (15  Oct.
    2010). The  Assistant  Professor  explained  that,  socio-economically,
    "Pakistan has [a] very sharp rural and urban divide" (15 Oct. 2010).
    Rural is collectivist, community/village based, agrarian,  traditional,
    more illiterate and poor. Women are not  recognized  as  an  individual
    member of the community,  they  are  members  of  their  male-dominated
    family. Woman's life in the village context is a matter of concern  for
    every man of the neighborhood community. There  is  no  concept  of  an
    'unattached' woman. She has to live with her family.  What  do  widows,
    divorced or spinsters do? They live  with  their  parental  or  in-laws
    family. Older women with grown up children  normally  depend  on  their
    sons or daughters. There are always exceptions to their  situations  in
    the rural context but generally it is not socially safe and  acceptable
    for women to live in the rural context.
    Urban is semi-collectivist and  individualistic,  more  literate,  with
    better infrastructure and transportation facilities and plenty  of  job
    opportunities i.e. skilled or unskilled. Urban is different  but  still
    there are difficulties for  single  women.  Here,  class  is  the  main
    determinant of woman's choices  for  her  life  style.  In  big  cities
    educated women with jobs or some property income would  not  have  much
    difficulty to live alone. (ibid.)
    The Law Professor also said that "[i]t all depends on who you are, what
    resources you have, which part of the country you come from, [and] what
    your own educational and economic, professional  status  is"  (17  Oct.
    2010).

    Degree of independence experienced by women
    Both the Assistant Professor  and  the  Law  Professor  said  that  the
    ability of women to act independently differs depending on their  level
    of education (Assistant Professor  15  Oct.  2010;  Professor  17  Oct.
    2010). For example, the Assistant Professor said that

         "[Educated] urban, upper/middle class working women  or  housewives
         do not find it difficult to rent an apartment or  to  open  a  bank
         account or travel domestically or  internationally.  Women  in  the
         rural areas normally do not rent a house or any other place. Due to
         lack of education, they are normally [accompanied] by a male member
         to open an account or to do other things in public sphere. (15 Oct.
         2010)"
    The Law Professor also indicated  that,  although  there  are  no  laws
    preventing a woman to open her own bank account, "it depends  [on]  who
    that woman is," whether she's literate, has her own identification, and
    can travel alone (17 Oct. 2010). As the Professor explained,

          "This is more to do with access rather than the law  or  society.
          If a professional woman, earning  good  money  went  to  rent  an
          apartment, no one would bat an eyelid. [But] that is because  her
          sense of autonomy and authority would make her able to do so. (17
          Oct. 2010)"
    Treatment of single women
    The Assistant Professor reported that a woman living alone in  a  rural
    area is an "exceptional situation" that "is not liked by her family  or
    community" (15 Oct. 2010). However,  the  Assistant  Professor  allowed
    that the woman's age should be taken into consideration (15 Oct. 2010).
    If she is an older woman, in her 70s or 80s, it  would  not  be  a  big
    problem in both contexts, rural and urban or in any class. A young or a
    middle age woman finds it hard to live alone in all of these  contexts.
    All kind [of] gossips surround her and she is watched by  everyone  for
    every move she makes. (Assistant Professor 15 Oct. 2010)

    The Law Professor stated that the absence of a male relative may make a
    woman  "vulnerable"  and  added  that  "the  worsening  law  and  order
    situation" has made Pakistan "a generally unsafe place to be" (17  Oct.
    2010). Younger women risk attracting  "unwanted  attention  from  men";
    older women may find themselves taken advantage  of  by  their  helpers
    (Professor 17 Oct. 2010). The Assistant  Professor  also  said  that  a
    woman "[living] alone in majority of the contexts such as rural  (which
    is about 70% of Pakistan)  and  lower/middle  class  urban"  would  put
    herself at "risk for her safety and security" (15 Oct. 2010).  The  Law
    Professor likewise said that any attempt to break away from her  family
    "might pose a danger" to the safety of even "a resourceful  woman"  (17
    Oct. 2010).
    Regional differences

    In a follow-up to initial correspondence with the Research Directorate,
    the Assistant Professor explained that of  Pakistan's  four  provinces-
    Sindh, Punjab, Balochistan and Khayber Pakhtunkhah (KP)  (formerly  the
    North-West Frontier Province [NWFP])-the urban centres  in  Punjab  and
    Sindh are "more educated and liberal" while cities in  Balochistan  and
    KP have a "very  conservative  culture.  It  would  be  easier  for  an
    educated single woman to live alone in Karachi or  Lahore  but  not  in
    Peshawar or Quetta" (18 Oct. 2010). The Assistant Professor added that

          "[social] and physical mobility of single women  in  Pakistan  is
          not an easy thing. An educated woman working in  a  multinational
          may move easily from Karachi  to  Lahore  or  Islamabad  (capital
          city) [but] not to the rural areas or to the smaller  cities.  If
          she is hiding from her family or her husband, it  would  be  much
          difficult for her do that." (18 Oct. 2010)


    Similarly,  the  Law  Professor  said  that   "maybe"   an   "educated,
    professional woman," with "resources," could relocate and live alone in
    a city (17 Oct. 2010). But, the Law  Professor  cautioned,  if  she  is
    young and does not have a male relative, it would  be  "difficult"  (17
    Oct. 2010).

A 2012 report by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) agreed with  those
findings.   Older  evidence  from  the  AHRC  largely  predate   the   legal
protections which were put in place in  2010  and  2011  and  the  slow  but
visible cultural change which that entails. We  note,  in  particular,  that
the most recent Human Rights Watch report in the bundle is  the  2011  World
Report, published  in  January  2011,  and  that  there  are  no  Integrated
Regional Information Network News (IRIN) reports  in  the  bundle  after  27
January 2011.  The latest Amnesty International report relied upon is  dated
27 May 2010.  Given the age of these reports, were are unable to place  much
weight upon their contents and neither party in their  submissions  directed
us to these documents or relied thereon.

4.   'Safe to Return? Pakistani  women,  domestic  violence  and  access  to
refugee  protection  -  a  report  of  a  trans-national  research   project
conducted in the United Kingdom  and  Pakistan'  (Safe  to  Return?)  [2008]
published by South Manchester Law  Centre  in  partnership  with  Manchester
Metropolitan University

The Safe to Return? Report was in the bundle, but  neither  of  the  parties
directed us to any specific passages therein.  We have  had  regard  to  the
report, which we consider to be  a  well-constructed  and  careful  research
document  based  on  field  work  in  Pakistan  by  a  single,  multilingual
researcher  between  2003-2006  and  interviews  with  33  individuals   and
organisations in Pakistan conducted between  February  and  July  2006,  and
individuals and organisations in the United  Kingdom  between  October  2006
and July 2007.

Safe to Return? was considered at length by the Upper  Tribunal  in  KA  and
Others (domestic violence risk  on  return)  Pakistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  216
(IAC), at [214]-[242].  It is not in any sense new evidence:  as  published,
it is  now  8  years  old,  but  the  evidence  considered  was  taken  from
interviews which took place between 10 and 13 years ago.   The  Tribunal  in
KA and others expressed some concerns about Safe to Return?:

         "219.     Turning in more detail to the Safe to Return? report,  it
         has some other features (besides being  several  years  old)  which
         call for caution on our part. It is a campaigning document  written
         in part by legal representatives who act for women  in  UK  asylum-
         related cases and in places expressly notes that  it  reflects  the
         experience of such representatives (see the reference  at  8.11  to
         "the  experience  of  legal  practitioners  handling  the  relevant
         evidence"). The report also contains a  critique  of  the  existing
         case law of the Tribunal and higher courts on  internal  relocation
         which it considers too restrictive; it is not simply an  assessment
         of the situation in Pakistan.  Further  we  find  certain  features
         relating to the nature of its principal  findings  and  conclusions
         troubling. Many are set out in the form  of  broad  generalisations
         with very little by way of qualification. The reason why that is  a
         concern is that the  authors  candidly  explain  elsewhere  in  the
         report that their research  had  various  limitations:  that  their
         primary research only covered parts of Pakistan; that they did  not
         have access to comprehensive  data  regarding  women's  centres  in
         Pakistan and  that  it  relied  heavily  on  a  limited  number  of
         interviews (individual and collective)  with  various  participants
         who were either victims of domestic violence or  service  providers
         for such women. The report also  acknowledges  the  need  for  more
         research and for more diverse data (presently the authors  explain,
         researchers are heavily reliant on press cuttings). On one  or  two
         key  points   of   detail   (see   below   our   discussion   about
         confidentiality) its  findings  are  unclear.  Such  qualifications
         should in our view have made the authors less ready to generalise.


         220.    However,  it  remains  that  by  virtue  of  the  empirical
         research the authors conducted, and the fact that they seek to  put
         that in the context of other  studies  and  reports  available,  it
         represents the most  detailed  study  that  exists.   In  addition,
         although the limitations of the reach  and  quality  of  their  own
         research do not deter the authors from advancing a series of  broad
         generalisations, the specific observations made  by  the  principal
         field worker (and her assistant)  show  a  clear  determination  to
         record faithfully  all  aspects,  positive  and  negative,  of  the
         service provisions visited.  (It  is  also  a  valuable  source  of
         information on  subjects  not  intrinsically  related  to  domestic
         violence - see e.g.  its coverage in chapter 4 of the legal context
         impacting on women  in  Pakistan  -  but  these  are  now  somewhat
         dated)."

The Tribunal in KA considered that the position  on  domestic  violence  was
improving slowly and at [221]  that  'it  would  be  unwise,  therefore,  to
assume that the situation will not be subject to  change  in  the  next  few
years'.  At paragraph 222, the Tribunal said this:

    "222.    It remains our assessment that within Pakistan there are  many
         differences in the  way  that  family,  tribal  and  cultural  (and
         sometimes religious) patterns of living impact on the  position  of
         women. One of the persons interviewed by the main Safe  to  Return?
         fieldworker noted, for example,  the  sharp  contrast  between  the
         position of women from rural areas as compared with that of   women
         in Lahore: "Lahore is  a  city  and  here  women  are  progressive"
         (6.7.1). Such variations and different  perceptions  in  a  country
         with a large population spread over a large geographical area  make
         it very difficult to generalise as to what will  be  the  situation
         facing returning  women  who  are  victims  of  domestic  violence.
         Against this background it continues to make very good  sense  that
         country guidance should continue to avoid broad generalisations and
         should emphasise the  need  for  examination  of  the  individual's
         particular circumstances.  That is as true whether one is examining
         risk  in  a  person's  home  area  or  in  a  place  of   potential
         relocation."

Dealing with the availability of shelters, and whether it was  unduly  harsh
for internal relocation purposes to  expect  women  to  use  them,   the  KA
Tribunal said this:

         "236.    We wish to emphasise,  however,  that  what  emerges  very
         strongly from the  Safe  to  Return?  report  is  that  it  is  not
         sufficient simply to consider the issue of internal  relocation  by
         reference   to   whether   there   are   available   and   adequate
         centres/refuges. Focus has to be not only on the provision but  the
         general position women who make  use  of  such  centres  will  find
         themselves in the longer term.

         237.     ... So whilst we think the Safe to  Return?  report  draws
         helpful attention to the need to look at the longer-term  situation
         such women face, we do not find that the evidence contained in this
         report or the other sources helps us very much in forming  a  clear
         picture of how women victims of domestic violence who have made use
         of women's centres and refuges then resolve their  difficulties  in
         terms of finding places to live  and  work.  The  Safe  to  Return?
         report argues that the position is that in general such  women  end
         up being forced to return to their abuser husbands/families or face
         serious exploitation. But there is very little  empirical  evidence
         cited in support of these  broad  generalisations  and,  given  the
         numbers of  women  said  to  use  these  services,  we  would  have
         expected, if the general position was that  these  centres/shelters
         routinely failed to end the cycle of oppression the women who  turn
         to them face, that would have been evident  in  the  form  of  more
         reported cases in  the  press  or  in  the  Pakistan  Human  Rights
         Commission report or in available cases studies. Nevertheless,  the
         uncertain state of the evidence makes it  imperative  in  our  view
         that decision-makers pay particular regard to how  they  think  the
         individual applicant/appellant will be able to  manage  getting  on
         with their lives after they have left the centres/refuges.

         238.    We need to consider further to what  extent  other  factors
         such as class, age, culture, tribe, religion etc can further modify
         the position of women victims of domestic violence.

         239.    It is fairly clear that women who have their own  financial
         means or access to financial help from family members or friends or
         who are well-educated or professional women are likely to  be  able
         to secure residential accommodation. We accept the observation made
         by the Safe to Return?  authors  that  possessing  a  class  status
         higher up the social ladder does not mean that such  women  do  not
         still face discrimination and a degree of stigmatisation.  However,
         even the authors themselves accept that  if  women  have  financial
         means they can in general survive (see 6.15) and  the  evidence  is
         lacking to indicate that such women are in general unable  to  cope
         with  such difficulties; although clearly some do not cope and some
         may even find they have lost more than poorer women (7.5.1) .

         240.    On the other hand, concerning age,  it  would  appear  that
         most centres/refuges do not adequately cater for the needs of young
         girls on their own (Safe to Return?, 6.10) and  young  adult  women
         are likely to find it more difficult to live alone than others  (we
         note that is also the view taken by the Canadian  IRB  in  December
         2007).

         241.    Another important variable concerns  women  who  have  male
         children over five.  From  the  Safe  to  Return?  research,  taken
         together with other materials,  we are satisfied  that  women  with
         boys over five may not be able to find a centre or refuge that will
         allow them to live together; the boys above this age are placed  in
         orphanages or madrassahs in the area. As described by the  Safe  to
         Return? report:

              "[On] admittance the mother is informed of  this  policy  and
             has to then make a choice of being with her sons or  accepting
             a place at the shelter. If the  woman  chooses  to  enter  the
             shelter her sons  are  referred  to  the  local  madrassas  or
             orphanages. This practice has not taken into consideration the
             impact this has on the children who may have been a witness to
             the violence. Apart from the trauma of separation  from  their
             mother the children  may  have  specific  psychological  needs
             because of their previous experiences in their homes".

         242.    We do not say that such arrangements are necessarily to  be
         seen as making the mother and her  son's  relocation  unreasonable,
         only that this may be a factor which has considerable  significance
         when considering the reasonableness of internal relocation."

We adopt and rely upon that analysis of Safe to  Return?   The  KA  Tribunal
concluded, so far as relevant to the present enquiry, that:

         "iii.         The Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act
         2006 ("PWA"), one of a number of legislative measures undertaken to
         improve the situation of women in Pakistan in the past decade,  has
         had a significant effect on the operation of the Pakistan  criminal
         law as it affects women accused of adultery. It led to the  release
         of 2,500 imprisoned women. Most sexual  offences  now  have  to  be
         dealt with under the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC)  rather  than  under
         the more punitive Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance
         1979. Husbands no longer have power to register a First Information
         Report (FIR) with the police alleging adultery;  since  1  December
         2006 any such complaint must be presented to  a  court  which  will
         require sufficient grounds to be shown for any charges to  proceed.
         A senior police officer has to conduct the investigation.  Offences
         of adultery (both zina liable to hadd and  zina  liable  to  tazir)
         have been  made  bailable.  However,  Pakistan  remains  a  heavily
         patriarchal society and levels of domestic violence continue to  be
         high.  ...

         vi.      The guidance given in SN and HM (Divorced women - risk  on
         return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283 and FS (Domestic violence  -
         SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan CG [2006] UKIAT 00023 remains valid.  The
         network of women's  shelters  (comprising  government-run  shelters
         (Dar ul-Amans) and private and Islamic women's crisis  centres)  in
         general affords effective protection for women victims of  domestic
         violence, although there are significant shortcomings in the  level
         of services and treatment of inmates in some  such  centres.  Women
         with boys over 5 face separation from their sons.

         vii.     In assessing whether women victims  of  domestic  violence
         have a viable internal relocation alternative, regard must  be  had
         not only to the availability of such shelters/centres but  also  to
         the situation women will face after they leave such centres."

The author of Safe to Return?  noted  in  her  report,  8  years  ago,  that
further research might be  needed  to  take  account  of  new  and  emerging
evidence on domestic violence in Pakistan. We must look elsewhere  for  that
evidence.

Discussion

We have considered what conclusions we can draw from the  country  evidence.
 The generic country evidence indicates that despite protective  legislation
introduced in 2010 and after, sufficient state protection will normally  not
be available in the home  area,  in  circumstances  where  a  real  risk  of
persecution or serious harm has been shown to  exist  there  from  a  female
applicant's family or husband.  Any assessment of  international  protection
needs will require a careful and fact specific assessment as to the  nature,
source and scope of the risk to  the  applicant  at  the  date  of  hearing,
including taking into account the  possibility,  if  the  woman  has  family
support, a male protector, or is educated, wealthy, or  older,  of  internal
relocation to one of the larger cities.

We accept the evidence of Ms Brown regarding the  strong  and  growing  bond
between the appellant, her partner, and their children, and we  have  relied
upon it in the individual assessment of the appellant's circumstances  which
follows  the  country  guidance  in  this  decision.   As  regards   country
conditions, Ms Brown does not claim to be a country expert and  the  country
conditions part of her report is derived from the report of Dr Ballard.  She
had no independent perspective to  add  to  that  of  Dr  Ballard,  and  her
assessment of country conditions therefore stands or falls with that  of  Dr
Ballard.

The principal country expert evidence is therefore that of Dr  Ballard.   Dr
Ballard is a respected country expert who has assisted  the  Upper  Tribunal
and its predecessor the Immigration Appeals  Tribunal  in  country  guidance
cases on a number of occasions, most  recently  in  TG  and  others  (Afghan
Sikhs persecuted) (CG) [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC).

Dr Ballard did not give oral evidence and his  report  provides  no  sources
for his opinions and conclusions. We have therefore given his evidence  such
weight as it will bear: where there are matters which concern  us,  we  have
not been able to resolve them by asking questions directly  of  Dr  Ballard.
It is clear from the present report that Dr Ballard had not been made  aware
of the much improved  relations  between  the  appellant  and  her  partner:
however, his report remains  relevant  as  to  the  circumstances  which  he
understood to be those  of  this  appellant,  that  is,  a  female  head  of
household, with no family support, and  divorced  or  estranged  from  their
spouse or male partner.

In general, we accept Dr Ballard's written evidence that a  female  head  of
household in Pakistan with no husband or family backing,  would  be  treated
as kinless and a demi-mondaine, because of  her  inability  to  explain  her
circumstances truthfully to new friends  and  neighbours.  His  opinion  was
that  such a person would have little difficulty in  finding  a  room  in  a
five star hotel but that without a respectable male guardian, she  would  be
unable to  find  cheaper  accommodation,  and  thus  would  be  at  risk  of
accepting an accommodation offer which  she  realised  too  late  came  with
sexual strings attached.  That observation  was  not  sourced,  and  is  not
differentiated by age, social position, education  or  financial  resources,
as is the case in other generic reports before us.  We treat  that  part  of
Dr  Ballard's  evidence  with  a  degree  of   caution.   We   accept   that
accommodation is more readily  available  to  women  who  are  in  a  strong
financial or social position, but we do not consider that the other  country
evidence, particularly the evidence of the Canadian  IRB  or  the  US  State
Department Report supports Dr Ballard's assertion that nothing short of a 5-
star hotel will do.

We accept Dr Ballard's evidence of the  limited  availability  of  shelters,
the scarcity of places, and the risk that children, particularly  boys,  who
are over 5 years old, would not be admitted to  the  shelters,  because  the
perception was that they should be with their fathers.  His evidence  is  in
line with the findings set out in the headnote  to  KA  (Pakistan)  in  2010
that:

    "(vi)    ...The network of women's shelters (comprising  government-run
    shelters (Dar-ul Amans) and private and Islamic women's crisis centres)
    in general affords effective protection for women victims  of  domestic
    violence, although there are significant shortcomings in the  level  of
    services and treatment of inmates in some such centres. Women with boys
    over 5 face separation from their sons.

    (vi) In assessing whether women victims of  domestic  violence  have  a
    viable internal relocation alternative, regard must be had not only  to
    the availability of such shelters/centres but  also  to  the  situation
    women will face after they leave such centres."

In so far as the risk in a woman's home area is concerned,  we  also  accept
his assertion that where her family will not  accept  a  woman's  return  to
them, she runs a higher risk of ostracism on the basis that  her  sin  would
be perceived as having been exceptionally serious; however,  we  treat  that
assertion with a degree of caution in relation to  women  who  are  able  to
make their way in larger cities because they are older, or  educated,  in  a
good financial position, or have a male guardian.

The Canadian Immigration and Refugee  Board,  the  respondent's  Country  of
Information Report and the Pakistani Law Firm report all indicate  that  two
types of  divorce  are  open  to  Pakistani  women:   Khula  divorce,  which
requires the filing of a divorce suit at the  Family  Court,  either  within
Pakistan or from overseas through the appointment of an agent by  way  of  a
power of attorney; or  judicial  divorce,  pursuant  to  section  2  of  the
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act 1939, on a limited  number  of  grounds,
including where the whereabouts of the husband have not  been  known  for  a
period of four years. The social consequences, and risks, of divorce can  be
ameliorated where the  female  petitioner  is  abroad  and  the  divorce  is
undertaken through Pakistani lawyers, on her instructions.  It  is  not  the
case that divorce proceedings cannot  be  initiated  without  the  husband's
consent, or without a Nikah Nama: the Canadian evidence  is  clear  on  that
point.

The evidence before us indicates  that  poorly  educated  rural  women,  who
depend totally  on  their  family  for  support,  may  well  be  in  serious
difficulty if ostracised by that family for  making  a  love  match  or  for
divorcing their husband.

On the evidence before us, we  consider  that  educated  women,  those  with
marketable employment skills, and older women, may well be able to  relocate
to a city and live alone: the risk of ostracism leading  to  destitution  is
not the same in that case.  It is more  likely  that  those  who  reach  the
United  Kingdom  would  fall  into  the  latter  category.  The  social  and
educational status, and vulnerability to family  control,  of  an  appellant
will be a question of fact in each appeal.

Country guidance

Although we find that the circumstances of this appellant are not that of  a
lone female head of family (see below),  we  have  considered  what  country
guidance we can give in relation to women who  are  such  circumstances.  We
give the following guidance:

          i. Save as herein set out, the existing country guidance in SN and
             HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG  [2004]  UKIAT
             00283 and in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return)
             Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

         ii. Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her  home
             area for a single woman or a female head  of  household,  there
             may be an internal  relocation  option  to  one  of  Pakistan's
             larger cities, depending on the family, social and  educational
             situation of the woman in question.

        iii. It will not be normally be unduly  harsh  to  expect  a  single
             woman or female head of household to relocate internally within
             Pakistan if she can access support from  family  members  or  a
             male guardian in the place of relocation.

         iv. It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better  off,
             or older women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It helps
             if a woman has qualifications enabling  her  to  get  well-paid
             employment and pay for accommodation and childcare if required.



          v. Where a single woman, with or without children,  is  ostracised
             by family members and other sources of possible social  support
             because she is in an irregular situation,  internal  relocation
             will be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will be a
             question of fact in each case.

         vi. A single woman or female head of  household  who  has  no  male
             protector or social network  may  be  able  to  use  the  state
             domestic violence shelters for a short time, but the  focus  of
             such shelters  is  on  reconciling  people  with  their  family
             networks, and places are in  short  supply  and  time  limited.
             Privately run shelters may be more flexible,  providing  longer
             term support while the woman regularises her social  situation,
             but again, places are limited.

        vii. Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk  but
             where they are used by women with children,  such  shelters  do
             not always allow older children to enter and  stay  with  their
             mothers.   The  risk   of   temporary   separation,   and   the
             proportionality  of  such  separation,  is  likely  to   differ
             depending on the age  and  sex  of  a  woman's  children:  male
             children may be removed from their mothers at the age of 5  and
             placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until the family  situation
             has been regularised (see KA and Others (domestic violence risk
             on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC)).  Such  temporary
             separation will not always be disproportionate or unduly harsh:
             that is a question of fact in each case.

       viii. Women in  Pakistan  are  legally  permitted  to  divorce  their
             husbands and may institute divorce proceedings from the country
             of refuge, via a third party and with the help  of  lawyers  in
             Pakistan, reducing the risk of family reprisals.  A  woman  who
             does so and returns with a new partner  or  husband  will  have
             access to male protection and is  unlikely,  outside  her  home
             area, to be at risk of ostracism, still less of persecution  or
             serious harm.

Decision in relation to this appellant

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

For the appeal, we  were  provided  with  four  bundles  of  evidence  which
included the appellant's six witness statements, dating from 18  March  2011
to the most recent of 18 May 2015, together with various reports from  human
rights organisations providing background information  about  the  situation
for women in Pakistan  and  information  about  Pakistani  divorce  law  and
procedure, case law relating to women in Pakistan and two expert reports.

The appellant gave oral evidence before us through the official  interpreter
in the Urdu language. She adopted her six  statements  as  her  evidence  in
chief and was  cross-examined  by  Mr  Melvin.  Both  parties  had  prepared
skeleton arguments and made submissions at  the  hearing.  In  reaching  our
decision, we have had regard to all of the documents  before  us,  including
the written and oral submissions.  We remind ourselves that  the  respondent
no longer seeks to rely on the May 2010 refusal letter  and  that  her  case
before the Upper Tribunal is therefore as set out in her refusal  letter  of
31 March 2014 and Mr Melvin's skeleton argument.

The principal country expert report  was  that  of  Dr  Roger  Ballard.  The
second report  was  from  Christine  Brown,  an  Independent  Social  Worker
providing specialist social worker evidence in family  cases.   Her  revised
report  of  31  September  2014  in  the  first  bundle  of   evidence   was
supplemented  by  a  shorter  report  dated  15  May  2015  in  the   second
supplementary bundle.  Neither expert gave oral evidence.

Evidence of the appellant's partner

The appellant's partner did not give oral evidence:  all we  had  before  us
was his untested witness statement of 30 September  2014,  stating  that  he
would prefer to continue living illegally in the United  Kingdom,  and  that
his principal reason for not accompanying  the  appellant  to  Pakistan  was
that he feared her husband and that they would be at risk if  they  were  to
live together in Pakistan as an unmarried couple.  The  appellant's  partner
asserted that his parents were not aware of his situation as the  father  of
three illegitimate children and that they would not take  him  in  with  his
new family.

We have however derived significant assistance from Ms  Brown's  description
of her conversations with the appellant's partner, and of his care  for  the
appellant and their children, as well as his financial support  for  members
of his extended family in Pakistan.

Evidence of Dr Ballard

In his report, Dr Ballard gave detailed consideration  to  the  position  of
the appellant returning to Pakistan as a single woman with two  illegitimate
children, in the context of  the  cultural  expectations  of  a  patriarchal
society.  Dr  Ballard  considered  that  it  was  most  unlikely  that   the
appellant's husband would be able to  track  her  down  outside  Lahore.  He
concluded, however, in the absence of a respectable male guardian, a  single
female  head  of  household  would  find  it  impossible  to  find  suitable
accommodation.

Dr Ballard considered that  a  woman  in  the  appellant's  position  as  he
understood it to be (a female head of household who was not married  to,  or
widowed from the father of her children) risked accusations of adultery  and
fornication, and/or charges of zina. Such a person would be ostracised  from
society and would be unable to access any  state  resources:  she  might  be
treated  as  a  prostitute,  and  would  be  vulnerable  and  at  risk.   He
considered only two viable strategies to be available  to  a  woman  in  the
appellant's position: either disposing of her children in some way so as  to
enhance her prospects of remarriage,  or  accepting  her  status  of  social
inferiority by establishing  a  relationship  of  concubinage  with  a  male
patron.

Evidence of Christine Brown

In her report Ms Brown provided a  family  circumstances/Article  8  report,
after interviewing  the  appellant  and  her  partner.   Ms  Brown  met  and
observed  their  two  elder  children.   Her  first  report  considered  the
appellant's circumstances in the United Kingdom and on return  to  Pakistan.
A supplementary report was  produced  to  address  the  implication  to  the
appellant and the family of the birth in January 2015 of a  further,  female
child.  Ms Brown had the opportunity  of  seeing  Dr  Ballard's  report,  to
which she made frequent reference in her own reports.  She  reached  similar
conclusions, in particular that the appellant would be left with  no  option
other than to have resort to the  sex  industry  in  order  to  be  able  to
provide the means to survive for herself and her children.

Respondent's submissions

For the respondent, Mr Melvin relied on the respondent's letter of 31  March
2014, and the 2010 removal directions.  In relation to the country  guidance
issue of the risk to lone women or female heads of household, with  children
born outside marriage, Mr Melvin suggested that the  Upper  Tribunal  should
not go beyond the summary in the respondent's country of origin  information
report.  The Tribunal should not be prepared to find that there was  a  real
risk of persecution.

The two expert reports produced by the appellants  should  be  given  little
weight.  Ms Brown was not a country expert.  Dr  Ballard  had  not  met  the
appellant and the premise of his report was flawed: the Tribunal should  not
be prepared to find that any Pakistani woman with a child  outside  marriage
would be ostracised and such a view was inconsistent with country guidance.

Dealing with the specifics of the appellant's appeal, Mr Melvin argued  that
in relation to Article 8  ECHR,  any  private  and  family  life  which  the
applicant, her partner and their children had developed while in the  United
Kingdom should be given little weight, having regard to section 117B (4)  of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  principal  appellant
was a significant financial burden on the United Kingdom's  economy,  having
had substantial access to the NHS through her miscarriages (at  least  nine)
and her three successful pregnancies. The timing of the asylum claim,  which
was not made until after the birth of her first child,  should  be  regarded
as undermining the appellant's credibility.

As regards the asserted risk on return,  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that,  as  a
matter of law, there was no need for the appellant to return to Pakistan  as
her husband's unfaithful spouse or as a lone female head of  household.   It
was open to her to obtain a  copy  of  her  marriage  certificate,  instruct
lawyers in Pakistan, and divorce  her  husband  before  leaving  the  United
Kingdom, then to return with her new partner,  even  perhaps  as  his  wife.
The appellant had made no attempt to regularise her  position  in  that  way
and he contended  that  she  was  deliberately  creating  obstacles  to  her
return. There was no evidence that her husband had any ongoing  interest  in
her and it was more likely than not that he had moved on  and  remarried  by
now.

The section 55 best  interests  of  the  children  were  to  be  with  their
parents.  They were still very young:  applying  the  principles  in  Azimi-
Moayed and others (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals),  [2013]
UKUT 00197 and in Zoumbas v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2014] UKSC 75, no individualised evidence had been produced indicating any
reason for them not to accompany their parents.  All  of  the  parties  were
citizens only of Pakistan and not of the United Kingdom.  The  children  had
the right to grow up in the culture of their country  of  nationality.   The
respondent would return the family together to Pakistan

Mr Melvin invited the Tribunal to depart from the preserved findings of  the
First-tier Tribunal, given the passage of time. He submitted  that  even  if
the appellant could not return to her  home  area,  there  was  no  credible
evidence that her husband  would  have  any  interest  in  pursuing  her  in
another part of the country.

Appellant's submissions

For  the  appellant,  Mr  McCarthy  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and
submitted that the appellant remained at risk in  her  home  area.  Although
time had passed, the appellant's mother's advice to the appellant  had  been
that her husband's attitude had not changed. The fear that  he  would  still
wish to do her harm was consistent with the  background  information  as  to
societal  attitudes  towards  women  in  Pakistan.   As   regards   internal
relocation, the respondent's approach to the case, that the appellant  would
be removed together with her partner, was  wrong,  since  the  evidence  was
that he would refuse to return with her. It was still open to him to make  a
fresh asylum claim and that would take some time to consider.  His  previous
behaviour suggested that he was not prepared to leave the United Kingdom.

It was appropriate to approach the case on  the  basis  that  the  appellant
would be returning to Pakistan alone, with her  children,  and  as  such  it
would be unduly harsh to expect her to relocate to an unknown  part  of  the
country. The background evidence showed that women of her  class  and  level
of  education  could  not  live  alone.  She  would  have   no   access   to
accommodation and in the event that she managed  to  obtain  a  place  in  a
shelter she would be separated from her son  who,  being  over  the  age  of
five, would be sent to an orphanage or a madrasa. She would  face  ostracism
and discrimination and would be at risk as a fornicator and  adulteress.  If
she tried to divorce her husband he would find out where she was  and  would
reveal her status as an adulteress.

Even if the appellant returned to Pakistan  with  her  current  partner,  Dr
Ballard considered that she would be at risk  because  the  couple  are  not
married and their children are illegitimate. In Dr  Ballard's  opinion,  the
appellant had a compelling extra-territorial Article  8  claim  because  her
partner, who loved his children dearly, was not willing to return with  them
to Pakistan.

Analysis of the individual appeal

We take as our starting point the preserved findings of fact of  the  First-
tier Tribunal on  30  July  2010,  set  out  at  paragraphs  41-52  in  that
decision. We  note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the  appellant's
account to be largely consistent and credible, including the account of  her
problems arising in her marriage from  her  abusive  husband,  and  that  it
found that she would be at risk  from  her  husband  in  her  home  area  of
Lahore. However we are mindful that five  years  have  elapsed  since  those
findings were made and we remind ourselves of the guidance given by the  IAT
in  Devaseelan  [2002] UKAIT 00702* at paragraph 37:

    "The first Adjudicator's  determination  stands  (unchallenged  or  not
    successfully challenged) as an assessment of claim  the  Appellant  was
    then making at the time of that determination. It is not binding on the
    second Adjudicator, but on the other hand the second Adjudicator is not
    hearing an appeal against it. An assessment of the matters  which  were
    before  the  first  Adjudicator  it  should  simply  be   regarded   as
    unquestioned. It may be built upon and as a result the outcome  of  the
    hearing may be quite different from what might have been expected  from
    a reading of the first determination only but  it  is  not  the  second
    Adjudicator's role to consider  arguments  intended  to  undermine  the
    first Adjudicator's determination."

In this appeal, whilst we have regard to the preserved findings, we had  the
benefit of hearing from the appellant at some length and were able  to  make
our own observations  from  that  evidence.  We  have  not  heard  from  the
appellant's partner and we place little weight on the untested assertion  in
his witness statement that he would not accompany her and the children  back
to Pakistan. He has no lawful right to be here and we do not  consider  that
he would remain without the appellant and their children.

We are particularly struck by the evidence  both  from  the  appellant,  her
partner, and from Ms Brown,  regarding  the  closeness  of  the  appellant's
partner to the  appellant  and  their  children.   There  is  no  accidental
quality to their family life:  the appellant has tried  very  hard  to  have
children,  enduring  the  distress  and  discomfort   of   at   least   nine
miscarriages in addition to her three pregnancies, with, it  is  clear  from
the  medical  evidence,  full  support  now  from  her  partner,   including
attending hospital appointments with the appellant. The  evidence  is  clear
that the appellant's partner is fully involved  with  the  children,  taking
them to and from school and spending most of every  day  with  his  children
and the appellant. He is  restricted  from  living  with  her  by  her  NASS
conditions but he says in his statement that if  he  could,  he  would,  and
that he would like to stay overnight if that were permitted.  We  find  that
there is strong family life between the  appellant,  her  partner,  and  the
children.

The appellant was reticent about her partner's address:   when  asked  where
he lived, she said that he did not live with her, that she  had  never  been
to his house and did not know where it was, save that she  presumed  it  was
in Nottingham. We consider such a response to be  self-serving  and  lacking
in credibility. We consider it much  more  likely  that  the  appellant  was
seeking to conceal the fact that the couple were in fact living together  in
breach of the conditions of her NASS accommodation,  or  that  she  did  not
want to disclose her partner's address in  Nottingham  due  to  his  illegal
status.


The appellant's evidence concerning her family in Pakistan and  the  contact
she and  her  husband  have  with  them  was  inconsistent  and  lacking  in
credibility. The evidence recorded in her six  witness  statements  and  her
previous oral evidence was that she remained in  contact  with  her  mother,
albeit with some difficulty, but not with her father. However, in  her  oral
evidence to us, the appellant said that she had not  spoken  to  her  mother
since January 2014 and that her mother was unaware of  her  third  pregnancy
and the birth of the  appellant's  daughter  in  January  2015  because  her
mother had not called the appellant.


As regards her estranged husband's behaviour while in  the  United  Kingdom,
the appellant's account of what happened was reasonably consistent,  but  in
relation to his actions in Pakistan, her account varied:  at first she  said
that she would know if her husband had divorced her and  remarried,  because
he "comes home  [to  her  parents'  house]  and  tells  all  those  things",
visiting her mother's house whenever he wants to say anything. Later in  her
evidence, the appellant stated that her husband had visited her family  home
just once, just after the birth of her first child,  on  which  occasion  he
was angry and had beaten up  her  younger  brother.   That  discrepancy  was
further complicated by her statement, both to Ms Brown, and in  her  initial
witness statement of 18 March 2011, that it was at  the  end  of  2007,  not
long after her husband threw the appellant out, that  her  mother  told  the
appellant that her husband was back in  Pakistan,  had  visited  the  family
home and beaten up the appellant's brother. In 2007, the  appellant's  first
child was three years in  the  future  and  her  new  relationship,  on  the
evidence, did not begin until May 2008.

Even if we were  to  accept,  as  did  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  the
appellant's husband remained in contact  with  her  family  until  2010,  we
cannot be satisfied on the evidence before us that he has  kept  in  contact
in the 6 years since then.  There is no evidence other than the  appellant's
assertions to  indicate  that  the  appellant's  husband  has  retained  any
interest in her. We note that it  was  he  who  ended  the  relationship  by
ejecting her from the family home and that, even on her own account, he  has
not contacted the appellant since, nor sought to file  charges  against  her
for adultery, or to harm her in any other  way.   Eight  years  have  passed
since the couple separated and we  are  not  satisfied  that  her  estranged
husband has any continued interest in the appellant.  Indeed we  find  merit
in Mr Melvin's submission that it is likely that he has since remarried  and
that he may well have divorced the appellant unilaterally by way of Talaq.
Having regard to all the evidence, we are not now satisfied that there is  a
continuing risk to this appellant from her  husband  in  her  home  area  of
Lahore. Neither is there any proper basis for concluding that the  appellant
would be at risk today from her husband's family  or  indeed  from  her  own
family. The appellant gave no evidence of any recent  threats  to  her  from
either family.  If a risk were to exist in  the  appellant's  home  area  in
Lahore, we do not consider that she has discharged the burden  upon  her  of
showing that she could not relocate to another part of  Pakistan  where  she
would be safe. The First-tier Tribunal's finding  to  that  effect  has  not
been challenged in this appeal: rather,  the  appellant  contends  that  the
First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the risk to her of social  ostracism.


We turn, therefore, to the risk of ostracism for this appellant as a  single
woman with illegitimate children.   We  have  considered  how  much  we  are
assisted by the evidence of Dr Ballard and Ms Brown and  what  weight  their
evidence will bear.  We accept that Dr Ballard  is  a  known  and  respected
expert in his field and we give weight to his report to that extent  in  the
general country guidance which we shall give. However,  the  factual  matrix
upon which his report was based does not reflect the circumstances in  which
the appellant  would  be  returning  to  Pakistan  now,  in  particular  the
unchallenged decision in the First-tier Tribunal that  her  partner  has  no
right to remain in the United Kingdom and would be returned with her.

The First-tier Tribunal decision and Dr Ballard's report both  proceeded  on
the basis that the appellant's partner provided only  intermittent  support,
such that she was  likely  to  be  returning  to  Pakistan  alone  with  her
children.  We note Dr Ballard's finding that to return with a male  guardian
would protect the appellant and that her reputation as a  respectable  woman
could be restored by her becoming  a  wife  and  daughter-in-law  in  a  new
family, and that  if  her  partner  were  able  to  marry  her,  that  would
legitimise her social status.  He approached the appeal on  the  basis  that
the appellant's partner had not sought to legitimise their  relationship  by
marrying her because his own family was  unwelcoming  to  her.   Dr  Ballard
does not appear to have been made aware of the partner's  precarious  status
in the United Kingdom nor of the closeness  which  had  developed  over  the
years within their little family.  Whatever doubts the  appellant's  partner
may have had in 2010, when the First-tier Tribunal  considered  this  appeal
and the couple had only one  son,  the  relationship  has  strengthened  and
solidified in the  meantime.   Her  partner  loves  and  supports  both  the
appellant and her three children.

With regard to Ms Brown's reports, we have considerable reservations  as  to
the weight we can attach to her overall  conclusions,  given  that  she  has
clearly gone well beyond her remit, commenting and expressing opinions as  a
country expert without indicating  why  she  has  the  expertise  which  she
purports to have in that respect. We find that we can give  weight  only  to
those aspects of the report  within  her  area  of  expertise  as  a  social
worker, namely the family circumstances in the United Kingdom.


We place no weight on Mr McCarthy's assertion that the  appellant's  partner
might now frustrate removal by claiming asylum after a long  period  in  the
United Kingdom.  His asylum claim was made and  failed  in  2010,  and  that
decision stands unchallenged. If a fresh claim  were  made  now,  on  weaker
grounds than those in 2010, it would in all likelihood  be  certified  under
section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

We conclude, therefore that the appellant  would  be  returned  to  Pakistan
accompanied by her children and by her partner, the father of her  children,
with all of whom she undoubtedly has family and private life.  If  they  are
returned to Pakistan together as a unit  and  relocate  outside  Lahore,  we
consider there to  be  no  reason  why  they  should  face  problems  as  an
unmarried couple and no reason why the appellant and her partner  could  not
marry.

It is the appellant's assertion that  she  cannot  divorce  her  husband  in
order to be free to marry her partner, but contrary  to  her  understanding,
the country materials indicate that  it  is  legally  open  to  a  woman  to
divorce her husband and  initiate  divorce  proceedings  inside  or  outside
Pakistan,  despite  the  patriarchal  culture  of  that  country.  It   has,
therefore, always been open to the appellant  to  divorce  her  husband  and
remains open for her to do  so,  in  the  event  that  he  has  not  already
divorced her. Her assertion that such proceedings would  alert  her  husband
to her whereabouts and lead him to publicly denounce her as  an  adulteress,
even if  accurate,  is  mitigated  by  the  fact  that  she  could  initiate
proceedings from abroad or indeed from Pakistan, through a third  party  and
using a lawyer in Pakistan. It would then be open to the appellant  and  her
partner to marry, so legitimising her status and  that  of  their  children,
either in the United Kingdom or in Pakistan.

As we have already stated, we find no reliable evidence to suggest that  the
partner's family would reject the appellant and their grandchildren, but  in
any event we  conclude  that  this  family  could  establish  themselves  in
Pakistan with or without the support of extended family members. They  would
have the option of returning by way of Assisted Voluntary Return, with  some
money to tide them over and enable them to find accommodation  suitable  for
the family in the short term.  Thereafter,  the  appellant's  partner  could
establish himself in employment given his skills as a chef, a driver  and  a
machinery operator. The appellant is not at risk  of  being  regarded  as  a
single woman,  or  an  adulteress,  and  the  risk  of  being  subjected  to
ostracism and discrimination does not arise in her case.  Her  circumstances
in Pakistan would not amount to a risk of persecution or  serious  harm  and
we therefore dismiss  her  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
grounds.  As before, the Article 2 and 3 appeals  stand  or  fall  with  the
asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

Article 8 ECHR

Turning to Article 8 ECHR, we accept that there is family life  between  the
appellant, her partner, and their children.  There is very  little  evidence
of private life outside the family circle. We consider it more  likely  than
not  that  this  family  would  return  together  to  Pakistan,  since   the
appellant's partner has no right to remain in the United Kingdom.

The appellant does not claim to be able to bring  herself  within  paragraph
276ADE or Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  Nor do we find  that  there
are any exceptional or compelling circumstances outside the Rules for  which
the respondent should consider exercising her discretion, as set  out  in  R
(Nagre) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
(Admin) and approved by the Court of Appeal in Singh v  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

In relation to the children's section 55 best interests,  the  eldest  is  a
boy, now just 6 years old, and the youngest is now just  1  year  old.   All
three children are still very young and are  at  an  age  where  their  best
interests lie in remaining with their parents, which will  be  the  case  if
they are returned to Pakistan as a  family.  They  are  too  young  to  have
established substantial  links  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  there  is  no
evidence to suggest otherwise.

We must have regard to part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002 (as amended) and in particular, to the statutory  presumptions  set
out in section 117B thereof:
         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases


         1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in  the
            public interest.


         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to-
             (a)  a private life, or
             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

Applying those criteria, we consider that  they  operate  to  weaken  rather
than strengthen the appellant's Article  8  case.   We  note  that  sections
117B(2) and 117B(3) are engaged: the appellant, who has lived in the  United
Kingdom for 12 years, still is not fluent in English, and she,  her  partner
and the children are not financially independent and  have  already  been  a
significant charge on the  United  Kingdom,  both  for  maternity  care  and
benefits.  The  indication  is  that  such  dependence  will  continue   and
therefore section 117B(3) is engaged, both of which reduce their ability  to
integrate into the United Kingdom.

Section 117B(5) is not relevant since the appellant has never had  leave  to
remain and has been in the United Kingdom unlawfully  since  the  expiry  of
her visit visa on 11 October 2006.

In  relation  to  section  117B(4),  little  weight  can  be  given  to  the
appellant's private life, or to family life between  her  and  her  partner,
which was established when she was in  the  United  Kingdom  without  leave.
Her partner is not a qualifying partner, because he  also  is  here  without
leave. Her family and private life was established at a  time  when  neither
the appellant, nor her partner nor any of her children had any lawful  basis
of stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Section  117B(6)  does  not  avail  the
appellant, since none of her children is  a  qualifying  child,  because  in
order to qualify, they would need to be settled or be British citizens.

We conclude, therefore  that  it  would  not  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
international  human  rights  obligations,  or   any   other   international
obligations, if the family were to be returned to Pakistan.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside.  We  re-make
the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.

ANONYMITY

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(as amended), the appellant has  been  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
proceedings and after their conclusion, absent any order to the contrary  by
the Upper Tribunal or any other Court seised  of  relevant  proceedings.  No
report  of  these  proceedings,  in  whatever  form,   either   during   the
proceedings  or  thereafter,  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
appellant.

Failure to comply with this order may be treated as a contempt of court.

Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Dated: 14 January 2016

          Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
                                 Appendix A


                     Documents before the Upper Tribunal

|Date         |Source               |Description                             |
|                                                                            |
|2014                                                                        |
|2014         |UK Home Office       |Country Information and Guidance -      |
|             |                     |Pakistan: Women                         |
|27 February  |US Department of     |2013 Country Reports on Human Rights    |
|2014         |State                |Practices: Pakistan                     |
|                                                                            |
|2013                                                                        |
|14 January   |Immigration and      |Pakistan: Domestic violence, including  |
|2013         |Refugee Board of     |effectiveness of the Protection of Women|
|             |Canada               |(Criminal Law Amendment) Act 2006; state|
|             |                     |protection and services available to    |
|             |                     |victims                                 |
|15 January   |Immigration and      |Pakistan: Honour killings targeting men |
|2013         |Refugee Board of     |and women                               |
|             |Canada               |                                        |
|19 April 2013|US Department of     |2012 Human Rights Reports: Pakistan     |
|             |State                |(Section 6)                             |
|                                                                            |
|2012                                                                        |
|2012         |Asian Human Rights   |The State of Human Rights in Pakistan in|
|             |Commission           |2012 - Pakistan: Failure of the         |
|             |                     |institutions related to the rule of law |
|             |                     |provides impunity to the perpetrators of|
|             |                     |violations human rights                 |
|                                                                            |
|2011                                                                        |
|27 January   |Integrated Regional  |Pakistan: Hundreds of women die for     |
|2011         |Information Networks |"honour" each year                      |
|             |News (IRIN)          |                                        |
|24 January   |Human Rights Watch   |World Report 2011                       |
|2011         |                     |                                        |
|2 February   |Human Rights         |HRCP urges probe into alleged honour    |
|2011         |Commission of        |killing                                 |
|             |Pakistan (HRCP)      |                                        |
|28 February  |Asian Human Rights   |Pakistan: A lady health worker raped and|
|2011         |Commission           |forced by police to withdraw her        |
|             |                     |complaint                               |
|8 March 2011 |Inter Press Service  |Women's Day: Pakistan is not for single |
|             |News Agency (IPS)    |women                                   |
|8 March 2011 |Asian Human Rights   |Pakistan: A 16 year old girl was gang   |
|             |Commission           |raped almost for one month -            |
|             |                     |perpetrators were released by the police|
|11 March 2011|Inter Press Service  |Pakistan: At Home, and in Hell          |
|             |News Agency (IPS)    |                                        |
|                                                                            |
|2010                                                                        |
|11 January   |Human Rights Watch   |Pakistan: Expedite Domestic Violence    |
|2010         |                     |Legislation                             |
|11 March 2010|US Department of     |2009 Human Rights Report: Pakistan      |
|             |State                |                                        |
|27 May 2010  |Amnesty International|Amnesty International Report 2010:      |
|             |                     |Pakistan                                |
|17 November  |Immigration and      |Pakistan: Circumstances under which a   |
|2010         |Refugee Board of     |woman has the legal right to get a      |
|             |Canada               |divorce through the courts (judicial    |
|             |                     |divorce) through her own initiative;    |
|             |                     |circumstances under which single women  |
|             |                     |can live alone                          |
|25 November  |Asian Human Rights   |Pakistan: Women have little to celebrate|
|2010         |Commission           |on the International Day for Elimination|
|             |                     |of Violence against Women               |
|                                                                            |
|2009                                                                        |
|26 November  |Immigration and      |Pakistan: Resources available to female |
|2009         |Refugee Board of     |victims of violence in Karachi,         |
|             |Canada               |Islamabad and Lahore                    |
|                                                                            |
|2007                                                                        |
|24 January   |Immigration and      |Pakistan: Honour killings targeting men |
|2007         |Refugee Board of     |and women, especially in the northern   |
|             |Canada               |areas (2001-2006)                       |
|4 December   |Immigration and      |Pakistan: Circumstances under which     |
|2007         |Refugee Board of     |single women could live alone           |
|             |Canada               |                                        |
|                                                                            |
|2006                                                                        |
|25 November  |Amnesty International|Pakistan: Panah needs your support      |
|2006         |                     |                                        |

                                 APPENDIX B

                            Appellant's evidence

The appellant adopted all six of her  witness  statements,  confirming  that
she had had the contents translated to her and that they were  true  to  the
best of her knowledge information and belief.  She stated that she was  able
to read and speak English to some extent.  All  of  the  witness  statements
postdate the First-tier Tribunal  decision  and  they  are  to  some  extent
repetitive.  We summarise briefly the additional matters in each  statement.


In her witness statement of  18  March  2011,  the  appellant  set  out  the
history of her relationships and stated that she had  studied  only  to  the
level of Matriculation (Matric) in Pakistan.  She had never  worked,  either
in Pakistan or in the United Kingdom.  She believed that as a  single  woman
with one child, she  would  not  be  respected,  she  would  be  ostracised,
treated as an outcast  and  stigmatised  for  living  alone.  She  would  be
considered un-Islamic and immoral.  Even in 'the slightly  modern  parts  of
cities, such as Karachi or Islamabad,  where  single  women  may  have  some
opportunities of living alone or finding employment', the accommodation  was
too expensive and she would never be able to afford it.  She wanted to  give
her son a normal childhood, with the opportunity of receiving an education.

In her second witness statement of 2 May 2012, the appellant confirmed  that
her son's father had now joined  her  in  Nottingham,  visiting  them  about
twice a week, or more, and that the child was growing increasingly  attached
to him.  They were in  a  subsisting  and  intimate  relationship,  actively
trying for a  second  child.   The  appellant  said  she  had  suffered  two
miscarriages in her second relationship, the first  having  taken  place  in
November 2010, about three months into her pregnancy.   Her mother had  been
told of that miscarriage and was sympathetic.  Her son was starting  nursery
school.  There was no social security system in Pakistan and she  would  not
be able to work there, which made her feel 'deeply terrified' of  return  to
Pakistan.

The third statement, on 10 September 2013, disclosed that the appellant  had
suffered 9 miscarriages in total, three during her marriage, and six in  her
new relationship, three before the  birth  of  her  first  child  and  three
before she was able to sustain her second  pregnancy.   Both  children  were
Pakistani citizens, as she  understood  it.   Her  elder  son  continued  to
attend nursery, but had changed to a different one.  Her  children's  father
was very important in the appellant's life and that of  her  sons.   He  was
always there for her, especially for doctors' appointments, and spent  about
4-5 days a week with her and the boys.  He was a reliable and caring  father
to their sons and a loving partner to the appellant.

The next statement is dated 31 March 2014.   The  relationship  between  the
appellant and her partner had become even closer.   Her  partner  could  not
provide financial support because of his precarious status but  he  spent  a
great deal of time with his little family during the week and  did  whatever
he could to look after all of them, taking the elder boy to the nursery  and
picking him up when needed, bathing and changing the  children,  and  during
the second pregnancy, taking full responsibility for the care of  the  older
boy.  When the family had  influenza,  he  was  there  all  the  time.   Her
partner  could  not  stay  overnight  because  the  family  were   in   NASS
accommodation but NASS had agreed that  he  could  spend  as  much  time  as
needed during the day.  He returned  home  at  night,  to  stay  within  the
rules.

Both boys were very attached  indeed  to  their  father.   He  brought  them
presents often, especially on their  birthdays  and  other  such  occasions.
The elder boy would sit by the window, waiting for his father to arrive  and
saying 'I miss my daddy'.  The younger would cry for his attention  when  he
left.  The elder boy spoke only English, although he  understood  Urdu.  The
appellant was thinking of starting English  language  courses  to  help  her
communicate more easily in English with her children as they grew  up.   The
appellant and her partner spoke 'mainly in English'  to  the  older  boy  at
home.

The next witness statement  is  dated  30  September  2014.   By  then,  the
appellant was 7 months pregnant again, with the couple's third  child.   The
appellant was having a bad  third  pregnancy,  with  breathing  difficulties
caused by anxiety about her circumstances. Her partner  continued  to  visit
often but not live with the family, and to play an  important  role  in  the
children's lives.  He was still unwilling to return with them  to  Pakistan,
partly because of the perceived risk to him from  her  husband,  but  mostly
because he liked  living  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  was  still  buying
presents and toys for the children and spending time with  them,  but  could
not give financial support because of his circumstances.

The appellant had not sought advice on  a  divorce:  her  understanding  was
that the terms of her marriage contract did  not  give  her  the  option  of
divorcing her husband. In  any  event  she  considered  that  remarriage  in
Pakistan between  the  appellant  and  her  current  partner,  even  if  the
appellant were able to obtain a divorce, would  not  be  a  solution.   They
would still be considered adulterers with two illegitimate children and  her
husband knew about the children being born during their marriage.

   The appellant's mother had been in contact less often recently,  and  not
since January 2014.  She  was  now  in  her  sixties,  frail  and  suffering
overall poor health.  She had broken her leg about a year earlier,  and  her
health had deteriorated further after that.  Her mobility was  significantly
impaired.  The  appellant's  father  remained   unforgiving   and   if   the
appellant's name were mentioned, he would  get  angry.   On  more  than  one
occasion, her mother  had  been  told  that  if  she  mentioned  her  errant
daughter  again,  she  should  leave  his  house  altogether.  Her  father's
financial circumstances had been modest at best throughout his life: he  had
seen no reason to have his daughters educated beyond matriculation and  none
of them had university educations.  The appellant did not consider that  she
would  be  able  to  find  decent  employment  or   accommodation:   shelter
accommodation was short term and people would be suspicious of  her  if  she
were living in private accommodation,  alone  with  three  children  and  no
husband.

On the same day, 30 September 2014, the appellant's partner wrote  a  letter
of support, the only contribution he  has  made  to  these  proceedings.  He
confirmed his nationality and his increasing concern that the  family  would
be separated if the appellant and the children were  returned  to  Pakistan.
He considered that there would be a significant physical risk  to  him  from
the husband and his family, due to jealousy  that  the  appellant  was  with
him.

The appellant was not even divorced yet, so she would be unable to  re-marry
and they would have to live together as an unmarried  couple.   He  did  not
believe that she could get divorced without the husband  becoming  aware  of
their address. The appellant's partner had lived in the United  Kingdom  for
13 years, albeit without any leave, and considered that he  had  established
and built a life here.  The children's birth certificates record that he  is
working in the United Kingdom as a chef.  He considered that he  would  find
it difficult to 'earn even a slightly  decent  living'  in  Pakistan.    His
father was a truck driver and when in Pakistan, her partner used to  do  odd
jobs working in shops:  his  family  earned  very  little  money  and  their
lifestyle in Pakistan had always been very simple and  modest.   They  would
be unable to provide the couple with any financial support.   He  considered
that in those circumstances there  would  be  'absolutely  no  sense  in  my
returning to Pakistan'.   His family did not know that he had a  family  out
of wedlock and certainly would not  approve.   His  life  in  Pakistan  'was
always one of desperation and hardship' and  if  returned  he  would  simply
leave again.

The appellant's final witness statement for this hearing was  dated  18  May
2015.  The third child, a girl, had been safely born, despite the  appellant
having a  difficult  pregnancy  with  some  breathing  difficulties  at  8-9
months.  The child was healthy.  She  suffered  back  pain,  caused  by  her
childcare  duties,  and  had  also  had  mastitis,  for   which   she   took
antibiotics.  She was still married to  her  husband  and  getting  divorced
would not be easy.  Any attempt to divorce her husband  through  the  courts
would give him an opportunity to accuse her  of  adultery  and  fornication,
for which she considered that the police  would  take  action  against  her.
She remained clear that her partner would not return to  Pakistan  with  her
and that, therefore, she would be the lone parent of three small children.

The appellant gave oral evidence at the hearing.  In answer to  supplemental
questions from her Counsel, she confirmed her  evidence  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal that she had become estranged from her family  following  her  love
marriage, but that she had some  contact  with  her  mother.  The  appellant
spoke of the difficulties in her relationship  with  her  husband  when  she
returned to the United Kingdom.   He had changed.  He was drinking and  told
the appellant that she was no longer  attractive  to  him.   He  was  having
relationships with other women.  Her husband would go to work,  leaving  the
appellant at home.  When he returned home he would quarrel  with  her  about
small matters.  Her husband had land issues back home and when he was  upset
about that, he would pick a fight with her.   Although he was not  attracted
to the appellant, her husband doubted  her  fidelity  after  they  moved  to
Nottingham.  He thought she was calling other men to the house when  he  was
at work.

In March 2007, her husband saw the appellant speaking to a  man  who  was  a
guest of their neighbour, outside the house.  The man was  speaking  to  the
appellant as a sister: there was nothing going on.  Her husband saw  her  in
conversation with that man and called her a whore.  He beat her  up,  saying
that he had caught her red-handed with another man.  He told  the  appellant
that she was dirty, and to get out of the house.  She  had  not  heard  from
him since, but was certain  that  he  would  not  have  divorced  her.   The
appellant did not know whether her husband had other women, since  he  would
not have been with them when he met her mother around Lahore.

The appellant did not consider that her husband's  attitude  was  likely  to
change.  When he had thrown her out, there was no fault  in  the  appellant,
but that was no longer the case.  He had  thrown  her  out  over  one  small
matter: what would he  not  do  now,  when  she  had  children  outside  her
marriage?

The appellant stated that her contact with her mother was initiated  by  her
mother telephoning, when she could do so away from the family.   Her  mother
had last telephoned in January 2014.  The appellant had told her  mother  of
the birth of her second child.  Her mother said that she had broken her  leg
and was unwell.  She said that the appellant's husband had not  changed  his
attitude and was not likely to do so.  Her mother had not  telephoned  since
then so she was not aware of the birth of the appellant's  third  child,  or
even that she had become pregnant  again.  If  her  mother  telephoned,  the
appellant would tell her.

If she were returned to Pakistan, the appellant did not  consider  that  any
member of her family would be in a position to help her.  Her  mother  would
support her emotionally if she could, but  was  afraid  of  the  appellant's
father, her  own  husband.   Their  contact  remained  hidden  and  was  not
discussed with him.  Her mother was also unwell and was in  no  position  to
assist the appellant in resettling with her children.  The  appellant's  two
younger siblings were still living at home.  Her elder brother and his  wife
lived in Muscat, and another sister was married and  living  in  Rawalpindi.
If she were to return to Pakistan and seek  support  from  her  sister,  the
sister's parents-in-law would think less of  her  and  it  would  spoil  her
sister's reputation and make her own position delicate.  No  member  of  the
appellant's family could assist her.

The appellant would not be  able  to  keep  her  irregular  status  and  her
relationship with the father of her children secret:  even if she were  able
to do so, she would always be frightened that the truth would come  out  and
people would discover her position.  If that happened, neither she  nor  the
three children would be allowed to live.  The truth would always  come  out.
She was frightened of the local community and the police in Pakistan,  which
was an Islamic country, where adultery was extremely  sinful.   All  of  her
children  would  be  beaten  up  in  the   community   because   they   were
illegitimate.  A woman alone in that  situation,  without  a  husband  or  a
father for her children was the kind of person people mistreated. She  would
be unable  to  escape  or  protect  her  children.  Her  daughter  would  be
disadvantaged growing up with no  proper  family  and  in  Pakistan,  female
children as young as three years old were sometimes  raped.   The  appellant
would have particular difficulty as a woman alone  in  protecting  a  female
child.

The appellant stated that she remained very afraid of her husband even  now,
because she had children outside her marriage.  As far as the appellant  was
aware, despite his hostility and his wealth, her husband  had  not  filed  a
case against her in Pakistan or even an FIR.  Her husband would be  able  to
do so easily:  he could give money to the police to bribe them and create  a
lot of problems for her.  Her  husband  had  a  lot  of  money:   he  was  a
landlord, with both land and shops.  She did not know where,  or  how  many.
That was men's business and not for discussion with women.

In cross-examination, the appellant confirmed that  when  she  came  to  the
United Kingdom in September 2006, she  had  no  intention  of  returning  to
Pakistan without her husband. She had come to stay, for as long as  he  did.
Her husband had invited her (as a visitor) and he said he would arrange  the
paperwork.  It was not an issue for her what visa she had:  she  had  simply
handed over her passport to her husband to sort it out.  The  appellant  was
aware that her visa was good only for six months, since that was written  on
the passport, but he said he would arrange extension of the visa.   She  did
not know whether he had ever applied to do so.

The appellant had not applied to regularise her  status  after  her  husband
threw her out in March 2007, because she thought he would come and take  her
back.  She thought that, despite his having said that wherever he  saw  her,
he would kill her.  Her husband had said that he could not kill her  in  the
United Kingdom. The landlady, whom she called Auntie, had  been  supportive,
telling the appellant not to  worry,  because  her  husband  would  come  to
collect her.  All  husbands  and  wives  had  quarrels,  Auntie  said.   The
appellant's husband never came, and she was very sad  and  quiet  until  she
met her present partner, who gave her comfort and support.  She  started  to
feel better then, and eventually, they had a child together.

The appellant had no documents on which to travel and  did  not  seek  legal
advice.  It simply did not occur to her to regularise  her  situation  until
2010, three years later, because she was not thinking of that.  She had  met
her partner and got her life back, and in any case, she  did  not  know  the
procedure to apply for a new visa, or for asylum.  There was never any  need
to go to a solicitor, until she had her  child,  and  her  mother  told  the
appellant that her husband had started threatening to harm her if  she  came
to Pakistan.   She had not asked anyone and it had not occurred to her  that
the situation would change as much as it did.

When she had her first child, her husband had gone to  her  family  home  to
say bad things, he was swearing and beating her  younger  brother.   He  was
not afraid of anyone.  He had not come to the  house  again,  but  he  would
make remarks if he met her mother in public and gather people in the  bazaar
to hear them, so that her mother would  be  embarrassed.   Her  husband  had
said, openly, that if the appellant came he would not leave her alone.

The appellant had not divorced her husband because she considered  that  she
had no right in Islamic law to do so.  She had  not  taken  advice  on  that
point or made any application to the courts in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in
Pakistan.  Mr Melvin put it to the appellant that she had now  been  legally
advised for several years and her solicitors had included  evidence  in  the
bundle which showed that  she  did  have  a  right  to  seek  a  divorce  in
Pakistan, even from the United Kingdom.  The appellant referred him  to  her
solicitor.

The appellant was asked why the father of  her  children  had  not  come  to
court to give evidence.  She said that it was her life,  principally,  which
was in danger, although there was also a risk to her partner.   Her  partner
did not want to go back to Pakistan and she would not force him  to  do  so.
If he did return with her, the danger would  multiply  rather  than  reduce,
because they were not married but they had children.  People would say  that
she was a bad person, living with this man and having his  children  without
marriage.  Her partner could not provide  any  financial  security  for  his
family, because he was a poor man.  Her partner was a poor man:  he  had  no
financial resources and his family were in a  similar  position.   He  could
not offer her protection without money.

Her partner was not an educated man  and  could  not  obtain  employment  in
Pakistan. His old father was  a  truck  driver  and  her  partner  had  many
brothers and sisters, who relied on him financially.  They would  disapprove
of him having children without being married and  people  would  talk  about
his family members in that context.  Her first husband was looking  for  the
appellant.

Asked why she could not live elsewhere in Pakistan, the appellant said  that
wherever she stayed, whether it was Karachi, or Islamabad, the situation  of
Pakistan as a country meant that she and her family would not be allowed  to
live peacefully. She had not divorced her husband and remarried  because  it
was her clear understanding that she would have to go to court to do so  and
that would make it easier for her husband to trace her.   The  police  would
not say a word if he came after her.

The appellant stated that she did not have a copy of her Nikah Nama  because
her husband had taken  it.   She  was  not  prepared  to  undertake  divorce
proceedings unless the Tribunal would guarantee  that  after  doing  so  she
would be allowed to stay in the United Kingdom. If an overseas  divorce  was
possible, she would expect a guarantee that it  would  cause  no  danger  to
herself or her children.

In re-examination, the appellant said she  was  unaware  that  there  was  a
divorce procedure for Pakistani women which could be exercised from  abroad.
 She had no control over her children's father.  He was happy in the  United
Kingdom: his life was here.  He had no wish to  go  to  Pakistan  with  her.
She was not prepared to pressurise him: he had told her that  he  could  not
and would not go with her.
                                 APPENDIX C
                              Country evidence



|Document              |Summary                                                   |
|Home Office Country   |The status of women in Pakistan differs in accordance with|
|Information and       |their social positioning. Patriarchal attitudes and       |
|Guidance, Pakistan:   |deep-rooted stereotypes concerning women's roles and      |
|Women (2014)          |responsibilities discriminate against them and maintain   |
|                      |their subordination within family and society. Due to the |
|                      |prevailing patriarchal and misogynistic culture in        |
|                      |Pakistan, women are victims of violence in both the       |
|                      |private and public spheres.                               |
|                      |                                                          |
|                      |The Human Rights Commission for Pakistan reported that the|
|                      |need for the establishment of women's shelters continued  |
|                      |to be neglected, as did police reporting and investigation|
|                      |systems. Although many laws relating to women's rights    |
|                      |have been passed by Parliament, there have been no        |
|                      |significant changes in the status of women in Pakistan.   |
|                      |Honour killings, domestic violence, acid burning, rape and|
|                      |sexual assault are amongst the reported cases of violence |
|                      |against women in Pakistan. However, women who tried to    |
|                      |report abuse faced serious challenges and are reluctant to|
|                      |pursue charges due to the stigma attached to divorce and  |
|                      |their economic and psychological dependence on relatives. |
|                      |Divorcees faced specific stigmatization and social        |
|                      |rejection.                                                |
|                      |                                                          |
|                      |Extra-marital sex was criminalised and sexual relations   |
|                      |between unmarried parties was punishable by up to five    |
|                      |years imprisonment and fine.                              |
|                      |                                                          |
|                      |Although women are legally free to marry without consent, |
|                      |women who did so were often ostracised or risked being the|
|                      |victims of honour crimes. The government had failed to    |
|                      |prosecute cases in which families punished women for      |
|                      |marrying or seeking a divorce against the wishes of other |
|                      |family members.                                           |
|                      |                                                          |
|                      |A representative of the Human Rights Commission of        |
|                      |Pakistan (HRCP) stated that it was next to impossible for |
|                      |a single woman to live alone in Pakistan due to prejudices|
|                      |against women and economic dependence. Most women in rural|
|                      |areas lived with their families and it was generally not  |
|                      |socially acceptable for women to live alone, although     |
|                      |working women in urban areas found it easier to live      |
|                      |alone.                                                    |
|US Department of      |Section 6: Women in Pakistan are at risk of various types |
|State, Country Reports|of societal violence and abuse, including: honour         |
|on Human Rights       |killings, facial, bodily, and genital mutilation, forced  |
|Practices: Pakistan   |marriages, imposed isolation, and being used to settle    |
|(2014)                |disputes. Rape, domestic violence, sexual harassment and  |
|                      |other harmful traditional practices were also a serious   |
|                      |problem. Discrimination against women and girls continued:|
|                      |women were often treated as chattels, with domestic       |
|                      |violence offences mainly committed by husbands and other  |
|                      |male family members.                                      |
|                      |Child abuse and commercial sexual exploitation of children|
|                      |persisted, with children being sold into prostitution and |
|                      |many young girls/women entered into forced marriages,     |
|                      |arranged by their families. Although rape was frequent,   |
|                      |prosecutions were rare, spousal rape was not deemed to be |
|                      |a crime, and rape by members of the police was a problem. |
|                      |Domestic violence is a widespread and serious problem.    |
|                      |Divorced women were often left with no means of support as|
|                      |their families ostracised them, as were those who married |
|                      |without the consent of their family. Women faced          |
|                      |significant discrimination in employment and were paid    |
|                      |less than men for similar roles. In many rural areas,     |
|                      |strong societal pressure prevented women from working     |
|                      |outside of the home and some tribes even practiced        |
|                      |sequestering women from all contact with men other than   |
|                      |relatives. There are also significant barriers to         |
|                      |education and medical assistance for women and girls.     |
|Immigration and       |Domestic violence in Pakistan is a widespread and serious |
|Refugee Board of      |problem, and can include torture, physical disfigurement, |
|Canada, Pakistan:     |amputation, the denial of food, rape and the shaving of   |
|Domestic Violence,    |hair and eyebrows. The perpetrators of violence are often |
|including             |the victim's husband or family member and many cases of   |
|effectiveness of the  |violence are not reported. Sources estimated that         |
|Protection of Women   |approximately 70 to 90 per cent of women in Pakistan had  |
|(Criminal Law         |experienced domestic violence. Legislation has been passed|
|Amendment) Act 2006;  |in order to provide relief and protection to women against|
|state protection and  |misuse and abuse of laws and prevent their exploitation;  |
|services available to |such laws have not provided any significant changes in the|
|victims (2013)        |status of women.                                          |
|                      |                                                          |
|                      |There is no sufficiency of protection from the government |
|                      |for victims of domestic violence.  Police and other       |
|                      |justice officers are often corrupt and do not carry out   |
|                      |their duties in an ethical manner. Although there are some|
|                      |police stations for women, staffed by female officers,    |
|                      |they are not very effective. There are also government    |
|                      |funded centres for women that provide shelter, legal aid, |
|                      |medical treatment and counselling, but they mostly involve|
|                      |staying in miserable overcrowded conditions, where abuse  |
|                      |of women continues. Private shelters are more effective,  |
|                      |offering longer stays and greater support, but places are |
|                      |limited.                                                  |
|Immigration and       |Women in Pakistan are considered to be the carriers of the|
|Refugee Board of      |honour of their entire family. Women face discrimination  |
|Canada, Pakistan:     |and violence in all facets of life in Pakistan.  The      |
|Honour Killings       |concept of women as property and source of honour is      |
|targeting men and     |deeply rooted in the social, political and economic fabric|
|women (2013)          |of the country. Honour crimes include killings, assaults, |
|                      |acid throwing, confinement, imprisonment, interference    |
|                      |with a choice of marriage, burning, and nose-cutting.     |
|                      |Honour crimes occur when a woman is perceived to have     |
|                      |brought dishonour to the family, as a way to protect      |
|                      |family honour and preserve the family's good name. Honour |
|                      |crimes remain a serious and persistent problem in         |
|                      |Pakistan, with rural areas most affected, and methods     |
|                      |varying according to the region. Women are often urged by |
|                      |their families to commit suicide, with over 700 women     |
|                      |committing suicide in 2011. Suicides of women are rarely  |
|                      |investigated by the police.                               |
|US Department of State|Section 6: See summary above for US Department of State,  |
|2012 Human Rights     |Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Pakistan       |
|Reports: Pakistan     |(2014).                                                   |
|(2013)                |                                                          |
|Asian Human Rights    |A.7 Violations of Women's Rights: Women face              |
|Commission, The State |discrimination in all facets of life in Pakistan and      |
|of Human Rights in    |brutal treatment such as domestic abuse, sexual violence  |
|Pakistan in 2012 -    |and rape, torture, honour killings, and murder. Verdicts  |
|Pakistan: Failure of  |by illegal tribal judicial courts ensure the persistence  |
|the institutions      |of violence against women. It is believed that 70 per cent|
|related to the rule of|of people who commit honour killings in Pakistan escape   |
|law provides impunity |punishment.                                               |
|to the perpetrators of|                                                          |
|violations human      |J. No Place to be a Woman: No significant changes are yet |
|rights (2012)         |visible in the position of women in society; they have    |
|                      |limited access to employment, social security, respect and|
|                      |recognition. The patriarchal and often conservative       |
|                      |mind-set of Pakistani society, together with persistent   |
|                      |religious fundamentalism, entails gender based            |
|                      |discrimination which affects the female population. There |
|                      |have been some encouraging improvements with the passing  |
|                      |of protective statutes, but enforcement still appears     |
|                      |inadequate. Serious problems persist, including honour    |
|                      |killings, acid attacks and other forms of burning, rape   |
|                      |and sexual harassment, domestic violence, early marriage, |
|                      |bullying, abusive language offences, abductions followed  |
|                      |by forced religious conversion or induction into          |
|                      |prostitution or human trafficking. Pakistan still ranks   |
|                      |among the most difficult countries in the world to be     |
|                      |respected as a woman.                                     |
|Integrated Regional   |News Article: A 22 year old woman faced the most harrowing|
|Information Networks  |honour killing reported in recent months. According to    |
|News (IRIN), Pakistan:|reports she was murdered by her relatives for eloping with|
|Hundreds of women die |a man she had chosen to marry and they had stated that she|
|for "honour" each year|had committed suicide.                                    |
|(2011)                |                                                          |
|Human Rights Watch,   |The report outlined the deterioration of the security     |
|World Report 2011     |situation in Pakistan in 2010 and stated that violence and|
|                      |mistreatment of women and girls was a serious problem.    |
|                      |Additionally, in 2010, a Christian woman from the Punjab  |
|                      |province was the first woman in the country's history to  |
|                      |be sentenced to death for blasphemy.                      |
|Human Rights          |The HRCP called upon the Punjab government to ensure an   |
|Commission of Pakistan|early and transparent investigation of an alleged incident|
|(HRCP), HRCP urges    |of honour killing of a young woman in the Bahawalpur      |
|probe into alleged    |district, following concerns that police were not taking  |
|honour killing (2011) |interest in the investigation and one of the accused was  |
|                      |being pampered by the police.                             |
|Asian Human Rights    |Urgent Appeal Update: The Asian Human Rights Commission   |
|Commission, Pakistan: |(ARHA) received information that a female government      |
|A lady health worker  |health worker was raped by a notorious gangster with the  |
|raped and forced by   |help of two police informants. The police made attempts to|
|police to withdraw her|destroy the evidence and were attempting to coerce the    |
|complaint (2011)      |victim into settling the case with the perpetrators.      |
|Inter Press Service   |Society in Pakistan is a family system, with no provision |
|News Agency (IPS),    |for being single. It was even more difficult to be a      |
|Women's Day: Pakistan |single mother. It was considered quite normal to remain in|
|is not for single     |a bad marriage as there is stigma attached to being       |
|women (2011)          |single. Single women are often pitied, which is mixed with|
|                      |suspicion. Safe and affordable accommodation and mobility |
|                      |are both serious challenges for single women.  Single     |
|                      |women who were educated, or who were financially strong   |
|                      |and/or had family support, were in a stronger social      |
|                      |position.                                                 |
|Asian Human Rights    |Urgent Appeal Case: Six armed men from a group of land    |
|Commission, Pakistan: |grabbers from Karachi, abducted a 16 year old girl, along |
|A 16 year old girl was|with her brother, and held them for ransom. During the    |
|gang raped almost for |month captivity, the time it took for the father to raise |
|one month -           |the necessary funds for ransom, the girl was subjected to |
|perpetrators were     |gang rape. Following payment and their release, two       |
|released by the police|individuals were arrested, but were released shortly after|
|(2011)                |paying a bribe to the police. A public prosecutor raised  |
|                      |questions about the ill intentions and negligence of the  |
|                      |police.                                                   |
|Inter Press Service   |For a woman to leave home is a threat to male honour. The |
|News Agency (IPS),    |situation for women in the Federally Administered Tribal  |
|Pakistan: At Home, and|Area got worse after the dismissal of the Taliban         |
|in Hell (2011)        |government in Kabul. The Taliban call the shots and they  |
|                      |strictly oppose women's role in society. Women are banned |
|                      |from participation and decision-making and the men decide |
|                      |who they can talk to and who they should marry and when.  |
|                      |The female literacy rate is much lower in this region than|
|                      |it is nationwide and parents invest more on their sons    |
|                      |education that their daughters.                           |
|Human Rights Watch,   |The Pakistani government was urged to reintroduce         |
|Pakistan: Expedite    |legislation to protect women and children from domestic   |
|Domestic Violence     |violence after the Domestic Violence Bill lapsed. An      |
|Legislation (2010)    |amendment to the Penal Code that criminalised the         |
|                      |harassment of women was a step forward but it needed a    |
|                      |companion bill to provide a mechanism to investigate      |
|                      |complaints. The law was criticised for providing legal    |
|                      |protections without putting in place the mechanisms needed|
|                      |to give female workers access to the protections.         |
|US Department of      |Section 6: Although rape was frequent, prosecutions were  |
|State, 2009 Human     |rare. There were no national statistics on rape, due to   |
|Rights Report:        |the serious underreporting of the problem. Police were at |
|Pakistan (2010)       |times implicated in rape cases and often abused or        |
|                      |threatened victims and demand they drop charges,          |
|                      |especially when the accused had paid the a bribe. Domestic|
|                      |violence was a widespread and serious problem. Husbands   |
|                      |reportedly beat, and occasionally killed their wives and  |
|                      |in-laws abused and harassed married women. Dowry and      |
|                      |family related disputes often resulted in death or        |
|                      |disfigurement by burning or acid. The cases of violence   |
|                      |against women increased 13 per cent from the previous     |
|                      |year. Women who tried to report abuse faced serious       |
|                      |challenges and were usually returned to the abusive family|
|                      |members. Women were reluctant to pursue charges because of|
|                      |the stigma attached to divorce and their economic and     |
|                      |psychological dependence on relatives. Women were also    |
|                      |abused at government run shelters.                        |
|Amnesty International,|Millions of Pakistanis suffered as a result of a sharp    |
|Amnesty International |escalation in armed conflict between the government and   |
|Report 2010: Pakistan |armed groups. Women continued to be victims of honour     |
|(2010)                |killings with 960 incidents reported. Taleban groups      |
|                      |closed or burned down girls' schools, forced women to wear|
|                      |a veil and prohibited them from leaving their homes unless|
|                      |accompanied by male relatives. Several women were         |
|                      |punished, shot dead or mutilated for alleged 'immoral'    |
|                      |activities. Legal redress sought for abuses of women's    |
|                      |rights remained difficult to obtain. Child labour,        |
|                      |domestic violence, sexual abuse and forcing girls into    |
|                      |marriage to settle disputes continues. The government     |
|                      |rarely took action to prevent such abuses or to ensure    |
|                      |punishment of perpetrators.                               |
|Immigration and       |There are two ways in which a Muslim woman in Pakistan can|
|Refugee Board of      |divorce her husband:  by judicial or khula divorce.  It   |
|Canada, Pakistan:     |remains difficult for a woman to exercise her right to    |
|Circumstances under   |divorce, not only because Pakistan is a male-orientated   |
|which a woman has the |and male-dominated society, but also because the woman may|
|legal right to get a  |not be aware of her rights and sometimes was              |
|divorce through the   |'psychologically debarred' from exercising them.          |
|courts (judicial      |                                                          |
|divorce) through her  |The ability of a woman to live alone and unmarried in     |
|own initiative;       |Pakistan, will depend on the province and in what context |
|circumstances under   |they are living. There is a sharp rural/urban divide with |
|which single women can|rural areas not recognising women as individuals but as   |
|live alone (2010)     |members of a male's family. Urban living is different but |
|                      |there remain difficulties for single women.               |
|Asian Human Rights    |In recognition of the International Day for the           |
|Commission, Pakistan: |Elimination of Violence against Women, the article served |
|Women have little to  |as a reminder of how much Pakistan had yet to do to       |
|celebrate on the      |protect its women from gender-based violence and to ensure|
|International Day for |their safety, with an aim of inspiring consideration of   |
|Elimination of        |the circumstances faced by women in Pakistan. There was an|
|Violence against Women|increase in forced marriage and forcible conversion by    |
|(2010)                |Muslim extremists. Women, who were members of religious   |
|                      |minorities, were more vulnerable to discrimination and    |
|                      |violence, and cases involving violence to women remain    |
|                      |unsolved. Women continued to experience unmitigated abuse |
|                      |and were targeted in vicious, disfiguring attacks as well |
|                      |as being the victims of sexual assaults and murder.       |
|Immigration and       |A presentation on government initiatives to foster social,|
|Refugee Board of      |economic and legal empowerment of women stated that female|
|Canada, Pakistan:     |complaint areas were set up at existing police stations   |
|Resources available to|for female victims of violence, staffed by women police   |
|female victims of     |officers. There were also women's police stations.        |
|violence in Karachi,  |Women's shelters existed, but they focused on mediating   |
|Islamabad and Lahore  |between couples, instead of offering women protection.    |
|(2009)                |Shelters were under resourced, limiting the available     |
|                      |help. Private shelters were more helpful and could offer  |
|                      |longer stays, but there were limited places available.    |
|                      |There was little follow-up work after a woman left the    |
|                      |shelter, which was of particular concern.                 |
|Immigration and       |It is difficult to get an accurate picture of the extent  |
|Refugee Board of      |of the problem since many honour killings go unreported,  |
|Canada, Pakistan:     |with only five per cent of rape and honour crimes being   |
|Honour killings       |reported. Honour killings are mainly prevalent in rural   |
|targeting men and     |areas of Pakistan and are usually carried out by male     |
|women, especially in  |family members, with the methods varying by location.     |
|the northern areas    |                                                          |
|(2001-2006) (2007)    |                                                          |
|Immigration and       |According to statements from professors and NGO           |
|Refugee Board of      |representatives, it is hard for single women to live alone|
|Canada, Pakistan:     |both in urban and rural areas, due to security concerns   |
|Circumstances under   |and social constraints. Whether a woman can live alone    |
|which single women    |depends on age, class, education and where she lives.     |
|could live alone      |Young unmarried/divorced women had more difficulty due to |
|(2007)                |social pressures and difficulty in finding apartments to  |
|                      |rent.   Older women could live alone but still felt       |
|                      |insecure socially and physically. The percentage of highly|
|                      |educated and economically independent women living alone  |
|                      |is very low. In order to access internal relocation, you  |
|                      |need money and resources.  There were no government       |
|                      |housing or other support services if the woman could not  |
|                      |support herself.                                          |
|Amnesty International,|An estimated 80 per cent of all Pakistani women suffer    |
|Pakistan: Panah needs |violence in the home and over the years over 250 of those |
|your support (2006)   |women ended up in Panah - a shelter set up by Amnesty     |
|                      |International, offering a safe haven to women where they  |
|                      |have access to free legal aid, medical care and           |
|                      |counselling. The report states that the Panah shelter was |
|                      |looking for a new home and was seeking a safe and         |
|                      |affordable location to which it could relocate.           |


