



|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|                                                                  |
|KH (Funding-RS followed) Turkey  [2008] UKAIT 00068               |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                |                                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
| SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|KH                                                                |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


1. It is now established that save in exceptional circumstances  the  grant
of an order for reconsideration means that a funding order will be made  if
applicable: see RS (Funding-meaning of 'significant prospect') Iran  [2005]
UKAIT 00138 and reg  6(3)  of  the  Community  Legal  Service  (Asylum  and
Immigration Appeals) Regulations 2005.

2. Deciding whether there was a significant prospect that the appeal  would
be allowed upon reconsideration means considering what the position was "at
the time when the appellant made the section 103A application"; it  is  not
an exercise in hindsight based on how things appear later to an immigration
judge in the light of further evidence and/or submissions.

                       REVIEW OF FUNDING DETERMINATION

1. The appellant is a  national  of  Turkey.  In  a  funding  determination
notified on 8 April 2008 a panel comprising  Designated  Immigration  Judge
Billingham and Immigration Judge C H Bennett  decided  in  a  determination
running to 7 pages to refuse to make a s.103D(3) order of  payment  of  the
appellant's costs. This followed a 30-page  determination  notified  on  10
July 2007  by  the  same  panel  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal.  The
appellant's representatives made an in-time application for a review of the
refusal of the funding order. This application arises under reg  7  of  the
Community Legal Services (Asylum and Immigration Appeals) Regulations  2005
which provide for such a review to be carried out by a  senior  immigration
judge who was  not  the  member  of  the  Tribunal,  or  a  member  of  the
constitution of the Tribunal, which made the original decision (reg  7(3)).
I may carry out the review without a hearing or hold an  oral  hearing,  if
one is requested by the supplier or  counsel.  No  oral  hearing  has  been
requested, hence my review has been carried out without a hearing.  By  reg
7(5) I may:


      "(a) make an order under section 103D(3); or
      (b) confirm the Tribunal's original decision".

 Legal framework
2. The relevant statutory provisions governing the making of  an  order  for
funding are set out in section 103D  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 (the  2002  Act),  rules  28A  and  33  of  the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (the Procedure  Rules)  and  the
Community Legal Service (Asylum and Immigration  Appeals)  Regulations  2005
as amended with effect from 30 April 2007 by  the  Community  Legal  Service
(Asylum and Immigration Appeals)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2007  (the   CLS
Regulations). Paragraph 15 of the  Practice  Directions  as  amended  on  30
April 2007 is also relevant.

3. The power to make an order that an appellant's costs be paid out  of  the
relevant fund is set out in section 103D of the 2002 Act. Section 103D  (1),
(2) and (3) provide:

     "(1)   On the application of  an  appellant  under  section  103A,  the
     appropriate court may order that the appellant's costs  in  respect  of
     the application under section 103A shall be paid out of  the  Community
     Legal Service Fund established under section 5 of the Access to Justice
     Act 1999 (c.22).


     (2)         Subsection (3) applies where an order for reconsideration
                is made -


         (a)     under section 103A(1), and
         (b)     on the application of the appellant.


     (3)    The Tribunal may order payment out of that Fund of the
          appellant's costs -


         (a)     in respect of the application for reconsideration;
         (b)     in respect of the preparation for reconsideration;
         (c)     in respect of the reconsideration;"


     4. Regulation 6 of the CLS Regulations provides:


     (1)    The Tribunal must exercise the power to make an order under
     section 103D(3) in accordance with this regulation.


     (IA)   The Tribunal may only make an order under section 103D(3) where-
      (a)  it has reconsidered its decision on an appeal; or
      (b) an order for reconsideration has been made but the reconsideration
      does not take place or is not completed because:-
        (i) the appeal lapses, or is treated as abandoned or finally
        determined, by operation of an enactment; or
        (ii) the appeal is withdrawn by the appellant, or is treated as
        withdrawn because the respondent withdraws the decision or decision
        to which the appeal relates.


     (2)    If the Tribunal allows an appeal on reconsideration, it must
     make an order under section 103D(3).


     (3)    If the Tribunal dismisses an appeal on reconsideration, it must
     not make an order under section 103D(3) unless satisfied that, at the
     time when the appellant made the section 103A application, there was a
     significant prospect that the appeal would be allowed upon
     reconsideration.


     (3A)   If an order for reconsideration is made but the reconsideration
     does not take place or is not completed, the Tribunal must not make an
     order under section 103D(3) unless it is satisfied that, at the time
     when the appellant made the section 103A application, there was a
     significant prospect that the appeal would be allowed upon
     reconsideration.


     (4) If, where paragraph (3) or (3A) applies, the Tribunal decides not
     to make an order under section 103D(3), it must give reasons for its
     decision."


  Procedural history
4.  I have already made reference to the panel's decisions relating to  this
case, but it is necessary to have regard to the fuller  procedural  history.
On 29 December  2005  Immigration  Judge  Cohen  dismissed  the  appellant's
appeal.  On  27  January  2006  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Jarvis   ordered
reconsideration. She found it arguable that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
apprehension of the true facts of the case concerning  the  history  of  the
appellant's claimed detentions, in his reasoning as  to  why  the  appellant
was found to have no political profile  and  in  failing  to  give  adequate
reasons for rejecting the evidence of a witness  for  the  appellant.  On  9
March 2007 Senior Immigration Judges Chalkley and Southern  found  that  the
immigration  judge   had   materially   erred   in   law,   because   of   a
misunderstanding by the  immigration  judge  of  the  evidence  before  him,
inadequate reasons for rejecting the evidence of the witness and  a  failure
to assess the appellant's explanation as to why he had been able  to  remain
in Mersin [a part of Turkey] for a month  without  difficulty.  Then  on  10
July 2007 Designated Immigration Judge Billingham and Immigration Judge C  H
Bennett promulgated their determination dismissing the appellant's appeal.

5. The reasons given by the panel in their subsequent  decision  on  funding
dated 8 April 2008 for finding that there was  not  a  significant  prospect
that the appeal would be allowed on reconsideration were  in  summary:  that
Senior Immigration Judges  Chalkley and Southern had rejected  a  number  of
alleged legal errors and  had  only  found  three  legal  errors;  that  the
panel's reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence "could and  ought  to
have been appreciated and considered by his representatives  at  or  before"
January  2006;  the  absence   of   documentary   evidence;   and   internal
inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence.

Discussion
6. Plainly the panel decided in their discretion to refuse a  funding  order
because  they  considered  the  requirement  at  reg  6  (3)  of  the    CLS
Regulations, that "at the time when the  appellant  made  the  section  103A
application, there was a significant  prospect  that  the  appeal  would  be
allowed upon reconsideration", had not been met.

7. Curiously, in view of the length of its decision on  funding,  the  panel
failed to refer to any case law dealing with reg 6(3).  In  particular  they
did not refer to  RS (Funding -  meaning  of  'significant  prospect')  Iran
[2005] UKAIT 00138 or to YH (Funding-regulation 8 - excluding  costs)  Sudan
[2007] UKAIT 00095. In RS the Tribunal gave guidance on the meaning  of  the
phrase "significant prospect". It held, inter alia, that,  in  the  majority
of cases:

      (a)    there  is  no  material  difference  between  the  "significant
           prospect" test for the issue of a  section  103D  funding  order
           under reg 6(3) and the "real possibility" test under rule  26(6)
           before reconsideration can be ordered under the Procedure  Rules
           (para 16 of the determination); and

      (b)   the initial views of the Senior Immigration  Judge  who  ordered
           reconsideration should be regarded as  the  decisive  factor  in
           determining whether the funding order should be made within  the
           terms of reg 6(3) (para 18 of the determination).

8. In RS, the Tribunal went on to give four examples of  exceptional  cases
in which the preliminary view of the Senior Immigration Judge  who  ordered
reconsideration might need to be revisited for the purposes of  deciding  a
funding order application. These related to: materially misleading grounds;
an order  for  reconsideration  inadvertently  made  without  reference  to
relevant law; unsupported allegations of bias or impropriety;  and  grounds
that are pointless in the face of binding precedent.

9. Nor did the panel refer to any  of  the  leading  cases  clarifying  the
nature of the reconsideration process, namely R(Wani) v SSHD and AIT [2005]
EWHC 2815 Admin; JA (Practice  on  Reconsideration:  Wani  applied)  [2006]
Ecuador UKAIT 00013 or DK  (Serbia)[2006]  EWCA  Civ  1747.  In  DK(Serbia)
Latham LJ cited  the  AIT  Practice  Direction  14.4,  which  includes  the
following:

      "[o]nly in exceptional circumstances can the  decision  contained  in
      [the written reasons for finding that the original  Tribunal  made  a
      material error lf law] be departed from or  varied  by  the  Tribunal
      which completes the reconsideration."

10. Why reference to these cases and this direction might have helped  will
become clear in a moment.


11. Bereft of any case law compass, the panel fell into a number of errors.
Before setting these out, it is important to  recall  their  reasoning.  At
para 6 the panel, having noted that one senior immigration judge  had  made
an order for reconsideration and two senior immigration  judges  had  found
there was a material error of law in the determination by Immigration Judge
Cohen,   stated:


      "But there is nothing in the papers before us  to  indicate  that  Mr
      Chalkely and Mr Southern were asked to consider, or that they in fact
      considered, the crucial question of whether the errors which they had
      identified made any difference to the ultimate conclusion...


      Because there was no consideration of whether the  errors  identified
      made any difference to  the  result,  we  do  not  consider  that  Mr
      Chalkley's and Mr Southern's having directed a  re-hearing  indicates
      that there was a  significant  prospect  that  the  appeal  would  be
      allowed.  A  fortiori  in  respect  of  Miss   Jarvis's   order   for
      reconsideration - since her determination was  on  the  basis  of  Mr
      Cohen's determination and the notice of  application.  There  was  no
      opportunity for argument before her to the  effect  that  the  errors
      made no difference.


      ...


      The matters to which we  have  referred  above  ought  to  have  been
      apparent to a competent legal adviser  in  January  2006.No  detailed
      examination can realistically be  expected  to  be  undertaken  by  a
      Senior Immigration Judge dealing with an application under s.103A  or
      at the first stage of a reconsideration unless (in that latter  case)
      the representative of the party who was successful  at  the  original
      hearing places the relevant material before  the  Senior  Immigration
      Judge or Judges to demonstrate that, whatever the deficiencies  there
      may have been in the determination and/or reasoning  process  of  the
      Immigration Judge, his ultimate conclusions were sound and  ought  to
      be upheld  and  that  there  were  sound  reasons  which  would  have
      justified the conclusions which he reached. That was not done in this
      case".


   12. From the above it is clear that the panel considered, not only  that
   one  senior  immigration  judge  had  erred  in  making  an  order   for
   reconsideration but  that two senior immigration judges had subsequently
   erred  in  finding  a  material  error  of  law.  It  may   be   thought
   extraordinary that in the absence of any glaring inadvertence the  panel
   could seriously consider, as they did at para  6,  that  no  fewer  than
   three senior immigration judges were ignorant of the requirements of the
   2002 Act and the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  and
   the  Tribunal  Practice  Directions.  The  order   for   reconsideration
   necessitated that the senior immigration judge concerned was  satisfied,
   to use the wording of Rule 26(b), that "there is a real possibility that
   the Tribunal would decide the appeal  differently  on  reconsideration".
   The two senior immigration judges could not have found a material  error
   of law in this case unless, to use the wording of Rule 31(5)  they  were
   satisfied there was an "error  of  law  which  affected  the  Tribunal's
   decision upon the appeal".  Of course, senior immigration judges are not
   infallible and, as the Practice Directions and RS recognise,  there  may
   be cases justifying departure from the general rule, if for example  the
   senior immigration judge's order or decision that there was  a  material
   error of law can clearly be seen to have been inadvertent in  the  light
   of binding precedent. But cases of this kind are clearly seen to be  the
   exception. If the fact that one senior immigration  judge  had  made  an
   order was not seen as a reason for caution on the part  of  this  panel,
   certainly the fact that two other senior immigration judges found actual
   material errors of law should have been. The panel's disregard for  such
   considerations bordered on the cavalier.


   13. But in any event, the panel were  wrong  in  their  judgement.   The
   errors the senior  immigration  judge  identified  were  arguable  legal
   errors giving rise to the  real  possibility  that  the  Tribunal  would
   decide the appeal differently on reconsideration. The implication that a
   senior  immigration  judge  cannot  safely  decide  that  an  order  for
   reconsideration should be made unless he or she has heard arguments from
   both  sides  misunderstands  the   nature   of   this   stage   in   the
   reconsideration process. So far as the  subsequent  decision  by  Senior
   Immigration Judges Chalkley and Southern is concerned, each of the three
   errors they identified was both a legal error and one which affected the
   Tribunal's decision on appeal.


   14. The panel cannot even be said to have been  internally  logical  and
   consistent in their approach. If  as  it  clearly  implied,  the  senior
   immigration judges had failed to apply the correct legal tests  both  in
   making an order and in finding a material error of law, one  would  have
   expected  the  panel  to  have  stated   this   in   their   substantive
   determination. But in their substantive 10 July determination dismissing
   the appellant's appeal the panel said nothing about this. Nor  did  they
   say  anything  to  indicate  that  they  thought  that  the  appellant's
   representatives had misled  the  senior  immigration  judges  previously
   involved in the case as  to  the  facts  or  the  law  or  the  relevant
   background material or as to their preparation for the appeal.


    15. A second point of error on the part of the panel was that  none  of
   the reasons they gave for considering that at the time of  the  decision
   to make an order there was not "a significant prospect that appeal would
   be allowed upon reconsideration"  fell   into  any  of  the  exceptional
   categories identified in RS. Admittedly RS did not seek  to  furnish  an
   exhaustive list, but, again, what is clear from the reasoning in  RS  is
   that it would only be in an exceptional situation that the  decision  of
   the senior immigration judge who made the order would not be treated  as
   the decisive factor. In giving their reasons for finding that there  was
   not  a  significant  prospect   of   the   appeal   being   allowed   on
   reconsideration the panel did not (as we  shall  see  more  fully  in  a
   moment) identify anything of an exceptional nature.


   16. A third point of error was that the panel itself applied  the  wrong
   legal  test.  Contrary  to  what  it  asserted  in  para  6,   a  senior
   immigration judge is not confined by statute or anything stated  in  the
   Procedure Rules or Practice Directions  to finding a material  error  of
   law only where satisfied that :


      "the representative of the party who was successful at  the  original
      hearing places the relevant material before  the  Senior  Immigration
      Judge or Judges to demonstrate that  his  ultimate  conclusions  were
      sound and ought to be upheld and that there were sound reasons  which
      would have justified the conclusions which he reached".


   17. It is puzzling in the extreme why the panel should consider that the
   correct test should be one which places an onus on  "the  representative
   of the party who was successful at  the  original  hearing",  especially
   since in this case the appellant had lost before the immigration  judge.
   What is meant by "relevant material" is also far from  clear.  If  there
   has not been any rule 32(2) notice then the material (at least  if  this
   term means to refer to evidence) would normally be the same as it was at
   the original hearing: see DK (Serbia).  If the above is meant  to  refer
   to the conclusions  of  the  original  immigration  judge,  then  as  an
   observation that is only going  to  make  sense  in  a  case  where  the
   findings of fact of that judge were not infected by legal error. In  the
   instant case, the original judge's findings  were  clearly  infected  by
   legal error and the appellant's credibility had to be considered afresh.
   The above statement is not only an unwarranted gloss, it is shot through
    with confusion.


   18. The panel in this case also erred in failing to recognise that their
   task was not to decide what would have been the decision of  the  senior
   immigration judges had they had the benefit of the fuller  evidence  and
   submissions at the stages they were considering  the  case  (whether  to
   grant an order for reconsideration, whether to find a material error  of
   law). Being required to consider whether "at the time when the appellant
   made the section 103A application" there was a significant  prospect  of
   success entails having regard to what was the state of the evidence  and
   submissions at that time. Except possibly in very  unusual  cases,  e.g.
   where it later becomes clear that the  senior  immigration  judges  have
   been misled as to the nature of the case, there is no place for analysis
   by hindsight.


   19.  Immigration judges tasked with determining  a  funding  application
   should not seek to rewrite the legal framework for deciding  whether  to
   make an order for reconsideration or whether there is a  material  error
   of law. If in exceptional cases where some revisiting  is  required,  it
   must be done by reference to the correct legal tests.


   20. Given not only that a senior immigration judge  made  an  order  for
   reconsideration and that two senior immigration judges found a  material
   error  of  law  and  that  there  were  no   exceptional   circumstances
   surrounding their having done so, it is plain that  the  requirement  of
   reg 6(3) of the CLS Regulations were met. At the time when the appellant
   made the section 103A application, there was a significant prospect that
   the appeal would be allowed upon reconsideration.


   21. Having reviewed the decision of the panel not to make an order under
   s.103D, and for the reasons given above, I exercise my discretion  under
   reg 7 (5) of the CLS Regulations to make an order under section  103D(3)
   to cover all of the appellant's costs in respect of the application  for
   reconsideration, preparation for reconsideration and in respect  of  the
   reconsideration will be paid  out  of  the  relevant  fund,  within  the
   meaning of rule 33 of the Procedure Rules.


               DR H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)
