
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Chang (paragraph 276A(a)(v); 18 months?) [2021] UKUT 00065 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under Rule 34 Without a Hearing       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|At Field House                                |                              |
|On 10 December 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                                 MONA CHANG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


In paragraph 276A(a) (v) the reference to "18 months" must be interpreted
as meaning 548 days.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. How long is 18 months? Or, more precisely, how many days are  there  in
    18 months? Whether the appellant meets  the  requirement  of  paragraph
    276A (a)(v) of the Immigration  Rules  turns  on  the  answer  to  that
    deceptively simple question.

 2. The appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom in  January  2009  at
    the age of 10. She  has  undertaken  all  her  secondary  and  tertiary
    education here, but has, understandably, returned to Hong Kong to visit
    her parents and has travelled during her education, spending  in  total
    543 days outside the United Kingdom between 12  January  2009  and  her
    application for indefinite leave to remain on  long  residence  grounds
    made on 13 June 2019.

 3. In her letter of  12  September  2019  refusing  the  application,  the
    respondent took the view that, following the long  residence  guidance,
    18 months is to be considered  as  540  days,  and  so  her  continuous
    residence had been broken. On that basis, the appellant  did  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276B (with reference  to  paragraph  276A
    (a) (v)) of the Immigration  Rules  as  and  so  was  not  entitled  to
    Indefinite Leave to Remain.

 4. On appeal, the appellant explained that she had made an  error  in  the
    schedule of her absences, overlooking the fact that she  had  travelled
    first to Thailand on 30 March 2016 and only then  to  Hong  Kong  on  4
    April 2016 before returning to the United Kingdom on 11 April 2016  and
    so had omitted 30 March to 4 April 2016 from her calculations.

 5. The judge found at paragraph 7 that:

         The respondent's Long Residence guidance states clearly  that  for
         the purposes of calculating time  spent  outside  the  UK  a  month
         constitutes 30  calendar  days.  The  period  is  longer  than  the
         statutory definition of a month meaning  calendar  month  (i.e.  28
         days) to be found in Schedule 1 to the Interpretation Act 1978

 6. The judge then went on to dismiss the appeal  on  the  basis  that  her
    removal was proportionate.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      a) In failing to give any reasons for rejecting or even engaging  with
         the appellant's submissions on how 18 months should be interpreted;

      b) In misdirecting herself that a calendar month is 28 days;

      c) In failing to follow R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33  in  concluding
         that the respondent's guidance, imposing a shorter period  than  18
         months was impermissible;

 8. On 7 May 2020 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien  granted  permission.
    Subsequent to that, Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington issued directions on
    13 July 2020 which provided that it would in this case  be  appropriate
    to determine without a hearing whether the  making  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error of law, and, if  so
    whether that decision should  be  set  aside.   Those  directions  also
    included a timetable within which any objections and  submissions  were
    to be made.

 9. The appellant made further submissions on 23 July 2020. The  respondent
    replied on 20 August 2020 and the appellant made further submissions in
    reply on 2 September 2020.

10. In deciding whether or not to make a decision without a hearing, I have
    borne in mind Rule 34 and the judgment of Fordham J in JCWI v President
    of the Upper Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 as well as  the  order  made  in
    that case.

11. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Given that no objection to this course of
    action has been raised, and bearing in mind the overriding objective in
    Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,  I
    am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of  this  case  where
    there has been no objection to a decision being made in the absence  of
    a hearing that it would be right to do so.

12. The Immigration Rules provide, so far as is relevant:

    276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE (1).
    (a) "continuous residence" means residence in the United Kingdom for an
    unbroken  period,  and  for  these  purposes  a  period  shall  not  be
    considered to have been broken where an applicant is  absent  from  the
    United Kingdom for a period of 6  months  or  less  at  any  one  time,
    provided that the applicant in question has existing limited  leave  to
    enter  or  remain  upon  their  departure  and  return,  but  shall  be
    considered to have been broken if the applicant:
       ...
        v) has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from the  United
           Kingdom during the period in question.
           ...

    (c) 'lived continuously' and  'living  continuously'  mean  'continuous
    residence', except that paragraph 276A(a)(iv) shall not apply.

   276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave  to
   remain on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom are that:
       (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful  residence  in
       the United Kingdom.
       (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why it
       would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave  to  remain
       on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:
       (a) age; and
       (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
       (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations  and
       employment record; and
       (d) domestic circumstances; and
       (e) compassionate circumstances; and
       (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and

13. For the avoidance of doubt, it is not the respondent's  case  that  the
    applicant had been present in the United Kingdom  otherwise  than  with
    leave, or had overstayed at any point.

14. As a starting point, it is not in dispute that "month" is  not  defined
    in the Immigration Rules. That was noted in FB and Others (HC 395  para
    284: "six months") Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT 00030 where the AIT  had  to
    consider  the  meaning  of  "six  months"  in  paragraph  284  of   the
    Immigration Rules as then in force.

15. The respondent in her submissions accepts  that  "month"  must  mean  a
    calendar month in line with the Interpretation Act 1978 at Schedule  1.
    That, as the AIT noted in FB &  Others  was  a  provision  designed  to
    exclude it from being a lunar month. It follows therefore, that seeking
    to limit a month to 28 days is wrong in law although  it  needs  to  be
    recalled that section 5 of the Interpretation Act provides:
    5. Definitions. In any Act, unless the contrary intention appears,
    words and expressions listed in Schedule 1 to this Act are to be
    construed according to that Schedule.

16. It is self-evident that not all calendar months are of the same length.
     In Migotti v Colvill (1879) 4 CPD 233, 238 Brett LJ held:

    "The term a calendar month is a legal and  technical  term  ...  .  The
    meaning of the phrase is that, in computing time  by  calendar  months,
    the time must be reckoned  by  looking  at  the  calendar  and  not  by
    counting days; and that one calendar  month's  imprisonment  is  to  be
    calculated  from  the  day  of  imprisonment  to  the  day  numerically
    corresponding to that day in the following month less one."
    Bramwell and Cotton LJJ agreed with him.

17. It follows from that that  where,  for  example  "6  months  leave"  is
    specified, that the end date can be determined precisely,  even  though
    the exact number of days in that  period  will  vary.  That  is  not  a
    problem when a continuous period is so defined; but it  is  problematic
    when, as here, the rules are intending  to  set  a  maximum  period  of
    absence, made up from smaller, shorter periods because  the  number  of
    days in a period of months will vary depending on when the day  on  the
    year on which the count is started.

18. As a matter of arithmetic, if a period of 18 months  were  consecutive,
    it would always be at least 547 days if it  incorporated  two  non-leap
    year Februarys.  But it can and does vary, and the exact number of days
    in a period of 18 months cannot  be  properly  ascertained  unless  the
    start or finish date of that period is known. Using a period of  months
    to calculate accumulated absences (as opposed to a  single  period)  is
    for that reason inappropriate and leads to a lack of certainty.

19. As an aside, that may well be why  the  permissible  absences  for  the
    purposes of naturalisation in Schedule 1 to the British Nationality Act
    are specified in days.

20. It would, therefore, appear that Immigration Rules  do  not  specify  a
    specific number of days that can be spent outside the  United  Kingdom,
    and that thus the meaning of 18 months is unclear.

21. But the Immigration Rules are not statutes and are to be interpreted in
    a common sense manner.  In everyday usage, 18 months means a year and a
    half, rather than a collection of months selected at random.  Any  year
    has either 365 or 366 days. Similarly, any half-year has  either  182.5
    or 183 days. As leap-years cannot follow each other, then a year and  a
    half is either 547.5, 548 or 548.5 days.

22. While that might be open to the objection that the law does not  reckon
    fractions of days, and  is  still  not  certain,  the  convention  when
    rounding numbers to the nearest whole number is, when rounding 0.5,  to
    round  up  (or  down)  to  the  nearest  even  number.  Applying   that
    convention, that the number of days in a common-sense interpretation of
    18 months would be 548 days reached by rounding 547.5 up or 548.5 down.

23. That is, however, different from the guidance issued by the  respondent
    which equates 18 months to 540 days.  That would appear to be based  on
    an assumption of months being,  on  average  30  days,  a  figure  only
    achieved by  rounding  down  30.4167  to  30  in  accordance  with  the
    convention noted above.

24. But suppose a hypothetical applicant spent 18 separate  months  outside
    the United Kingdom. A month is readily calculable, and those 18  months
    could total a widely different number of days spread  over  a  10  year
    period if, say, the months involved only February  (on  ten  occasions)
    and eight 30 days months spent outside the United Kingdom,  leading  to
    only 522 days, or 18 periods of 31 days were spent outside  the  United
    Kingdom those 18 months would be 558 days.

25. Thus, the respondent's interpretation of 18 months being  540  days  is
    predicated on 18 notional months. But those "months" are not defined in
    the rules or in  statute  and  that  interpretation  is  predicated  on
    "month" having a different meaning from when it is used  to  delimit  a
    specific period of leave which has been granted.  In  neither  case  is
    there a sufficient basis under section 5 of the Interpretation Act  for
    construing month other than as a calendar month.

26. As the AIT noted in FB & Others when calculating 6 months, it was based
    on calendar months and so the number of days within  that  period  will
    vary and so will the number of days in any period of leave granted  for
    6 months.

27.  The  respondent's  case  is  that  any  ambiguity  or  difficulty   in
    interpretation  is  resolved  by  the  guidance.  There  are,  however,
    difficulties in using guidance as a means to interpret  the  rules,  as
    was noted in Hoque & Ors v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 at [39] (Underhill
    LJ):

    39. I should acknowledge in connection with the previous paragraph that
    there may be a question whether  it  is  legitimate  to  refer  to  the
    Guidance as an aid to construction. At paras. 10-11 of his judgment  in
    Mahad (Ethiopia) v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16, [2010] 1 WLR
    48, Lord Brown disapproved the use of IDIs (the predecessor to Guidance
    documents) for this purpose; and para. 23 of the judgment of  Dyson  LJ
    in MD (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 213 is to the same effect. At para. 15 (7) of its judgment  in
    Masood Ahmed the Court referred to Lord  Brown's  observations  in  the
    context of this very issue. However at para.  42  of  his  judgment  in
    Pokhriyal v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1568 Jackson LJ noted a qualification to that approach in cases where a
    rule is ambiguous and the Secretary  of  State  has  in  her  published
    guidance adopted the interpretation more favourable to applicants.  The
    intended scope  of  element  [C]  is  certainly  ambiguous,  given  the
    mismatch between its terms and its placing within  the  paragraph,  and
    the interpretation that I believe to be correct is more  favourable  to
    applicants. In any event, however, the terms of the  Guidance  are  not
    essential to my conclusion.

28.  Similarly, McCombe LJ at [91]:
    91.  Finally, I would add a few words about the  Secretary  of  State's
    Guidance issued to caseworkers for the  purposes  of  helping  them  to
    decide applications for ILR submitted on the basis of  long  residence.
    No counsel took us to the detail of this material, which is included in
    the bundles before us for the appeal. Rightly, they did  not  focus  on
    this in their arguments on construction of the Rules because,  as  Lord
    Brown made clear in  Mahad,  the  Secretary  of  State's  intention  in
    formulating the Rules is not to  be  discovered  from  these.  However,
    there is a qualification to  this,  noted  by  Jackson  LJ  (with  whom
    Longmore LJ and Vos LJ (as he then was)) agreed  in  Pokhriyal  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1568. Jackson LJ said:
        "42 If there is ambiguity in Immigration Rules and the Secretary  of
        State publicly declares that he/she  will  adopt  the  more  lenient
        interpretation, then tribunals and courts may hold the Secretary  of
        State to that  assurance.  This  is  exemplified  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal's decision in Adeyodin v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773 ... At paragraph 70 Rix LJ said  that
        in a situation of genuine ambiguity, it  was  legitimate  to  derive
        assistance  from  the  executive's  formally   published   guidance,
        including IDIs
        43. I would  respectfully  agree  with  paragraph  70  of  Rix  LJ's
        judgment in Adeyodin. I would, however, add this comment. I  do  not
        think it is possible  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  rely  upon
        extraneous material in order to persuade  a  court  or  tribunal  to
        construe the rules more harshly or to resolve an  ambiguity  in  the
        Government's favour. The Secretary of State holds all the cards. The
        Secretary of State drafts the rules; the Secretary of  State  issues
        the IDIs and guidance statements; the Secretary of State  authorises
        the public statements made by his/her officials.  The  Secretary  of
        State cannot toughen up the rules otherwise than  by  making  formal
        amendments and laying them before Parliament. That follows from  the
        Supreme Court's reasoning in R (Alvi) v Secretary of State  for  the
        Home Department [2012] UKSC 33 ..."

29. Given that 18 months can, for the reasons set out above, mean a  longer
    period than 540 days, the ambiguity in the rules ought to  be  resolved
    in an appellant's favour.

30. Further, as the appellant argues, the effect of the  interpretation  as
    set out in the guidance has the effect, if the respondent  is  correct,
    to establish a rule.

31. In Alvi [2012] UKSC 33 Lord Hope said this

    57.  The problem that Mr Alvi's case  reveals,  however,  is  that  the
    Codes contain  material  which  is  not  just  guidance.  They  contain
    detailed information the application of which will determine whether or
    not the applicant will qualify. I agree with Lord Dyson (see  para  94,
    below) that any requirement which, if not satisfied, will  lead  to  an
    application for leave to enter or to remain being  refused  is  a  rule
    within the meaning of section 3(2) .  A  provision  which  is  of  that
    character is a rule within the ordinary meaning of that word. So a fair
    reading of section 3(2) requires that it be laid before Parliament. The
    problem is how to apply that simple test to the material that is before
    us in this case.

    Lord Dyson said this at [83]:

    83.   Nevertheless,  section  3(2)  raises  a  difficult  question   of
    interpretation. What is a rule "as to the practice to  be  followed  in
    the administration" of the 1971  Act?  Parliament  drew  a  distinction
    between rules within the meaning of section 3(2) and "instructions (not
    inconsistent with the immigration rules)" given to immigration officers
    by the Secretary of State within the meaning of para 1(3) of Part 1  to
    Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.  Rules  cannot,  therefore,  encompass  the
    instructions and guidance issued to case-workers  and  other  staff  to
    assist them with processing applications, although  in  a  sense  these
    documents describe some of the practice followed in the  administration
    of the 1971 Act. But the statute itself recognises that instructions to
    immigration officers as  to  how  they  are  to  apply  the  rules  are
    different from the rules themselves. The recognition that the 1971  Act
    distinguishes between rules and instructions  to  immigration  officers
    does not, however, shed light on  where  the  statute  draws  the  line
    between them. Various attempts have been made in recent cases to define
    rules. Lord Hope has referred to a number of the cases at paras  43  to
    52 above.

    And at [94]:

    94.  In my view, the solution which best achieves these objects is that
    a rule is any requirement which a migrant must satisfy as  a  condition
    of being given leave to enter or  leave  to  remain,  as  well  as  any
    provision "as to the period for which leave is  to  be  given  and  the
    conditions to be attached in different circumstances" (there can be  no
    doubt about the latter since it is expressly provided  for  in  section
    3(2) ). I would exclude from the definition any procedural requirements
    which do not have to be satisfied as a condition of the grant of  leave
    to enter or remain. But it seems to me that any requirement  which,  if
    not satisfied by the migrant, will lead to an application for leave  to
    enter or remain being refused is a rule within the meaning  of  section
    3(2) . That is what  Parliament  was  interested  in  when  it  enacted
    section 3(2) . It wanted to have a say in the rules which set  out  the
    basis on which these applications were to be determined.

32. Applying Alvi to this case,  I  consider  that  what  the  guidance  is
    seeking to do when defining 18 months as 540 days is the creation of  a
    rule, and thus is not permissible.

33.  Drawing  these  strands  together,  I  conclude  that  on   a   proper
    construction of "18 months" within  paragraph  276A  (a)  (v)  must  be
    interpreted as 548 days.  Accordingly, the judge misdirected herself in
    law in a material way, and her decision must be set aside.

34. In consequence, I am satisfied also  that  the  judge's  decision  with
    respect to article 8 is also flawed, as it is predicated on  that  same
    error of law.

35. Having reached that conclusion, I issued a decision to that  effect  to
    the  parties,  indicating  that  on  a  correct  construction  of   the
    Immigration Rules, the appellant meets  the  requirement  of  paragraph
    276A (a) (v), and so meets the requirements of paragraph 276B (i) as it
    was not suggested that any of the factors set  out  in  paragraph  276B
    (ii) apply to her such that she should not be granted indefinite leave,
    or that paragraphs 276B (iii) to (v) are not met.

36. I gave directions that it was  my  view  that,  in  consequence,  there
    appears to be no public interest in removing the  appellant,  and  thus
    that her appeal should be  allowed  without  the  need  for  a  further
    hearing and inviting the parties  to  make  comments  on  the  proposed
    course of action.

37. On 17 December 2020, the appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal agreeing to the proposed course of action; on 7 January  2021,
    the respondent wrote to the Upper Tribunal conceding  the  appeal,  and
    stating she was content for it to be allowed.

38. I am satisfied that on a proper construction of the Immigration  Rules,
    the appellant has acquired 10 years continuous residence in the  United
    Kingdom and meets all the  relevant  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, in particular paragraph 276B. It follows that there is no public
    interest in removal (see OA and Others  (human  rights;  'new  matter';
    s.120) Nigeria [2019] UKUT 65 (IAC) at paragraphs [27] and [28]), and I
    am satisfied by the  evidence  before  me  and  in  the  light  of  the
    respondent's concession, that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be  in
    breach of her protected article 8 rights. I therefore allow the  appeal
    on that basis.

39. The appellant has met the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    given the lapse of time since this appeal was lodged, she has not spent
    more than 548 days outside the United Kingdom in the last 10 years.  In
    the circumstances, it would be appropriate for her now  to  be  granted
    Indefinite Leave to Remain.



Notice of Decision & Directions
    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.




       Signed                                Date 10 February 2021


       Jeremy K H Rintoul
       Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
