
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

DK and RK (Parliamentary privilege; evidence) [2021] UKUT 00061 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                 Dk (India)
                                 RK (INDIA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                                MIGRANT VOICE
                                                                  Intervener


Representation:

For the appellants     (DK):  Mr P Turner and Mr J Gajjar (Direct Access)
     (RK):    Mr R Ahmed and Mr Z Raza, instructed by
              Charles Simmons Immigration Solicitors

For the respondent:    Ms L Giovannetti QC and Mr C Thomann,
     instructed by Government Legal Department

For the intervener:         Mr M Biggs



    (1) Although the Upper  Tribunal  is  not  bound  by  formal  rules  of
    evidence, it cannot act in such  a  way  as  to  violate  Parliamentary
    privilege, whether that be to interfere with free speech in  Parliament
    or by reference to the separation  of  powers  doctrine.  The  Tribunal
    cannot interfere with or criticise proceedings of the legislature.

    (2) Courts and tribunals determine cases by reference to  the  evidence
    before them and not by reference to the views of others, expressed in a
    non-judicial setting, on evidence which is not the same as that  before
    the court or tribunal.  Indeed, even if the evidence were the same, the
    court or tribunal must reach  its  own  views,  applying  the  relevant
    burden and standard of proof.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These appeals have been remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the Court  of
    Appeal.  Both appellants have brought human rights  appeals,  in  which
    they contend that the respondent was wrong to curtail  their  leave  to
    remain and, subsequently, to refuse their human rights claims,  on  the
    basis  that  they  had  cheated  in  oral  English  tests  set  by  the
    Educational Testing Service ("ETS"), which  the  appellants  needed  to
    pass in order to obtain further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.



 2. Both DK's and RK's appeals were  remitted  on  the  basis  of  discrete
    errors of law.  A further reason for remittal, common to both, was  the
    appearance in July 2019 of a report  of  the  All  Party  Parliamentary
    Group  ("APPG")  on  TOEIC   (Test   of   English   for   International
    Communication).  The APPG was chaired by Right Hon.  Stephen  Timms  MP
    and comprised six other MPs.  The Secretariat to the APPG was  "Migrant
    Voice",  a  charity  describing  itself   as   a   "migrant-led"   body
    "established to develop the skills, capacity and confidence of  members
    of  migrant  communities,  including  asylum  seekers  and   refugees".
    Migrant Voice works "to amplify migrant voices in the media and  public
    life to counter xenophobia and build support for our rights".

 3. On 17 December 2020, the Tribunal addressed  two  matters.   First,  it
    heard submissions on the question of whether the APPG report should  be
    admitted in evidence  in  the  appeals.   Secondly,  it  considered  an
    application by Mr Biggs of Counsel that Migrant Voice should be allowed
    to intervene in the appeals.

 4. At the conclusion of the hearing, we informed the parties that the APPG
    report would not be admitted; but that,  subject  to  one  matter,  the
    transcript, prepared by Migrant Voice, of the APPG hearing on  11  June
    2019, would be admitted as a factual record of what was  said  on  that
    occasion by and to Professor  Peter  Sommer,  Dr  Philip  Harrison  and
    Professor Peter French.  The matter just  mentioned  was  that  Migrant
    Voice would file and serve its recording of the session, so  that  this
    could be checked by the respondent against the written transcript.

 5. We also gave Migrant Voice permission to intervene, on a limited basis.
     Mr Biggs, who had helpfully produced written submissions on behalf  of
    Migrant Voice, would  re-cast  those  submissions,  so  as  to  exclude
    reliance upon the APPG report.  The  witness  statements  proffered  by
    Migrant Voice would not be admitted.  However,  Mr  Biggs  and  Migrant
    Voice would consider who might be best  placed  to  provide  a  witness
    statement that exhibited the recording and transcript of  the  11  June
    hearing.

 6. Our reasons for our decisions on these issues are as follows.

 7. Article 9 of the Bill of Rights 1689 provides that:-

         "... The freedom of speech and debates or proceedings in Parliament
         ought not to be impeached or questioned in any court or  place  out
         of Parliament."

 8. In Prebble v Television New Zealand Ltd [1994] UKPC 4,  the  respondent
    TV  company  wished  to  defend  a  libel  action  by  contending  that
    statements made by Ministers  in  the  House  of  Representatives  were
    misleading, in that they suggested the government  did  not  intend  to
    sell off state-owned assets, when in fact its spokesman  was  allegedly
    conspiring to do so.

 9. Giving the judgment of the Privy Council,  Lord  Browne-Wilkinson  held
    that Article 9 of the Bill of Rights was accompanied by a long line  of
    authority that supported the  wider  principle  "that  the  courts  and
    Parliament are both astute to recognise their respective constitutional
    roles.  So far as the courts are concerned  they  will  not  allow  any
    challenge to be made to what is  said  or  done  within  the  walls  of
    Parliament in performance of its legislative functions  and  protection
    of its established privileges".  The Privy Council held  that  "parties
    to litigation, by whomsoever  commenced,  cannot  bring  into  question
    anything said or done in the House by  suggesting  (whether  by  direct
    evidence, cross-examination, inference or submission) that the  actions
    or  words  were  inspired  by  improper  motives  or  were  untrue   or
    misleading".  Those matters lay "entirely within  the  jurisdiction  of
    the House" subject to any statutory exception.  There was, however, "no
    objection to the use of Hansard to prove what  was  done  and  said  in
    Parliament as a matter of history".

10. In Office of Government, Commerce and  Information  Commissioner  v  HM
    Attorney General obo the Speaker of the House of  Commons  [2008]  EWHC
    737 (Admin), Stanley Burnton J held that the  Information  Commissioner
    and the Information Tribunal had been wrong to consider the adequacy of
    a Ministerial reply to a Parliamentary question and that  the  Tribunal
    infringed Article 9 of the Bill of Rights and/or the wider principle of
    Parliamentary  privilege  by  relying   on   the   conclusions   of   a
    Parliamentary Select Committee as authority supporting its decision  on
    a contested issue before it.

11. Stanley Burnton J said:-

         "46. ... the law of Parliamentary privilege is essentially based on
             two principles.  The first is the need to avoid  any  risk  of
             interference with free speech in Parliament.   The  second  is
             the principle of  the  separation  of  powers,  which  in  our
             Constitution  is  restricted  to  the  judicial  function   of
             government, and requires the executive and the legislature  to
             abstain from interference  with  the  judicial  function,  and
             conversely requires the judiciary not to interfere with or  to
             criticise the proceedings of  the  legislature.   These  basic
             principles lead to the requirement of mutual  respect  by  the
             Courts for the proceedings and decisions  of  the  legislature
             and by the legislature (and the executive) for the proceedings
             and decisions of the Courts.

         47.  Conflicts between Parliament and the Courts are to be avoided.
              The above principles lead to the conclusion that  the  Courts
             cannot consider allegations of impropriety  or  inadequacy  or
             lack of accuracy  in  the  proceedings  of  Parliament.   Such
             allegations are for Parliament to address, if it  thinks  fit,
             and if an allegation  is  well-founded  any  sanction  is  for
             Parliament  to  determine.   The  proceedings  of   Parliament
             include Parliamentary questions and answers to.  These are not
             matters for the Courts to consider.

         48.  In my judgment, the irrelevance of an opinion expressed  by  a
             Parliamentary Select Committee to an issue that  falls  to  be
             determined by  the  Courts  arises  from  the  nature  of  the
             judicial process, the independence of the judiciary and of its
             decisions, and the respect that the legislative  and  judicial
             branches of government owe to each other.

         ...

         57.  ...  It was the duty of the Tribunal to determine  the  issues
             before it  judicially,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  and
             arguments before the Tribunal. ... The  Select  Committee  had
             arrived at its view on the evidence before it, and not on  the
             evidence that was before the Tribunal.  Indirectly, in relying
             on the opinion of the Select Committee, the Tribunal relied on
             evidence that was not  before  it,  and  failed  to  make  its
             decision only on the basis of  the  evidence  and  submissions
             before it.

         58.  ...  If  a  party  to  proceedings  before  a  court  (or  the
             Information Tribunal) seeks to rely on an opinion expressed by
             a Select Committee, the other party, if it wishes  to  contend
             for a different result, must either contend that  the  opinion
             of the Committee was wrong (and give reasons why), thereby  at
             the very least risking a breach of Parliamentary privilege, if
             not committing an actual breach, or, because of  the  risk  of
             that breach, accept that opinion notwithstanding that it would
             not otherwise wish to do so.  This would  be  unfair  to  that
             party.

         ..."

12. It is common ground that the APPG report is not  within  the  scope  of
    Article 9.  Its report is not a proceeding in Parliament.  The APPG has
    no official Parliamentary status, unlike the Public Accounts  Committee
    or the Home Affairs Select Committee.  As is stated at page 35  of  the
    APPG report:-

         "This is not an official publication of the House of Commons or the
         House of Lords.  It has not been approved by either  House  or  its
         Committees.  All Party Parliamentary Groups are informal groups  of
         Members of both Houses with a common interest in particular issues.
          The views expressed in this report are those of the group."

13. The APPG report, however, makes reference  to  proceedings  before  the
    Home Affairs  Select  Committee  and  the  Public  Accounts  Committee.
    Paragraph 1.1 of the report expresses a view about the findings of  the
    Home Affairs Select Committee and the National Audit Office  (to  which
    we shall turn in due course).   At  paragraph  2.1  and  its  footnote,
    further reference is made to evidence provided by the respondent to the
    Home Affairs Select Committee.  At paragraph  2.3,  under  the  heading
    "Misuse of expert evidence" reference is made in the footnote  to  what
    was said at the Public Accounts Committee hearing on 10 July 2019.   At
    paragraph 2.5, under  the  heading  "'Questionable'  students  unjustly
    targeted", doubt is thrown over evidence given by the respondent to the
    Public Accounts Committee.  By contrast, evidence  given  to  the  Home
    Affairs Select Committee  by  an  individual  who  runs  a  college  is
    referred to in approbatory terms.

14. Mr Turner submitted that the APPG report was based  upon  evidence  and
    that it was  therefore  legitimate  to  have  regard  to  the  report's
    conclusions, emanating from that evidence.   Mr  Turner  drew  specific
    attention to the judgment of Cockerill J in R (Cartref Care Home Ltd  &
    Others) v Commissioners for HM Revenue and  Customs  [2019]  EWHC  3382
    (Admin) as authority for the proposition that the APPG report  was  not
    itself covered by Article 9.  Mr Ahmed made submissions,  basically  in
    line with those of Mr Turner on this issue.

15. Although the Upper Tribunal is not bound by formal rules  of  evidence,
    it cannot act in such a way  as  to  violate  Parliamentary  privilege,
    whether that be to interfere with  free  speech  in  Parliament  or  by
    reference to the separation of powers  doctrine.  The  Tribunal  cannot
    interfere with or criticise proceedings of the legislature.

16. Were the APPG report to be admitted,  we  are  in  no  doubt  that  the
    Tribunal would be drawn into this forbidden area.   The  views  of  the
    APPG about the accuracy or otherwise of  what  was  said  to  the  Home
    Affairs Select Committee  and  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  is  an
    integral aspect of the APPG report.  They serve to inform  the  overall
    conclusions of the Group.

17. The APPG report also makes  reference  to  the  National  Audit  Office
    report on  TOEIC.   The  reports  of  the  National  Audit  Office  are
    documents that attract the protection of the Parliamentary  Papers  Act
    1840.  This protects the  publisher  of  any  document  ordered  to  be
    printed by either House of Parliament from any legal  action  that  may
    result from it.

18. In Warsama & Gannon v Foreign & Commonwealth  Office  [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    142, the  Court  of  Appeal  was  concerned  with  the  application  of
    privilege to an unopposed return; that is to say, a  paper  ordered  by
    the House of Commons to be printed following a motion on the  floor  of
    the House.  In a letter of 15 December 2020 to the respondent in regard
    to the present appeals, Counsel to the Speaker of the House of  Commons
    considers the factual position in Warsama to be analogous with that  of
    documents covered by the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840.  In both cases,
    the House of Commons has an interest in the reporting in question being
    full and frank.  Thus, as is the  case  with  evidence  provided  to  a
    Select Committee, the protection of privilege extends to a  person  who
    is not a Member of  Parliament,  in  order  to  protect  that  person's
    ability to report fully and honestly to the House.  That, we  find,  is
    the position with the National Audit Office report.

19. There is, however, a broader point, which emerges from the caselaw  and
    which we respectfully consider was articulated well by Cockerill  J  in
    Cartref.  This is the principle that  courts  and  tribunals  determine
    cases by reference to the evidence before them and not by reference  to
    the views of others, expressed in a non-judicial setting,  on  evidence
    which is not the same as that before the court  or  tribunal.   Indeed,
    even if the evidence were the same, the court or  tribunal  must  reach
    its own views, applying the relevant burden and standard of proof.

20. Considerations of this kind informed why Cockerill J not only  rejected
    the opinions in the  APPG  report  before  her  as  admissible  opinion
    evidence but also voiced concerns about the factual statements in  that
    report:-

        "170.  I conclude therefore that while I am not barred from  looking
             at such material by reason  of  any  issue  as  to  breach  of
             Parliamentary privilege, I  do  need  to  ask  myself  serious
             questions  about  the  nature  of  the   evidence,   and   its
             admissibility as relevant factual or opinion evidence.

         171. As  for  the  APPG  Report  I  conclude  that,  following  the
             authorities set out above, I  cannot  properly  regard  it  as
             providing me with admissible factual evidence.   It  does  not
             fall  within  any  of  the  recognised  categories  where  the
             contents of such documents  can  be  adduced.   It  is  not  a
             witness  statement,  provided  under  the  safeguards  of  the
             witness statement process.  It was not written for the purpose
             of being relied on as a statement  of  facts;  it  is  plainly
             written,  although  carefully  and  I  am   sure   with   much
             consideration, as a call  to  action.   The  sources  for  the
             factual statements are not given and are not capable of  being
             checked.  The process was not one where HMRC gave  a  response
             to the factual  assertions;  and  it  was  apparent  from  the
             submissions made on the main conclusions that HMRC does indeed
             take issue with significant parts  of  what  is  said  in  the
             report.

         172. So far as the opinions relied on are concerned I may  properly
             take into account the  fact  that  concerned  Parliamentarians
             expressed these views based on the material available to them;
             however, those opinions again must be taken with a rider as to
             the purposes for which they were given and the absence of  the
             safeguards  which  would  be  expected  of  opinion   evidence
             admitted in court in the usual way.  I do not therefore regard
             the opinions expressed as admissible opinion evidence."

21. The same is true of the APPG report on  TOEIC.   The  opinions  of  the
    Group are clearly and forcefully expressed in  the  report.   They  are
    not, however, opinions to which we can  have  any  material  regard  in
    reaching conclusions about the evidence which will be placed before  us
    in these remitted appeals.

22. Furthermore, much of the evidence given to the APPG is not relevant  to
    the task we face in determining these appeals.

23. We do, however, consider that, once verified, the record  of  what  was
    actually said to and by Professors Sommer and French and Dr Harrison on
    11 June 2019 should be admitted.  Those three  individuals  have  given
    expert evidence in other ETS cases.  What they had to say on that  date
    may, therefore, be of relevance.   Admitting  the  transcript  on  this
    basis would not infringe Parliamentary privilege or the principle  that
    courts and tribunals make up their own minds about the  matters  to  be
    decided by them on the basis of the evidence before them.

24. The fact that the respondent chose  not  to  appear  before  the  APPG,
    though relied on by Mr Turner, is nothing  to  the  point.   Mr  Turner
    attempted to analogise by reference to a  party  who  does  not  appear
    before a tribunal, without explanation for their  absence.   Mr  Turner
    said that the resulting decision of the Tribunal  was  not  necessarily
    impugned because of that party's absence.  Whilst  that  is  of  course
    true, it misses the fundamental difference between a body such  as  the
    APPG and this Tribunal, or any other judicial body.

25. We turn to Mr  Biggs's  application  on  behalf  of  Migrant  Voice  to
    intervene in the  proceedings.   Insofar  as  Migrant  Voice  seeks  to
    express opinions about the respondent's actions in ETS  cases,  whether
    in its own regard or by reference  to  the  APPG  report,  we  are  not
    persuaded that a case for intervention has been made  out.   Though  no
    doubt sincerely and forcefully held, those views are not expert opinion
    and therefore run the risk of deflecting the Tribunal from its judicial
    task.

26. Mr Biggs's written submissions on behalf of  Migrant  Voice  are  of  a
    different  order.  They  concern  legal  and   procedural   issues   of
    potentially wider relevance than in relation to the two appeals  before
    us.   In so saying, we are mindful of the fact that both Mr Turner  and
    Mr Ahmed supported Mr Biggs's application.  We  would  be  assisted  by
    these written submissions, which do not need to be supplemented by  any
    oral element.

27. As we have already stated, we would, in addition, find  it  useful  for
    Migrant Voice to adduce the recording of the APPG hearing  of  11  June
    2019 and the agreed transcript, once the process we have described  has
    been undertaken.

28. We permit Migrant Voice to  intervene  in  the  appeals  on  the  basis
    described in paragraphs 5, 26 and 27.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                           Mr Justice Lane                 Date: 20 January
                           2021




                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber


