


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                       JM (homosexuality: risk) Uganda CG [2008] UKIAT 00065


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 30th November 2007                         |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE KING TD
                        MRS A J F CROSS DE CHAVANNES



                                   Between

                                     JM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan of Counsel instructed by Wesley Gryk,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bourne, Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor

Although there is legislation in Uganda which criminalises homosexual
behaviour there is little, if any, objective evidence that such is in fact
enforced. Notwithstanding a prevailing traditional and cultural disapproval
of homosexuality, the evidence does not establish that in general there is
persecution of homosexuality in Uganda.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 2nd May  1975.   He  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 17th August 2000  and  was  given  six
    months leave to enter as a visitor.  After that  he  did  not  seek  to
    renew his leave but claimed asylum on 28th  March  2002.   Essentially,
    the basis of  his  claim  was  that  as  a  homosexual  he  would  face
    persecution or other degrading treatment in Uganda were he to return.

2.   By a decision of 4th April 2002, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to
    recognise the appellant as a refugee  and  issued  directions  for  his
    removal.  The matter came before an Adjudicator, Mrs P  Wellesley-Cole,
    for hearing on 12th March  2003.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  in  all
    respects.

3.   The appellant sought to  appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    which appeal was heard by a panel of two Vice Presidents on  28th  July
    2003.  The appeal was dismissed.

4.   Thereafter an appeal was made  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  against  the
    decision of the AIT.  By an order of Keene LJ on  23rd  November  2004,
    the decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  was  quashed  and  the
    matter remitted to the AIT for a fresh  hearing  before  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal.

5.   There was a further period of delay before the matter came back  before
    the  Asylum  and   Immigration   Tribunal.    The   first   stage   for
    reconsideration was conducted by a panel of Senior  Immigration  Judges
    on 24th July 2006, the focus of that reconsideration being the original
    determination of the  Adjudicator.   The  Tribunal  did  not  find  her
    determination to be clear as to the central issues.  A  material  error
    of law was found giving rise to a  second  stage  reconsideration,  all
    issues to be at large.  Details of the decision are set out as follows:-



         "REASONS  FOR  THE  DECISION  THAT  THERE  IS  AN  ERROR   IN   THE
         DETERMINATION:


         This appeal came before an adjudicator (Mrs P Wellesley-Cole) on 12
         March 2003.  The adjudicator dismissed the  appeal  and  an  appeal
         against the determination of the adjudicator was dismissed  by  the
         Immigration Appeal Tribunal on 30 April 2004 following a hearing on
         28 July  2003.   The  reasons  for  the  delay  are  unclear.   The
         appellant appealed successfully to the Court of  Appeal  who  in  a
         consent judgment quashed the decision  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
         Tribunal and remitted the appeal before a  differently  constituted
         Tribunal.


         Unfortunately the reasons given by the parties in the consent order
         are not before the Tribunal but  the  representatives  told  us  it
         revolved around the question of  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
         British High Commission letter dated 20 July 2000.


         The discussion before us centred on the interpretation to be  given
         to the adjudicator's findings about the appellant's  homosexuality.
         In paragraph 16 of the determination the adjudicator said "Whilst I
         accept this sensitive young man who nervously gave his evidence  in
         barely a whisper is quite possibly homosexual, I believe that  this
         application which was made some eighteen months after his entry  to
         the United Kingdom and a year after his leave had expired  does  to
         some extent damage his credibility to be in need  of  international
         protection.  Despite his explanation that he needed to  gather  the
         necessary evidence, I am of the opinion that if  genuinely  fearing
         persecution in Uganda to which  he  returned  after  a  sojourn  in
         Kenya, he would have applied for asylum at the earliest opportunity
         and not ostensibly when he had no further leave to remain  in  this
         country."   One  particular  sentence  in  paragraph  22   of   the
         determination was interpreted by Mr Chelvan for  the  appellant  as
         evidencing an error.  Having referred  to  the  appellant's  belief
         that it would be a matter of  time  before  his  homosexuality  was
         discovered on return to Uganda, the adjudicator observed:


             "However, in my view this is mere speculation on his  part  if
             he indeed is in a discreet  homosexual  relationship  which  I
             consider he could be in."


         Mr Chelvan submitted that the adjudicator was in  effect  requiring
         the appellant to be discreet on  return  to  Uganda.   However,  an
         alternative interpretation was  that  the  adjudicator  was  simply
         making a finding  that  the  appellant  was  being  discreet  in  a
         relationship in the United Kingdom.


         We gave Mr Chelvan the opportunity  to  take  further  instructions
         about whether further findings of fact were necessary because of an
         arguable lack  of  clarity  in  the  adjudicator's  findings.   The
         adjudicator appeared to have had at least  reservations  about  the
         appellant's general credibility and there  are  at  least  question
         marks about whether the appellant had a subjectively held  fear  at
         all.  Having had the opportunity to speak both to  his  instructing
         solicitors and to the appellant  counsel  accepted  that  the  case
         should be adjourned for a fresh hearing to enable clear findings of
         fact to be made.  Mr Gulvin for his  part  accepted  the  need  for
         fresh findings but stated that the appellant's homosexuality  would
         not appear to be in contention.


         We do not find the adjudicator's determination to be clear on  what
         may prove to be a central issue.  If the  adjudicator  was  finding
         that the appellant was discreet in the United  Kingdom  then  there
         would be no particular reason to suppose he would not  be  discreet
         in another country.  In so far as it was necessary to be "discreet"
         in Uganda the appellant would not arguably be  required  to  modify
         his behaviour and so it might be difficult to argue that his  human
         rights had been infringed, although we appreciate there  are  other
         issues that require investigation.


         This is an appeal where the issues are not  limited  to  issues  of
         law.  We find the adjudicator's findings to be lacking in  clarity.
         Accordingly it is necessary to have fresh findings of fact and  the
         Tribunal can then consider the up-to-date  background  material  in
         addition.  In view of Mr Gulvin's statement as to the Secretary  of
         State's position, the Tribunal is unlikely to disturb  the  finding
         that the appellant is a homosexual."

6.    Thus  the  matter  comes  before  us  by  way  of  that  second  stage
    reconsideration.

7.   We were presented  with  a  substantial  volume  of  documentation  and
    evidence which will be  identified  in  greater  detail  in  the  annex
    attached hereto.   Essentially  Mr  Chelvan,  who  is  acting  for  the
    appellant, submitted detailed  evidence  in  the  form  of  statements,
    expert evidence and background evidence to be found in bundles 1 and 2.
     A large number of authorities  were  also  submitted  under  cover  of
    bundles 1, 2 and 3.  In addition to the bundles, we were presented with
    further documents and reports which will be referred to below.

8.   Mr Chelvan, who represents the appellant, submitted for  our  attention
    a skeleton  argument  dated  15th  October  2007  and  a  supplementary
    skeleton argument dated 18th October 2007.

9.   On behalf of the  respondent,  Mr  Charles  Bourne,  Treasury  Counsel,
    presented for our  attention  a  skeleton  argument  and  a  number  of
    documents contained in the respondent's bundle.

10.  The appellant was interviewed in  connection  with  his  claim  on  1st
    April 2002.  There are some three statements which he made in  response
    to the letter of refusal and in further  amplification  of  his  claim.
    The last such statement was dated 12th October 2007.  In addition,  the
    appellant gave oral evidence and called a number of witnesses.

11.  In summary the appellant was born in Kampala as one of  five  children,
    all boys.     At the time when the appellant submitted his statement of
    evidence in support of his claim for asylum, his eldest brother  worked
    for UNESCO, another brother worked for the Post Office and a third  for
    the United Nations in Sierra Leone.  The last brother was then still at
    school.

12.  After completing  the  formal  part  of  his  education  the  appellant
    studied for a diploma in Nairobi at a beauty school to learn the art of
    hairdressing and beauty care.  He applied for  a  job  in  Nairobi  and
    became a hairdresser in  the  Urumbo  Beauty  Centre  in  Nairobi.   In
    Nairobi he attended gay nightclubs and would see gay men.  However, the
    government began to close down such clubs and arrest gay people and the
    appellant decided to return to Uganda.

13.  He opened a small hairdressing and beauty salon  which  he  ran  for  a
    number of years.  There came a time when he received an invitation from
    his cousin Josephine, who lived in the  United  Kingdom,  to  come  and
    visit her.  This he did.  At first he was reluctant to speak about  his
    homosexuality but eventually confided in  her.   It  is  the  case,  as
    advanced on behalf of the appellant, that in the United Kingdom he  was
    able to  express  his  sexuality  to  its  fullest  extent  and  enjoys
    frequenting gay bars and being with other homosexual or lesbian  people
    as well as heterosexual people.  It was  his  contention  that  if  his
    family in Uganda were to know about his lifestyle they would reject him
    and that he would be the subject of persecution at  the  hands  of  the
    authorities in Uganda were he to return.  Whilst in the United  Kingdom
    the appellant has enjoyed a number of homosexual relationships,  indeed
    one of his former partners was present at the hearing.   The  appellant
    in his written statements described himself  as  "feminine  and  softly
    spoken".  From our observations  of  him  this  would  be  an  accurate
    description.  Recognising as we do the dangers inherent  in  subjective
    approaches to demeanour, it is right that  we  acknowledge  that  there
    will be  a  perception  in  certain  quarters  that  the  appellant  is
    effeminate in manner and speech.

14.  The appellant gave evidence in  some  detail  before  us  and  was  the
    subject of cross-examination.  He commenced a  homosexual  relationship
    with B in 2003 which lasted for some two to three years.  It  ended  in
    May 2006.  He had had  a  long-term  friendship  with  M  and  A,  both
    homosexuals.  B was present at the hearing and A gave evidence  in  the
    course of that hearing.  In addition to those friends, his  cousin  was
    also in attendance at court.

15.  The appellant said that in Uganda  gay  relationships  did  not  really
    exist.   Such  relationships  were  considered  not   to   be   normal.
    Homosexuality was a crime and he would receive no protection  from  the
    police.  If he were to tell his  clients  about  his  homosexuality  he
    would lose their custom.  If he were to tell a taxi driver  in  Kampala
    that he was gay he was likely to face a beating.

16.  He wanted to live a gay life.  He had "come out" as a gay man  and  did
    not want to "go back into the  closet".   He  was  able  to  have  open
    relationships with other men which he could not enjoy  in  Uganda.   He
    was able to express himself as a gay man.

17.  He is fearful of his family's reaction to  his  homosexuality  if  they
    found out.  At present they do not know about his inclinations and such
    will inevitably be revealed on the issue of marriage.  The appellant is
    now of marriageable age and it  is  expected  by  the  culture  of  the
    community and by his family that he would marry.  He indicated that  he
    maintained regular communication with his parents and was  quite  often
    asked whether they could find somebody for him.  If they were  to  find
    out the reality of the situation they would disown him and ask  him  to
    live in another  area.   Moving  to  another  area  would  be  somewhat
    difficult because he would have  to  seek  permission  from  the  local
    counsellors who would, no doubt, check up to make sure that he  has  no
    criminal convictions.  As a 32 year old man  who  is  not  married,  it
    would not take many questions to elicit the fact of his homosexuality.

18.  The appellant says that in the United Kingdom  he  attends  gay  clubs,
    home parties and mixes with both "straight" and "gay".  He wishes to be
    able to express himself freely as to who he is and what  he  does.   In
    Uganda he would be unable to  do  that  and  would  have  to  keep  his
    feelings to himself and be guarded as to whom he  speaks  to,  or  what
    information he shares.  It is his contention that to return  to  Uganda
    would be to live in fear of being caught, and in fear of the law.

19.  The appellant indicated that he had been actively involved  in  running
    a salon and hairdressing for some seven years.  The precise  chronology
    was not entirely clear from his evidence, but it would seem that he had
    been training and then running a salon in Beauty and  Hairdressing  for
    four years in Uganda.  He had then been in Kenya for two complete years
    and then returned to Uganda for a further year.

20.   Although  he  showed  his  feminine  character  in  the   hairdressing
    business, his feminine characteristics helped him in communication with
    his female clients in particular.  The fact that  he  was  feminine  in
    nature did not necessarily indicate that he was homosexual, as  he  was
    always able to deny that he was if asked.  As he becomes older and, the
    issue of marriage arises, that will prove to be more difficult.

21.  The appellant repeated that he came to the United Kingdom to visit  his
    cousin.  As the visa ran out she asked him when he was  returning  home
    and that was the point that he confided in her as to his sexuality.

22.  He met CS through a gay and lesbian group in 2007 and A  through  B  in
    the summer of 2003.  They go to many clubs and parties.  The  appellant
    repeated that he wanted to "come out" as a gay man.

23.  He was cross-examined as to his evidence.  He  first  realised  he  was
    gay when he was 15.  He decided to study beauty when he  was  about  20
    and he was about 24 when he went to Kenya.  He went there around  April
    1998.  He formed a sexual relationship  with  a  man  in  Nairobi.   He
    agreed  that  beauty  and  hairdressing  were  often  identified   with
    homosexuality, but it also had to do with a  feminine  touch.   No  one
    really asked him whether he was gay.  The clients saw the feminine side
    of him and if they suspected him of being gay he denied it, saying that
    he was straight.  He was the only male - all the rest of the staff were
    female.  He had met a number of men in the hairdressing profession  who
    exhibited feminine characteristics but, generally speaking,  they  were
    married.

24.  He returned to Uganda from Kenya just before 2000 having spent one  and
    a half years there.  When he returned  to  Uganda  he  felt  safe  but,
    because of the relationship which he had had in Kenya, he found it hard
    to manage his feelings and to hold in his sexuality.  In the  years  in
    Uganda he had been focused upon study and work and  not  focusing  upon
    relationships.  Before he came to the United Kingdom he  did  not  know
    what it was like for gay men to "come out".  He had  not  come  to  the
    United Kingdom because of gay issues.   He  appreciated  how  different
    society was in the United Kingdom, he having "come out" here.   Because
    he has been in the United Kingdom for a  long  time  he  will  find  it
    harder to go home and keep it a secret.  He does not wish to  go  "back
    into the closet"

25.  He was asked about the passage in his latest statement at  paragraph  6
    where he indicated that if he were to be returned to  Uganda  he  would
    want to "come out" to those around him.  He contended that he would not
    get into a  relationship  in  Uganda  without  some  legal  protection.
    Otherwise it would not take long for a person to arrest  him.   He  had
    not "come out" in Uganda and had tried to keep his feelings to himself.
     He did not have a friend in Uganda who was gay and did  not  know  any
    gay people in Uganda.  As to the  understanding  which  he  had  gained
    about life and about the dangers to homosexuals in Uganda such had been
    gained  from  documents.   He  had  had  no   personal   knowledge   or
    acquaintance and understood what was happening from  reading  the  news
    and from articles.

26.  The appellant confirmed that he had not been arrested by the police  as
    he had not formed any relationships in Uganda because of fear of arrest
    and persecution.  He did not know what  would  happen  if  he  let  his
    feelings towards men show, but he would find  it  difficult  to  manage
    them.

27.  He said his  four  brothers,  three  were  married  and  one  still  at
    university, viewed him as a normal person.   There  was  no  assumption
    made that because he was a hairdresser working in a beauty  salon  that
    he was gay.  If the subject of marriage arose the appellant would  have
    to "come out"  to  friends  and  family  and  he  would  be  definitely
    arrested.  He wanted a life free from harassment.

28.  He had a good relationship with his mother and father and family.   The
    family  had  not  asked  him  about  his   sexuality.    His   feminine
    characteristics had not excited any comments.  What  he  wanted  was  a
    committed relationship to be able to express that relationship  openly,
    free from pressure or from fear.

29.  CS was called as a  witness  and  as  an  expert.   His  statement  and
    related documents are to be found at pages 197 to 225 of bundle 1.

30.  He is a gay man and was recognised as a refugee following  the  hearing
    of his appeal in April 2007.  He indicated that society in  Uganda  was
    hostile and that gay people were  not  welcome  and  were  regarded  as
    social misfits.  He said that protection would not be provided  to  any
    gay man, indeed any such  man  who  went  to  the  police  to  ask  for
    protection would be arrested and sent  to  prison.   Homosexuality  was
    against Ugandan law.  He went on to say that it was not possible for  a
    person to have a gay relationship unless that relationship  was  hidden
    completely.  He had had one gay  relationship  in  Uganda  with  a  man
    called Francis.  As he had a wife, that gave him a measure of cover.

31.  He said that there were some bars in Kampala where gay men  congregate.
     He found this information from another gay person.  He contended  that
    there were no  safe  places  where  one  could  openly  disclose  one's
    homosexual inclinations.

32.  Mr S produced the determination  relating  to  his  asylum  application
    heard on 25th April 2007.  It  was  recorded  in  paragraph  9  of  the
    determination that Mr S went to bars in Kabalagala where he  knew  that
    gay people congregated and became involved in Integrity  Uganda.   This
    was in 1999.  In 2000 he was  appointed  Vice  President  of  Integrity
    Uganda and in September 2003 Bishop Senyonjo asked him to speak at  the
    "Halfway to Lambeth" conference in the  United  Kingdom.   He  attended
    that conference  in  October  2003  in  Manchester  and  spoke  at  the
    conference about gay identity in Uganda.  After the conference he  flew
    back to Uganda and was arrested by the authorities at the airport.   He
    was released on bail by the police after paying a bribe.  He discovered
    that there had been media coverage at the conference and that  coverage
    had been negative.  Death threats were made against him.   He  went  to
    Buwasa and stayed with a distant relative in hiding for two  weeks  and
    then left Uganda in January 2004 before his house in Nsangi  was  burnt
    down and his daughter Alex, badly injured.  It was his belief that that
    was done deliberately.  A local newspaper article of 6th November  2003
    was produced at the hearing together with an expert report of Professor
    Oliver Furley dated 17th April  2007.   Mr  Senteza  was  found  to  be
    credible by the judge.  It  was  found  that  Integrity  Uganda  was  a
    genuine  organisation  committed  to  working  with  lesbian  and   gay
    Christians.  The report of Dr Oliver Furley is also  produced  for  our
    attention and is to be found at pages 212  to  220  of  bundle  1.   An
    article from Feminist Africa issued 02/2003 by Sylvia Tameale  "Out  of
    the  Closet:  Unveiling  Sexuality  Discourses  in  Uganda"  was   also
    presented.

33.  Mr S was cross-examined by Mr Bourne.  He said that he  had  been  Vice
    President of Integrity Uganda which was a  group  of  some  50  members
    organised to provide some spiritual support and moral guidance.  He was
    involved with its day-to-day running  and  organisation  and  spoke  in
    Uganda on behalf of the organisation.  Meetings took the form of church
    services and  there  would  be  entertainment.   Integrity  Uganda  had
    already been  established  before  he  had  become  involved  with  it.
    Meetings usually would  be  on  the  last  Sunday  of  each  month,  in
    particular a disused schoolhouse at Kitimu would be used.  This was  in
    a built-up area and the meeting would take the whole day,  starting  at
    10 o'clock.  The highest number of people would be 50 and sometimes 30.
     Kitimu was a small town and had a local police station.  The  meetings
    were openly held and were mixed  boys  and  girls,  teenagers  and  old
    people.  The main purpose was to give support to gay people.  Integrity
    Uganda closed down following the publicity after the conference.

34.  As for the arrests carried out in the various bars  frequented  by  the
    gay community, the witness had heard about matters from the  grapevine.
    He heard of two people being arrested and taken  to  prison.   He  said
    that the government was openly critical of homosexuals and  has  a  law
    against homosexuality on the Statute books.  He agreed that there  were
    a number of bars in  Kampala  where  the  gay  people  could  meet  and
    socialise.  He had heard of the bars from his  uncle  who  was  also  a
    homosexual.  His uncle used to go to the gay bars and did not have  any
    trouble with the  authorities.   The  witness  himself  had  no  direct
    experience of police breaking up gay bars.   He  was  asked  about  his
    relationship with Francis, and said that Francis was not married.

35.  A was called to speak to his statement of 17th October 2007.  He  first
    met the appellant in the summer of 2003.  He was in a relationship with
    B and during that time they would go to various clubs and bars.  He was
    described as a "out" gay man who conducted himself in a gay manner  and
    was affectionate and tactile with other gay males and enjoyed  dancing.
    The appellant would let people know that he was gay and was  expressive
    of his emotions and of who he was in public.  When  A  first  knew  the
    appellant, the appellant was shy and quiet but he quickly  gained  more
    confidence and more ability in expressing himself in a social  context.
    In the statement A said that it is dangerous for a homosexual to return
    to Uganda.  He himself was not Ugandan and had never been  there.   His
    knowledge was from the media and from discussing matters with  friends.



Expert Evidence

36.  Considerable reliance was placed by Mr Chelvan upon a number of  expert
    reports  contained  within  the  bundles.   The  first  being  that  of
    Professor Oliver  Furley  of  17th  April  2007,  produced  essentially
    relating to the case of Mr S.  That report made reference to the report
    of Dr Sylvia Tamale, a Lecturer in Law at Makerere University.  A  copy
    of that particular report is also attached.

37.  According to Professor Furley, two recent articles published in the on-
    line "Afrol News" reinforced the view that the dangers for  homosexuals
    and lesbians in Uganda  were  getting  worse.   One  headed  "Fears  of
    Enhanced Gay Repression in Uganda" picks up  the  Ugandan  Parliament's
    vote of 5th July 2006 declaring same sex marriages to be unlawful.   It
    was said that that proposed Constitutional change  followed  months  of
    state-promoted controversy about homosexuality in Uganda.  It said that
    in October the Ugandan  Information  Minister  had  ordered  police  to
    investigate and take appropriate action against a gay  organisation  at
    the Makerere University in Kampala.  It was  also  noted  by  Professor
    Furley that on  6th  July  2006  the  government-owned  newspaper,  New
    Vision, urged  the  state  to  crack  down  on  homosexuality,  warning
    government departments to  outlaw  and  restrict  websites,  magazines,
    newspapers and television channels promoting immorality.

38.  The second article was  headed  "Persecution  of  Gays  Intensifies  in
    Uganda".  There was a report of 1st December 2006 by a Gay Rights Group
    which reported a dramatic escalation of intimidation and persecution of
    gay and lesbian activists in Uganda  as  the  result  of  a  government
    campaign.  This was following the church in demonising homosexuality in
    the country after the Anglican  Church  of  Uganda  launched  a  strong
    campaign against homosexuality.  This was at the time when  the  Church
    of England and the Episcopal  Church  in  the  USA  were  opposing  the
    proposed ordination of homosexuals as clergy in  those  churches.   The
    Archbishop of Uganda strongly added his  voice  in  opposition  to  the
    proposal.  It was said that there was a talk show on Radio Simba  which
    featured sexual rights  activists,  but  the  Broadcasting  Council  of
    Uganda imposed a fine of US$1,000 on the radio station and the chairman
    of the council warned the station to  be  more  responsible  about  the
    content of its programmes.  A Ugandan weekly newspaper,  "The  Extreme"
    was said to have published a list of purportedly gay  people,  claiming
    that homosexuals had invaded and infested Uganda.

39.  Reference was made to thirteen alleged  lesbians  being  outed  by  the
    Ugandan newspaper, Red Pepper, on 8th September 2006.  The sentence for
    homosexuality is life imprisonment, although Professor  Furley  had  no
    record of the number of prosecutions.  He accepted that the Home Office
    may be right in stating that  prosecutions  are  rare.   Significantly,
    Professor Furley commented in paragraph 3.3  of  his  report  that  the
    campaign against homosexuals up until 2006 was fairly low key but, that
    in  recent  months,  it  had  thereafter  rapidly  escalated.    Prison
    conditions in Uganda were also the subject  of  the  report.   Finally,
    Professor Furley indicated that in Uganda's close knit  communities  it
    was difficult to hide.

40.  There were additional comments to the report that Section  140  of  the
    Penal Code criminalises "carnal knowledge against the order of  nature"
    with a maximum penalty of  life  imprisonment.   Section  141  punishes
    "attempts of carnal knowledge" with a maximum penalty  of  seven  years
    imprisonment and  Section  146  punishes  acts  of  procurement  of  or
    attempts to procure acts of gross indecency between men in public or in
    private, with up to five years imprisonment.

41.  It is said in the report that the social attitude towards  gay  men  is
    hostile because they are  seen  as  disrupting  the  norms  of  Ugandan
    society of its traditional aspects and are also seen to be against  the
    teachings of Christianity, which is the most widely  held  religion  in
    Uganda.  In traditional society in rural Uganda, homosexuality  remains
    a taboo subject and homosexuals are likely  to  be  disowned  by  their
    families.  Professor Furley went on as follows:  "In  the  more  modern
    society of Kampala I am told that there are a few gay bars,  but  these
    keep a low profile."

42.  Professor Furley next goes on to say that President Museveni  has  made
    strong comments on this issue which have been strongly echoed by police
    and politicians and church leaders.  Red Pepper is  a  popular  radical
    newspaper leading a fierce attack  on  homosexuals  and  is  reportedly
    owned by the half brother of the president.

43.  Dealing with the incidents of persecution of gay men, Professor  Furley
    refers to the report by Uganda's Gay and Lesbian Alliance (GLAA)  where
    men in army uniform attacked and outed a gay man and took  him  to  the
    police station where he was forced to make a statement.   The  Chairman
    of SMUG (another homosexual group) reports that many of those named  in
    Red Pepper are living in fear of being arrested, or ostracised by their
    families or sacked from their jobs.   That  was  a  report  dated  12th
    September 2006.  The author of the report "Juliet Mukasa"  was  herself
    the victim of a raid  on  her  home  in  July  2005  by  local  council
    officials when they confiscated  documents  relating  to  SMUG  (Sexual
    Minorities Ugandan).  A radio talk show was fined �1,000 and ordered to
    apologise for "having offended a wide section of the public".

44.  Professor Furley went on to say that the Ugandan  Judicial  System  was
    reasonably fair.  There was  some  support  in  groups  such  as  SMUG,
    although they had little effective power or influence.   He  said  that
    neighbours or families were usually hostile to homosexuals.

45.  When asked the question,

         "Is it possible to be openly gay in Uganda?"


    Professor Furley said,

         "It would be unwise and dangerous to show  this  in  public,  which
         might lead to arrest, or worst still by mob action.  The only place
         they may be open about it is in the gay bars in Kampala, of which I
         am told there are a few."


46.  As  to  Integrity  Uganda,  it  was  noted  to  be  a  small  group  of
    homosexuals with about 50 members.  The speech of Mr Senteza was on BBC
    News online 27.10.03.  That   he  was  sent  to  the  conference  as  a
    spokesman of Uganda was an indication, according to  Professor  Furley,
    that Mr Senteza was well-known as a pillar of the community.

47.  The report of Sylvia Tameale of February 2003 is to be found  at  pages
    221 - 225  of  bundle  1.   According  to  her  article  the  issue  of
    homosexuality took  centre  stage  in  Uganda  between  the  months  of
    February 2003, with the media being  dominated  by  emotive  views  and
    opinions from the public.  A wave of homophobia was  triggered,  it  is
    said, by a recommendation emanating  from  a  section  of  the  woman's
    movement which urged the proposed  Equal  Opportunities  Commission  to
    address  the  rights  of  homosexuals  as  members  of  a  category  of
    marginalised social groups in Uganda.

48.  Ms Tameale expresses herself in  very  strong  terms,  particularly  in
    paragraph 2 of her report.  We shall  return  to  that  report  in  due
    course.  The report seems in general to be advocating gay rights rather
    than highlighting, with any particularity, the problems in Uganda.  She
    makes reference to several stigmatised terms to describe homosexuals in
    Uganda, and expresses the view that society considers lesbians and gays
    to be a moral outrage.  She contends that with repressive conditions of
    state and religious inspired homophobia in Uganda, homosexuals find  it
    difficult to come out of their closeted lives or to be open about their
    sexual orientation.  Most blend within the wider society and even  live
    under the cover  of  heterosexual  relations  while  maintaining  their
    homosexual relations underground.  Ugandan gays and  lesbians  identify
    themselves simply with the term  "Kuchu".   There  are  well-recognised
    forms of self definition within the Kuchu sub-culture to  identify  one
    another within the system.  Identification upon gay men often  consists
    of gestures or mannerisms.  She stated that there were several gay  and
    lesbian organisations in Uganda, including Gay  and  Lesbian  Alliance,
    Gay Uganda, Spectrum, Right Companion, Lesgabix and Integrity.  Most of
    these act as  support  groups.   Reference  is  made  in  a  report  to
    avoidance of public visibility by gay and lesbian  organisations  given
    the severity of the law.  The silence of homosexual rights  within  the
    Ugandan Women's Movement contributed in part to the taboos  surrounding
    all sexual matters within the society.

49.  In addition to the report of Professor Furley dated  17th  April  2007,
    reliance is also placed upon a report which  he  specifically  prepared
    for the appellant dated 18th January 2007.  Professor  Furley  set  out
    his qualifications which indicated a long experience  in  Uganda  until
    1973 and thereafter annual visits.   Significantly  his  report  begins
    with the sentence, "Until quite recently, issues of homosexuality  were
    little discussed in  Uganda".   However,  it  has  gradually  become  a
    subject of conversation.  The Ugandan Joint Christian  Council  stating
    in June 2006 that it strongly and unequivocally deplores all activities
    linked  to  the  encouragement  or  promotion  of   the   practice   of
    homosexuality and lesbians.  Reference has already  been  made  to  the
    Penal Code Act in Uganda and to the remark made by  President  Museveni
    in March 2002 that  there  were  no  homosexuals  in  Uganda.   Amnesty
    International stated in its report of June 1999 that President Museveni
    held the view that active homosexuals  should  be  prosecuted,  a  view
    publicly  opposed  by  a  well-known  professor  in  an  address  to  a
    conference on constitutionalism at Makerere University in October 1999.
     The state had arrested and prosecuted culprits in a same  sex  wedding
    in Kampala in 1999.  Vice President Bukenya took the side of the Church
    when he praised Archbishop Nkoyo's stand  against  homosexuality  at  a
    government meeting, according to the  Monitor  of  7th  November  2003.
    Reference was made to homosexuals in Uganda forming lobbies  or  groups
    advocating their rights.  In October 2004, a radio  station  was  fined
    for hosting a live talk with sexual rights activists.  In July 2005 the
    home of Juliet Mukasa was raided.

50.   Professor  Furley  went  on  to  say   that   according   to   Amnesty
    International, Red Pepper is openly and specifically harassing  lesbian
    and gay people.  It said that on 8th September 2006 it published a list
    of thirteen women who it alleged  were  lesbians.   On  8th  August  it
    published a similar list of names of men whom it  claimed  to  be  gay.
    Following the publication of the  list  of  men  on  8th  August  2006,
    Amnesty International received several reports of harassment of gay men
    who had been named.  Some had been harassed by colleagues, others  were
    ostracised by relatives.   Amnesty  said  it  was  concerned  that  the
    continuing targeting of gay people put them at risk of  discrimination.
     Amnesty urged its supporters to write letters to both Red  Pepper  and
    President Museveni over the matter and called upon  the  government  to
    ensure that discrimination, hostility and violence against lesbians and
    gay men was forbidden.  The US-based Human Rights Watch had  criticised
    Red Pepper for its homophobic articles.

51.  Professor Furley commented that President Museveni  continued  to  back
    the Anglican Church's view to resist Western values being brought  into
    Africa.  His comment of September 2006 to that effect was  quoted.   In
    response, SMUG (Sexual Minorities Ugandan) called for Ugandan  citizens
    to stand up for their human rights.

52.   Once  again,  Professor  Furley  was  asked  whether  there  were  any
    incidents of gay men being persecuted in Uganda and essentially  quoted
    very few examples but repeated the same examples which had been  quoted
    by him in his later report relating to Mr Senteza.  It was the view  of
    Professor Furley that for the appellant  to  have  an  open  homosexual
    relationship or openly declare himself to be homosexual would  put  him
    at serious risk.  Now that the appellant was getting older  and  single
    this would attract suspicion and place him at risk.

53.  There is an expert report from Professor Robert  Wintemute  dated  18th
    January 2007 to be found at pages 31 to 41 of bundle 1.  Such a  report
    is essentially one dealing with  legal  aspects  rather  than  focusing
    directly upon the appellant's own situation.  Dr Semugoma is a  Ugandan
    medical doctor living and working in Uganda.  He has taken some time to
    study same-sex sexual behaviour.  He relates that there is considerable
    reliance placed upon the report of Dr Paul  Semugoma  which  is  to  be
    found at pages 71 to 196 of bundle 1.   On 15th August  2007,  the  gay
    community held its first ever press conference.   It  was  a  two  hour
    session detailing the problems of the gay community  in  Uganda.   Most
    wore masks, but others did not.  Dr Semugoma was present to  deal  with
    certain scientific issues.  This conference was widely reported.

54.  Dr Semugoma went on to say that the Minister of State  for  Ethics  and
    Integrity, Dr Buturo criticised the conference  and  wondered  why  the
    police did not arrest those who were at it.  There was much preached in
    church  about  the  evils  and  challenges  of  homosexuality   and   a
    demonstration was called "The  Faithful  Against  Homosexuality".   The
    demonstration  turned  into  a  rally  in  a   field   in   the   city.
    Significantly the march through the centre of the city was not allowed.
     A number of religious leaders attended  and  radio  stations  took  up
    inflammatory rhetoric.  There followed quite a debate in the country on
    the issue of homosexuality.  The gay leader, Juliet Mukasa and a  group
    of others, went on a round of radio stations to put across the views of
    gay Ugandans.  They were interviewed by the press,  on  television  and
    radio  stations.   Minister  Buturo  continued  to  make   inflammatory
    statements.  The gay leaders themselves had  been  informed  that  they
    would not be arrested for giving their point of view.

55.  Dr Semugoma went on  to  speak  about  the  rhetoric  that  ensued.   A
    tabloid newspaper took up the "outing" of gay people.  Over three weeks
    it named and shamed gay people.  The media fascination with  the  issue
    of homosexuality calmed down.  Reference is made to the report  in  the
    Steadman Poll showing  95%  of  Ugandans  opposing  homosexuality.   Dr
    Semugoma spoke of the negative social attitude towards  gay  men.   The
    loss of jobs, being disowned and being disinherited are  considered  as
    risks in this situation.  He confirmed that there were  meeting  places
    for gay Ugandans.  Red Pepper listed some of them and many  members  of
    the community disappeared from those places.

56.  A substantial number of reports were attached to that  main  report  of
    Dr Semugoma.  On the last day of the hearing application  was  made  to
    allow the admission in  the  evidence  of  a  further  report  from  Dr
    Semugoma dated 26th November 2007.   He  was  a  Ugandan,  it  was  not
    possible for him to come in person to speak to the report, but  he  had
    been asked to make various comments and it was desired  that  those  be
    placed before the Tribunal.  Such was admitted into evidence.

57.  The further report had attached  to  it  a  copy  of  the  Homo  Terror
    article published by the Sunday Red Pepper newspaper of  9th  September
    2007.  It was an article which, amongst other things, purported to  out
    prominent gay Ugandans and named certain gay  bars.   Dr  Semugoma  had
    been asked specifically as to what  outcome  that  report  had  had  in
    Uganda.

58.  He commented that the places mentioned  were  not  "gay  bars"  in  the
    traditional sense as they were not exclusively gay.  They were  popular
    mixed drinking places where gay  people  went.   On  certain  days  the
    clientele were almost certainly exclusively or largely  gay.   He  said
    that the gay Ugandans were comfortable when there were other "straight"
    people as their camouflage.  The immediate effect of  the  article  was
    that  the  places  were  shunned  by  the  gay  people  for   fear   of
    repercussions.  Such repercussions being, for example, a raid upon  the
    premises although, significantly, Dr Semugoma did not hear of any  such
    raid.  According to him, certain people who were named did  lose  their
    jobs and others were under suspicion.  One person  had  been  sidelined
    and another not regarded as a member of the team.  Once again, possibly
    significantly, Dr Semugoma heard of no subsequent arrests.

59.  He went on in the report to criticise  the  police  as  being  corrupt.
    The sting attached to being gay was that everyone would do his  or  her
    best to prevent this knowledge coming out.   He  said  the  cases  were
    often settled out of court between the victims and the  police  and  he
    was involved in one such case in early 2005.  He spoke of his  personal
    experience a  few  days  before  the  writing  of  his  report  of  the
    Commonwealth meeting (CHOGM) in November 2007  and  of  LGBT  activists
    attending it.  There was some form of fracas between  the  Bishops  and
    the activists.  The next day the gay activists were simply not  allowed
    to present anything.   The  Police  proceeded  to  throw  out  the  gay
    activists and chase them away.

Background Evidence

60.   There  was  produced,  particularly  in  bundles  1  and  2,  a   very
    considerable volume of articles, comment, reports and other material to
    be supportive of the case as advanced by the appellant.  We do not deal
    with each and every article, but will comment upon those to  which  our
    attention was specifically referred to in the course  of  argument  and
    submission.

61.  It is right to note, however,  that  the  respondent  also  produced  a
    small bundle of documents relating to various  matters  within  Uganda.
    There was, for example, a  report  from  a  Criminal  Justice  Baseline
    Survey of the Justice Law and Order Sector of Uganda 2002 published  in
    June 2002.  This was a survey focused upon criminal justice in order to
    establish the status and current trends.  It represented a field survey
    carried out between October 2001 and May 2002 and  the  methodology  is
    set out in some detail.  Some 1,017  households  were  covered  by  the
    survey.   The  significant  finding,  which  is  relied  upon  by   the
    respondent, is that a majority of respondents in all regions  supported
    decriminalisation of adultery and homosexuality.  In  the  Focus  Group
    discussions, of which there were seen to be sixteen,  the  participants
    who had no experience of homosexuality in practice considered  that  it
    was a heinous offence and that it should be  punished  severely.   That
    contrasted with the views of the household  informants  who  were  more
    liberal in their views, more than 70% favouring decriminalisation.

62.  There was also published an article from Human  Rights  Watch  "Uganda:
    Rising Homophobia Threatens HIV Prevention", a report of  11th  October
    2007.  It referred to  the  fact  that  in  the  August  16th  a  press
    conference was held by a coalition of LGBT groups in Uganda to launch a
    campaign called "Let Us Live In Peace".  This conference led to a month
    long backlash in the country.  It led to the tabloid paper  Red  Pepper
    publishing  the  first  names,  work  places  and   other   identifying
    information of 32 male homosexuals.  The article promised to  name  and
    shame top gays of the city.  It named a prominent  campaigner  who  had
    listed Ugandan LGBT rights activists by name on a website, called  them
    "homosexual promoters".  Pastor Ssempa was  the  key  organiser  of  an
    August 21st  rally  at  Kampala  at  which  hundreds  of  demonstrators
    demanded government action to punish LGBT  people,  calling  homosexual
    conduct a criminal act against the laws of nature.

63.  Ugandan officials continued to  threaten  a  new  persecution  of  LGBT
    people.  On August 21st, Radio 1 in Uganda announced  that  the  Deputy
    Attorney General  Ruhindi  had  called  for  criminal  prosecutions  of
    lesbian gays in Uganda.  In late August the Uganda Broadcasting Council
    suspended  Gaetano  Kaggwa,  a  presenter  of  Capital  FM  Radio   for
    interviewing a lesbian activist on air.

64.  Meanwhile, Red Pepper threatened to name all  lesbians  and  gays.   In
    2006 the newspaper published a similar list with 45 names.

65.  On 12th September 2007, in Africa News it was indicated  that  a  court
    agreed to hear the case  of  two  women  who  claimed  that  they  were
    tortured by police because of allegations that they were lesbians.  The
    result of that case does not seem to have been stated.

66.  Finally, there was produced the Operational  Guidance  Note  of  Uganda
    OGNV4.0 issued 17th January 2007  which  spoke  of  the  fact  that  in
    February 2006 there were presidential  and  legislative  elections  and
    that President Museveni was re-elected for a five year term.   Much  of
    that  report  was  devoted  to  the  issue  of  rebel  groups  and  the
    possibility of settlement.  Little mention was  made  in  that  report,
    however, about any ill-treatment of homosexuals.

Submissions

67.   The  parties  proceeded  to  make  their  submissions  to  us.   Those
    submissions were very detailed, and indeed spanned  some  two  days  of
    court  time.   We  do  not  propose  to  deal  with   the   submissions
    extensively, rather we seek to highlight the main arguments which  were
    made.   We  indicate  that  insofar  as  reference  was  made  in  such
    submissions to evidence, we have taken that evidence into account.   In
    terms of legal authorities, they are substantial in  volume.   Although
    reference will be made to them, they  will  not  be  cited  extensively
    unless such is necessary in the course of our analysis of the  evidence
    and of the issues.

68.  Mr Bourne, on behalf of the respondent, invited our  attention  to  his
    skeleton argument of 17th October 2007.  It was his contention that the
    removal of the appellant to Uganda would not expose him to serious risk
    of persecution or to a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3  of
    the ECHR.  It was his contention that the appellant's rights in respect
    of Articles 8 and 10 of the ECHR would not be breached either.

69.  It is not in dispute that  the  appellant  is  a  homosexual  and  that
    generally speaking, save for a few exceptions, his credibility  is  not
    impugned.  That concession is not, however,  made  in  respect  of  the
    other witnesses called in support of his case.

70.  It was also accepted on the part  of  the  respondent  that  there  was
    significant prejudice against homosexuals in Uganda  and  that  it  was
    illegal for homosexuals to engage in sexual  acts.   That  having  been
    said, however, the burden of the submission made  by   Mr  Bourne,  was
    that there was little evidence that such laws were in fact enforced, or
    that there was ill-treatment of homosexuals generally.

71.  Despite the large  quantity  of  material  there  was,  he  submits,  a
    striking lack of specific well-documented  cases  of  ill-treatment  of
    homosexuals.  There was much written in the articles,  particularly  by
    those coming from a particular view point as to what risks may arise or
    the fears that have been expressed, but very little by way  of  outcome
    or activity.  We were invited to place greater weight  upon  background
    materials from inspected sources rather than  from  press  cuttings  or
    statements by complaining groups.

72.  Mr Bourne submitted that an example of the lack  of  positive  evidence
    of discrimination, harassment and arrest was that to be  found  in  the
    last page of the report by Mr Semugoma to be found at page 80 of bundle
    1.  It said that when Red Pepper had listed a number of meeting places,
    the members of the gay  community  who  had  frequented  them  did  not
    thereafter go back to them for fear of arrest.  There was, however,  no
    evidence adduced in that report that any raids or arrests in fact  took
    place at all.  The most that could be said was that certain individuals
    experienced harassment at  work  or  discrimination  in  the  terms  of
    employment.  There was nothing to indicate that the government  itself,
    or indeed any agency of the government, whether police or security, had
    taken any untoward action against those individuals.

73.  Much has been made of the climate of fear and the hostile  attitude  of
    the police, but little by way of positive examples of  police  activity
    were given relating to members of the lesbian and gay community.

74.  Although the expert evidence, as adduced on behalf  of  the  appellant,
    spoke of  the   public  pronouncements  by  the  government  and  other
    prominent individuals, there was little to indicate that such had  been
    translated to any practical effect.  Professor  Furley  was  asked  the
    specific question "Are there any incidents of gay men being  persecuted
    in Uganda?"  His reply, which was contained at page 46 of bundle 1, was
    to highlight very  few  actions  taken  against  the  lesbian  and  gay
    community by the authorities.

75.  The COIR Report of April 2006 identified the  criminalising  provisions
    and referred to the government and media calling for a legal crackdown,
    but gives no evidence or indication as to whether that crackdown indeed
    materialised.  Few specific incidents are cited.  There are others said
    to have resulted in harassment, abuse and torture, but no  details  are
    given as to those individuals or any attempt at numbers specified.   It
    might be considered that Juliet Mukasa and  Sylvia  Tameale,  as  clear
    activists and having a high profile, would be the subject of attack  or
    arrest, if the policy  of  the  government  were  to  be  carried  into
    practical effect.  In contrast the evidence would seem to  be  that  in
    July 2005 the authorities arrested a friend staying with Juliet  Mukasa
    and took certain documents.  There was no indication of any persecution
    by the  authorities  in  respect  of  any  of  the  prominent  leaders,
    particularly those who featured  in  the  media  in  2007.   The  press
    conference of 15th August 2007 and the radio interviews which  followed
    would have been such as to promote discussion and comment, but there is
    no indication of any persecution or harassment of those who took  part.
    Mr Bourne further submitted that, although it may well  be  clear  from
    the generality of the reports that the population generally  in  Uganda
    is conservative, its traditional values do not approve of  the  lesbian
    and gay culture.  The  view  seemingly  is  one  reinforced  by  church
    comment and controversy.  There was little,  however,  to  support  the
    contention of mob violence or of  a  general  pervasive  atmosphere  of
    harassment  and  persecution,  directed  towards  members  of  the  gay
    community.

76.  Mr Bourne invited us to find that the evidence, looked at as  a  whole,
    supports the proposition that far from hiding  away  from  society  the
    lesbian and gay community are actively part of it.  There are bars  and
    restaurants to which they can  go,  seemingly  mixing  with  "straight"
    clients without any suggestion of malice or difficulty.   There  are  a
    large  number  of  lesbian  gay  rights  groups   which   have   become
    increasingly vocal in  recent  years,  seemingly  with  little  adverse
    result.  Even the  campaigning  group  at  the  Commonwealth  Heads  of
    Government Meeting Convention in November  2007  had  found  themselves
    removed from the building, but not arrested.  There was  no  indication
    that they had  been,  in  any  sense,  targeted  or  abused  for  their
    prominent stand in relation to gay rights.

77.  Mr Bourne submitted that there is no real risk in Uganda to  those  who
    give public expression of their homosexuality.  Such is  a  matter  for
    the Tribunal to determine within  the  context  of  cultural  norms  in
    Uganda generally.  Reliance was placed upon the case of J  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ  1238  to  the  extent
    that even if some modification of behaviour was required out of respect
    for social norms, such was not sufficiently significant  in  itself  to
    place the appellant in a situation of persecution.  It was Mr  Bourne's
    submission, that contrary to the contention advanced by  the  appellant
    and by his witnesses, he had not been  forced  to  conceal  his  sexual
    identity and that any modification of conduct in public  would  not  be
    such as to be considered to be intolerable or unreasonable.

78.  On behalf of the appellant, Mr Chelvan invites  our  attention  to  the
    two skeleton arguments which he has prepared and drew our attention  to
    a number of authorities.

79.  The first proposition advanced on behalf of the appellant  is  that  he
    would be at risk of prosecution, arrest, harassment were he to  return.
    Mr Chelvan submits that there is a climate in Uganda which  is  hostile
    to  homosexuality.   The  authorities  have,  through   their   various
    pronouncements, indicated their intention to crack down upon the  same.
    He relies upon the witnesses who have  been  called,  particularly  the
    expert witnesses as to their experiences in Uganda.  He relies  heavily
    upon the Red Pepper article and its attempt to "out" gay men.

80.  He develops his submissions to the effect that sexual identity is  more
    than just sexual conduct.  Thus, at the  very  least,  the  appellant's
    removal would involve flagrant breach  of  his  Article  10  rights  to
    freedom to express his sexual  identity  to  those  around  him  and  a
    flagrant breach of his Article 8 rights to a private life, both in  the
    private sphere and in the outside world linked to his sexual  identity.
    In the United Kingdom the appellant can  express  his  sexual  identity
    freely in whatever circumstance, whereas that would not be the case  in
    Uganda.  At the very least he would be  constrained  by  fear  of  such
    public or open expression.

81.   Mr  Chelvan  further  submits  that  any  modification   of   conduct,
    particularly if such modification arises from a fear of harm  would  in
    itself be persecutory in nature.  Mr Chelvan relies  heavily  upon  the
    fact that the appellant is now a single 32 year old man  with  no  wife
    and homosexuality would inevitably be discovered when  expectations  of
    marriage and questions about why he is  not  married  will  arise.   It
    would not  be  reasonable  or  fair  to  expect  him  to  lie  in  such
    circumstances.

82.  Mr Chelvan further  submits  that  having  regard  to  the  wording  of
    Article  5(2)(b)  of  a  Qualification   Directive,   any   legislation
    criminalising homosexuality offends against the spirit of the Directive
    and would seem upon its interpretation  to  be  in  itself  an  act  of
    persecution.

83.  Mr Chelvan developed at length his primary submissions and invited  our
    attention to various reports and to the decisions both of the  domestic
    and international Courts in addition to the  domestic  legislation  and
    decisions.  We do not set out those matters in any great detail at this
    stage.  Essentially they have been set out in the skeleton arguments as
    submitted and it would be duplication therefore to repeat the same.   A
    number of the matters which have been canvassed  will  inevitably  form
    part of our reasoning later in this determination.

The Law

84.  In determining whether or not the appellant is a refugee  or  qualifies
    for humanitarian protection by virtue of the 1951 Geneva Convention and
    the  Refugee  or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, we remind ourselves as to  the  lower
    standard and burden of proof to be  applied  in  such  matters,  namely
    whether there is a serious possibility or a  reasonable  likelihood  of
    persecution or of serious harm.  We bear in mind also  the  Immigration
    Rules and particularly paragraphs 339A to 339P.

85.  An "act of persecution" is defined in the  Protection  Regulations,  at
    Regulation 5(1).  Regulation 5(3) confirms that an act  of  persecution
    must be committed for one of the reasons set out in Article 1A  of  the
    Refugee Convention.  Protection is defined in Regulation 4(1) and (2).

86.  We bear in mind also that the same lower standard is to be  applied  in
    relation to the appellant's human rights as enshrined in  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights in determining whether or  not  there  is  a
    real risk of a breach of such protected rights.  In that connection  we
    bear in mind in particular Articles 3, 8, 10 and 14 separately  and  in
    combination.

87.  We remind ourselves that, in assessing credibility and the  issues,  we
    should consider the evidence both subjective and objective as  a  whole
    giving due weight to such factors  as  may  be  relevant  and  material
    within  the  overall  context.   We  remind  ourselves  also   of   the
    legislation and the judicial decisions made relating to the same.

The Issues

88.  The central issue in this appeal is whether the appellant, if  returned
    to Uganda as a homosexual, would  face  persecution,  serious  harm  or
    breaches of his fundamental and protected human rights.

89.  To determine such an  issue  requires  consideration  of  a  number  of
    distinct and yet related factors, in particular:-

         (1)  What is the current situation facing homosexuals in Uganda?


         (2)  How did the appellant behave as a homosexual in Uganda  before
             he left the country?


         (3)  How will the appellant behave upon return?


         (4)  If he acts in that way will that expose  him  to  persecution,
             harm or a breach of his protected rights?


         (5)  If not, is it reasonable to expect him to continue to  act  in
             that way?


What is the Current Situation for Homosexuals in Uganda?

90.    We remind ourselves of the opening remarks  of  Professor  Furley  in
    his report of 18th January 2007, as submitted for  this  hearing,  that
    issues  of  homosexuality  were  little  discussed  in   Uganda   until
    relatively recently.

91.  It is in that context that the final report dealing with  the  Criminal
    Justice Baseline Survey of 2002, as produced  by  the  respondent,  has
    some significance.  1017 households were interviewed,  such  interviews
    being conducted at 58 sites in 29 counties.  There  were  some  sixteen
    focus  group  discussions  and  some  28  key  informants   in   twelve
    institutions.

92.  Although opinions as to what should be  done  with  homosexuality  were
    varied, there was a wide diversity of opinion  from  those  who  wanted
    stricter laws and punishments to those who supported  decriminalisation
    of adultery and homosexuality.  The report  expressed  there  to  be  a
    widespread acceptance of decriminalisation.   There  were  areas  which
    were more conservative than others.  Although care must be taken not to
    promote the  significance  of  the  report  beyond  its  own  ambit  of
    statistics, it does not reflect a society focused upon the exposure and
    punishment of homosexuals.

93.  It is to be noted that much of the attention of politicians and  indeed
    of people as a whole who live in Uganda, was focused upon the issue  of
    the rebel organisations, particularly the  Lords  Resistance  Army  and
    efforts to conclude peace with such groups.   It  would  be  surprising
    indeed, if the issue of homosexuality took centre stage in the light of
    those other political considerations.

94.  It is clear from the background material that from  time  to  time  the
    President and other members of his government have spoken  out  against
    homosexuality  and  have  promised  a  crackdown  upon   it   and   its
    eradication.  Also, as Professor Furley has indicated  in  his  report,
    the question of homosexuality has come  more  to  the  fore  in  public
    debate and media comment, particularly arising from the Church's ban in
    relation to the ordination of homosexual priests and bishops.  So  much
    has been said of a  potentially  inflammatory  nature  that  the  issue
    before us is what has been done as a consequence.

95.  Those who  have  been  called  to  give  evidence  in  support  of  the
    appellant's case have been at pains to paint a  picture  of  harassment
    and fear, arrest  and  ill-treatment  which,  for  our  part,  we  find
    difficult to reconcile with the  background  material  which  has  been
    presented.  Mr Robertson, for example, maintains that it is unsafe  for
    homosexuals to return to Uganda.  He is not Ugandan, has never lived in
    Uganda and  he  agreed  with  the  proposition  put  to  him  that  his
    information came from the media and not from personal experience.

96.   The  report  from  Sylvia  Tameale  of  February  2003  is   of   some
    significance in this context.  We find that her report or statement  is
    partisan to a very high degree and seeks to paint a somewhat  distorted
    picture of the situation of homosexuality in Uganda.  In paragraph 2 of
    her account she says as follows:-

         "It is impossible to describe the depths  of  the  ugliness,  rage,
         revulsion,  disgust  and  malevolence  exhibited   by   the   vocal
         homophobic public".


     That statement made in 2003 stands in sharp contrast with  that  of  Dr
    Furley in his report of January 2007  which  indicate  that  issues  of
    homosexuality were little discussed in Uganda until recently.

97.  We considered the evidence of Mr S and conclude that he had  sought  to
    exaggerate the difficulties which he faced whilst living in Uganda.  It
    was his contention in paragraph 11 of his statement to be found at page
    198 of bundle 1, that it is not possible for a person  to  have  a  gay
    relationship.  "The only relationship  would  be  one  where  you  hide
    yourself 100%".  He claims  that  he  had  one  gay  relationship  with
    Francis which was concealed to some extent by  the  fact  that  he  was
    married.

98.  Such is,  however,  to  paint  a  somewhat  distorted  picture  of  his
    involvement and activities as a gay man in Uganda.  In his evidence  Mr
    S spoke of bars in Kampala where gay men meet.  He spoke of  his  uncle
    being a gay man who used to frequent such bars.  His  uncle  seemed  to
    have little trouble in that connection and, as Mr S agreed,  the  uncle
    nor himself had no experience of  police  breaking  up  the  gay  bars.
    Although it was not his evidence before us, it is to be noted, that  in
    his evidence before the Adjudicator, in pursuance of his own appeal, Mr
    Senteza indicated that from 1991 he began to go to bars  in  Kabalagala
    where he knew that gay people congregated.  This would  seem  to  be  a
    period until October 2003 when he  spoke  at  the  Halfway  to  Lambeth
    Conference in the UK.  Thus there would seem to be a four  year  period
    when he was able to frequent such bars.  Further, during  this  period,
    he became involved with Integrity Uganda, a support group  for  Lesbian
    and Gay People which on his own account  met  relatively  openly  at  a
    disused school house in a small town in Uganda.   Meetings  were  on  a
    regular basis on the last Sunday of each month and lasted all day.   We
    did not find it credible that the existence of such a  group  would  be
    unknown to the authorities in the local area, but seemingly nothing  of
    a hostile nature was done to them before October 2003 or at all.  There
    was a paucity of evidence on the issue as to what happened to Integrity
    Uganda after October 2003.

99.  In connection with the gay bars, it was the  evidence  of  Dr  Semugoma
    that they were not bars solely for gays but that lesbian and gay people
    met up at such bars mixing with "straight people".   He  seeks  in  his
    account to put a slant to that by seeking to suggest  that  it  was  by
    mixing with the straight people which gave the cover to the  homosexual
    community.  For our part we do not find that to be credible in any  way
    at all.  There is no doubt that it would be readily apparent  to  those
    members of the "straight" community visiting such bars that homosexuals
    were also frequenting them.  Such would be readily gained not  only  by
    behaviour and mannerisms, but also by the nature of  the  conversation.
    What is of more significance  to  our  consideration  is  that  certain
    "straight" people seem to take no exception to the homosexual community
    in their midst.  There  is  little  if  any  evidence  to  support  the
    contention that such bars were  raided  or  individuals  arrested  from
    them.  There is nothing  to  indicate  any  significant  government  or
    security interest in such bars.

100. The appellant in his evidence makes the point that he would wish  as  a
    homosexual man "coming  out  of  the  closet"  to  be  able  to  go  to
    nightclubs and parties and to enjoy the company of  other  homosexuals.
    There is little in the background  evidence  as  placed  before  us  to
    indicate that that was something that was not open  to  the  homosexual
    community in Uganda in any event.

101. The claim of Mr S centred upon his claim that arising from his  remarks
    at the conference in 2003 he was arrested by  the  Ugandan  authorities
    and that subsequently  his  house  was  burnt  down  and  his  daughter
    injured.  We note that upon arrest, Mr S was released  after  paying  a
    bribe and there was no suggestion of any charges or  any  ill-treatment
    being exercised against him.  The cause of his house being  burnt  down
    remains largely unclear as does the identity of whoever it was that did
    so.

102. The suggestion mooted by the evidence of the  witnesses  generally  was
    to the effect of mob violence and harassment  and  repercussions  taken
    against homosexuals.  There is, however, a paucity of  any  information
    identifying any specific incident.   We  find  that  to  be  of  utmost
    significance in assessing the matter of the country conditions.  As  we
    have indicated, there are substantial volumes of material, both on  the
    web site and  from  interested  groups,  including  Amnesty,  US  State
    Department, Human Rights Watch and many other  NGOs  and  organisations
    focused upon human rights.  Save for a very few incidents to  which  we
    will return, little by way of  detail  is  forthcoming  concerning  any
    actions taken against  homosexuals.   We  cannot  conceive,  given  the
    amount of scrutiny which has been applied to Uganda  by  these  various
    organisations, that they would be unaware  of  specific  incidents  and
    would not have reported them.

103. Mr Semugoma, in his evidence, seeks to suggest that there  would  be  a
    climate of concealment on the part of the authorities as to  whom  they
    had arrested and whom they had dealt with.  For our part we  very  much
    doubt the  accuracy  of  that  particular  remark  in  the  context  of
    homosexuality.  If, as seems clear, there were public pronouncements by
    the government expressing the intention to crack down on homosexuality,
    it would possibly serve its purpose to make an example of people so  as
    to demonstrate that  zeal.   There  is  no  reason  at  all  why  their
    activities would not be publicised.  Similarly there would be  possibly
    every reason for the aggrieved victim,  through  the  medium  of  human
    rights and gay rights groups, to publicise such  ill-treatment  as  was
    received.  In the absence of clear evidence on this issue, much must be
    speculative.  We were struck, however, by the paucity of such  specific
    incidents in the totality of  the  objective  evidence  which  we  have
    received.  It is serious indeed if Mr S's house  was  burnt  down,  but
    there is little evidence of other  similar  incidents  being  conducted
    specifically against homosexuals.  Although the  Immigration  Judge  in
    the appeal of Mr S found him to be credible we, for our part, can  find
    his evidence of little of assistance in  our  task  of  evaluating  the
    evidence as a whole.

104. Much reliance is placed upon the evidence of Dr Paul Semugoma.  In  his
    supplementary report dated 15th October 2007, he seeks to say  that  by
    openly telling people of one's sexual orientation the reaction would be
    negative, possibly violent.  He adds that mere suspicion  that  one  is
    gay can set off mob behaviour.  Thereafter he speaks of public lynching
    and  stoning,  suspicions  of  witchcraft  and  robbery,   apart   from
    expressing  the  view  that  mob  violence  in  Uganda  is  a  definite
    possibility.  However he gives no specific examples in which  that  has
    happened.

105. In support of his contention, Dr Semugoma includes as an annex  to  his
    report, live testimonies as published in the Monitor Newspaper on  11th
    August 2007.  The report speaks of a group of religious leaders holding
    a demonstration in the city, saying that homosexuals have no  place  in
    society.  There is an account of one Jane Rose Nassuuna being stoned to
    death accused of witchcraft.  The report goes  on  to  talk  about  mob
    violence in Uganda and how 97 people were killed, 108  cases  of  which
    involved theft, others robbery, witchcraft, murder, burglary and  other
    suspected crimes.  The  statement,  although  going  into  considerable
    detail, has little to say about homosexuality or attributing any of the
    deaths to that cause.  There is an account of one Brenda Kizza Entebbe.
     She lives as a woman, but it is common knowledge in her community that
    she used to be a man.  She spoke of problems with the police  and  with
    the community as a result.  Another, Juliet  Mukasa,  was  said  to  be
    rejected by her family and fired from  her  jobs  because  of  being  a
    lesbian.  She said she was raped by men and that the  government  broke
    into her home and arrested  her  friend.   Another  person,  Nabageser,
    seemingly  was  suspended  from  university  because  of   her   sexual
    orientation.  Richard, age 30, is gay and  has  been  accepted  by  his
    family.  He is happy because he has a community and has been  with  his
    partner seven years.  He finds it hard however to go to church.  Julian
    makes the comment that it is not only in Kampala that gay people  exist
    or make a fuss about rights.  He knows gay people in Jinja, Lira,  Arua
    everywhere.  In his village of Arua rumours spread that he was  a  gay.
    "I finally went in 2005, people were really chill, most just  said  "So
    what, it's her life."  He met an undercover policeman  at  a  bar  once
    with a bunch of gay people hanging out  together.   Juliet  was  afraid
    that the policeman would arrest them but he did not.  When asked why he
    was not arresting them the policeman told him that they  were  sensible
    people and that there was no  case  to  take  against  them.   Finally,
    Helena who works for Freedom and Roam Uganda speaks of  being  bothered
    in a bar on one occasion.

106. Having considered the documents on which  Dr  Semugoma  seeks  to  rely
    heavily we can find little, if anything,  to  indicate  the  cause  for
    concern as he has expressed it to be.  It is apparent to  us  from  the
    articles that there are quite a number of gay bars and areas where  gay
    people can meet, not only in Kampala but  throughout  Uganda.   Despite
    the rhetoric there would seem to be little  in  reality  that  is  done
    about it by the authorities or by anybody else.

107. Three particular incidents are cited more recently.  The first  is  the
    publication by the Sunday Tabloid, Red Pepper, of  the  identity  of  a
    number of gay people and specifying a number of gay clubs.   Little  of
    consequence would seem to have flowed from that.  Dr Semugoma seeks  to
    indicate that because of the article, many gay people sought  to  avoid
    those bars, fearing arrest.  There is, however, no evidence  that  such
    bars were raided or that any significant arrests were made arising from
    the information contained  in  that  article.   Dr  Semugoma  seeks  to
    suggest  that  he  is  intimately  involved   with   the   Gay   Rights
    organisations in Uganda.  It is not entirely clear  whether  he  is  of
    that sexuality or not, but it would be reasonable to suppose that given
    his intimate involvement, any actual raids  upon  bars  or  arrests  of
    individuals would have come to his attention or indeed to the attention
    of the active rights groups which now clearly exist.  The fact that  no
    such information has been forthcoming is of itself  significant.   That
    one individual may have been sacked or sidelined by his boss at work as
    a result of the article is scarcely  an  indication  of  widespread  or
    endemic harassment of gay people.

108. The second event is the gay community  holding  its  first  ever  press
    conference on 15th August 2007.  Most  of  those  who  took  part  were
    masked, but not all.  This conference was widely  reported,  which  was
    the purpose of holding it in the  first  place.   The  purpose  of  the
    conference was to provoke debate and that  seemingly  was  the  result,
    positive  or  negative  from  the  standpoint  of  those  holding   the
    conference.  Not-  withstanding the strong comments made in  the  press
    or the media, there was no indication that those  who  took  part  were
    arrested and no indication of any wider mob violence  or  repercussions
    against gay and lesbians in general.  Once again, given the presence in
    Uganda of so many gay rights organisations as well as the  usual  Human
    Rights Watch and other NGO and other human rights organisations, it  is
    surprising that no information has come to light in relation  to  overt
    violence,  arrests,  harassment  or  intimidation,  arising  from  this
    conference or generally.

109. The final matter being the expulsion of a  group  of  homosexuals  from
    the Commonwealth  Heads  of  Government  meeting  in  Kampala  on  23rd
    November 2007.  A press article attached to the supplementary report of
    Dr Semugoma recounts the LGBT speakers remaining outside the  gates  in
    quiet protest waiting to be allowed back  to  deliver  their  speeches.
    They were there for seven hours.  Once again  there  is  no  indication
    that any action was taken against those in the group by  arrest  or  by
    violence.

110. Mr Chelvan relies also upon an article by  Max  Neghicheam  who  is  an
    Advisory Board member of the Sexual Health Rights Programme of the Open
    Society Institute in New York City and also  a  Programme  Director  of
    ILGA - Europe.  He produced a statement dated 15th  October  2007.   He
    spent three weeks in Uganda between August 28th and September  13th  of
    2007 researching lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender  activity.   He
    interviewed ten LGBT groups and other individuals in Kampala, Jinja and
    Masaka.  He speaks of an atmosphere of fear for personal integrity  and
    noted cases of gay  people  being  fired  from  their  jobs,  or  being
    disowned from their family.  The  case  of  Paul  who  appeared  on  TV
    speaking out for gay rights was cited in particular.   Red  Pepper  was
    mentioned.  Pastor S S Empa of the Makarere Church was also cited.

111. Apart from such  matters,  little  evidence  was  given  of  any  other
    specific  instances  and  none  seemingly  for  violence,   arrest   or
    imprisonment of gays or lesbians.  It is not entirely clear  from  what
    perspective the witness is coming from, or indeed as to the  extent  to
    which he is objective about the problem which he seeks to describe.  He
    describes himself as an activist but it was not entirely clear  whether
    he was an activist within the Lesbian  and  Gay  Rights  Movement.   He
    seems to suggest in the course in the report  that  he  is  homosexual.
    Reference is made to Victor  Mukasa  and  the  security  which  has  to
    surround him.  This picture of a person living in a  remote  but  well-
    guarded house in Kampala bears little  relationship  with  descriptions
    elsewhere in the background evidence  as  to  the  life-style  of  that
    individual.  In any event the report does not  assist  materially,  nor
    does it throw any new light on the aspects of the matter which  we  are
    considering.

112. Thus we return full circle to the report of Professor  Furley  of  18th
    January 2007, and  the  specific  question  asked  of  him  as  to  any
    incidents of gay men being persecuted in Uganda.  He cited that in July
    2005 the home of Victor Juliet Mukasa was raided in her absence  and  a
    friend arrested and subjected to humiliating and  degrading  treatment.
    Reference is made to the Red  Pepper  article.   According  to  Amnesty
    International Red Pepper is "openly and specifically harassing  lesbian
    and gay people".

113. It is significant that in Uganda there  are  a  substantial  number  of
    human rights groups and, indeed  gay  and  lesbian  groups.   All  have
    particular interest in monitoring what happens in Uganda and we have no
    doubt that if any significant event or arrest  took  place,  that  that
    would be the subject of comment or media attention.

114. As we have indicated before, notwithstanding the enormous  quantity  of
    material which has been placed before us, we can find very few specific
    incidents set out in detail as to harassment,  arrest  or  prosecution.
    Understanding the polemic which  is  addressed,  either  by  government
    ministers or the media, we can find little by way of  concrete  example
    of any violence being inflicted or arrest and prosecutions  instigated.



115. Mr Chelvan submits to us that it is not necessary that there should  be
    actual arrest or ill-treatment.  He submits that the legislation is  in
    itself discriminatory against the lesbian and gay community such as  to
    infringe at the very least Article 14 of the ECHR.  He submits that the
    pronouncements are at the highest level and are designed to instil fear
    into the gay and lesbian community, so as  to  force  them  to  act  in
    secret  or  under  a  feeling  of  constraint.   He  submits  that  the
    pronouncements are designed to provoke the wider community  into  anti-
    gay attitude and behaviour.  He asks us to find that that in itself  is
    persecutory behaviour such as to come within the 1951 Convention or  to
    infringe or to breach the obligations  in  relation  to  Article  3  by
    exposing the gay  and  lesbian  community  to  humiliation,  abuse  and
    degrading treatment.

116. In that connection our attention was  drawn  to  the  decision  of  the
    European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg in the matter of Smith and
    Grady v the United Kingdom (Application  nos.  33985/96  and  33986/96)
    [1999] EHRR 493.  This was a matter raised as to the policy applied  in
    the armed forces which made homosexual conduct  a  disciplinary  matter
    leading to dismissal from the services.   It  was  contended  that  the
    operation of such a policy would breach the fundamental human rights or
    those wishing to engage in same sex relationships.  It  was  argued  on
    behalf of the Ministry of Defence that such a policy was  necessary  to
    promote discipline and enable the military to function  as  it  should.
    It was argued that homosexuality was undermining the  general  military
    efficiency.

117.  The  Court  at  paragraph  89  of  its  judgment  recognised  that  an
    interference would be considered "necessary in  a  democratic  society"
    for a legitimate aim if it answered a pressing social need and  if,  in
    particular, it was proportionate to the legitimate  aim  pursued.   The
    Court underlined the link between the notion of "necessity" and that of
    a  "democratic  society",  the  hallmarks  of  the   latter   including
    pluralism, tolerance and broadmindedness.  The Court recognised it  was
    for  the  national  authorities  to  make  the  initial  assessment  of
    necessity, though the final evaluation as to whether the reasons  cited
    for the interference are relevant and sufficient would be one  for  the
    court.  They further highlighted that where the  relevant  restrictions
    concerned "a most intimate part of an individual's private life"  there
    must exist, "particularly serious reasons" before such interference can
    satisfy the requirements of Article 8 of the ECHR.  At paragraph 116 of
    the judgment, the Court  considered  that  the  appellant's  complaints
    under Article 14, in conjunction with Article 8, did not give  rise  to
    any separate issue.

118. The claimants in Smith and Grady maintained that  their  discriminatory
    treatment based on crude stereotyping and prejudice, denied and  caused
    affront to their individuality and dignity and "as  such"  amounted  to
    treatment contrary to Article 3.  It also noted that ill-treatment must
    attain a minimum level of severity if it is to fall within the scope of
    Article 3 of  the  Convention.   The  assessment  of  that  minimum  is
    relative and depends on all the circumstances of  the  case,  including
    the duration of the treatment and its physical and mental effects.   It
    is also recorded that such treatment may be considered degrading if  it
    is such as to rouse in  its  victims  feelings  of  fear,  anguish  and
    inferiority capable of  humiliating  and  debasing  them  and  possibly
    breaking their physical or moral resistance.

119. In paragraph  122,  however,  the  Court,  whilst  accepting  that  the
    policy, taken together  with  the  investigation  and  discharge  which
    ensued,  "were undoubtedly distressing and humiliating for each of  the
    applicants, did not consider, having regard to all the circumstances of
    the case, that the treatment reached  the  minimum  level  of  severity
    which would bring it within the scope of Article 3 of the Convention."

120. The claimants further argued that  the  right  to  give  expression  to
    one's sexuality encapsulated opinions, ideas and information  essential
    to an individual and his or her identity.  It was said that the  policy
    of the Ministry of Defence forced them to live secret lives denying the
    simple opportunity to communicate openly and freely  their  own  sexual
    identity which, in turn, had a  chilling  effect  on  them  and  was  a
    powerful inhibiting factor in their right to express themselves.

121. The Court made a comment upon which Mr Chelvan strongly relies  in  the
    context of this case as follows in paragraph 127:-

         "The Court would not rule out  that  the  silence  imposed  on  the
         appellants as regards their sexual orientation, together  with  the
         consequent and constant need for vigilance, discretion and  secrecy
         in that respect with colleagues, friends  and  acquaintances  as  a
         result of the chilling effect of the Ministry  of  Defence  policy,
         could constitute an interference with their freedom of expression."


122. However the Court noted that the  subject  matter  of  the  policy  and
    consequently the sole ground for the investigation and discharge of the
    appellants was  their  sexual  orientation  which  is  "an  essentially
    private manifestation of human personality".  It  considered  therefore
    that the freedom of expression element of the case  was  subsidiary  of
    the appellants' right to respect  for  their  private  lives  which  in
    principle was that in issue.  The Court considered it was not necessary
    to  examine  the  appellants'  complaints  under  Article  10  of   the
    Convention, either taken alone or in conjunction with Article  14.   It
    went on to find that the appellants' right to respect for their private
    lives was violated by the conduct of the Ministry of Defence.

123. Mr Chelvan also invited our attention to the case of  Pretty  v  United
    Kingdom (29th April 2002) (Application No. 2346/02) [2002]  2  FLR  45.
    Such a case revolved around the issue as to the right of an  individual
    to assisted suicide under the European Convention on Human Rights.   In
    that case the Court did not find any  breach  of  the  Convention.   Mr
    Chelvan, however, invited our attention to  certain  passages  in  that
    judgment relating the Court's assessment as  to  the  applicability  of
    Article 8(1) of the Convention.  He wished to highlight, in particular,
    paragraphs 61 and 62.

124. The Court in those paragraphs recognised that the concept  of  "private
    life" was a broad term not susceptible to  exhaustive  definition.   It
    covered the physical and psychological integrity of a person.  It could
    sometimes embrace  aspects  of  an  individual's  physical  and  social
    identity.   Elements  such  as   gender   identification   and   sexual
    orientation and sexual life fell within a person's sphere protected  by
    Article 8.  It also protected a right to  personal  development  and  a
    right to establish and develop relationships with other human beings in
    the outside world.

125. The Court observed that the ability to conduct one's life in  a  manner
    of one's own choosing  may  also  include  the  opportunity  to  pursue
    activities perceived to be of a physically or morally harmful dangerous
    nature for the individual concerned.  The extent to which a  State  can
    use compulsory powers or the Criminal Law to protect  people  from  the
    consequences of their chosen lifestyle has long been the topic of moral
    and jurisprudential discussion.

126. Mr Chelvan seeks to argue that the  climate  of  fear  which  has  been
    deliberately engendered by the Ugandan government  media  breached  the
    human rights of the appellant and in particular Article 3  and  Article
    8.  We observe that a common theme  throughout  the  evidence  both  as
    presented by the experts and by the  individuals  concerned,  was  that
    there was a climate of fear and of the prevailing societal disapproval.

127. The central and perhaps most recent example of  such  overt  expression
    of anti-homosexual views was that of the Red Pepper article.  Much  has
    been made of it.  There is little evidence, however,  that  members  of
    the public or indeed elements of the community were incited to  act  by
    reason of what was printed in that article.   Apart  from  perhaps  two
    individuals being discriminated against at  work,  there  has  been  no
    evidence of arrest or harassment either by the authorities  or  by  the
    population  generally.   Again,  although  the  report  speaks  of  mob
    violence, there is no evidence that  any  such  violence  was  directed
    towards homosexuals or for that reason.

128. It is very  easy  to  paint  popular  opinion  as  being  only  in  one
    direction but, as was made clear by the baseline survey of the justice,
    law and order sector of Uganda, there was quite a substantial  body  of
    opinion from those who were spoken to favouring a  more  liberal  view,
    both as to the law and to the approach to homosexuality.   We  make  it
    clear that we are not seeking to  suggest  that  persecution  can  only
    arise if there is a monolithic societal hostility towards  homosexuals.
    Clearly  it  can  also  arise  from  a  number  of  non-state  actions,
    particularly if there is no protection.  For our part, however, we have
    been presented with little  reliable  evidence  of  such  hostility  or
    activity.

129. A specific question was asked of Professor Furley, as recorded  in  his
    report of 18th January 2007.  That question was in these terms:-

         "Is it possible for a person  to  have  an  open  gay  relationship
         without suffering adverse consequences?"


     The answer was in these terms:-

         "It would be very risky.  Ugandan society consists of  very  close-
         knit family groups, neighbours, as well as clans and other networks
         such as work mates or former pupils of schools.  In  any  locality,
         everybody knows everybody else's business, and privacy is  hard  to
         come by.  If you are discovered to be a homosexual then there is  a
         risk of arrest  and  imprisonment,  in  addition  to  violence  and
         discrimination.  As explained there is no protection available."


130. As we have already indicated, the background evidence  gives  very  few
    examples of any arrest or imprisonment arising  from  that  matter  and
    very little evidence of any overt violence or discrimination.  We find,
    therefore, that the risk has been exaggerated and that in reality  that
    which is feared does not arise.

131. A further question asked of Professor Furley was:-

         "What steps would a gay man have to take in order to avoid the risk
         of serious harm in Uganda?"


     Professor Furley replied:-

         "His best chance to avoid risk would be to hide himself  in  a  big
         town where he might avoid notice (Kampala being the  only  sizeable
         town) or possibly in some very remote region."


132. Given the background material and the nature  thereof,  we  place  very
    little weight upon that particular assertion.  There are gay  bars  and
    places where the lesbian and homosexual community can meet in a  number
    of towns not simply confined  to  Kampala.   There  are  a  significant
    number of active groups promoting gay rights and indeed there has  been
    much overt publicity in the press and in conferences.

133. Much reliance was placed on the  article  "Behind  the  Mask"  produced
    from a website magazine on lesbian and gay affairs in Africa.  It was a
    report dated 23rd August 2007 of at least 500 adults interviewed  in  a
    weekly Steadman Group survey.  It said that 95% of that group said that
    homosexuality should not be legalised.  It said that most Ugandans have
    conservative views about gay culture.  The fact remains, however,  that
    although people might disapprove of homosexuality, it is not  the  same
    thing as actively taking steps to harass or discriminate or in any  way
    make life unduly difficult for the individuals  concerned.   We  do  no
    consider that  "disapproval"  without  more  constitutes  persecutional
    behaviour which in any way breaches the protected human rights  of  the
    individual.

How Did the Appellant Behave in  Uganda  and  What  Will  Be  the  Situation
    Facing Him
On Return?

134. We turn to consider, therefore, how the appellant would behave were  he
    to return to Uganda.  He indicated to us that he wishes to live life as
    a gay man and to express himself as a gay man.  He indicated to  us  at
    the outset of his evidence that  he  wanted  to  live  in  a  committed
    relationship with another.  Such is also borne out by the manner of his
    living  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Essentially  he  had  a   long-term
    relationship with B and a "one night stand" with  another  before  that
    relationship.  We, for our part, can see no reason,  having  regard  to
    the  evidence  which  has  been  adduced,  why  a   similar   committed
    relationship could not be established and maintained in Uganda.

135. The starting point for our  consideration  must  of  necessity  be  the
    experiences of the appellant himself whilst living in Uganda.   At  the
    time that he was in Uganda he experienced no hostility either from  the
    authorities or seemingly from any quarter.  He was able  to  study  and
    gain experience in the beauty treatment  and  hairdressing  profession.
    Although obviously effeminate in his manner,  the  appellant  does  not
    speak of incurring any unpleasantness at the hands of individuals or of
    the authorities.  He lived with his family and although they would seem
    to be very traditional in their outlook at no stage, according to  him,
    did the issue of homosexuality arise.

136. The appellant enjoyed a homosexual relationship in Kenya and  chose  to
    return to Uganda as seemingly the Kenyan authorities were cracking down
    on gay bars and arresting individuals.  Given that concern it would  be
    surprising indeed if the appellant were to move  to  Uganda  where  the
    same was happening.  Indeed,  the  evidence  of  police  or  government
    action does not come from the appellant but from those called  to  give
    evidence in this appeal.

137. The appellant was able to work  within  the  beauty  salon/hairdressing
    profession for some seven years  without  encountering  any  difficulty
    whatsoever on account of his sexuality.  In his oral evidence before us
    the appellant indicated that despite  his  characteristics  nobody  had
    really asked him whether he was gay.   He  subsequently  modified  that
    reply to say that if clients did suspect that he was gay, he would  say
    that he was not and was straight.  It is difficult to  reconcile  those
    two statements other than drawing the inference that the issue  of  his
    being gay was not something which was regularly raised with him.  As Mr
    Chelvan has remarked, however, sexual identity is wider  than  conduct.
    There were feminine qualities of the  appellant's  behaviour  which  he
    would not have been able to hide and would have been  apparent  to  all
    whom he would have met.  We have little doubt that his effeminacy would
    have raised questions in the minds of some  as  to  his  homosexuality.
    Significantly the appellant did not seemingly encounter  any  hostility
    or violence towards him throughout the lengthy period of his  residence
    in Uganda.


138. We note that in his interview conducted on 1st April 2002 he was  asked
    specifically the question at question 9: "Why did  you  leave  Uganda?"
    His answer was, "It's because I was gay and I was tired of keeping it a
    secret any more."  Such stands in some contrast to the  evidence  which
    the appellant gave to us, namely that he left Uganda because his cousin
    Josephine had invited him to visit  her.   It  was  only  after  having
    experienced a greater  sense  of  freedom  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    relation to his sexuality that he decided to make his claim for asylum.
     This matter, perhaps, has been clarified in a further passage  of  the
    appellant's evidence before us which was to the effect  that  while  he
    was in Uganda he was focusing upon  his  work  and  not  focusing  upon
    relationships.  He also added, "Before coming to the UK I did not  know
    what it was like for gay men.  I came for a visit and  not  because  of
    any gay issues."  The appellant added that it was only afterwards  that
    he appreciated how different it was  and  was  therefore  unwilling  to
    return to Uganda.

139. We do not accept on the totality of the evidence,  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof as we do, that the appellant would be unable to  live
    in Uganda as a  gay  man  or  indeed  express  himself  as  such.   The
    appellant indicates that he wants to go out to bars and parties and  be
    with his friends.  Clearly before the  Red  Pepper  article  many  such
    meeting places existed,  at  which  members  of  the  lesbian  and  gay
    community  could  meet  together  with  members  of  the   heterosexual
    community.  We remind ourselves of the evidence of Mr S that often  the
    bars in which the gay people met were also frequented by heterosexuals.
     We recognise that the publication of the article  in  Red  Pepper  may
    have caused members of the lesbian  and  gay  community  to  move  from
    certain bars.  There is no reason to believe however  that  other  bars
    and clubs have not been frequented.  It is clear that  there  are  many
    lesbian and gay support groups in existence,  no  doubt  providing  the
    facility for communication and for social intercourse.

140. We recognise that homosexual identity is a wider  concept  than  merely
    sexual conduct.  We do not find that the  appellant's  sexual  identity
    would be unduly  constrained.   The  appellant,  as  we  have  remarked
    before, completed his education and ran a  business  seemingly  without
    difficulty.  Part of his  sexual  identity  is  clearly  his  sensitive
    tactile and effeminate manner.  There is no reason to believe that that
    was not very much a  part  of  his  identity  from  an  early  age  and
    expressed by him in his day-to-day activities.  He  expressed  such  in
    the past and no doubt will do so in the future.

141. Much has been made in the course of these submissions to us  about  the
    expressions "coming out" and "going into the  closet".   We  understand
    the phrase "coming out" to be one enabling a  homosexual  to  recognise
    his sexuality and to express that  sexuality  to  others.   We  see  no
    reason why that cannot be done in Uganda.

142. We emphasise that we do not make light of  the  strong  comments  which
    have been made by those in authority  in  Uganda.   Such  falls  to  be
    considered as part and parcel of the general situation which we have to
    determine after assessing the  likelihood  of  any  real  risk  to  the
    appellant upon return.

143. Much is also made of the fact that Ugandan  society  consists  of  very
    close knit family groups, neighbours, clans and other networks.  It  is
    said that everybody knows everybody else's business and that privacy is
    hard to come by.  In  particular,  that  the  appellant  will  find  it
    increasingly difficult to conceal his sexuality, particularly given the
    expectations of marriage.  Such may well  depend  upon  the  particular
    circumstances of the appellant at that time,  including  where  he  was
    living and the community in which he was living.

144. The appellant contends that were he to  reveal  his  sexuality  to  his
    clients he would lose them and were he to reveal his sexuality  to  his
    family he would face rejection or worse.  The appellant is, as we  have
    observed, very effeminate in manner and we have no  reason  to  believe
    that such was not his situation and  circumstances  from  a  relatively
    early age.   He  ran  a  successful  business  -  a  beauty  salon  and
    hairdressing for a number of years by displaying characteristics  which
    no doubt appeared to some to be representative of gay behaviour and yet
    the appellant seemingly did not experience any harassment or rejection.

145. The appellant seeks to suggest that he would  be  ostracised  from  his
    family if they came to know.  He has  a  number  of  brothers  who  are
    clearly mature adults having responsible  jobs  and  families.   It  is
    difficult to imagine, given the manner in which the appellant  presents
    himself, that the issue of his homosexuality would not have been raised
    at home.  This was a matter that was of particular concern  to  us  and
    indeed we felt it right to alert parties to that concern in order  that
    they may address the issue should they wish to do  so.   The  appellant
    indicated that he had never been  asked  about  that  matter  from  his
    family.  Even now that he is in the United Kingdom,  when  he  contacts
    his parents they are always asking him  whether  he  has  met  somebody
    special or the right person.  The appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for some seven years and his family have never really asked him
    when he is coming back or why he remains.  The family  have  not  asked
    him how long he is staying.  This does not  portray,  in  our  view,  a
    family that is keen to control or to taint  the  lifestyle  of  another
    member.  When the  appellant  first  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  he
    considered that his cousin J would disapprove  of  his  behaviour,  but
    when he revealed his sexuality to her he received nothing but  support.
    We find it surprising that his sexuality was not  a  matter  which  was
    raised in the course of his growing up with his family.  Even  if  that
    were the case, we find little basis to consider that the family even if
    they knew would in fact ostracise him from their midst.  It  is  to  be
    noted that several of the brothers are employed by UNESCO and  the  UN,
    perhaps not as "narrow-minded" or "traditional" as the appellant  would
    have us believe.  In any event, even were the family to  disapprove  of
    his behaviour, the appellant could live apart from them as he has  done
    for many years.

How Will the Appellant Behave on Return?

146. We turn therefore to our assessment of the evidence  of  the  appellant
    and our assessment as to his sexuality expressed by him verbally and by
    his demeanour.  We find him to be a mature  and  thoughtful  individual
    seeking to enjoy without fear a committed sexual relationship which  he
    can acknowledge with others.  He is someone who would  wish  to  engage
    socially with others who may or may not share his sexual identity,  but
    who would enjoy his company or social intercourse.  He is  someone  who
    has worked hard to build up a business and is committed to  living  his
    life, not only sexually but also economically  and  socially.   Clearly
    the  issue  of  demeanour,  particularly  in  the  somewhat  artificial
    confines of court proceedings, should be approached with  care  but  we
    would observe that the appellant  appeared  far  more  restrained  than
    certain of his witnesses, particularly A, who presented  himself  as  a
    somewhat flamboyant character, expressing his wish to "come out" to all
    whom he met.

147. We have considered with great care all that the appellant has  written,
    and all that he has said and the comments made  as  to  his  nature  by
    those witnesses called on his behalf.  We do not  find  that  were  the
    appellant to return to Uganda and live and behave in the  way  that  he
    would wish to that he would be at risk of persecution either  from  the
    authorities or at risk of harm from individuals.  We are  fortified  in
    that conclusion by the fact that the appellant  was  able  to  live  in
    Uganda without any form of harassment or ill-treatment for a number  of
    years.

148. We recognise that his life-style may not be approved of by  certain  of
    those with whom he comes into contact,  and  possibly  by  his  family.
    Such disapproval without more does  not,  seem  to  us,  to  cross  the
    threshold into persecutory  activity.   It  is  very  relevant  to  our
    consideration that the appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  not  to
    avoid persecutory treatment but to visit his cousin.  The appellant has
    expressed his fear of revealing his sexuality.  To some extent we  find
    that fear to be an exaggeration and, in  any  event,  ill-founded.  His
    sexual  identity  encompasses  his   tactile   nature,   and   feminine
    mannerisms, such characteristics having existed since  his  youth.   We
    find that the appellant was able to conduct his life  style  in  Uganda
    for  many  years  exhibiting  such  characteristics  without  harm   or
    harassment and we can  find  little  reason  to  find  that  he  cannot
    continue to do so.  However, we do  not  find  that  the  appellant  is
    somebody who is reasonably likely to proclaim his homosexuality to  all
    and sundry whom he meets or to taxi drivers in the course of a journey.



149. We observe the appellant to be a sensitive  and  attentive  person  who
    would be discreet  in  his  public  behaviour,  being  mindful  of  his
    society's concepts of good manners and the general  social  mores.   We
    find as a matter of fact that  he  will  on  return  act  in  the  same
    relatively  discreet  way  he  did  before.   We  recognise  that  such
    discretion in his case may extend to avoiding kissing in public or of a
    public act or remark which might provoke comment or outrage.

Is It Reasonable for the Appellant To Continue  to  Behave  in  the  Way  in
Which he Will?

150. The issue of homosexuality and risk on return has  been  considered  by
    the Tribunal in a number of decisions.   The  most  relevant  being  as
    follows:-

     EK (non-overt- homosexual) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00021

     YL AND RL (Kosovo - Risk  to  homosexuals)  Serbia  and  Montenegro  CG
    [2005] UKIAT 0005

     MN (Findings on Sexuality) Kenya [2005] UKIAT 00021

     HS (Homosexuals: Minors, Risk on Return) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00120

     DW (Homosexual Men - Persecution - Sufficiency of  Protection)  Jamaica
    CG [2005] UKAIT 00168

    LD (Article 14: same-sex relationships) Brazil [2006] UKIAT 00075

151. The issue of behaviour has  been  considered  in  a  number  of  recent
    decisions of the Court of Appeal, particularly:-


     Jain v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] Imm AR 76


    Z v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1578


    Amare v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1600


    RG (Colombia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 57


    J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1238


152. In particular we would seek to highlight a passage  from  the  judgment
    of Schiemann LJ in the case of Jain which perhaps puts into sharp focus
    the task which is currently before us:-

         "As it seems to me there is now  a  broad  international  consensus
         that everyone has a right to  respect  for  his  private  life.   A
         person's private life includes his sexual life, which thus deserves
         respect.   Of  course  no  person  has  a  right   to   engage   in
         interpersonal  sexual  activity.   His  right  in  this  field   is
         primarily not to be interfered with by the  state  in  relation  to
         what he does in private at home, and to an effort by the  state  to
         protect him from interference by others.  That is the  core  right.
         There are  permissible  grounds  for  state  interference  of  some
         persons' sexual life - e.g. those who  most  easily  express  their
         sexual desires in sexual activity with small children, or those who
         wish to engage in sexual activities in the  unwilling  presence  of
         others.   However,  the  position  has  now   been   reached   that
         criminalisation of homosexual activity between consenting adults in
         private is not regarded by the international community at large  as
         acceptable.  If a person wishes to  engage  in  such  activity  and
         lives in a state which enforces a  criminal  law  prohibiting  such
         activity, he may be able to bring himself within the definition  of
         a refugee.  That is one end of the continuum.


         The other end of the continuum is the person who lives in  a  state
         in which such activity is not subjected to  any  degree  of  social
         disapprobation and he is free to engage in it as he is to breathe.


         In most states, however, the position is  somewhere  between  these
         two extremes.  Those who wish to engage in homosexual activity  are
         subjected to various pressures to discourage them  from  so  doing.
         Some pressures may come from the  state  -  e.g.  state  subsidised
         advertising or teaching to discourage them  from  their  lifestyle.
         Other pressures may come  from  other  members  of  the  community,
         without those members being subjected to effective sanctions by the
         state to discourage them.  Some pressures are there all  the  time.
         Others are merely spasmodic.  An occasional interference  with  the
         exercise of a human right is not necessarily  a  persecution.   The
         problem which increasingly faces decision-makers is when to ascribe
         the word "persecution" to those pressures on the continuum."

153. The matter was considered by the Court of Appeal in J  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1238 in which  an  appeal
    was allowed on the basis that the AIT should  reconsider  a  number  of
    matters as set out in the judgments of Maurice Kay and Buxton LJJ.

154. In allowing the appeal, Maurice Kay LJ said that this Tribunal:-

         ".. will have to address questions that were not considered on  the
         last occasion, including the reason why  the  appellant  opted  for
         'discretion' before his departure from Iran  and,  by  implication,
         would do so again on return.  It will have to  ask  itself  whether
         'discretion' is something that  the  appellant  can  reasonably  be
         expected to tolerate, not only in  the  context  of  random  sexual
         activity but in relation to 'matters following  from  and  relevant
         to, sexual identity' in the wider  sense  recognised  by  the  High
         Court of Australia (see the judgment of Gummow and Hayne JJ at para
         83 [5395/002 2003 HCA71]).  This requires consideration of the fact
         that homosexuals living in a stable relationship will wish, as this
         appellant says, to live openly with each other and the 'discretion'
         which they may feel constrained to exercise as the price to pay for
         the avoidance of condign punishment  will  require  suppression  in
         respect of many aspects of life that are 'related to or informed by
         their  sexuality'  (ibid,   para   81).    This   is   not   simply
         generalisation; it is dealt with in the appellant's evidence."


155. Buxton LJ added a further point:-

         "The question that will be before the  AIT  on  remission  will  be
         whether the  applicant  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  tolerate
         whatever circumstances are likely to arise were  he  to  return  to
         Iran.  The applicant  may  have  to  abandon  part  of  his  sexual
         identity, as referred to in the judgment of Gummow and Hayne JJ  in
         S, in circumstances where failure to do that  exposes  him  to  the
         extreme danger that is set out in the country guidance case  of  RM
         and BB (Iran) CG 2005  UKAIT  00117.   The  Tribunal  may  wish  to
         consider whether the combination of  these  two  circumstances  may
         have an effect on their decision as to whether the applicant can be
         expected to tolerate the situation he may find himself in  when  he
         returns to Iran."

156.   It was recognised in the Court of Appeal  judgment  that  persecution
    was a "strong" word, requiring a high threshold.  It  would  constitute
    persecution only if, by reason of its intensity or duration, the person
    persecuted cannot reasonably be expected to tolerate it.  That test has
    been adopted in a number of recent authorities.  The judgment  stressed
    that regard must be had to what the appellant himself had to say  about
    his experiences and that the words "fear" and "forced" are particularly
    important in that context.

157. Mr  Chelvan,  in  his  submissions,  seeks  to  persuade  us  that  any
    restraint of whatever nature would be persecutory or in breach  of  the
    appellant's fundamental human rights.  We do not accept that  argument.
    We prefer the approach which has  been  highlighted  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal as set out in the judgment as summarised above.

158. We consider that separate issue therefore as to whether, given  how  he
    will behave, it is reasonable to expect that he so behave.  We note his
    expressed desire for a committed sexual relationship with  another  and
    can find nothing in the evidence before us to indicate that such  would
    not be reasonably possible  in  Uganda.   We  have  found  that  it  is
    possible for the appellant and other members of  the  gay  and  lesbian
    movements to enjoy a fulfilling and social life with others.  There  is
    no reason why the appellant cannot  continue  to  express  himself  and
    exhibit his fundamental qualities and characteristics as he has done in
    the past and how we find that he will do so in the future.

159. We do not find that any limited restraint or  discretion  exercised  by
    the appellant so as not to give rise to offence in public would in  any
    event cause the appellant to act otherwise than his integrity or sexual
    identity would allow.

160. We find therefore, having considered all the evidence placed before  us
    that the appellant upon return will  act  discreetly  and  that  it  is
    reasonable to expect him to do so.

161. In the circumstances, therefore, we do  not  find  that  the  appellant
    would face persecution such as to engage the Refugee Convention, nor do
    we find that he would experience such harm as to call for  humanitarian
    protection, nor do we find that he would face treatment of a violent or
    degrading nature such as to cross the threshold of Article 3.

162. We turn therefore to consider  the  aspect  of  the  appellant's  human
    rights as enshrined in Article 8 of the ECHR.  We apply the  structured
    approach to such considerations as has been set out  in  Razgar  [2004]
    2AC 368.

163. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  August  2000  aged  25.
    He had spent his formative years in Uganda and had developed  both  his
    training and a  business  in  beauty  therapy  and  hairdressing.   The
    appellant has not developed any business in the United Kingdom.

164. We recognise the measure of family life which the  appellant  has  with
    his cousin Josephine, living as he  does  with  her  and  enjoying  her
    company and support.  We do  not  find,  however,  that  his  emotional
    dependency is significantly above that which would be normally expected
    from family relations and friendship between extended family members.

165. We observe from his wide circle  of  friends  that  he  has  enjoyed  a
    relationship in the past but, at present, does not  have  such  a  firm
    relationship of such a nature.  He expresses his freedom to visit  bars
    and to enjoy the company of his wide circle of friends.

166. We recognise therefore that he has developed an element of private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom.  To return the appellant  to  Uganda
    would clearly be an interference with that private  life.   However  we
    would envisage little difficulty in the appellant  maintaining  contact
    with his friends by communications and possibly by visits to  them,  or
    by them to him.

167. It is to be  noted  that  the  appellant  has  family  in  Uganda,  his
    parents,  his  brothers  and  their  families  and  children.   He  has
    demonstrated  his  ability  to   establish   and   to   maintain   good
    relationships with his clients.  The appellant has of course  contended
    that his homosexuality will cause such clients to avoid him.   We  find
    little reason to believe that this is indeed the case.   We  note  also
    the immigration history of the appellant in that he came as  a  visitor
    and thereafter remained without leave.  We find the fears which he  has
    expressed to be unfounded for the reasons which we have already set out
    at great length.

168. Balancing all matters as we do, we do not find that  his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would be interference to such a degree to engage his
    Article 8 rights.  Even were that to be  the  case  we  find  that  his
    removal would in any event be proportionate to  the  proper  management
    and control of immigration.

169. Mr Chelvan seeks also to rely upon Articles 10  and  14  in  their  own
    right or to bolster the  claim  under  Article  8.   We  do  not  find,
    however, for the reasons we have been at pains to set  out,  that  such
    considerations have any material effect upon the assessment of risk  on
    return as has been conducted.

Conclusion

170.  (1)  Although  there  is  legislation  in  Uganda  which  criminalises
        homosexual behaviour there is little, if  any,  objective  evidence
        that such is in fact enforced.

     (2) Although the President and government officials  have  made  verbal
        attacks upon  the  lifestyle  of  homosexuals  and  have  expressed
        disapproval of homosexuality in the strongest terms,  the  evidence
        falls well short of establishing that  such  statements  have  been
        acted upon or would be provoked or should provoke in themselves any
        physical hostility towards homosexuals in Uganda.

     (3) Although a number of articles have been  published,  in  particular
        the Red Pepper article identifying areas where the gay and  lesbian
        community meet  and  indeed  identifying  a  number  by  name,  the
        evidence falls very short of establishing that such  articles  have
        led to adverse actions from either  the  authorities  or  non-state
        actors and others in the form, for example,  of  raids  or  persons
        arrested or intimidation.

     (4) Although it is right to note a prevailing traditional and  cultural
        disapproval of homosexuality, there is  nothing  to  indicate  that
        such has manifested itself in  any  overt  or  persecutory  action.
        Indeed there was evidence  placed  before  us  that  a  substantial
        number of people favour a more liberal approach to homosexuality.

     (5) A number of support organisations exist for  the  gay  and  lesbian
        community and their views have been publicly  announced  in  recent
        months.  There is no indication  of  any  repressive  action  being
        taken against such groups or against the individuals who  made  the
        more public pronouncements.

171. In general, therefore, the evidence does not establish  that  there  is
    persecution of homosexuality in Uganda.

172.     We  considered  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  appellant,
    particularly as to his intended expression of sexual conduct and sexual
    identity on return to Uganda.  We find that he would face no real  risk
    of persecution, serious harm or treatment contrary to his human  rights
    were he to return to Uganda.

173.     In all the circumstances  the  appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights is dismissed.






Signed


Senior Immigration Judge King TD

































|APPENDIX 1: LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIALS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL               |
|     |Undated               | |Report from Dr Paul Semugoma (additional    |
|     |                      | |report): Additional Answers to Questions    |
|     |                      | |raised (Behind the Mask article)            |
|     |Undated               | |Immigration Appeal Tribunal: Grounds of     |
|     |                      | |appeal to Immigration Appeal Tribunal for   |
|     |                      | |permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal |
|     |                      | |appendices.                                 |
|     |Undated               | |Statement from Appellant                    |
|     |Undated               | |Witness Statement of Mr Christopher Kalyango|
|     |                      | |Senteza (with accompanying documents)       |
|     |Circa 2000            | |British High Commission letter 2000.        |
|     |Circa 2002            | |Extracts from A Criminal Justice Baseline   |
|     |                      | |Survey of the Justice Law and Order Sector  |
|     |                      | |of Uganda - 2002                            |
|     |Circa April 2003      | |Immigration and Nationality Directorate -   |
|     |                      | |Country Information and Policy Unit: Uganda |
|     |                      | |- Country Report                            |
|     |Circa October 2003    | |Immigration and Nationality Directorate -   |
|     |                      | |Country Information and Policy Unit: Uganda |
|     |                      | |- Country Report                            |
|     |Circa April 2004      | |Immigration and Nationality Directorate -   |
|     |                      | |Country Information and Policy Unit: Uganda |
|     |                      | |- Country Report                            |
|     |Circa 2005            | |Amnesty International:  Report on Uganda for|
|     |                      | |period January to December 2005             |
|     |7 July 2005           | |Behind the Mask: 'Ugandan lawmakers pull the|
|     |                      | |plug on homosexual activities' - Article by |
|     |                      | |Musa Ngubane. (www.mask.org.za)             |
|     |12 July 2005          | |Human Rights Watch: "Uganda: Same-Sex       |
|     |                      | |Marriage Ban Deepens Repression In Uganda,  |
|     |                      | |Colonial-Era Sodomy Law Already Mandates    |
|     |                      | |Life in Prison". (www.hrw.org)              |
|     |2 August 2005         | |Amnesty International: Public Statement     |
|     |                      | |'Uganda: Intimidation of lesbian and gay    |
|     |                      | |activists', News Service No. 208            |
|     |                      | |(www.amnesty.org)                           |
|     |13 October 2005       | |International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights  |
|     |                      | |Commission: 'IGLHRC Condemns Uganda's       |
|     |                      | |Targeting of Lesbian and Gay Men; Calls Ban |
|     |                      | |on Same-Sex Marriage "Legislative Overkill".|
|     |                      | |(www.iglhrc.org)                            |
|     |March 2006            | |Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and       |
|     |                      | |Labour: US Department of State Uganda:      |
|     |                      | |Country Reports on Human Rights Practices   |
|     |                      | |2005'. (www.slate.gov)                      |
|     |April 2006            | |Home Office: Extracts from Home Office      |
|     |                      | |'Country of Origin Information Report       |
|     |                      | |Uganda', April 2006 and October 2005        |
|     |                      | |editions.                                   |
|     |1 May 2006            | |Behind the Mask: 'We need to regulate IT    |
|     |                      | |laws in East Africa, says Buturo" - Article |
|     |                      | |by Al-Mahdi Ssenkahirwa. (www.mask.org.za)  |
|     |3 May 2006            | |Topix.net: Transcript of 'topix.net' website|
|     |                      | |posting by Muhumuza Gerald, dated 3 May     |
|     |                      | |2006, regarding article in The News Watch   |
|     |                      | |dated 27 April 2005                         |
|     |                      | |Re: treatment of homosexuals in Uganda.     |
|     |3 July 2006           | |Behind the Mask: "Buturo slams gays" -      |
|     |                      | |Article by Ronnie Kijjambo.                 |
|     |                      | |(www.mask.org.za)                           |
|     |Circa 2007            | |Amnesty International: Report               |
|     |4 January 2007        | |Directions dated 11 December 2006 and       |
|     |                      | |amendments to those Directions              |
|     |15 January 2007       | |Home Office: Home Office Operational        |
|     |                      | |Guidance Note - Uganda                      |
|     |18 January 2007       | |Expert Report of Professor Robert Wintemute |
|     |18 January 2007       | |Expert Report of Professor Oliver Furley    |
|     |21 January 2007       | |Letters from Wesley Gryk Solicitors to AIT  |
|     |                      | |and HOPOU since 21 January 2007             |
|     |21 February 2007      | |Behind the Mask: "Christians warned on      |
|     |                      | |homosexuality"                              |
|     |6 March 2007          | |US Department of State: Report              |
|     |20 March 2007         | |Afrol News: "Uganda's gays left out of      |
|     |                      | |HIV/AIDS strategy"                          |
|     |23 March 2007         | |Africa News: Uganda; Lesbian Survives       |
|     |                      | |Deportation From the US                     |
|     |April 2007            | |International Lesbian and Gay Association : |
|     |                      | |"State sponsored homophobia"                |
|     |29 June 2007          | |Behind The Mask: "Anti-gay Ugandan minister |
|     |                      | |receives hate mail"                         |
|     |11 July2007           | |Afrol News: "Fears of enhance gay repression|
|     |                      | |in Uganda"                                  |
|     |17 August 2007        | |BBC News: "Uganda rejects a gay rights call"|
|     |17 August 2007        | |Behind the Mask: "Homosexuals demand        |
|     |                      | |acceptance in Society"                      |
|     |21 August 2007        | |Christian Today: "Christian Groups hold     |
|     |                      | |anti-gay protest in Uganda"                 |
|     |21 August 2007        | |New Vision Newspaper: "Religious group      |
|     |                      | |demonstrate against homosexuals"            |
|     |21 August 2007        | |Pink News.co.uk: "Ugandan churches          |
|     |                      | |demonstrate against gay acceptance"         |
|     |23 August 2007        | |Human Rights Watch: Letter to Ugandan       |
|     |                      | |President                                   |
|     |23 August 2007        | |Human Rights Watch: "Uganda: State          |
|     |                      | |homophobia threatens health and human       |
|     |                      | |rights"                                     |
|     |24 August 2007        | |Behind the Mask: "Ugandan government accused|
|     |                      | |of state homophobia"                        |
|     |27 August 2007        | |ABC Premium News (Australia): Gays, Lesbians|
|     |                      | |fight for rights Uganda                     |
|     |28 August 2007        | |Behind the Mask: "Tabliqs plan squad to     |
|     |                      | |fight gays",                                |
|     |29 August 2007        | |Behind the Mask: "Migrate, Buturo tells     |
|     |                      | |gays"                                       |
|     |30 August 2007        | |Gay Republic Daily: "Anti gay censorship in |
|     |                      | |Uganda"                                     |
|     |31 August 2007        | |Behind The Mask: "Anti gay group hits back  |
|     |                      | |at rights activists"                        |
|     |31 August 2007        | |New Vision Newspaper: "Anti Gay group hits  |
|     |                      | |back at rights activists"                   |
|     |31 August 2007        | |New Vision Newspaper: "Parents start        |
|     |                      | |campaign against homos"                     |
|     |9 September 2007      | |Sunday Pepper: "Homo terror: we name and    |
|     |                      | |shame top gays in the City"                 |
|     |11 September 2007     | |International Gay                           |
|     |                      | |and Lesbian Human Rights Commission:        |
|     |                      | |"Threats of Arrests and State-Sponsored     |
|     |                      | |Violence Against Gay Men, Lesbian,          |
|     |                      | |Transgenders' in Uganda"                    |
|     |12 September 2007     | |Africa News: Uganda; Court Agrees to Hear   |
|     |                      | |Lesbian Case                                |
|     |13 September 2007     | |Doug Ireland: "Uganda's anti gay witch hunt |
|     |                      | |continues"                                  |
|     |13 September 2007     | |Letter from UK Lesbian and Gay Immigration  |
|     |                      | |Group                                       |
|     |14 September 2007     | |Pink News.co.uk: "Ugandan newspaper         |
|     |                      | |continues outing strategy"                  |
|     |1 October 2007        | |Report of Dr Paul Semugoma with enclosures  |
|     |15 October 2007       | |Report of Maxim Anmeghichean with enclosures|
|     |16 October 2007       | |African Veil: Gay Sympathiser Attends Mass  |
|     |                      | |(www.africanveil.org)                       |
|     |17 October 2007       | |Human Rights Watch: Uganda: Rising          |
|     |                      | |Homophobia Threatens HIV Protection         |
|     |17 October 2007       | |Letter from Chistophe Dendaletche: Re: JM   |
|     |17 October 2007       | |Letter from Alexander Robertson             |
|     |16 November 2007      | |Letter from Laura Willett: Re: JM  v SSHD   |
|     |16 November 2007      | |Letter from Barry O'Leary: Re: JM, Country  |
|     |                      | |Guidance case                               |
|     |20 November 2007      | |Letter from Barry O'Leary: Re: Letter of    |
|     |                      | |support for UK asylum case.                 |


