











R (on the application of ZAT and Others) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department  (Article  8   ECHR   -   Dublin   Regulation   -   interface   -
proportionality) IJR [2016] UKUT 00061 (IAC)



                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







    The Queen on the application of ZAT, IAJ, KAM, AAM, MAT, MAJ and LAM
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



            Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                       Mr CMG Ockelton, Vice President





   i) EU Regulation number 604/2013 (the "Dublin Regulation") and the  Human
      Rights Act 1998, while separate regimes, are not in  competition  with
      each other.


  ii) Where the two regimes pull in different directions, full cohesion,  or
      harmonisation, may not be achievable and some  accommodation  must  be
      found.

 iii) Where an interference with a person's rights under Article 8  ECHR  in
      consequence upon full adherence to the  Dublin  Regulation  regime  is
      demonstrated, the question to be determined is proportionality.

  iv) In the proportionality balancing exercise, the Dublin Regulation  will
      be a consideration of undeniable potency.  Vindication of an Article 8
      challenge will require a strong and persuasive case and such cases are
      likely to be rare.


Having considered all documents lodged and having heard Mr M Fordham QC,  Ms
C Kilroy, Ms A Pickup, Ms M Knorr and Ms J Sane, all of counsel,  on  behalf
of the Applicants, instructed by the Migrants' Law Project of Islington  Law
Centre and Bhatt Murphy Solicitors, respectively and Mr D Mankell and  Mr  T
Sadiq, of counsel, on behalf of  the  Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field
House, London on 18 and 20 January 2016


      Decision: Permission to apply for  judicial  review  is  granted,  the
substantive application succeeds and the Applicants are granted a  mandatory
order in the terms  appended to this judgment.


McCLOSKEY J

Anonymity

(1)   All of the Applicants are granted anonymity on account of  their  ages
      and vulnerabilities.   The effect of this discrete order is  that  any
      communication or  publication  which  either  identifies  any  of  the
      Applicants or could have this effect is prohibited.

Introduction

   2) This application for judicial review  raises  issues  of  the  keenest
      difficulty for the determination  of  individual  rights  against  the
      background of the rule of law and for the exercise of  a  jurisdiction
      that is at the same time humanitarian and alive to  the  national  and
      international regulatory context.  The first four  Applicants  are  in
      France.  They are at  a  makeshift  camp  the  features  of  which  we
      describe in the next few paragraphs.  It is said  that  they  wish  to
      claim the status  of  refugee  under  the  United  Nations  Convention
      Relating to the Status of Refugees.  The other three Applicants are in
      the United Kingdom. They have been recognised as  refugees  under  the
      Convention. It is claimed that each is a sibling of one or two of  the
      first four Applicants. All of the Applicants seek an order  that  will
      enable  them  to  be  together  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in  various
      combinations, while refugee claims by the first  four  Applicants  are
      determined.


   2) The spotlight in these proceedings is  on  an  area  just  across  the
      English Channel from Dover. It has become known colloquially  as  "the
      jungle".  This is a bleak and desolate place adjacent to Calais on the
      coast of northern France.  It attracts this  appellation  not  without
      good reason. Unlike other jungles, this place is  inhabited  by  human
      beings, not animals.

   3) "The jungle" did  not  materialise  overnight.  Its  development  has,
      rather, been an organic process.  The eyes of Europe, with  a  mixture
      of shock and revulsion, have been fixed firmly on this location during
      most of the past year.  The description of the jungle in some parts of
      the evidence as a camp, or settlement, is  misleading.    It  is  more
      accurately described in the uncompromising language of the substantial
      number of organisations and individuals who have shown an interest and
      have attempted to provide some alleviation for the occupants.

   4) The evidence adduced  in  these  proceedings  regarding  "the  jungle"
      speaks unremittingly with  a  single  voice.   It  is  unnecessary  to
      reproduce it in extenso.   One example will suffice.  In early January
      2016 a concerned English public representative stated:

           "I have just returned from the camps in Calais and Dunkirk where
           thousands of migrants have temporary homes.  The conditions  are
           so bad that describing them ..... cannot  capture  the  squalor.
           You have to smell conditions like these and feel the squelch  of
           mud mixed with  urine  and  much  else  through  your  boots  to
           appreciate the horror."

      Descriptions such as "a living hell"  abound.  The  evidence  includes
      graphic  photographs  which  speak  for  themselves.  Elaboration   is
      unnecessary.  It  is  estimated  that  "the  jungle"  has  some  6,000
      occupants at present.  In summary, the conditions prevailing  in  this
      desolate part of the earth are about as deplorable as any  citizen  of
      the developed nations could imagine.


   5) It seems likely that there is no real basis for many of its  occupants
      remaining indefinitely in "the jungle"  and  enduring  the  conditions
      that obtain there.  Many are probably  not  refugees  in  any  general
      sense or in any sense  entitled  to  recognition.   Rather,  they  are
      migrant nationals of a number of countries outside the European Union,
      who, while intending to make a claim for refugee  status,  decline  to
      make the claim in France  due  to  perceived  advantages,  correct  or
      otherwise, of doing so in the United Kingdom. Like the United  Kingdom
      and other member states of the European Union, France has  obligations
      to asylum claimants and because of the United Kingdom's 'opt  out'  of
      recent relevant EU legislation, the duties owed by France are in  many
      respects more onerous than those applying in the United  Kingdom.   In
      general terms there is no basis at all for thinking that a person  who
      claims asylum in France will not be treated properly and will not have
      the benefit of the reception and other facilities which  those  duties
      entail. The first four Applicants, however, are in a  special,  indeed
      unique, situation because of their ages,  their  vulnerability,  their
      psychologically traumatised condition,  the  acute  and  ever  present
      dangers to  which  they  are  exposed  in  "the  jungle",  the  mental
      disability  of  the  fourth  Applicant,  the  (claimed)  relationships
      linking all seven Applicants, the particular  relationship between the
      third and the fourth Applicants  and  the  firm  likelihood  that  the
      outcome of asylum applications made by the first  four  Applicants  in
      France would be a "take charge" acceptance by the United Kingdom.

The Judicial Review Challenge

   6) This is a so-called "rolled up" application for  permission  to  apply
      for judicial review.  The Respondent is the Secretary of State for the
      Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State").  The  thrust  of  the
      Applicants' case is that the refusal of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
      admit the first four Applicants to the  United  Kingdom  forthwith  is
      unlawful.  The relief sought consists  of  mandatory  and  declaratory
      orders.  Expedition was granted and an inter partes hearing  followed.



General

   7) We observe at the outset that in the Secretary  of  State's  pleading,
      there are no denials of the various assertions made on behalf  of  the
      Applicants.  It is, however,  formally  pleaded  that  the  assertions
      relating to the ages of the first four Applicants, the  mental  health
      condition of  the  fourth  Applicant,  the  asserted  relationship  of
      dependency between  the  third  and  fourth  Applicants,  the  sibling
      relationship of  the  first  four  Applicants  with  the  final  three
      Applicants, the  historical sufferings of the first  four  Applicants,
      the conditions in  which  they  have  been  residing  recently,  their
      attempts to reach the United Kingdom and their treatment by the French
      authorities are not admitted.  Having acknowledged this, we  summarise
      the factual matrix on which the Applicants advance their case  in  the
      following terms.


   8) While mindful that  judicial  review  proceedings  do  not  provide  a
      paradigm fact finding forum, we are conscious that the onus  rests  on
      the Applicants to make good their key assertions to our  satisfaction,
      that is to say on the balance of probabilities.   We  have  considered
      all of the evidence presented through this prism.  We have also  taken
      into account that, given  the  speed  at  which  this  litigation  has
      progressed, it has not been realistically possible for  the  Secretary
      of State to investigate fully the evidence upon which  the  Applicants
      rely and/or to present contrary evidence.  This is a factor  which  we
      weigh in our consideration of whether the main factual elements of the
      Applicants'  challenges  have  been  established  to   the   necessary
      standard.  Bearing in mind, inter alia, that this judgment is urgently
      required, we consider it  inappropriate  to  attempt  a  comprehensive
      resume of the evidence.  We have considered all of the  evidence  with
      care, paying particular attention to its most significant and  salient
      aspects.

   9) Another intrinsic feature of judicial review litigation is that it  is
      not ideally suited to  the  exercise  of  resolving  disputed  factual
      issues.  This is one of the reasons for the imposition  on  applicants
      (or claimants)  of  a  burden  of  proof  which  entails  establishing
      material facts to the standard of the balance of probabilities.  These
      proceedings have generated a substantial  quantity  of  evidence.  The
      contributors   include   some   of   the   Applicants,   their   legal
      representatives, lawyers  practising  in  France,  representatives  of
      humanitarian  organisations  and  others.   This  evidence  has   been
      provided mainly  in  the  form  of  detailed  witness  statements  and
      reports. It is of notable  pedigree  and  consistently  satisfies  the
      requirements of reliability and objectivity. We have evaluated all  of
      this evidence with care and have conducted  the  penetrating  analysis
      required by the principle of heightened scrutiny.  Having done so,  we
      are satisfied that the core elements  of  the  Applicants'  cases  are
      established. We shall elaborate on this assessment infra.

  10) This assessment  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  that  relevant
      decision making authorities, whether in the United Kingdom or  France,
      may form a different view on certain factual issues.   We  acknowledge
      that those authorities are the primary  fact  finding  agencies.   The
      judgment  of  this  Tribunal  does  not  usurp  their   functions   or
      responsibilities.  The intervention  of  this  Tribunal  occurs  at  a
      particular moment in time when the  Applicants  have  exercised  their
      constitutional entitlement to seek judicial adjudication of the rights
      which they assert and the corresponding duties to which  they  contend
      the United Kingdom Government is subject.  The agencies  charged  with
      the legal responsibility of making decisions post dating this judgment
      will all be bound by the well established public  law  constraints  of
      fair and independent decision making, the avoidance of  irrationality,
      a procedurally fair decision making process and  the  duties  to  take
      into account  everything  material  while  disregarding  all  that  is
      immaterial. To this inexhaustive list one  adds  the  specific  duties
      imposed by the relevant measures of EU  legislation.  It  is  scarcely
      necessary to add that this Tribunal is  not  concerned  with  possible
      legal challenges to future decisions.

  11) Our evaluation of  the  totality  of  the  evidence  has  one  further
      dimension. We consider it highly  probable  that  if  the  first  four
      Applicants  had  pursued  asylum  claims  under  the   Regulation   No
      604/2013/EU ("the Dublin  Regulation")  in  France,  they  would  have
      established an entitlement to a "take charge" request  by  the  French
      authorities, directed  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  a  consequential
      transfer to England. This is one of the issues which we shall  address
      infra in our consideration of what has emerged as the  critical  issue
      in these  challenges,  namely  the  proportionality  of  the  impugned
      decisions of the Secretary of State.

Factual Matrix

  12) From the submissions on behalf of  the  parties  and  the  substantial
      evidence provided we have identified four main  factual  issues.   The
      first of these is the conditions  prevailing  in  "the  jungle".   The
      second concerns the Applicants: who they  are,  their  background  and
      histories, their mental states and fears, their sibling  relationships
      and the prospects of the first four Applicants reunifying  with  their
      respective siblings among the other Applicants if entry to the  United
      Kingdom can be achieved. The  third  main  issue  concerns  the  laws,
      practices  and  arrangements  prevailing  in  France   regarding   the
      formulation, processing and determination of applications for  asylum.
      The fourth, which is related to the  third,  concerns  the  prevailing
      conditions in  France  for  the  reception  and  treatment  of  asylum
      applicants.

  13) "The jungle" consists of some 18 hectares of uneven,  sandy  heathland
      on a former landfill site some four kilometres to the east of  Calais.
      Its occupants have gradually swollen to around 6,000.  In July 2015 it
      was recorded that up to 3,000  people  lacked  electricity,  lighting,
      sanitary facilities and water supply.   It was littered with waste and
      excrement.  The occupants had installed a  variety  of  dangerous  and
      insalubrious temporary shelters, consisting mainly of  tarpaulins  and
      precarious shacks.  True it is that during the months which  followed,
      some slight improvements were effected, probably due in large  measure
      to an order dated 02 November 2015 made by the  Tribunal  Adminstratif
      de Lille.

  14) In its judgment the Court noted the following:

           "..... As a result of manifestly inadequate access to water  and
           toilets and  the  lack  of  refuse  collection  operations,  the
           population at the camp are living in  conditions  which  do  not
           meet their basic  needs  in  terms  of  hygiene  and  access  to
           drinking water and which expose them  to  health  risks;   As  a
           result, there is a serious and  manifestly  unlawful  breach  of
           their right  not  to  be  subjected  to  inhuman  and  degrading
           treatment. ...."


           [Emphasis added.]

      The Court made a mandatory order.  This obliged the Prefet of  Pas-de-
      Calais to take certain specified  measures,  to  be  commenced  within
      eight days: the provision of water access points; the installation  of
      50 toilets; the introduction of a  refuse  collection  operation;  the
      cleaning of the site; and the creation of internal  access  routes  to
      facilitate  the  emergency  services.   Notably,   this   order   also
      specifically required the Prefet to -


           "....   within 48 hours of services .... begin  carrying  out  a
           census of unaccompanied minors in situations of distress and  to
           liaise with the ....  Regional authority in  relation  to  their
           care ...."

      The order was also addressed to the Minister of the Interior  and  the
      Minister of Social Affairs, Health and Women's Rights.

  15) One of the lessons of history is that the desperate  plight  of  human
      beings can bring out the best  in  mankind.   This  is  true  of  "the
      jungle".  A striking theme of the evidence is the charity,  solidarity
      and near heroism which the plight of the occupants of  this  site  has
      stimulated.  Volunteers  of  all  kinds  -  doctors,  social  workers,
      lawyers and others - feature prominently in the  evidence.   The  most
      recent evidence  includes  a  statement  of  one  of  these  exemplary
      persons.  This makes clear that while the measures taken  pursuant  to
      the Lille Court order effected some improvement, this has been  offset
      by the growing number of camp  occupants.  The  appalling  and  highly
      dangerous   living   conditions   continue.    The   dangers   include
      trafficking, violence, exploitation of unaccompanied children and  the
      abuse, including rape, of women. Other  sources  of  danger  to  human
      health include toxic  white  asbestos  giving  rise  to  the  risk  of
      carcinogenic disease.  The  volunteer  in  question  summarises,  with
      commendable understatement:

           "In summary, the claimants are residing in conditions which  are
           physically harmful and wholly unsuitable for any human being but
           particularly harmful for children and  other  vulnerable  people
           ....


           The  claimants  do  not  have  adequate  access  to  the   basic
           necessities of life to ensure that they are able  to  live  with
           dignity. Instead they live under  constant  threat  of  violence
           from camp residents and the French authorities."

[The" claimants" are the first four Applicants.]

  16) Switching our focus to the seven Applicants, all of them claim  to  be
      Syrian nationals.  The three are unaccompanied minors,  each  aged  16
      years when these proceedings were commenced.  The fourth is  aged  26,
      suffers from a serious mental illness, claims to be the brother of the
      third Applicant and is looked after by  the  latter.  The  first  four
      Applicants have all fled the war in Syria, claiming to  have  suffered
      extreme trauma there.  They have travelled from Syria to the  northern
      port of Calais in France. They  have  been  living,  with  some  6,000
      others, in "the Jungle".  Applicants (5) - (7) claim to be related  to
      Applicants (1) - (4) in various permutations.   They  too  are  Syrian
      nationals and have been granted the status of refugees in  the  United
      Kingdom.  The first four Applicants  previously  enjoyed  family  life
      with the second three in Syria, in  differing  combinations,  and  all
      seven crave reunification in the United Kingdom.  Swift  reunification
      is the central aim and object of these proceedings.

  17) There are psychiatric reports to  the  effect  that  the  first  three
      Applicants are suffering from recognised  stress  disorders.   In  the
      case of  the  fourth  Applicant,  a  psychiatric  disorder  and  post-
      traumatic stress disorder have been  diagnosed.   Further  psychiatric
      and  neurological  assessments  are  advised  and  this  Applicant  is
      described as completely dependent on his younger  brother,  the  third
      Applicant.

  18) Another of the central themes of the evidence is that of the fears and
      apprehensions of the first four Applicants.  These are  linked  in  no
      small measure to the treatment they claim to have  suffered  in  their
      country of origin, their age, the absence of parental or  other  adult
      support in their lives, the circumstances  in  which  they  have  been
      surviving since departing their  home  country  and  their  respective
      psychological conditions.  The lawyers' witness statements make  clear
      that by reason of this constellation of  factors  communications  with
      and taking instructions from  the  first  four  Applicants  have  been
      consistently difficult exercises.  The lawyers describe in  persuasive
      and measured terms these Applicants' fears and mistrust of the  French
      authorities.  From these sources of evidence one also  learns  of  the
      first four Applicants' desperation to be reunited with  their  refugee
      siblings in the United Kingdom.

  19) The third of the main factual issues which we have identified in  [13]
      above concerns the arrangements, practices and  facilities  prevailing
      in France for the presentation, processing and determination of asylum
      applications, particularly those made by unaccompanied  children.   On
      this issue, in common with the other principal issues, the Applicants'
      legal representatives have clearly been unstinting in their efforts to
      ensure that  the  Tribunal  is  equipped  with  relevant  evidence  of
      appropriate  quality  and  accuracy.   This  particular  category   of
      evidence emanates particularly from the reports  of  certain  agencies
      and organisations and practising French lawyers.

  20) A report compiled by the Council  of  Europe  Commissioner  for  Human
      Rights in September 2014 recorded that France was experiencing  "major
      difficulties in terms of the reception of asylum seekers".  This  gave
      rise to, inter alia, shortcomings in the  provision  of  accommodation
      and other services and facilities.  Deficiencies in legal  and  social
      support for asylum applicants were also highlighted.  So too  was  the
      plight of unaccompanied foreign children. These concerns  were  echoed
      by  other   international   organisations.   Similar   concerns   were
      highlighted in the Asylum  Information  Database  ("AIDA")  report  of
      January  2015.   This  noted,  inter  alia,  that  eligibility  to  be
      accommodated in reception centres was dependent upon a pending  asylum
      claim and the grant of a temporary residence permit.  Insufficient and
      inappropriate reception conditions for  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
      children were considered to  impair  their  effective  access  to  the
      asylum procedure.

  21) In a 2012 report, certain features of  the  operation  of  the  Dublin
      Regulation in France were highlighted.  First, only a small percentage
      of orders for transfer to other Member States was  executed.   Second,
      unaccompanied foreign minors  who  lodged  an  asylum  application  in
      France and who fall within the responsibility of another Member  State
      are not in practice transferred there.  This report is supplemented by
      the detailed evidence of a  practising  French  lawyer.    This  draws
      attention to the unavailability of public funding for legal advice  at
      the stage of preparing and formulating applications for asylum to  the
      relevant local Prefecture.  Some limited pro  bono  legal  advice  has
      been made available to the occupants  of  "the  jungle",  albeit  with
      significant limitations.  Unaccompanied foreign minors are not legally
      competent to make a claim for asylum.  Such claims  must  be  made  on
      their behalf through a specified State funded agency, followed by  the
      appointment of a species  of  administrator  or  representative.   The
      process of registering a child's asylum  application  takes  at  least
      three months.  This is followed by a decision on  whether  the  Dublin
      Regulation process applies.  "Take charge" requests of another  Member
      State are unlikely to materialise until almost a year has elapsed from
      the beginning of the process.  At this juncture it is  appropriate  to
      interpose one particular passage in the evidence of the French lawyer:

           "In practice, it is very rare for children to make asylum claims
           in France.  Under French law, a foreign unaccompanied  minor  is
           entitled  to  stay  on  the  territory  without  any   kind   of
           authorisation or residence permit. As a result, child protection
           services/FTDA do not particularly  encourage  children  to  make
           applications.  The view is that there is no need,  because  once
           they enter the care system, they are adequately protected  until
           their 18th birthday in any event.  Upon turning  18,  those  who
           entered the care system before their 15th  birthday,  receive  a
           French residence permit and those who did  not  must  apply  for
           asylum."

      We note that this accords with other evidence of French law  emanating
      from a French government agency.

  22) One of  the  mechanisms  of  the  Dublin  Regulation  (infra)  is  the
      transmission of a "take charge" request by the first  decision  making
      state, in which the asylum applicant is present, to another EU  Member
      State.  The evidence shows that in 2015 France transmitted a total  of
      four such requests  to  the  United  Kingdom.  Of  these,  three  were
      rejected and the fourth was accepted, resulting in the transfer of the
      subject between the two States. None of these  requests  concerned  an
      unaccompanied minor. While there is insufficient data in the  evidence
      provided to enable a fuller assessment of the  significance  of  these
      figures to be made  they  are,  as  a  minimum,  confirmation  of  the
      undisputed evidence, the  source  whereof  is  two  practising  French
      lawyers, that it is French Government policy to discourage the  making
      of asylum claims by children on its territory.  We  note  further  the
      evidence that only one successful family  reunion  claim  by  a  child
      under the Dublin Regulation, in France, is known to have occurred  and
      there have been no such cases during the past five years.  It is clear
      that alien children on French territory do not require by law any form
      of residence permit and it is government policy to tolerate them until
      they achieve their majority.

  23) It is not easy to  reach  any  general  relevant  conclusion  on  this
      material.  Clearly the attitude of the French State  to  unaccompanied
      minors is more  benevolent  than  any  Europe-wide  legislation  would
      require.  The assumption that such individuals should  be  allowed  to
      reside in French territory and should have the benefits of an  interim
      right of residence until their eighteenth  birthday  gives  more  than
      they would obtain routinely in the United Kingdom  or  many  other  EU
      Member States; and the practice of not returning unaccompanied  minors
      to other member states in which they may have made a claim in  transit
      to France is a generous one.  On the other  hand,  the  administrative
      difficulties in making an asylum claim in France, of  which  there  is
      much evidence, may distance children and others from  the  possibility
      of family reunion recognised in the Common European Asylum Policy (the
      "CEAS" - treated below).  Similarly, we do not think it would be right
      to draw any  meaningful  conclusions  from  the  statistics  of  "take
      charge" requests, to which we have alluded  above  and  on  which  the
      Applicants placed weight.  As noted in  the  evidence  of  the  French
      lawyer set out above, an unaccompanied minor in France may well prefer
      to rely on the general benefits arising from his or her status.  There
      is no indication of what number of such requests might be expected  in
      the context of the benefits attributable to minors  under  French  law
      and practice; and there is no basis for  suggesting  that  the  French
      authorities recognise or process fewer claims than might be expected.

  24) In our review of the evidential matrix we make reference, finally,  to
      the Anglo-French accord executed at Calais on 20 August 2015.   Within
      this instrument one finds a heavy emphasis on the primacy of security,
      public order, policing and breaches of the  law.   The  analysis  that
      these are its  main  themes  seems  uncontroversial.  The  plight  and
      predicament of the  human  beings  involved  qualifies  for  secondary
      consideration only. The document  describes  "a  migratory  phenomenon
      without precedent and with a substantial humanitarian element".  In  a
      short section dealing with the need to protect the most vulnerable and
      the imperative of combating human  trafficking,  the  two  Governments
      committed  themselves  to,  inter  alia,  the  provision  of  adequate
      information,   advice   and   support,   coupled    with    "protected
      accommodation" to assist the vulnerable in removal to places of safety
      and making asylum claims.  The evidence, viewed as a  whole,  suggests
      that any measures of this  kind  implemented  subsequently  have  been
      acutely inadequate.

Findings

  25) As a prerequisite to the exercise  of  applying  the  governing  legal
      rules and principles, there must be a substratum of  findings  on  the
      material issues.  Recalling the framework set  forth  in  [7]  -  [12]
      above, the central  factual  elements  of  the  personal  aspects  and
      circumstances of the Applicants are the subject of clear and currently
      undisputed evidence.  We are mindful that because of the urgency,  and
      the manner, in which these cases have come before us, there  has  been
      little or no opportunity for the Secretary of State to investigate the
      claims of  relationships,  prior  associations,  mental  disorder  and
      kindred issues.  However, for the purposes of these proceedings we act
      on the positive and persuasive evidence before  us  while  recognising
      that our doing so cannot be regarded as a final determination of those
      issues.  The equation within which future decision  making  pertaining
      to the  Applicants  is  undertaken  may  be  infused  with  additional
      evidence not available to this Tribunal.



The Secretary of State's Stance

  26) At this juncture it  is  convenient  to  record  the  essence  of  the
      Secretary of State's stance.  In pre-proceedings correspondence and in
      the formal pleading which has followed more recently, the Secretary of
      State has denied that she owes any present legal duty to  any  of  the
      Applicants.  The foundation of this denial is the procedural mechanism
      contained in EU Regulation No  604/2013  and,  specifically,  Articles
      20(1), 21(1), 22(1) and 29(1).  The Secretary of State  contends  that
      in accordance with these provisions, it is incumbent on the first four
      Applicants to lodge an application for international  protection  with
      the French authorities, to be followed by a "take charge" request made
      by the French Government of the United Kingdom Government, a  response
      thereto by the latter and, ultimately (if appropriate) the transfer of
      these Applicants to the United Kingdom by the French authorities  with
      a view to reunification with their siblings there,  if  feasible.   In
      short, the Secretary of State  has  taken  her  stand  firmly  on  the
      mechanisms and procedures of the Dublin Regulation.

The Dublin Regulation

  27) The Dublin Regulation,  a  measure  of  the  European  Parliament  and
      Council, entered into operation on 01 January 2014.   This  instrument
      of EU law prescribes the criteria and mechanisms for  determining  the
      Member  State   responsible   for   examining   an   application   for
      international protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third
      country national or a stateless person. "Examining" in  this  context,
      means determining.

  28) Given the context of the present challenges, the following  provisions
      are of particular significance:

        a) By Article 6, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
           consideration at all stages; due  account  shall  be  taken  of,
           inter alia, family reunification possibilities; the minor's well
             being  and  social  development  and   safety   and   security
           considerations; unaccompanied minors shall be  provided  with  a
           representative; and following the lodgement of an  unaccompanied
           minor's application for  international  protection,  appropriate
           action shall be taken as soon as possible to identify the family
           members, siblings or relatives of the unaccompanied minor on the
           territory of other Member States, whilst protecting the  child's
           best interests.


        b) By Article 8, the responsible Member State in  the  case  of  an
           unaccompanied minor is that State where a  family  member  or  a
           sibling  of  the  minor  is  legally  present,  subject  to  the
           application  of  the  best  interests  criterion;  where  it  is
           established that a relative legally present  in  another  Member
           State can take care of an unaccompanied minor, unification  will
           be effected, subject to the best interests criterion.

        c) Per Article 18(1),  the  responsible  Member  State  shall  take
           charge of an applicant  who  has  lodged  an  application  in  a
           different  Member  State,  under  the  conditions  specified  in
           Articles 21, 22 and 29.

        d) By Article 20(1), under the rubric "Start of the Procedure", the
           process of determining the responsible Member  State  begins  as
           soon as an application for  international  protection  is  first
           lodged with one of the Member States; and,  per  Article  20(2),
           this act occurs as soon as the application, whether  in  writing
           or otherwise, is received by the competent authority.

        e) By Article 21(1):

                 "Where  a  Member  State  with  which  an  application  for
                 international protection has  been  lodged  considers  that
                 another Member  State  is  responsible  for  examining  the
                 application, it may, as quickly  as  possible  and  in  any
                 event  within  three  months  of  the  date  on  which  the
                 application was lodged ......  request  that  other  Member
                 State to take charge of the applicant."

[Emphasis added.]

           The responsible Member State shall be the first in circumstances
           where it has not made a take charge request of the second within
           the aforementioned time limits.

        f) Article 22(1) provides that where a  "take  charge"  request  is
           made, the "requested Member  State"  shall  make  the  necessary
           checks and give a decision on the request "within two months  of
           receipt".


        g) By Article 29, where the requested Member State agrees  to  take
           charge of the person  concerned,  there  shall  be  consultation
           between the Member States concerned  and  the  ensuing  transfer
           shall be effected "as soon as practically possible  and  at  the
           latest within six months of  acceptance  of  the  request  ...."
           This is accompanied by a series of procedural, humanitarian  and
           default provisions.

  29) Reduced to its bare essentials, the process established by the  Dublin
      Regulation entails an initial application by the person  concerned  to
      the competent authority of the EU Member State where  that  person  is
      present,  the  consideration  of  such  application  and  an   ensuing
      decision.  One of the central pillars of the Dublin Regulation is  the
      discrete regime devised for allocating the responsibility among Member
      States for the examination of international  protection  applications.
      "Examination", in this context, denotes determining such  applications
      on their merits. It may  be  preceded  by  an  initial,  more  limited
      decision by a host Member State to transmit to a second Member State a
      request to "take charge" of the person applying.  Where a  request  of
      this kind is made and accepted, the transfer of the applicant from the
      first to the second Member State should follow. In this scenario,  the
      second Member State must "examine" and determine  the  merits  of  the
      protection application. The applicant has a  right  to  challenge  the
      first Member State's initial decision before a court or tribunal,  per
      Article 27.

  30) Before turning to summarise the submissions of the parties' respective
      Counsel, which were of conspicuous ability, we observe that the common
      ground is not insubstantial.  Subject to the issue of  the  Tribunal's
      findings which, in the event, are favourable to the Applicants  -  see
      [26] above - the common ground among the parties is that  all  of  the
      Applicants are entitled, in principle, to invoke Article 8 ECHR in the
      circumstances prevailing; the Secretary of State's refusal  to  accede
      to the first four Applicants' requests to admit  them  immediately  to
      the United Kingdom in order to achieve family reunification  with  the
      last three Applicants interferes with the right to respect for  family
      life  of  all  of  the  Applicants;  a  legitimate  aim,  namely   the
      maintenance of effective and orderly immigration control  is  engaged;
      and the central question to be determined is whether the Secretary  of
      State's refusal is a proportionate means of achieving this  legitimate
      aim.  In these circumstances, in their  analyses  of  Article  8,  the
      submissions  of  both  counsel  travelled  quite   directly   to   the
      proportionality exercise, which rapidly became the main battleground.

  31) One key feature of the Applicants' challenge, as noted above, is  that
      they do not wish to pursue the Dublin Regulation procedures in France,
      on the basis of their assertion that, in the circumstances prevailing,
      these do not provide them with an adequate and efficacious solution to
      their predicament. More specifically,  they  contend  that,  in  their
      special circumstances, the Dublin Regulation fails to vindicate  their
      rights under Article 8 ECHR.  They argue in any event that they have a
      free standing entitlement to assert their rights under  Article  8  at
      this stage, irrespective of the adequacy and efficacy of the operation
      of the Dublin Regulation in France.  Mr Fordham's submissions  further
      highlight that there is nothing in the  Dublin  Regulation  precluding
      the admission of the first four Applicants to the  United  Kingdom  at
      this stage.  It is convenient at  this  juncture  to  quote  from  the
      Applicants' grounds:

           "There is a complete absence of any information to indicate that
           the Dublin  III  process  will  work  or  has  ever  worked  for
           unaccompanied  minors  or  vulnerable  adults  in   France,   or
           consistent and reliable funded French  legal  representation  to
           assist them exceptionally to make it  work.  There  are  obvious
           systemic deficiencies in the Dublin III process  in  France  for
           unaccompanied  minors.   The  Applicants  cannot  reasonably  be
           expected to rely on the French system as a means  of  protecting
           their rights .....


           There is no  evidence  that  vulnerable  individuals  are  being
           identified and advised properly by the French authorities or the
           [Secretary of State], no evidence that any information  provided
           to residents in the "Jungle" includes reference to rights  to  a
           lawful transfer to the UK under Dublin III and no evidence  that
           any contact group established has sought to establish  efficient
           procedures for family reunification under Dublin III whether for
           unaccompanied minors or anyone else.  The [Secretary  of  State]
           has been asked to provide information about  these  matters  but
           has failed to do so."

The Main Arguments

  32) The contours of the  Applicants'  challenge  are  susceptible  to  the
      following summary.  First, their succinct riposte to the Secretary  of
      State's refusal is that, in the circumstances prevailing,  the  Dublin
      Regulation procedures are quite inadequate to provide  the  practical,
      expeditious and effective protection which the first  four  Applicants
      need.  Second, the Applicants contend that Article 8 ECHR  gives  rise
      to a positive obligation on the part of the United  Kingdom  to  admit
      the first four Applicants to its territory and, in this context,  they
      also pray in aid its mirror provision in the EU Charter of Fundamental
      Rights, Article 7.  Third, it  is  contended  that  the  Secretary  of
      State's refusal to act infringes the  general  public  law  duties  of
      reasonableness and proportionality and, further, is incompatible  with
      the domestic "best interests" duty.  Finally, the  Applicants  contend
      that the Secretary of State's refusal is in breach  of  her  published
      policy.  We shall examine each of these grounds seriatim.

  33) The fundamental contention advanced is that the Secretary of State  is
      under a present legal duty to admit each of the first four  Applicants
      to the United Kingdom.  The  Applicants'  pleaded  case,  as  outlined
      above,  has  four  distinct  elements.   However,   Mr   Fordham   QC,
      representing all of the Applicants,  positioned  the  Article  8  ECHR
      challenge at the  heart  of  their  case.   In  doing  so,  while  not
      expressly abandoning any of the other three grounds, he  was  disposed
      to acknowledge that if the  Article  8  challenge  does  not  succeed,
      realistically none of the other grounds will do so. Thus the  question
      for this Tribunal becomes: does fulfilment of the right to respect for
      family life enjoyed by all  seven  Applicants  under  Article  8  ECHR
      oblige the Secretary of State to admit the first  four  Applicants  to
      the United Kingdom now?

  34) Mr Fordham reminded us of how what he termed the "exit"  human  rights
      principle operates under the scheme of the Dublin Regulation. This  is
      illustrated in EM (Eritrea) [2014] AC 1321. The context was a decision
      to remove the claimants, all third country nationals, from the  United
      Kingdom to Italy.  The Supreme Court, allowing the claimants' appeals,
      stated, at [58], per Lord Kerr of Tonnaghmore JSC:

           "I consider that the Court  of  Appeal's  conclusion  that  only
           systemic deficiencies in the listed countries asylum  procedures
           and reception conditions will constitute a basis  for  resisting
           transfer to the listed country cannot be upheld.   The  critical
           test remains that articulated in Soering v United Kingdom [1989]
           11 EHRR 439.  The removal of a person from a Member State of the
           Council of Europe to another country is forbidden if it is shown
           that there is a real  risk  that  the  person  transferred  will
           suffer treatment contrary to Article 3 of ECHR."

      In thus deciding, the Supreme Court acknowledged one of the  essential
      underpinnings of the  Dublin  Regulation  namely  (per  Lord  Kerr)  a
      "presumption that members of an alliance of states such as those which
      comprise the European  Union  will  comply  with  their  international
      obligations": see [40].

  35) Next, turning to the soi-disant "entry"  human  rights  principle,  Mr
      Fordham's submissions highlighted a provision of the Convention  other
      than  Article  3,  namely  Article  8  and  a  different   stream   of
      jurisprudence.  Much of this is conveniently digested in  the  opinion
      of Lord Wilson JSC in R (Quila) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2012] 1 AC 621, at [30] - [43].

  36) The scope for invoking Article 8 ECHR in support of the duty for which
      the Applicants contend is illustrated particularly by two decisions of
      the  ECtHR.   The  first  is  Tuquabo  -  Tekle  v   The   Netherlands
      [Application No  60665/00],  where  the  applicant  claimed  that  the
      Netherlands was under a positive obligation under Article 8  to  admit
      her son, aged 13 years and with whom  family  life  had  been  enjoyed
      previously in their country of origin, Eritrea, for the purpose of re-
      establishing family life with the family unit in question.  The  ECTHR
      adopted the following approach, in [42]:

           "The Court reiterates that the essential object of Article 8  is
           to protect the individual against arbitrary action by the public
           authorities. There  may  in  addition  be  positive  obligations
           inherent in effective 'respect' for family life.   However,  the
           boundaries between the State's positive and negative obligations
           under  this  provision  do  not  lend  themselves   to   precise
           definition. The applicable principles are, nonetheless, similar.
           In both contexts regard must be had to the fair balance that has
           to be struck between the competing interests of  the  individual
           and of the community as a whole; and in both contexts the  State
           enjoys a certain margin of appreciation."

      Drawing together the governing principles,  the  Court  continued,  at
      [43]:

           "(a)  the extent  of  a  State's  obligation  to  admit  to  its
                 territory  relatives  of  settled  immigrants   will   vary
                 according to the particular circumstances  of  the  persons
                 involved and the general interest;


           (b)   as a matter of  well  established  international  law  and
                 subject to its treaty obligations, a State has the right to
                 control the entry of non-nationals into its territory;


           (c)   where  immigration  is  concerned,  Article  8  cannot  be
                 considered to impose on a State  a  general  obligation  to
                 respect the choice by married couples  of  the  country  of
                 their matrimonial residence and to authorise family reunion
                 in its territory."

      In its  reasoning  the  Court,  without  purporting  to  prescribe  an
      exhaustive list of touchstones, placed emphasis  on  the  age  of  the
      children concerned, their current situation in their country of origin
      and the extent to which they are dependent on their parents.  In [47],
      it described the settlement of the child  concerned  with  his  family
      unit in the Netherlands as "the most adequate means  for  the  various
      members to develop family life together."   In  finding  a  breach  of
      Article 8, the Court concluded that the Netherlands -


           "...    has  failed  to  strike  a  fair  balance  between   the
           applicants' interests on the one hand and its  own  interest  in
           controlling immigration on the other."

      See [52].

      We note that the Court's earlier decision in Sen v Netherlands  [2003]
      36 EHRR 7 is to similar effect.

  37) This pattern of Strasbourg decision making  continued  in  Mayeka  and
      Mitunga v Belgium [2008] 46 EHRR 23, the  second  of  the  Applicants'
      sheet anchors.  There the basic ingredients of  a  moderately  complex
      matrix were a mother, a national of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo
      ("DRC"); the grant of refugee status to  the  mother  in  Canada;  her
      daughter, then aged five years, who was accompanied  by  the  mother's
      brother (the daughter's uncle), both of whom travelled from the DRC to
      Belgium; an aspiration that the uncle would continue to take  care  of
      his niece until the latter had secured permission to reunify with  her
      mother in Canada; actions of the  Belgium  authorities  involving  the
      arrest of the uncle and the detention of the child  for  a  period  of
      some two months; and, following the  child's  release  pursuant  to  a
      court order, her immediate deportation to the DRC  where  the  Belgium
      authorities had identified the presence of another  uncle,  a  student
      who protested that he did not have the means to look after the child.

  38) In considering the mother's and daughter's claims under Articles 3 and
      8 ECHR, the ECtHR drew on, inter alia, Articles 3, 10 and  22  of  the
      United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child.    These
      provisions, respectively, concern the  best  interests  of  the  child
      principle, the obligation on States  to  handle  family  reunification
      applications in a positive, humane  and  expeditious  manner  and  the
      separate  duty  on  States  to  provide  appropriate  protection   and
      humanitarian assistance to child refugee applicants, whether alone  or
      accompanied. The ECtHR also invoked  a  2002  publication  of  the  UN
      Committee on the Rights of the Child, which recommended,  inter  alia,
      that unaccompanied minors be informed of their rights and have  access
      to legal representation in the asylum process.  The Committee  made  a
      separate recommendation for  improved  co-operation  and  exchange  of
      information among  all  relevant  agencies.   The  Court  decided  the
      Article 8 claims of mother and daughter as follows, at [90]:

           "The Court .....  reiterates that the Belgium State had positive
           obligations in the instant case, including an obligation to take
           care of the second applicant and to facilitate  the  applicants'
           reunification.   By  deporting   the   second   applicant,   the
           authorities did not assist their reunification.   Nor  did  they
           ensure that the second applicant would in fact be  looked  after
           in [the DRC].  In these circumstances, the Court considers  that
           the Belgium State failed to comply with its positive obligations
           and interfered with the applicants' rights to respect for  their
           family life to a disproportionate degree."

      To summarise, the main features  of  this  case  were  those  of  pre-
      existing family life  between  the  separated  persons  concerned,  an
      unaccompanied minor, special vulnerability and a  positive  obligation
      to facilitate family reunification.

  39) The final limb of the Applicants' arguments seeks to reason by analogy
      by invoking the  decision  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Chikwamba  v
      Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  40.    This
      decision  illustrates the  strong  public  interest  underpinning  the
      maintenance and enforcement of immigration control being outweighed by
      Article 8  ECHR  in  a  context  where  the  effect  of  refusing  the
      claimant's Article 8 application was to require her to return  to  her
      country of  origin,  where  conditions  were  harsh  and  unpalatable,
      simultaneously disrupting the family life which she enjoyed  with  her
      husband and baby in the United Kingdom, thereby requiring her to  make
      a spousal entry application from overseas  which  appeared  likely  to
      succeed.

  40) Mr Fordham sought to draw the parallel with the Secretary  of  State's
      insistence that the first four Applicants can enter the United Kingdom
      via the Dublin Regulation process only, thereby subjecting them  to  a
      lengthy period of delay of uncertain proportions,  continued  exposure
      to the appalling  conditions  in  "the  jungle"  in  the  short  term,
      persisting mental anguish having a further detrimental impact on their
      already significantly damaged mental states and,  throughout  most  of
      the period, being accommodated  in  "Reception  Directive"  conditions
      bearing no realistic comparison with the immediate family  life  which
      would be restored with  their  siblings  if  returned  to  the  United
      Kingdom forthwith. On to this  is  grafted  the  contention  that  the
      United Kingdom siblings have refugee status in this country, all  have
      residence cards and two are in gainful employment.  The final limb  of
      this discrete submission  that  if  the  first  four  Applicants  were
      compelled  to  remain  in  France   and   pursue   Dublin   Regulation
      applications there, they are very strong candidates for the making  of
      a "take charge" request by France to which  the  United  Kingdom  will
      eventually accede.

  41) The submissions of Mr Manknell on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
      highlighted that the Applicants' presence in France is unlawful,  they
      are not asylum claimants, they do not have  the  status  of  refugees,
      they have made no  application  for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
      Kingdom under a combination of Article 8 ECHR  and  the  Secretary  of
      State's reunification policy and they have chosen not  to  invoke  the
      mechanisms of the Dublin Regulation.  As a  result,  he  argued,  they
      have  excluded  themselves  from  enjoyment  of  the   better   living
      conditions which would materialise were they to do so.

  42) Turning to the legal framework, Mr Manknell drew to our attention  the
      statement of Advocate General Jaaskinen in Federal Republic of Germany
      v PUID [Case C-4/11], at [1]:

           "The European Union  has  harmonised  both  the  procedures  and
           substantive  rules  of  refugee  law,  thereby  establishing   a
           complete body of rules within the Common European Asylum System.
            It is founded on respect for relevant  rules  of  international
           law, including the principle of non-refoulement.   It  restricts
           examination of an asylum application to a  single  Member  State
           and provides for transfer of the asylum  seeker  to  the  Member
           State responsible for processing an asylum application if asylum
           is sought elsewhere in the European Union."

      We interpose the observation that the "CEAS" has been one of the major
      policy strategies of the EU during the past two decades.


  43) Mr Manknell further directed us to the somewhat  fuller  statement  to
      this effect contained in Tabrizagh v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWHC 1914 (Admin), at [121].  Per Laing J:


           "There are four relevant parts of the System as  it  applies  to
           the United Kingdom. They are:


           (i)  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  343/2003  establishing   the
           criteria  and  mechanisms  for  determining  the  member   state
           responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of
           the member states  by  a  third-country  national  ("the  Dublin
           Regulation").


           (ii) Council Directive 2004/83/EC on minimum standards  for  the
           qualification and status of third-country nationals as  refugees
           or as persons who otherwise need  international  protection  and
           the  content  of  the  protection  granted  ("the  Qualification
           Directive").


           (iii) Council Directive 2003/9/EC laying down minimum  standards
           for the reception of asylum seekers ("the Reception Directive")


           (iv)  Council  Directive  2005/85/EC  on  minimum  standards  on
           procedures in member states for granting and withdrawing refugee
           status ("the Procedures Directive")."

      Her Ladyship continues, at [123]:


           "The System (in its earlier form and as recast)  makes  detailed
           provision designed to ensure,  throughout  the  European  Union,
           basic common standards in  every  aspect  of  the  treatment  of
           asylum claimants. A primary aim (evident from  the  recitals  to
           the relevant  instruments)  is  to  reduce  secondary  movements
           caused by disparities in  the  standards  applied  by  different
           member states. The Dublin Regulation seeks to achieve  this  aim
           by ensuring that, in general, there is  only  one  member  state
           which can be responsible for deciding an application for  asylum
           made by someone who is present in  the  territory  of  a  member
           state, but has in the past been  present  in  the  territory  of
           another."

      Laing J's further observation of note, at [124],  is  that  one  finds
      within these four measures of  EU  law  the  detailed  outworkings  at
      institutional level of the right to asylum guaranteed by Article 18 of
      the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union

  44) Mr Manknell also reminded us of  the  terms  in  which  the  Court  of
      Justice of the European Union ("CJEU") has explained the rationale and
      aims of the Common European Asylum System and the  Dublin  Regulation.
      In Abdullahi  v  Bundesasylamt  [Case  C-394/12],  the  Court,  having
      observed that the Dublin Regulation  (a  predecessor  of  the  current
      incarnation) must be construed not only in the light of  its  wording,
      but also in the light of its general scheme,  objectives  and  context
      and in particular its evolution in connection with the system of which
      it forms part, continued, at [52] - [53]:

           "In that regard, it should be borne in  mind,  first,  that  the
           Common European Asylum System was conceived in a context  making
           it possible to assume that all the participating States, whether
           Member States  or  third  States,  observe  fundamental  rights,
           including the rights based on the Geneva Convention and the 1967
           Protocol, and on the ECHR, and that the Member States  can  have
           confidence in each  other  in  that  regard  (N.S.  and  Others,
           paragraph 78).


           It is precisely because of that principle of  mutual  confidence
           that the EU legislature adopted Regulation No 343/2003 in  order
           to rationalise the treatment of applications for asylum  and  to
           avoid blockages in the system as a result of the  obligation  on
           State authorities to examine multiple applications by  the  same
           applicant, and in order to increase legal certainty with  regard
           to the determination of the State responsible for examining  the
           asylum application and thus to avoid forum  shopping,  it  being
           the principal objective of all these measures to  speed  up  the
           handling of claims in the interests both of asylum  seekers  and
           the participating Member  States  (N.S.  and  Others,  paragraph
           79)."

      The Court then noted that, through the medium of  further  Directives,
      the EU asylum rules have been harmonised "to a  large  extent":  [54].
      The Court held that where it is proposed to transfer a  third  country
      asylum applicant to another Member State for the purpose of  examining
      his asylum application (which involves the  "take  charge"  mechanism)
      thereby giving effect to the  "first  country  of  arrival"  criterion
      enshrined in Article 10(1) of the Dublin Regulation -


           "... . The only way in which the applicant for asylum  can  call
           into question the  choice  of  that  criterion  is  by  pleading
           systemic  deficiencies  in  the  asylum  procedure  and  in  the
           conditions for the receipt of  Applicants  for  asylum  in  that
           Member  State,  which  would  provide  substantial  grounds  for
           believing that the applicant for asylum would face a  real  risk
           of being subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment within  the
           meaning of Article 4 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
           European Union."


  45) Mr  Manknell  further  submitted  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  a
      generalised breakdown in  the  arrangements  and  procedures  for  the
      presentation and  consideration  of  international  protection  claims
      under the Dublin Regulation  prevailing  in  France.   He  pointed  to
      evidence which indicates the availability of at least  some  level  of
      advice and assistance to third country applicants  and  legal  aid  to
      challenge a substantive decision.  He further  emphasised  that  third
      country nationals in France enjoy the  protection,  not  only  of  the
      Dublin Regulation but also that  of  the  relevant  recast  Directives
      (listed in the quotation in [44] above).

  46) One of Mr Manknell's discrete submissions was that,  typically,  legal
      challenges under the Dublin Regulation are directed to  a  contentious
      "take back" decision - as in EM (Eritrea) - and are  advanced  on  the
      basis of an asserted breach of  Article  3  ECHR/Article  4  CFR.   He
      emphasised the high threshold which  such  challenges  must  overcome,
      contending that the same threshold should apply to the  challenges  of
      these Applicants, taking into account that their cases are founded  on
      a weaker, qualified Convention right viz Article 8.  In  this  context
      he reminded us that the test devised by the ECtHR in a challenge to an
      expulsion decision based on Articles 8 and 9 ECHR was that of  a  real
      risk of a flagrant breach  of  either  or  both  of  these  Convention
      rights: R (B) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
      Civ 854, at [19]-[21].

  47) Mr Manknell, finally, laid emphasis on  an  amalgam  of  factors:  the
      unorthodox nature of the claims  made  and  remedy  pursued  in  these
      proceedings; the assertion of a right on the part of  the  first  four
      Applicants to enter the United Kingdom effectively without  any  legal
      barriers; resort to the  judicial  process  in   lieu  of  the  Dublin
      Regulation model; and the different contexts in which the decisions in
      Tuquabo-Tekle, Mayeka, and Chikwamba were made.  While contending that
      these  decisions  reaffirmed  the  well  established  touchstones   of
      striking a balance, every  state's  right  to  control  entry  to  its
      territory  and  the  margin  of  appreciation  in  play,  Mr  Manknell
      characterised them as highly fact specific.  His concluding submission
      was that the Dublin  Regulation  enshrines  various  safeguards  which
      strike the Article 8 proportionality balance.  It establishes a regime
      containing built in measures  for  the  protection  and  promotion  of
      family  life,  including  special  measures  for  the  protection   of
      unaccompanied minors and the achievement of family reunification.

OUR CONCLUSIONS

  48) As we have already noted, in EM (Eritrea) the Supreme Court held  that
      the systemic deficiencies threshold does not supplant  or  trump,  but
      coexists with, the Soering principle. In short, the Dublin  Regulation
      exists, and operates alongside, the ECHR and, in the  United  Kingdom,
      the Human Rights Act 1998. In passing, while the Supreme Court reached
      this decision by reference to the test formulated by the CJEU in R (NS-
      Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (Joined
      Cases C-411/10 and C-493/10) [2013] QB 102, the consideration that the
      CJEU subsequently framed the applicable test in Abdullahi in  slightly
      different terms is not an issue which we  have  to  resolve  in  these
      proceedings.

  49) It is not suggested, correctly in  our  view,  that  either  of  these
      regimes has any inherent value or status giving  one  precedence  over
      the other.  They are not in competition with each other.  However,  as
      this litigation demonstrates, they  may  sometimes  tug  in  different
      directions.  Where this occurs full  cohesion,  or  harmonisation,  is
      unlikely to be achievable and some accommodation, or compromise,  must
      be found.

  50) The challenges of the Applicants illustrate the potential for decision
      making to arise at an interface between these two regimes.  Where this
      occurs in a context such as the present, the fundamental question  for
      the  decision  maker  or  judicial  organ  will  be  whether  to  give
      precedence to, or confer exclusivity on, the  EU  regime  operates  to
      infringe one or  more  of  the  protected  Convention  rights  of  any
      affected person.  In the present case, we are not concerned  with  any
      of the absolute Convention rights.  Rather, our focus is  confined  to
      the qualified right enshrined in Article 8.  Given our  assessment  of
      the parties' approach to interference  in  [31]  above,  in  which  we
      concur, the question to be determined  judicially  in  an  "interface"
      case of this kind is whether a disproportionate interference with  the
      Article 8 rights of a person or persons claiming to be a victim within
      the compass of section 7 of the Human Rights Act 1998 is demonstrated.

  51) What is the correct approach to the Dublin Regulation  in  a  case  of
      this kind?  We consider that the Dublin Regulation, with its rationale
      and overarching aims and principles, has  the  status  of  a  material
      consideration of undeniable potency in the  proportionality  balancing
      exercise.  It follows that vindication of an Article  8  human  rights
      challenge will require a strong and persuasive  case  on  its  merits.
      Judges will not lightly find that,  in  a  given  context,  Article  8
      operates in  a  manner  which  permits  circumvention  of  the  Dublin
      Regulation procedures and mechanisms, whether in whole or in part.  We
      consider that such cases are likely to be rare.

  52) We give effect to the approach outlined above in  the  following  way.
      In doing so, we draw attention to a passage in the  brief  ex  tempore
      decision delivered at the conclusion of the hearing:

           "It  is  trite  to  highlight  that  these  are  intensely  fact
           sensitive cases.  They are particularly strong on  their  unique
           facts, especially as regards Applicants (3)  and  (4).  We  have
           been alert to our duty to conduct a penetrating scrutiny of  the
           voluminous evidence applying the heightened standard required."

      The first theme of this passage requires no elaboration. The second is
      a reference to the familiar principle  of  anxious  scrutiny.   It  is
      difficult to conceive,  in  the  abstract,  of  cases  in  which  this
      principle has greater purchase. Having said  that,  we  recognise,  of
      course, the innate capacity of humankind to shock and abhor.  Thus the
      possibility of still stronger cases cannot be discounted.  We  confine
      our attention to the acutely fact specific  matrix  constituted  by  a
      combination of our findings and much  uncontested  evidence  suffering
      from no inherent frailties or deficiencies.

  53) We reiterate the test which we consider is to  be  applied:  have  the
      Applicants demonstrated a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
      rights to respect for family life under Article 8 ECHR consequent upon
      the Secretary of State's refusal to admit Applicants (1) - (4) swiftly
      to the United Kingdom outwith the full rigour of the Dublin Regulation
      procedures and mechanisms?  The answer to  this  question  involves  a
      balance of the public interest  engaged,  namely  the  maintenance  of
      immigration  control  which,  in  this  instance,  involves  primarily
      insistence  upon  the  uncompromising  application   of   the   Dublin
      Regulation process (on the one hand) and the family life rights of all
      seven Applicants (on the other).  In the interests of clarity, we  add
      that the private life dimension of Article 8 ECHR does not  form  part
      of any of the Applicants' challenges.  This is a family reunion  case,
      pure and simple.

  54) What are the ingredients and factors in the  proportionality  equation
      which are said to tip the balance in favour of the Applicants?   These
      are rehearsed in  extenso  in  [8]  -  [23]  above.   Subject  to  the
      qualification that any attempted summary is likely to  be  inadequate,
      they are age, particularly as  regards  the  first  three  Applicants;
      mental  disability,  as  regards   the   fourth   Applicant;   accrued
      psychological damage, as regards all of the first four Applicants; the
      clear likelihood of further psychological turmoil and disturbance,  in
      the event of the best case scenario Dublin Regulation process delay of
      almost one year materialising;  the  previous  family  life  in  their
      country of origin enjoyed by all seven Applicants,  in  their  various
      permutations;  the pressing and urgent need for  family  reunification
      on the very special  facts  of  these  cases;  the  wholly  inadequate
      substitute for  family  reunification  which  pursuit  of  the  Dublin
      Regulation avenue would entail  in  the  short  to  medium  term;  the
      absence of any parent or parental figure in the  lives  of  the  first
      four Applicants; the potential for the re-establishment of the various
      combinations of family life to be realised very quickly indeed in  the
      event of the first four Applicants being permitted to enter the United
      Kingdom; the availability, willingness and capacity of the last  three
      Applicants to provide meaningful care and support to the  first  four;
      and the avoidance of  the  mentally  painful  and  debilitating  fear,
      anxiety  and  uncertainty  which  the  first  four  Applicants   will,
      predictably, suffer if swift entry to the  United  Kingdom  cannot  be
      achieved.

  55) Turning to the legitimate aim side of the  scales,  we  reiterate  our
      assessment that strict and full adherence  to  the  Dublin  Regulation
      regime forms a major component  of  the  overarching  public  interest
      engaged, namely the State's entitlement to impose  effective  controls
      on the admission of aliens to the territory of the United Kingdom and,
      given the CEAS dimension and all of its characteristics, qualifies  as
      a potent factor in the proportionality balancing exercise. The aim  in
      play was formulated by Lord Bingham of Cornhill  in  R  (BAPIO  Action
      Limited) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL  27,
      at [4], in these terms:

           "It is one of the oldest powers of a sovereign state  to  decide
           whether any, and if so which, non-nationals shall  be  permitted
           to enter its territory, and to regulate and enforce the terms on
           which they may do so."

  56) We remind ourselves of the judicial role in this context.   In R  (SB)
      v  Governors of Denbigh High School [2007] 1 AC 100, Lord  Bingham  of
      Cornhill stated, at [30]:

           "It  is  clear  that  the  court's  approach  to  an  issue   of
           proportionality  under  the  Convention  must  go  beyond   that
           traditionally adopted to judicial review in a  domestic  setting
           .....


           There is no shift to a  merits  review,  but  the  intensity  of
           review is greater than was previously  appropriate  and  greater
           even than the heightened scrutiny test ....


           The  domestic  court  must  now  make  a  value   judgment,   an
           evaluation, by reference to the circumstances prevailing at  the
           relevant time ......


           Proportionality must be judged objectively, by the court ...."

      While mindful of the operation  of  the  margin  of  appreciation,  or
      discretionary area of judgment, in every exercise  of  this  kind,  we
      note, as did Lord Wilson in Quila (supra), at [46], that  the  refusal
      decisions of the Secretary of State impugned in these proceedings  are
      not imbued  with  any  "special  sources  of  knowledge  and  advice".
      Similarly, we take into account, as did the Court of  Appeal  recently
      in R (Sehwerert) v  Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]
      EWCA Civ 1141, at [46], that lesser weight is to be  accorded  to  the
      Secretary of State's assessment of the balance to  be  struck  between
      the public interest and the rights of the individual in  circumstances
      where the Secretary of State's insistence upon full adherence  to  the
      Dublin Regulation embodies a generalised assessment, a broad brush, to
      be contrasted with a specific, considered response and decision  on  a
      case by case basis.  As the  pre-proceedings  correspondence  and  the
      Secretary of State's pleaded defence make  clear,  the  platform  upon
      which the Secretary of State has contested these proceedings is  quite
      unrelated to the individual circumstances, needs and merits of any  of
      the seven Applicants.

  57) We are satisfied that the Secretary of State's refusal to  permit  the
      swift admission to the United Kingdom of  the  first  four  Applicants
      would interfere disproportionately with the right to respect to family
      life under Article 8 ECHR enjoyed by all seven Applicants if the first
      four Applicants could properly be seen as claimants to refugee  status
      who, because of the operation of the Dublin Regulation, to be able  to
      have their  claims  determined  in  the  United  Kingdom  where  their
      siblings are.  In their cases, the negative aspects of pursuing a full
      blown Dublin Regulation claim in France would detrimentally affect all
      seven Applicants in the manner set  forth  in  [55]  above.  The  sole
      difficulty then is that having as yet made no claim,  the  first  four
      Applicants' present status is not  that  of  persons  seeking  asylum.
      Rather, they are  family  members  simpliciter.  Having  prepared  the
      scales in the manner  outlined  above,  our  conclusion  is  that  the
      balance tips in favour  of  the  Applicants  provided  that  they  are
      prepared to set in motion their asylum  claims  processes  in  France.
      The Order we make achieves an  accommodation  between  the  two  legal
      regimes in play. It strikes an appropriate balance by  preserving  the
      general structure of the CEAS and the Dublin Regulation principles  in
      particular, while simultaneously ensuring that once a claim by any  of
      the first four Applicants has been made the administration of the CEAS
      will not be permitted to interfere disproportionately with the Article
      8 rights of that Applicant or his family member.

ORDER

  58) It is convenient, at this juncture, to append the transcript of the ex
      tempore decision pronounced at the conclusion of  the  hearing.   This
      contains the text of  our  substantive  Order.  To  this  we  add  the
      following ancillary provisions.

PERMISSION TO APPEAL

  59) We refer to [10] of the transcript annexed. Having now considered  the
      terms in which permission  to  appeal  is  sought  we  accede  to  the
      Secretary of State's application. We concur with counsel's  suggestion
      that expedition would be desirable.


COSTS

(61)  We refer to [11] of the transcript annexed.   Having  promulgated  our
      full judgment, we have now  received  considered  submissions  on  the
      issue of costs.  The general rule is that costs follow the event.  The
      Applicants have succeeded.  Their success is unqualified. We  consider
      that the general rule clearly applies. Accordingly, the Respondent  is
      ordered to pay the Applicants'  costs  in  full,  to  be  assessed  in
      default of agreement. This aspect of our order is stayed, with liberty
      to apply.  We do not concur with  the  suggestion  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State that the composition of the Applicants' legal  team
      was excessive, in these complex  and  unprecedented  proceedings.  The
      Applicants benefit from public funding and notice of issue  of  public
      funding certificates was provided  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  when  the
      claims were issued.

POSTSCRIPT

(62)  We are indebted to counsel for their able and succinct  arguments.  We
      add with pleasure that the conduct of these proceedings was exemplary.





                            [pic]
           Signed: _____________________________________


                 The President, The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                 Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber


           Dated:   29 January 2016











Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------

 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).


                                  APPENDIX


                                    [pic]
In the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         Heard at Field House on 18 January 2016 and 20 January 2016


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the Application of

                          (1) ZAT, (2) IAJ, (3) KAM
                           (4) AAM, (5) MAT, (6) MAJ
                                 And (7) LAM
                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

Mr M Fordham QC appeared with Ms C Kilroy, Ms A Pickup, Ms M Knorr and Ms J
Sane, all of counsel, on behalf of the Applicants, instructed by Bhatt
Murphy solicitors and Islington Law Centre.


Mr D Manknell and Mr T Sadiq, both of counsel, instructed by the Government
Legal Department, appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


Mr Justice McCloskey

   1. Given the dire circumstances in  which  Applicants  (1)  to  (4)  find
      themselves and the fluctuating and possibly worsening  nature  of  the
      situation which has been brought  to  our  attention  in  all  of  the
      evidence, including the most recent  evidence  adduced  today  on  the
      second  day  of  hearing,  we  accede  to  the  plea   for   immediate
      promulgation of a judicial decision with reasons to follow.

   2. We have reached our decision which is unanimous.  Arguably,  the  most
      important legal consideration in the matrix  of  these  challenges  is
      that  the  European  Union  Dublin  III  rgime  (Council   Regulation
      604/2013) and the Council of Europe measure, the  Convention  for  the
      Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which has  effect
      in the United Kingdom via the Human Rights Act 1998, a quite  separate
      rgime, coexist.

   3. It is trite to highlight  that  these  are  intensely  fact  sensitive
      cases. They are particularly strong on their unique facts,  especially
      as regards Applicants (3) and (4).  We have been alert to our duty  to
      conduct a penetrating scrutiny of the voluminous evidence applying the
      heightened standard required.  Having done so, we  consider  that  the
      Applicants  succeed.   Their  claims  under   Article   8   ECHR   are
      established.

   4. The remedy to which the Applicants are entitled is one which,  in  our
      judgment, should not if possible frustrate the operation of the Dublin
      III procedure, insofar  as  harmony  between  the  two  aforementioned
      regimes can be achieved in this context.  We consider that this can be
      attempted by  the  grant  of  a  mandatory  order  in  terms  somewhat
      different from the order sought  by  the  Applicants  but  which  will
      nonetheless  achieve  the  vitally  important  goal  of  providing   a
      practical and effective remedy.  We recognise that complete harmony is
      not achievable.

   5. We are therefore proposing to make an order in  the  following  terms.
      Upon  each  of  the  Applicants  (1)  to  (4)  making  to  the  French
      authorities a claim for asylum within the sense of article 2(h) of the
      Procedures Directive [2011/95 EU], and article  20(2)  of  the  Dublin
      Regulation [604/2013 EU], the Secretary  of  State  shall  admit  each
      Applicant to the  United  Kingdom  with  a  view  to  determining  the
      applications  under  the  provisions   of   the   Dublin   Regulation.
      Permission to apply for judicial review is granted.

   6. Costs are reserved.

      [Having considered the parties'  submissions  regarding  the  proposed
      order]




                                    ORDER

   7. We grant permission to apply for judicial review.

      (With reference to the text provided to and settled by the Tribunal).

   8. Upon any of the Applicants (1) to (4) or their representatives sending
      to the French authorities a letter  claiming  asylum,  and  upon  that
      Applicant's solicitors providing to the  Respondent  a  copy  of  that
      letter and confirmation of it having been sent, the  Respondent  shall
      admit that Applicant to the United Kingdom with a view to  determining
      their application under the Dublin III Regulation [604/2013/EU].

Permission to Appeal

   9. We make no ruling today upon the Secretary of State's application  for
      permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal for two main reasons.  The
      first is we shall be handing down judgment within  a  very  swift  and
      short period.  And, secondly, we consider it inappropriate to  make  a
      ruling in circumstances where we have no grounds.  The Court of Appeal
      will receive  no  assistance  whatsoever  from  this  Tribunal  if  we
      determine to grant permission  to  appeal  without  reference  to  the
      grounds formulated.  This application can be renewed upon the  handing
      down of the judgment or shortly thereafter.  You shall  wish  to  take
      cognisance of our particular procedural rule that permission to appeal
      to the Court of Appeal is as a general rule  determined  upon  handing
      down a reserved judgment.

Costs

  10. We continue to reserve the issue of costs while noting  our  tentative
      proposition to  Mr  Manknell  that  there  may  be  no  answer  to  an
      application to costs and Mr Fordham's submission to like effect and in
      considerably stronger terms, again taking into account that there  has
      been considerable immediacy in the latter phase of  these  proceedings
      and a fully reasoned judgment is not yet available.

Addendum

  11. We shall hand down our full judgment at 10.00am on 29 January 2016.






                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                       Date: 21 January 2016

