

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

            OO (gay men: risk) Algeria CG [2013] UKUT 00063 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th January, 22nd August and 23rd August   |                             |
|2012                                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     Oo

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


      a) "Sodomy" and "acts against nature with a member of  the  same  sex"
         are illegal under Penal Code Article 388 and 333 in Algeria and  on
         conviction carry a criminal sentence of up to 3 years  imprisonment
         and/or a fine.


      b) Criminal prosecutions of gay men under Articles 388  and  333  are,
         however, extremely rare.


      c) The evidence does not suggest that, as a general  matter,  societal
         and familial disapproval of male gay identity  in  Algeria  reaches
         levels that are persecutory, within the meaning of Article 9 of the
         Qualification Directive or  which  otherwise  reach  the  threshold
         required for protection under Article 15(b) of  that  Directive  or
         Article 3 of the ECHR.

      d) That conclusion is reinforced by the evidence that  the  admittedly
         small number of gay men who live openly as such in Algeria do  not,
         in general, suffer serious harm amounting to persecution.

      e) If somebody is able to establish that their behaviour was shaped by
         more than disapproval amounting to serious harm, they may  be  able
         to establish a need for protection. Each case should be  determined
         on the evidence specific to that particular case.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith on  4th January 2012 and Ms R Chapman on
                    22nd and 23rd August 2012, instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the determination of the Tribunal to which both members of  the
    Panel have contributed.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Algeria, born on  11th
    February 1995. On the dates of the resumed hearing  before  us  he  was
    still a minor. His solicitor was present throughout the hearing and his
    representatives were content that the arrangements for the  hearing  of
    the appeal  were  satisfactory.  We  followed  and  applied  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 "Child,  vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive appellant guidance". Although no responsible adult per se was
    present, the appellant's  solicitor  was  present  throughout  and  the
    absence of a responsible adult was not  said  to  raise  a  difficulty.
    Although the appellant was asked questions for a significant period  of
    time, breaks were given and there was no objection  to  the  length  or
    nature of the questioning. The hearing was held in camera. The basis of
    the appellant's claim is that he fears persecution in Algeria as a  gay
    person. We have used the acronym LGBT in this determination instead  of
    using the phrase lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,  being  the  term
    used by the witnesses.

 3. Ms Chapman stated that no point was being taken with regard to the lack
    of tracing conducted by the respondent (KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of
    State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1014).  Because  the
    appellant was estranged from his father he did  not  wish  any  tracing
    undertaken and he was not, she said, disadvantaged by  the  failure  of
    the respondent to make any  attempt  to  trace  relatives  in  Algeria.
    However, if we were inclined to find that his mother was  alive,  then,
    she submitted, KA may be relevant as there was, she said, a "collision"
    between section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009
    (duty regarding the welfare of children) and the  tracing  requirements
    and it may be that in  those  circumstances  she  would  seek  to  make
    further submissions.

 4. This appeal, under section 83(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, is against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge W
    L Grant who dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to reject his asylum claim  on  28th  March  2011  but
    granted him discretionary leave to remain until  11th  August  2012  in
    accordance  with   the   published   Asylum   Policy   Instruction   on
    Discretionary Leave. On 4th January 2012 it was found  that  the  judge
    had erred  in  law  in  failing  to  make  a  finding  on  whether  the
    appellant's mother had committed suicide, as  claimed,  thus  rendering
    the subsequent findings on credibility unsafe; and that the  Judge  had
    failed to take  into  account  and  assess  in  reaching  his  decision
    evidence before him as to the appellant's claimed  sexual  orientation.
    The decision was set aside to be re-made. No  findings  were  preserved
    save that he was an Algerian citizen with  a  date  of  birth  of  11th
    February 1995; that he had spent some 18  months  in  France  prior  to
    coming to the UK, had been charged with burglary  in  the  UK  about  2
    weeks  after  his  arrival,  remanded  in  custody  in  Feltham   Young
    Offender's Institution and subsequently acquitted.

Appellant's case

 5. The essence of the appellant's claim is that when he was around  12  or
    13 years old he began a sexual relationship with a young  man  2  or  3
    years older. He claims they were discovered by  his  parents  on  their
    bed, him wearing his shorts, as  a  consequence  of  which  his  mother
    committed suicide by throwing herself from the window  of  their  third
    floor apartment; he then fled the family home. He claims he slept rough
    for a few days until his father, who had been pursuing him,  found  him
    and stabbed him  in  the  shoulder.  The  appellant  escaped,  received
    treatment at Mustafa Bacha hospital and subsequently fled to  the  port
    city of Ouarhan and travelled by sea  to  Spain  (remaining  there  for
    about 4 days), then to France where he remained from 10th November 2008
    until 13th June 2010 and then to the UK via Belgium. He is unclear when
    he arrived in the UK.  He claims he is sexually attracted to and enjoys
    physical relationships with both men and  women;  he  fears  return  to
    Algeria because he would not be able to, and would not want to, conceal
    that he is attracted to both men and women.

 6. There was some delay in the appellant submitting his claim for  asylum.
    His   age   was   initially   disputed   but   subsequently   accepted.
    Correspondence between his solicitors and the  respondent  indicates  a
    history of cancelled and adjourned appointments, illness on the part of
    the appellant and lack of interpreter  during  an  interview  with  the
    respondent,  resulting  in  the  fragmentary  preparation  of   witness
    statements and interviews.

 7. The respondent does not accept that the appellant is bisexual or gay or
    that he experienced the claimed difficulties in Algeria, nor  does  she
    accept that his mother died in the manner  described  or  at  all;  she
    rejected his claim to be in need of international protection.

Structure of this determination

 8. The Tribunal has identified  this  appeal  as  a  suitable  vehicle  to
    provide country guidance  on  the  issue  of  persecution  of  gays  in
    Algeria.  We  deal  with  this  first  and  thereafter  deal  with  the
    appellant's appeal.

The Evidence

 9. We received evidence from three witnesses offered as expert  witnesses:
    Dan Littauer and Ludovic Lofti Mohammed Zahed attended the  hearing  to
    give evidence in person, while written evidence was available  from  Ms
    Alison Pargeter. We are particularly grateful to Mr  Zahed  for  having
    come to the UK from France at less than a day's notice in order to give
    his evidence.  There was considerable documentary evidence before us, a
    schedule of which is attached. We  have  had  regard  to  all  of  this
    material. We  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant,  through  an
    interpreter and have had regard to that evidence, in the round with the
    documentary evidence.

The Experts' evidence

Ms Alison Pargeter


10. Ms Smith relied upon a written report dated 13th June 2012 prepared  by
    Ms Pargeter but this witness did not attend the hearing  to  give  oral
    evidence. Ms Pargeter describes herself as an  analyst  and  consultant
    specialising in political and security issues in North Africa  and  the
    Middle East. She has held various academic posts  most  recently  as  a
    Senior Research Associate at the Centre of International Studies at the
    University of Cambridge where she led a major study  on  radicalisation
    in North Africa which was  funded  by  the  UK's  Economic  and  Social
    Research Council ("ESRC") and included Algeria as a case study.  She is
    currently a Senior Associate with Menas Associates, a consultancy  firm
    specialising in Middle East and North African  political  and  economic
    affairs, and she provides  regular  analytical  contributions  for  the
    Jane's Information Group and Oxford Analytica on North Africa.


11. Ms Pargeter's report sets out the history of the approach within  Islam
    to homosexuality. She referred to the lack  of  the  death  penalty  in
    Algeria arising from Algeria's broad assertion to be a  secular  state.
    Engaging in same-sex activity is illegal and is  a  punishable  offence
    leading on conviction to a possible term of imprisonment of  between  6
    months and 3 years and a fine of between 1,000 and 10,000  dinars.  She
    states:


         "...whilst the state imposes such legislation [imprisonment, fine],
         it is  rare  for  it  to  prosecute  people  for  homosexuality....
         largely because homosexuality is a taboo subject and  is  something
         that is kept hidden".


    She refers specifically to one prosecution in 2010 and  does  not  give
    any other examples of prosecution. (This is also referred to in various
    press reports before us.) She says there are no legal  gay  or  lesbian
    associations or openly gay venues although there are:


         "increasing numbers of gay internet and social networking sites  in
         the country and  also  a  number  of  known  gay  venues  including
         nightclubs in various cities. There are also specific areas  within
         some cities where gay men go in order to pick other men up".


    She refers to homosexuals' fear of being a target of homophobic attacks
    and states that "homosexuals are forced to live an  almost  underground
    existence." She refers to a 5 July 2000 Maghreb  report  by  the  Swiss
    Federal Office of Refugees  Maghreb  (Algerie,  Egypte,  Libye,  Maroc,
    Tunisie) homosexualite  et  prostitution  stating:  "Homosexuality  has
    always been tolerated in Islamic countries so long as it  is  practised
    clandestinely".


12. Ms Pargeter says this about the seemingly contradictory situation [3.i]
    whereby the Algerian state might:


         "display a degree of tolerance in so far as it  does  not  actively
         seek out and prosecute homosexuals, Algerian society has an overtly
         hostile  attitude   towards   homosexuality...   ...As   a   result
         homosexuals face severe social stigma and in many cases  their  own
         families disown them as they deem them to have brought  shame  upon
         the family as a whole....any sign of effeminacy or homosexuality is
         generally considered a betrayal of these values and codes [physical
         strength,  virility,  upholding  the  honour  of  the  family   and
         tribe]...anyone believed to be homosexual would be considered as an
         affront to such moral codes [public morality]. Responses range from
         mockery and isolation to outright hostility...being forced  into  a
         homosexual act or being raped is considered to  be  the  utmost  of
         humiliation".


13. She goes on to describe the complexity of the perception  of  same  sex
    relationships in Algeria and in [3.v] that:


         "....there is a degree to which there is some tolerance of same sex
         intercourse  which  is  considered   as   something   separate   to
         homosexuality per se."


    She describes this as being drawn from old tribal traditions whereby it
    was not considered unusual or abnormal for  men  to  engage  in  sexual
    relationships with youths, largely as a response to the lack of  access
    to pre-marital heterosexual sexual activity, but that  such  activities
    were not talked of openly. She said also that as:


         "public religiosity has increased .... society is far less tolerant
         of such practices .... Algerian society today is generally  hostile
         to all homosexual acts and behaviour".


    This was a view that was  also  echoed  by  Mr  Littauer  in  his  oral
    evidence.


14.  So  far  as  individuals  are  concerned,  Ms  Pargeter  referred   to
    homosexuals being  seen  as  'soft  targets'  by  police  and  security
    services. She expressed the view that if  the  appellant  were  gay  or
    bisexual he would not be  able  to  live  openly  as  a  homosexual  or
    bisexual in Algeria. Homosexuality is considered to  bring  shame  upon
    the whole family; she made the observation that to come  across  a  son
    "engaged in a sexual act with another man  would  have  been  a  deeply
    shocking experience" [4.ii]. She referred to Bab El-Oued in Algiers  as
    being  known  for  its  Islamist  character,  deeply  conservative  and
    impoverished [4.iii page A21]: "...public attitudes in Bab El-Oued  are
    likely to have been particularly hostile  to  any  hint  of  homosexual
    behaviour. It is true that Mr O  could  move  to  another  district  of
    Algiers or to another city in Algeria to  get  away  from  his  father.
    However as a homosexual or bisexual he would continue  to  face  social
    stigma and would be forced to conceal his sexuality." This was  a  view
    also expressed by Mr Zahed.

Ludovic Lofti Mohamed Zahed

15. Mr Zahed was born in Algeria. He moved to France when he was aged 2 and
    lived there until he was 15 when he returned to Algeria for 2 years. He
    holds dual Algerian/French nationality. He returned to  France  on  the
    basis that by then he knew he was gay and he  considered  it  would  be
    dangerous for him to remain in Algeria as a gay man. He is now aged 35.
    Until 2 years ago he had travelled  to  Algeria  on  holiday  to  visit
    family and attend family occasions and celebrations during  the  summer
    holidays but he has not been back in the last two years  having  had  a
    public wedding with his gay partner in South Africa with  whom  he  now
    lives openly in France. He also had a religious ceremony in France. His
    partner does not want to travel to an Arab country.

16. He is the founder and spokesman for HM2F (Homosexual Muslims of France)
    and International Co-ordinator of Calem (Confederation of  Associations
    LGBT, European or Muslim). He has a BSc in psychology, a Masters degree
    from L'Ecole Normale Superieure in cognitive  studies  (psychology  and
    human  cognition)  and  is  currently  studying  for  his  PhD  (Sexual
    minorities at the vanguard of change of the relationship to  Islam)  at
    L'Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales ("EHESS").

17. He has published a number of articles about Islam and homosexuality  on
    the HM2F website and has written a  book  on  religious  dogmatism  and
    being gay - Le Coran et La Chair ("the Qur'an and the flesh"); he is co-
    producer of a documentary examining LGBT and spirituality in  Palestine
    and Israel. He is reported in a newspaper interview as having described
    himself as a "convinced Muslim" and he has made several large and small
    pilgrimages to Mecca.

18. HM2F has a membership of about 300, with about 8 council members. It is
    financially supported  by  the  Paris  Municipality  and  the  European
    Council for Youth. The organisation has email contacts  of  about  2000
    and Face book groups and Twitter totalling  about  3000,  making  about
    5000 in all.

19. In response to a question from Mr  Melvin  whether  he  would  describe
    himself as a 'gay activist' he said:


         "On a certain point of view I am a gay activist within  the  Muslim
         community and this was bad and from another point of  view  in  the
         LGBT community I am an Islamist, a radical  because  I  talk  about
         Islam and peace and so on, where Islam should be  and  I  am,  from
         some LGBT  point  of  view  condemned.  So  I  would  say  I  am  a
         researcher; I like to produce intellectual  material  that  can  be
         used to help other people to reconcile and find their own  identity
         their own way".


20. He was asked whether he was a supporter of gay rights and replied:


         "yes if you consider that gay rights are human rights but I am  not
         part of what some  intellectuals  call  the  intellectual  gay  and
         lesbian lobby."


21. Mr Zahed describes the area of  Hydra  (where  government  offices  and
    Embassies are situated) in Algiers as an area where there is  a  rather
    more easy-going atmosphere than elsewhere in Algiers or  Algeria,  such
    that a gay man can be a bit more effeminate and a lesbian woman  a  bit
    more masculine, but that would be as far as it would go. He  said  that
    it was simply not possible to be openly gay anywhere in Algeria.   When
    asked about the statement in the US State Department report 2011 quoted
    in the COIS report that 'some LGBT people live openly  in  Algeria'  he
    said:


         "from a certain point of view you could say that they could survive
         being more or less open in  a  certain  network...but  openly  like
         publicly, not at all."


    He went on to say that


         "in a neighbourhood like Hydra perhaps it  is  fashionable  to  say
         yeah I am gay to friends and very close friends  but  publicly,  if
         publicly means openly then it is  not  possible,  especially  these
         years."


22. He referred to an HIV group where gay men  meet  but  said  that  other
    groups do not have an office or organise meetings where LGBT people can
    make contact with each other; any contact between LGBT people would  be
    through the internet or email unless by reason of being HIV.


23. He described receiving teaching as a child from the Imam at the  mosque
    on how to move his hands, how to speak and not speak; he described  the
    need to hide his gender: he said that if a man,  one  has  to  be  very
    masculine and the Imams  would  teach  these  mannerisms;  he  recalled
    trying very hard to 'be a man'.

24. He had studied Salafi  Islam  (which  is  associated  with  literalist,
    strict and puritanical approaches to  Islam)  for  five  years  at  the
    mosque in Bab El-Oued. He said that, coming from the area  of  Bab  El-
    Oued, he could not imagine being able to "find  a  space  for  oneself"
    although he could imagine that coming from a  small  village  a  person
    could "find a way to escape, to have some space".

25. He was not aware of any prosecutions in  the  previous  12  months  for
    homosexual activity. He explains this by way of  the  intense  societal
    pressure:  family members would  blackmail  men  to  marry,  using  the
    threat of accusing them of some crime or unpaid debt;  a  man  who  was
    raped by another man would not report it for fear of  being  prosecuted
    himself, even though he was the victim. He referred to many people  not
    referring to themselves as gay because of the extreme taboo in  society
    - people who are homosexual do not consider themselves homosexual; they
    might have a sexual relationship with another man but will not say they
    are gay. He refers to  interviews  he  has  conducted  in  France  with
    refugees who are established and do not need to justify their  identity
    and could say they are gay but do not  because  of  the  high  societal
    pressure, it is impossible for  them  to  classify  themselves  as  gay
    "because  it  is  like  a  perversion."  He  said  that  families,  the
    neighbourhood and the community  deal  with  homosexuality  by  way  of
    detention in the family home and/or with violence. He said he had never
    heard of any 'honour killings'.

26. In response to a question from Mr Melvin about a report that says there
    is an area where there is the Cappuccino Bar that is apparently  a  gay
    rendezvous point, Mr Zahed replied that although he could  not  confirm
    its existence, he would not be astonished  to  hear  that  such  a  bar
    exists in Algeria and that so far as he was aware there was no evidence
    of the authorities raiding such a bar.


Mr Dan Littauer

27.  Mr  Littauer  is  a  journalist  with  Gay  Star  News,   an   on-line
    news/magazine specialising in particular on LGBT issues in Middle East,
    North Africa, Scotland and South America. He also writes for Pink  News
    (also on-line) and is the editor of Gay Middle East, a web  based  news
    and information based site which started in about 2009. He has  written
    unpublished academic articles on LGBT issues in the course of  studying
    for a PhD. He has not completed his PhD (which  he  started  in  1997),
    explaining that he had  to  give  up  because  of  funding  issues.  He
    described Gay Star News as "objectively reporting the situation on  the
    ground from across different parts of the world and  providing  a  news
    service." Gay Middle East has  been  used  as  a  source  by  the  UKBA
    (although we could find no reference to this in the current  COIR).  He
    has not visited Algeria. He stated that his knowledge of Algeria  comes
    from extensive reading and from correspondence with people  in  Algeria
    and Algerians who live outside Algeria who are gay or LGBT.

28. Mr Littauer reinforced what Mr Zahed and Ms  Pargeter  had  said  about
    issues of orientation being dealt  with  locally,  by  communities  and
    families. He went on to say:


         "If you admit you are gay [by complaining to the  police]  you  are
         opening yourself to further violence by the  police  and  potential
         blackmail and this is assuming that the person is  educated  enough
         to even come to terms with their sexuality when they have all  this
         social stigma and taboo; it's very, very difficult, very few people
         can articulate it and that's why this is very, very rare."


29. In response to a question whether he accepted the evidence given by  Ms
    Pargeter about gay venues or nightclubs  in  Algiers  and  other  major
    cities, Mr Littauer replied that:


         "... openly gay venues as known in the UK do not exist;  there  are
         places where people could perhaps meet for sex but  even  there  it
         carries risk of arrest, blackmail, abuse, attack...there are spaces
         where sometimes  people  can  meet  informally  and  certainly  not
         identify openly as gay or lesbian."


30. Mr Littauer's evidence also provided support for what Mr Zahed had said
    in response to a request for  his  opinion  why  there  was  so  little
    written about LGBT issues in Algeria by respected NGOs or human  rights
    organisations, Amnesty International or Human Rights Watch:


         "LGBT organisations in Algeria are  very,  very  weak  compared  to
         other countries...from  the  social  stigma  shame  and  it's  very
         difficult   to    establish    and    get    reports    in    those
         circumstances...there is  very  little  information  or  relatively
         little compared to other countries."

31. Mr Littauer does not refer to the criminal prosecution of the  Imam  in
    2010 (see [11 & 32]) but states that Articles 338 and 333  are  applied
    regularly and refers to a "young lawyer [being] imprisoned  and  judged
    according to these laws" in February 2008  and "In 2008  a  young  Imam
    who was convicted of violation of 338 with a  minor...he  was  publicly
    named the 'paedophile Imam' which put him at permanent  death  risk  in
    Algeria when he does eventually serve the time for the harsh sentence".
    No further details of these convictions were provided and there was  no
    indication that in the latter case  the  Imam  had  actually  served  a
    prison  sentence.  In  his  written  report   Mr  Littauer  refers   to
    references in Behind the Mask to honour killings not being rare.


Country Evidence

32. We were referred to a report of one  prosecution  (in  [21.07]  of  the
    Country of Origin Information Service  Report  ("COIS")  on  Algeria  3
    November 2011): an Imam who had been caught "in  flagrante  delicto  in
    the mosque". Both he and his "companion" were  sentenced  to  2  years'
    imprisonment and a fine of 20,000 dinars.

33. The COIS report [21.09] refers to an LGBT Asylum News  Blog  posted  on
    13th September 2010 which talks of 'living their sexuality in  hiding'.
    The blog describes cruising as a last  resort  and  although  it  makes
    reference to the area of Hydra (a wealthy area of the city of  Algiers)
    comments that a gathering of some 30 or so gay and lesbian  individuals
    is not capable of representing a significant part of the gay  community
    in  Algeria.  [21.08]  quotes  an  interview  in  May  2011   with   an
    unidentified person who states he was arrested when he was 17 and  that
    "[the authorities] keep a register containing  all  the  names  of  gay
    people in Algeria".

34. The US Country Report on Human Rights Practices 2011, page 25 states:


         "The penal code criminalizes public homosexual behaviour for  males
         and  females,  and  there  is  no  specific  legal  protection  for
         lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgender (LGBT) persons.  The  law
         stipulates penalties that include imprisonment of two months to two
         years and fines of 500 to 2000 dinars (approximately $7 to $27). If
         a  minor  is  involved  the  adult  may  face  up  to  three  years
         imprisonment and a fine of 10,000 dinars (approximately �135).


         According to the NGO Heartland Alliance, during the  year  a  woman
         engaged in grassroots LGBT activism received several death  threats
         and  felt  compelled  to  flee  the  country.  There  was  societal
         discrimination against homosexual conduct. While some LGBT  persons
         lived openly, the vast majority did not, and most  feared  reprisal
         from their families or harassment from authorities."

35. Asylumlaw.org states

    "According to Article 388 of the  penal  code  (adopted  June  8  1996)
    sodomy may be punished with imprisonment from two months to 2 years and
    a fine of 10,000 Algerian dinars. According to Article 333, an "outrage
    to public decency" increases the penalties in the case of "acts against
    nature with a member of the same sex" with a prison sentence of between
    6 months to 3 years and a fine of between 1,000 and 10,000 dinars".


36. Paragraph 21.02 of the COIS report refers to Article 338 of  the  Penal
    Code Ordnance 66-156 of June 8 1966 which  provides  for  an  increased
    sentence of imprisonment up to 3 years and  a  fine  of  up  to  10,000
    dinars for the adult if one of the "perpetrators" is under the  age  of
    18.

37. The Bradt Travel Guide - Algeria 2008 in its chapter on gay and lesbian
    travellers states:


         "There is no gay and lesbian scene  in  the  traditional  sense  in
         Algeria....discretion is the key for all  Algerians.  Despite  this
         there is a lot of cruising in the  main  streets  of  Algiers  city
         centre...Gay relationships are rare in  Algeria  and  largely  only
         until marriage which is seen as an obligation. Most gay men do  get
         married and father at least one child which is seen as a duty which
         must be fulfilled. Of course after marriage dalliances  are  common
         but relationships remain rare. For this reason many  Algerians  who
         would like to live an openly  gay  life  and  have  a  relationship
         rather than a sexual partner leave the country."


38. A 'Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,  Transgender  Law  and  Rights  in  Algeria'
    report in the respondent's bundle  dated  2012  from  Discover  Algeria
    refers to there being "little tolerance for homosexuality  in  Algeria"
    and that:


         "There are many groups that fight for the  right  of  gay  men  and
         lesbians  in  Africa,  these  groups  believe  that  the   Algerian
         attitudes towards homosexuality  can  be  violent.....however  many
         people in Algeria are becoming more accepting of homosexual people.
         The President of Algeria Abdelaziz Bouteflika stated at  one  point
         that if homosexual people behave well they will  be  given  freedom
         and remain unharmed. Many people in Algeria wish  the  constitution
         of Algeria to be revised in order to take  out  the  segments  that
         demonstrate inequality to both women and gay citizens of Algeria."


39. A reference to the Country  of  Return  Information  Project  May  2009
    Country Sheet for Algeria in the COIS report [21.13] for  Algeria  says
    that:


         "..despite homosexuality being quite spread out as a  practice,  it
         is invisible as topic or as political demand and its  existence  is
         denied  by   Algerian   authorities...Young   gay   Algerians   are
         stigmatised, oppressed and  marginalised.  In  practice  the  shame
         associated with homosexuality means  that  few  individuals  openly
         reveal their sexual orientation. Homosexuals may suffer  harassment
         from the security forces and society in general."


Legal framework

40. The legislative framework to these appeals includes  international  and
    European Union law including the Refugee Convention  and  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and the  Council  Directive  204/83/EC  (the
    Directive).

41. The Directive at Article 9 defines acts of persecution in these terms:

         "1.  Acts of persecution within the meaning of Article  1A  of  the
             Geneva Convention must

             (a)  be sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition  as
                  to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in
                  particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made
                  under Article 15(2) of the  European  Convention  for  the
                  Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

             (b)   be  an  accumulation  of  various  measures,   including
                  violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  mentioned
                  in (a).

         2.   Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph  1,  can,  inter
             alia, take the form of:

             (a)  acts of physical or mental violence,  including  acts  of
                  sexual violence;

             (b)  legal, administrative, police, and/or  judicial  measures
                  which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which  are
                  implemented in a discriminatory measure;

             (c)  prosecution or punishment which  is  disproportionate  or
                  discriminatory;

             (d)    denial   of   judicial   redress   resulting    in    a
                  disproportionate or discriminatory punishment;

             (e)  prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform military
                  service in a conflict, where performing  military  service
                  would include crimes or acts falling under  the  exclusion
                  clauses as set out in Article 12(2);

             (f)  acts of gender-specific or child-specific nature.

         3.   In accordance with Article 2(c) there  must  be  a  connection
             between the reasons mentioned in Article 10 and  the  acts  of
             persecution as qualified in paragraph 1."

42.  Article  10  of  the  Directive  sets  out  reasons  for   persecution
    illustrated in a number of ways including:

         "1(d)    a group shall be considered to form an innate social group
             where in particular;

                - members of that group share an innate characteristic or  a
                  common background that  cannot  be  changed,  or  share  a
                  characteristic  or  belief  that  is  so  fundamental   to
                  identity or conscience that a person should not be  forced
                  to renounce it, and

                - that group has a distinct identity in the relevant country
                  because  it  is  perceived  as  being  different  by   the
                  surrounding society;

             depending on the circumstances in the  country  of  origin,  a
             particular social group might  include  a  group  based  on  a
             common characteristic of sexual orientation..."


43. Paragraph 65 of HJ and HT [2010] UKSC 31 cogently summarises the  basis
    of protection provided:


         "...so far as the social group  of  gay  people  is  concerned  the
         underlying rationale of the Convention is that they should be  able
         to live freely and openly as gay men  and  lesbian  women,  without
         fearing that they may suffer harm of  the  requisite  intensity  or
         duration because they are gay or lesbian. Their home  state  should
         protect them and so enable them to live in that way. If it does not
         and they will be threatened with serious harm if they live  openly,
         then most people threatened with persecution will be forced to take
         what steps they can to avoid it."


44. Lord Rodger at [82] sets out the test to be applied by the Tribunal:


      i. When an applicant applies for asylum  on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality.


     ii. If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on
         the available evidence that gay people who lived  openly  would  be
         liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.


    iii. If so, the tribunal must go on  to  consider  what  the  individual
         applicant would do if he were returned to that country.


     iv. If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
         "discreetly".


      v. If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.


     vi. If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.


    vii. If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him.


45. RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 at [24] considered whether there could  be
    a distinction between core and marginally held rights or beliefs and in
    discussion [40-52] concluded [51] that:


         "...nothing...supports the idea that it is  relevant  to  determine
         how important the right is to the individual. There is no scope for
         the application of  the  core/marginal  distinction  (as  explained
         above) in any of the appeals  which  are  before  this  court.  The
         situation in Zimbabwe as disclosed by RN is not that the  right  to
         hold political beliefs is generally accepted subject only  to  some
         arguably peripheral or minor restrictions. It is that anyone who is
         not thought to be a supporter of the  regime  is  treated  harshly.
         That is persecution."


Submissions


Respondent's submissions on the country evidence and expert witnesses

46. Mr Melvin submitted that although it was  accepted  that  homosexuality
    was illegal in Algeria, prosecution and persecution were extremely rare
    and that it was extremely unlikely that the appellant, even if found to
    be gay, would be at serious risk of being persecuted.  He  referred  to
    the expert evidence that there were gay clubs and  bars  together  with
    networking sites; there was no evidence of 'honour killings'  and  that
    although there was considerable evidence of the need to portray a macho
    persona in Algeria there was no evidence that there was persecution  of
    homosexuals. He pointed  to  the  lack  of  reports  by  reputable  and
    established NGOs such as Amnesty International and Human  Rights  Watch
    that there were serious problems for gay people arising from non  state
    actors.  He  acknowledged  that  it  may  be  persecutory  if  it   was
    established  that  the  cultural  dynamic   was   dealt   with   at   a
    familial/tribal  level  but  asserted  that  the  evidence  of  violent
    consequences was lacking so that was not established.  He  referred  to
    what seemed to be an increase in website/blogging and this was how  the
    gay scene was conducted. He drew attention  to  the  references  in  Ms
    Pargeter's report to known gay venues including nightclubs. He referred
    to the lack of evidence of violence and  commented  that  although  the
    community may not accept homosexuality and there may be harassment this
    did not amount to serious harm. He referred to Ms Pargeter saying  that
    some gays live openly as gays. He relied upon [21.09] COIS report:


         "A post of 13 September 2010, on the LGBT Asylum  News  blog  site,
         called Being gay in Algeria today, explored being gay in Algiers:


         -    Living their sexuality in hiding,  the  gays  of  Algeria  are
             taking up more and more public space, but face  a  reactionary
             mentality. In this country,  where  the  penal  code  severely
             condemns   homosexuality,   gays   are   faced   with   severe
             difficulties. Alongside this sexual battle, a social  struggle
             also plays out that is crucial to their future.


         -    Life is difficult. To escape the judgment of others, the  only
             solution is discretion.'  [said  a  25  year  old  hairdresser
             living in Algiers]... He says that men  sometimes  connect  at
             the gym, while, on the Internet, you can't know  who's  hiding
             beneath.


         -    Unlike some Arab-Muslim countries, in Algeria, gay  sites  are
             hardly  ever   blocked   by   the   government...Farouk,   30,
             communications consultant, knows the system well. On the  Web,
             it's about setting up rendezvous. In order not to be had,  the
             best thing is to have a webcam, and to meet the  person  at  a
             neutral place,' The Web is only the first  step...  Many  gays
             live with either their family or  their  wife.  As  a  result,
             precious few gays permit themselves to receive at home. Hotels
             are the sole alternative. If  we  show  up  together  at  some
             hotels, the receptionist may  find  the  situation  fishy  and
             prevent us from renting a  room,'  says  the  consultant.  And
             that's a lost cause, he says.


         -    If you can't find a place, going to cruising areas is  a  last
             resort. And that's where it  gets  complicated,  even  to  the
             point of  homosexuals  being  picked  up  by  the  police...By
             nightfall, numerous gays run into each other there. Apart from
             the fact of playing cat and mouse with the police,  they  fear
             being the target of homophobic attacks....'Society rejects  us
             and religion condemns us. In all of this,  nobody  listens  to
             us.'...


         -    Hydra, a wealthy neighbourhood on the heights of the  capital.
             It is in this upscale neighbourhood that  is  found  the  main
             unofficial (Officially, Algeria has no gay places.) gay venue,
             the Cappucino bar. On the terrace, families devour  shawarmas,
             while the gays and lesbians of the capital gather  upstairs...
             Although gays  have  no  freedom,  everything's  fine  at  the
             Cappuccino,' is how Lotfi, a Commerce student, sums it up. But
             isn't it just a facade? Thirty or so people squatting  at  the
             bar are not capable of representing a significant part of  the
             LGBT community living in Algeria."

47. Mr Melvin submitted that Mr Zahed was little more than the  founder  of
    and spokesman for an organisation for  homosexual  Muslims  in  France,
    that he was not impartial and that it was difficult to see that he  had
    any reason other than a subjective reason for coming to  give  evidence
    in the appeal. He referred to Mr Zahed's comment that the appeal should
    be allowed and that it was not possible to assess his ability  to  give
    evidence  before  the  Tribunal  because  he  had  never  before  given
    evidence. He submitted that  Mr  Zahed  was  not  an  expert,  was  not
    impartial and was not objective.

48.  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that   Mr   Littauer   was   unaware   of   his
    responsibilities as an expert witness, had never  visited  Algeria  and
    that his evidence was partial and sourced through gay publications.  He
    considered that the disclosure of  the  appellant's  account  to  other
    individuals who had then written in support amounted  to  'drumming  up
    support' and that this undermined his impartiality.

49. Mr Melvin relied upon a blog "Gay men in Africa and  HIV/AIDS"  in  the
    respondent's bundle as support for his submissions although he did  not
    specify in what way.

50. He also relied upon SA (Algeria) v Minister for Justice,  Equality  and
    Law Reform and Refugee Appeals Tribunal [2008] No 1194  J.R.  an  Irish
    case involving a gay Algerian musician who sought  leave  to  challenge
    the rejection of his application for refugee status by  reason  of  his
    sexual orientation; the rejection being based "largely due  to  the  de
    facto circumstances of homosexuals in Algeria, but also by reference to
    the fact that he had failed to  apply  for  asylum  during  a  2  month
    sojourn in Spain and France...". The Court concluded that the  Tribunal
    had erred in law by failing to ask itself how the claimant  was  likely
    to be  treated  if  returned  to  Algeria  and  secondly  whether  such
    treatment amounted to persecution. The Court stated  that  "It  may  be
    accepted that the position of homosexuals in Algeria  does  not  equate
    with that in Iran......The  situation  seems  possibly  closer  to  the
    situation in Cameroon...." Mr Melvin submitted that this gave  credence
    to his submission that it was possible Mr O could live openly as a  gay
    man on return to Algeria.

Submissions on behalf of the appellant on the country  evidence  and  expert
    witnesses

51. Ms Chapman relied upon her skeleton argument,  expanded  upon  this  in
    oral submissions and responded to Mr Melvin's submissions.

52. In essence her  skeleton  referred  to  the  continuing  illegality  of
    homosexuality in Algeria, acknowledged that it was rare for  the  State
    to prosecute, referred to the lack of legal gay associations or  openly
    gay venues, submitted that society  has  an  overtly  hostile  attitude
    towards homosexuality, that honour  killings  have  been  attempted  by
    family members, that gay people are  forced  into  marriage,  that  the
    police and military harass and brutalise gay people with impunity, that
    there is evidence that the police keep a register of gay  people,  that
    there are no gay bars or cafes, that gay  relationships  are  rare  and
    that there is little information in the public domain due to inter alia
    stigmatisation and  lack  of   communication.  Since  the  Arab  Spring
    attitudes have become more conservative.

53. Ms Chapman accepted that the witnesses called as expert witnesses  were
    not experts in the traditional sense but submitted that their  evidence
    was such as could  be  relied  upon.  She  referred  to  Mr  Littauer's
    journalistic experience and to the fact that he had specific  knowledge
    of the Muslim world particularly in the context of North Africa and the
    Middle East; he monitors and writes  upon  evidence  relating  to  LGBT
    issues in the Middle East. She  submitted  that  Mr  Zahed's  evidence,
    being upon the very discrete issue before the Tribunal, could be relied
    upon both from his personal experience (a gay  man  from  Algeria)  and
    from his academic knowledge and research.

54.  Ms Chapman submitted that the evidence confirms that engaging in same-
    sex acts is illegal and carries serious  penalties  if  convicted.  The
    experts were  broadly  consistent  with  each  other  and  the  overall
    conclusion to be drawn from the evidence was that there were no  openly
    gay venues in Algeria; repression is so extensive that the evidence  as
    to such repression does not emerge through traditional routes, eg NGOs,
    because they are not  reported  as  matters  that  affect  LGBT  people
    specifically; that prosecution was rare; and that there is  no  concept
    of gay identity or a gay scene. People who are  LGBT  are  forced  into
    hiding/being discreet.

55. She accepted that Algerian people may not identify themselves  as  gay;
    this does not mean they are not gay but that there is  difficulty  with
    the concept of being gay. Whilst she accepts it is possible to have sex
    as a gay person in Algeria, eg from cruising venues, it was simply  not
    possible to have an openly gay relationship.

56. She submitted it was not an issue of  a  core  or  marginal  aspect  of
    persona. She was asked to comment on the concept that  sexual  identity
    could be seen as a spectrum and that at some stage within the spectrum,
    sexuality and/or bi-sexuality could be considered to be a choice  or  a
    preponderance. She acknowledged that this may be so  in  some  cultures
    and that some individuals may have a choice but not in the  context  of
    Algeria. In Algeria, Algerian men do not identify  themselves  as  gay;
    that does not mean they are not but that they have difficulty with  the
    concept because of their cultural identity.  Consideration  had  to  be
    given to the possibility of a relationship as a whole  and  not  merely
    physical contact. She referred us in particular to [76 - 78]  and  [82]
    of HJ (Iran) and  HT  (Cameroon)[2010]  UKSC  31  and  to  [24]  of  RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.

57. Ms Chapman submitted that gay people would be forced to marry; they are
    not heterosexual by choice; it is not an identity they  can  choose  to
    exercise.

58. With regards to SA, she submitted  that  this  was  not  a  substantive
    decision but a permission to appeal. In any event  the  question  posed
    "whether the applicant is likely to have to endure a  severe  violation
    of his basic human rights if he is returned to Algeria in the sense now
    contemplated  by  Article  9  of  the  Qualification  Directive   [such
    that]....is it likely he will suffer persecution  [having  been  marked
    out as effeminate]?" was wrong.

59. She acknowledged that there was no reporting of  violent  incidents  by
    family or society relating to homosexuality and submitted that this was
    due to the great taboo in society towards homosexuality and  the  level
    of under-reporting reflecting the  great  reluctance  of  families  and
    societies to admit to the concept of homosexuality.

OUR ASSESSMENT

Evaluation of experts

60. Mr Melvin argued that neither Mr Zahed nor Mr Littauer were experts and
    submitted that no weight should be placed upon their  evidence.  We  do
    not agree. Their evidence is to be assessed  by  the  Tribunal  and  be
    given whatever weight the Tribunal considers appropriate. Just  as  the
    Tribunal is not bound to accept and rely upon the evidence of a witness
    who is established to be an expert witness, if there is reason in  that
    particular case not to do so, similarly the weight to be given  to  the
    witnesses who gave evidence in this appeal is something to be  assessed
    in the light of the evidence as a whole.

61. We have taken account of Mr Zahed's  background:  he  has  written  and
    published on Islam and LGBT. He is coming to the end of his PhD on  the
    topic on which he was giving oral evidence.  On  the  question  of  how
    partisan he was, we are satisfied that although some of  his  expressed
    views were informed by his personal experience, his own description  of
    himself was nuanced and thoughtful and we  are  satisfied  he  was  not
    pursuing a personal crusade or speaking as a political activist on LGBT
    issues during the hearing.  Whilst  we  note  that  Mr  Zahed  has  not
    previously given evidence before the Tribunal, we do not see this to be
    a reason to consider his evidence to be unreliable. There  will  always
    be a time when someone gives evidence for the first time; that does not
    determine the level of their expertise. We also note, as identified  by
    Mr Melvin during cross examination,  that  he  was  not  aware  of  the
    Ikerian Reefer[1993] 2 LILR 68 duties of an  expert  and  that  he  had
    expressed an opinion that the appeal should be allowed.  Mr  Zahed  has
    not met or spoken directly to the appellant. He was asked  his  opinion
    and expressed it in the context of what he  had  been  told  about  the
    appellant. Mr Zahed drew upon his own experience but, as  evidenced  by
    his writings, research and academic work, he displayed an  intellectual
    rigour in his evidence. We are  satisfied  that  he  saw  his  role  as
    assisting the Tribunal in the context of his own knowledge and that his
    knowledge was gained both from  personal  experience  and  through  his
    writing and research. We are  satisfied  that  he  correctly  describes
    himself as an expert and we have treated him as such.  We  have  placed
    considerable weight on his evidence in reaching our assessment.

62. The same cannot be said about Mr Littauer; he is not able to offer  the
    same academic qualifications or background of research. His  experience
    comes from his personal contacts but he has  no  direct  experience  of
    Algeria, never having been  there.  Nevertheless  he  spoke  with  some
    authority on the issues faced by gay men  in  the  Arab/Islamic  world.
    Despite Mr Littauer's  shortcomings,  we  do  not  accept  Mr  Melvin's
    submission that the witness is on that  account  to  be  considered  as
    disqualified from speaking with any authority. We are satisfied that he
    has some level of expertise even though insufficient to qualify him  as
    an expert on LGBT issues in Algeria. It was perfectly in order  for  Mr
    Littauer to seek additional information from other sources  when  asked
    to provide an opinion and although some of the information received was
    sparse and perhaps could have been written in more temperate  language,
    this does not in itself undermine the evidence given by Mr Littauer. We
    accept that in giving  evidence  he  saw  his  role  as  assisting  the
    Tribunal.

63. It is unfortunate that the Tribunal did not have the benefit of hearing
    oral  evidence  from  Ms  Pargeter.   She   has   impressive   academic
    qualifications and there is no doubt as to the quality of  her  report.
    Mr Melvin did not challenge either of these aspects. We were  satisfied
    that her history of academic involvement qualified her to comment  with
    authority on the matters set out in her report. Nevertheless there were
    what appeared to be some inconsistencies in  her  report  and  we  were
    unable to obtain clarification of these; for example that "there were a
    number of known gay venues in various cities", "homosexuals were forced
    to live an almost underground existence", "there was a degree to  which
    there was some tolerance", "a gay person would  not  be  able  to  live
    openly", "..forced to conceal sexual identity", "Algerian  society  has
    an overtly hostile attitude towards homosexuality".

Our conclusions on the evidence as regards country guidance

64. Essentially Ms Pargeter, Mr Zahed and Mr Littauer  have  given  broadly
    consistent evidence upon which we draw on  variously  in  reaching  our
    conclusions concerning the general situation for gay  men  in  Algeria.
    The COIS report (see for example [21.09]) reinforces what was  said  by
    the witnesses. We confine ourselves to reaching conclusions  concerning
    the position of gay men in Algeria and have not considered the position
    of transgender individuals or lesbians because the evidence  before  us
    does not specifically address the position of such individuals and none
    of the witnesses was asked to address this issue, which is  not  before
    us.

65.  There is no dispute that the Algerian Penal Code criminalises  certain
    public homosexual acts (see [35] & [36] above)  and,  if  convicted,  a
    person is liable to a prison sentence of up  to  3  years  imprisonment
    and/or fines. However the evidence indicates that prosecutions are very
    rare. Only one of the prosecutions referred  to  was  substantiated  by
    additional reports; one did not appear to have led  to  a  sentence  of
    imprisonment and the third (in February 2008)  was  lacking  in  detail
    (see paragraph [31]). We accept that homosexuality is  the  subject  of
    profound societal disapproval such that, as a practice, it is invisible
    and its very existence denied even amongst men who in  fact  engage  in
    same sex behaviour.

66. Neither representative referred us to any reports  from  NGOs  such  as
    Amnesty International or Human Rights Watch  with  regard  to  gays  in
    Algeria. The position described by Mr Zahed and Mr  Littauer  was  that
    societal  and  familial  opprobrium  manifested  itself  in  blackmail,
    threats of violence, forced marriage, being locked  up  in  the  family
    home  and  accusations  of  other  crimes  as  punishment.   In   these
    circumstances it is surprising that there are no NGO reports  detailing
    these issues.

67. The 'Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender Law  and  Rights  in  Algeria'
    report from Discover Algeria, relied upon by Mr Melvin,  is  unsourced,
    vague and made up of generalist platitudes. It gives no information  on
    how it reached its generalised statements and it  conflated  statements
    about Algeria with wide  ranging  and  non  specific  statements  about
    "Africa". We found this report to be of  little  assistance  to  us  in
    reaching our decision.

68. It is not clear what the Country of Return Information Project is ([39]
    above). Although  there  is  reference  to  harassment,  this  was  not
    described with  any  particularity.  When  considered  with  the  other
    evidence before us these references were very generalised remarks  that
    were not sourced to any  incidents.  We  are  not  able  to  place  any
    particular weight upon that report other than as a  piece  of  evidence
    alongside the other evidence before us.

69. Mr Zahed had not  experienced  this  societal  disapproval  although  a
    record of one of his interviews to the  press  indicates  that  he  was
    under psychological pressure from his family  to  renounce  being  gay,
    that he had been violently assaulted by his brother  and  that  various
    family members had told him not to return to Algeria after he underwent
    a civil partnership in South Africa. We note that he said that  he  had
    left Algeria to live in France because he felt that  it  was  dangerous
    but he gave us no specific instances where he had suffered any form  of
    harm or harassment other than by his brother. There is reference by  Ms
    Pargeter to  society  being  "generally  hostile",  but  she  gives  no
    examples of how such hostility manifests itself. None of the  witnesses
    gave us any specific examples of individuals  being  affected  in  this
    way.

70. The witnesses and the  documentary  material  before  us  speak  of  an
    inability to live openly as a gay person. All refer to a requirement to
    "conceal" sexuality, but there is a lack of explanation as  to  exactly
    what is meant by this. The US State Department report  refers  to  some
    LGBT individuals living openly, but they also report that the  majority
    of such individuals did not, fearing reprisal from family or harassment
    from the authorities.

71. It appears to us that the reference to living openly  is  living  in  a
    manner that does not require a denial of sexual identity and to  freely
    express it  subject  to  legitimate  behavioural  norms  that  underpin
    societies.

72. There is some indication that the web enables  more  informal  contact,
    although said to be circumscribed by what appears to  be  a  subjective
    fear of who the other person may be. Although there  was  reference  to
    some 'cruising areas' and some bars or nightclubs  where  opportunities
    for meeting are possible (although still  not  possible  to  be  openly
    gay), we accept that there are few places for gay men to meet and  that
    at those that do exist, behaviour is circumspect.

73. The evidence before us from Mr Zahed ([25] above) as  to  how  gay  men
    conduct themselves in France is, in our view, important and capable  of
    informing our examination of the reasons why gay men living in  Algeria
    conduct themselves as they do in respect of their sexual orientation.

74. We do not accept the evidence of Mr Littauer that honour  killings  are
    not rare; this was not referred to in the  other  documentary  evidence
    before us or by Mr Zahed upon whose evidence we place  greater  weight.
    We do not accept that there is a register  of  the  names  of  all  gay
    people in Algeria:  this  is  one  quote  from  an  unnamed,  unsourced
    interview.

75. In our view the absence of any recorded adverse treatment  which  might
    otherwise have triggered reports is because  the  few  homosexuals  who
    live openly are able to do so without sustaining serious harm and those
    who are perceived to be gay are not the victims of serious harm  within
    Algeria.

76. What however of the majority who choose  to  conform  to  the  societal
    strictures which underpin the taboo against homosexuality?

77. Although both spoke of this in giving evidence, neither Mr Zahed nor Mr
    Littauer, was able to point to evidence that  families  enforced  their
    antipathy or hostility towards gay men by serious harm, forced marriage
    etc. We have taken into account  what  was  said  about  the  weak  and
    unorganised  nature  of  the  LGBT  community  in   Algeria   and   the
    unwillingness of Algerian gay men to self identify  as  gay  even  when
    they have moved outside Algeria to a country where  they  are  able  to
    live openly. We have also borne in mind the expressed view that  anyone
    believed to be gay would be  considered  to  represent  an  affront  to
    society's moral code because of a  refusal  to  conform  to  prescribed
    norms of behaviour.

78. Ms Chapman submitted that the extent to which individuals would  permit
    themselves to be identified as gay was  circumscribed  because  of  the
    fear of being a target of homophobic attacks. Yet as we  have  observed
    above there is no evidence indicating  homophobic  attacks  or  serious
    harm meted out upon an individual who is or was suspected of being gay.
    Although she  submitted  that  there  were  "honour"  killings,  forced
    marriages and detention in the family home, the evidence to this effect
    was very generalised with no  specific  examples  given.  We  were  not
    directed to any specific background evidence to that effect.  Mr  Zahed
    said he had never heard of any "honour"  killings.

79. We have noted the submission that there was a  serious  and  legitimate
    fear of the potential of blackmail and abuse from the  security  forces
    because of both  corruption  and  criminal  penalties  and  a  lack  of
    protection as a victim of violence either pursuant to rape  or  because
    of violence meted out through the family or community as  a  result  of
    being identified as or perceived as being gay. However this  submission
    by Ms Chapman was not based  on  any  accounts  of  such  treatment  or
    reference to any incidents, but rather on an  unsubstantiated  fear  of
    such treatment. We were only directed to one prosecution  in  2010  and
    that was over an incident  in  a  mosque.  The  reference  to  the  two
    prosecutions by Mr Littauer in his written report was  sparse,  lacking
    in detail and there was no substantiation from any other source  before
    us and we find these two references to be of little assistance to us in
    our deliberations. Nevertheless we are satisfied that  the  absence  of
    such evidence is likely to be due to the  self-restraint  exercised  by
    gay people rather than any underlying tolerance or  acceptance  of  gay
    people.

80. There is evidence to suggest that some  gay  men  in  Algeria  find  it
    possible to live openly. The question is whether the limited number  is
    because gay men must hide their sexual identity and live discreetly  in
    order to avoid a real risk of serious harm at the hands  of  those  who
    seek to suppress any manifestation of homosexuality, or whether  it  is
    because gay men choose to live their lives in  that  manner  for  other
    reasons; whether that lack of open expression  of  sexual  identity  is
    because  gay  men  fear  serious  harm  or  because  of  the   societal
    disapproval we have identified. Ms Pargeter's evidence is inconclusive.
    In particular there is no  evidence  that  what  she  identifies  as  a
    compulsion to act discreetly is as a response to coercion. A  threshold
    of severity has to be  reached.  If  living  openly  does  not  attract
    serious harm, which on the evidence  before  us  it  does  not,  people
    feeling compelled to act discreetly does not mean that the threshold of
    Article 9 is reached; the fact that  a  person  does  not  live  openly
    cannot put that person in a better position than a person who does live
    openly.

81. It follows from the above that the threshold  required  for  protection
    under Articles 9 or 15(b) of the Qualification Directive or  Article  3
    of the ECHR is not met.

    Conclusions

82. It is not the purpose of the Refugee  Convention  to  reform  societies
    which have less pluralistic values than in the UK (see [15] HJ (Iran)).
    The Convention is concerned with providing protection from serious harm
    brought about  for  one  of  the  five  reasons  stated.  International
    surrogate protection is to be given where there is a serious  violation
    of fundamental human rights or where there is a serious risk of harm in
    certain situations of internal or external armed  conflict.  There  are
    forms of pressure on gay men in Algeria and in some circumstances  this
    may amount to harm but on the evidence before us  this  harm  does  not
    amount to serious harm or persecution.

83. Our conclusion on the evidence is that, in general, Algerian gay men do
    not  express  their  sexual  identity  openly   because   of   societal
    disapproval, not because they fear persecutory or other serious harm.

84. There is only limited evidence before us that there  is  a  significant
    desire to live openly or that it is of particular importance for  those
    who do not live openly that they wish to do so. On  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before us this lack of desire is a reflection of adherence  to
    and deference to societal mores and not because of an objectively based
    fear of serious harm.

85. On the basis of the evidence  we  have  heard  we  give  the  following
    guidance:

                  a) "Sodomy" and "acts against nature with a member of the
                  same sex" are illegal under Penal Code  Article  388  and
                  333  in  Algeria  and  on  conviction  carry  a  criminal
                  sentence of up to 3 years imprisonment and/or a fine.


                  b) Criminal prosecutions of gay men  under  Articles  388
                  and 333 are, however, extremely rare.


                  c) The evidence does  not  suggest  that,  as  a  general
                  matter, societal and familial  disapproval  of  male  gay
                  identity in Algeria reaches levels that are  persecutory,
                  within the meaning of  Article  9  of  the  Qualification
                  Directive,  or  which  otherwise  reach   the   threshold
                  required for  protection  under  Article  15(b)  of  that
                  Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR.

                  d) That conclusions is reinforced by  the  evidence  that
                  the admittedly small number of gay men who live openly as
                  such in Algeria do not, in general  suffer  serious  harm
                  amounting to persecution.


                  e) If somebody is able to establish that their  behaviour
                  was shaped by more than disapproval amounting to  serious
                  harm,  they  may  be  able  to  establish  a   need   for
                  protection.  Each  case  should  be  determined  on   the
                  evidence specific to that particular case.


Evidence and submissions relating to the appellant personally

Appellant's evidence

Dr Sean Perrin

86. Dr Perrin is a consultant Clinical Psychologist registered with the  UK
    Health  Professions  Council  and  is  also  chartered  as  a  clinical
    psychologist by the British Psychological Society. He did not give oral
    evidence. Mr Melvin did not challenge the expertise of Dr Perrin or his
    standing  but  drew  attention  to  discrepancies  in  the  information
    provided by the appellant to Dr Perrin and the appellant's written  and
    oral evidence. Dr Perrin's report was not specific to our determination
    in terms of country guidance but was specific to our assessment of  the
    appellant's personal account.

87. Although Dr Perrin did not formally assess the appellant's intelligence
    he commented that his responses  and  behaviour  indicated  either  low
    average intelligence or very little  education  and  that  he  "clearly
    needs questions rephrased to suit  someone  who  has  a  few  years  of
    primary school education". Dr Perrin describes the  appellant  becoming
    very upset when asked about  his  mother  -  a  matter  which  we  also
    observed during his oral evidence;  becoming  angry  and  tearful  when
    describing his experiences in Feltham (which included assault  on  him)
    but calm and matter of fact when describing his experiences of sex with
    men.  He records the appellant stating that his overall preference  was
    for sex with men but that he has enjoyed sex  with  women.  He  records
    that the information  given  by  the  appellant  during  his  interview
    accorded generally with that set out in his various witness statements;
    he does not repeat this information but highlighted specific matters in
    his report.

88. Dr Perrin describes the appellant saying that when he was selling  food
    in the streets he was approached by older men who would try to befriend
    him, that Karim was one of these young men who  was  kind,  kissed  and
    cuddled him and that looking back upon their first sexual encounter  he
    now recognises he was raped. In oral evidence the appellant  said  that
    these older people were not attracted to him but were bullying him,  he
    thought because they did not want to see him selling things and  wanted
    to be given things which he refused to do.

89. The appellant's evidence was  as follows:

90. As regards his relationship with Karim, in oral evidence:

      a) He initially said that Karim did not attend school  but  then  said
         that he did; he gave no explanation for this discrepancy;


      b) He said he used to meet Karim after school, they would  play  sport
         together including football with other boys;  Karim  had  initially
         kissed and cuddled him and then they had sex when the appellant was
         aged about 12 or 13 years old.  The  appellant  describes  this  as
         'messing around' and that he  thought  what  they  were  doing  was
         normal. He also said that he decided he did not want  to  "do  this
         again" but Karim had said that if he did not continue to  have  sex
         with him he, Karim, would tell his father.


      c) He was bullied by other boys. He thought this was because they  did
         not like his friendship with Karim because he  had  recently  moved
         into the  area.  He  was  not  called  names  with  regard  to  his
         relationship with Karim;


      d) He said he would usually have sexual relations with Karim  at  his,
         Karim's, family home; his parents and brothers were often not there
         but he was not aware why that was;


      e) The time when his mother threw  herself  out  of  the  window  was,
         according to his oral evidence the first time he and Karim had been
         together at his home although in his witness statement  dated  15th
         February 2011 he said that when his home was empty  they  would  go
         there. This discrepancy was not explained.


91. As regards to the incident which led to his departure from Algeria:


      a) The apartment has a sitting/dining room space and his  parents  had
         their own room. He and Karim were on his parents' bed;  he  was  in
         shorts. There was a door separating the bedroom from  the  rest  of
         the living space and the appellant had not heard anyone coming into
         the flat.


      b) His mother and father had been to mosque and on  their  return  had
         come into the bedroom and seen him and Karim on the  bed  together;
         he was wearing shorts, he did not say what Karim was wearing.


      c) His mother on seeing them had thrown herself out of the window.


      d) He ran from the apartment whilst his father was looking out of  the
         window.


92. The appellant describes his father's behaviour to him and his mother as
    violent and aggressive. He gives examples of being  locked  up,  beaten
    and  severely  chastised.  He  describes  severe  restrictions  on  his
    mother's ability to move outside the home; that she  was  only  allowed
    out when in the company of his father. There is a slight discrepancy in
    his oral evidence: she did not leave the apartment at all  without  his
    father/she used to visit other women in the apartment block.

93. The appellant described being found by his father in the park after  he
    had fled, his father  stabbing  him  and  some  people  taking  him  to
    hospital. His evidence is again slightly contradictory: that he fled to
    a hospital that was not a local hospital because he feared  his  father
    would find him (witness statement 15th February 2011) or  that  someone
    saw him bleeding and took him in the car to hospital  (oral  evidence).
    There was no reason provided why they took him to a hospital  that  was
    not local, particularly since he had escaped from his  father.  He  did
    not give evidence that he had explained to them why he had been stabbed
    and why he did not want to go to the local hospital.

94. The appellant went to his mother's funeral; he says he discovered  when
    and where it would be (2 hours away by bus) from hearing prayers at the
    mosque the next day.

95. Since leaving Algeria the appellant claims to  have  had  a  number  of
    sexual relationships:


      a) In his witness statement dated 12th March 2012 he refers to  an  18
         month  relationship  in  France  with  a  girl   (Alicia)   and   a
         relationship with a man (Yazid); he lived  in  the  same  house  as
         them. In oral evidence he described the household within  which  he
         lived as being lesbian and gay. He states that  since  arriving  in
         the UK he has had a sexual relationship with one girl (Shardi)  who
         was friends with a lesbian couple. This is referred to in his March
         2012 witness statement and in oral evidence he said he had met  her
         between 6 and 8 months ago and it had  lasted  about  a  month.  He
         states in written evidence that he has not been able  to  meet  men
         with whom he could have a sexual relationship because  of  his  age
         and because he does not speak English very well; he  says  this  is
         not his choice.


      b) In oral evidence the appellant said that he has had one male sexual
         relationship with Hassan whom he thought was from Sudan  and  whose
         mother he thought lived in Saudi Arabia. He could not  recall  when
         it was other than after his relationship with Shardi had ceased and
         nor could he recall how long  it  lasted.   He  was  no  longer  in
         contact because he had lost his phone. There  is  no  reference  to
         this relationship in any of his witness  statements  including  his
         handwritten witness statement dated 22nd August 2012.


      c) In his interview with the  respondent  he  describes  Alicia  as  a
         girlfriend and makes no reference to  homosexual  relationships  in
         France.


96. Mr Melvin asked Mr Littauer to comment on the  reference  in  the  COIS
    report [24.26 to 24.32] that the Algerian government pursue a policy of
    education for the youth of Algeria until 16 years of age  primarily  to
    avoid the mosques taking over the teaching. Mr Littauer responded  that
    although the government may wish  to  engineer  some  secular  national
    identity, that is unsuccessful; children are sent to  work  instead  of
    going to school and completing their education. [24.02] of COIS  refers
    to declining school completion rates, a recent study  on  child  labour
    revealed that more than a quarter of children are working and ambitious
    plans to introduce universal education have yet to materialise.

Submissions in relation to the appellant personally

97. Mr Melvin did not challenge the expertise of Dr Perrin or his  standing
    to give a report but drew attention to discrepancies in the information
    provided by the appellant to Dr Perrin and the appellant's written  and
    oral evidence. In so far as this  personal  account  was  concerned  Mr
    Melvin disputed that the appellant was gay  or  bisexual;  he  disputed
    that the appellant's mother had committed suicide,  disputed  that  his
    father had stabbed him, disputed that he had  ceased  attending  school
    and was selling commodities on the street and asserted that contrary to
    Dr Perrin's opinion the appellant was resourceful and sophisticated and
    able to tailor his evidence according to the questions  asked  and  how
    this corresponded to his account.

98. Our attention was drawn by Mr Melvin to the  appellant's  inability  to
    recall dates of relationships in contrast with his ability to  remember
    exact dates as to when he left Algeria and when  he  left  France,  the
    very late disclosure of his claimed relationship with  Hassan  and  the
    vagueness of his description of  the  relationships  he  had.  He  drew
    attention to the very late disclosure of the  relationship  with  Yazid
    and the lack of corroborative evidence  despite  it  having  lasted  so
    long; there had been no  attempt  to  write  to  Alicia  or  Yazid.  He
    asserted that the discovery of him and Karim by his parents was totally
    implausible and went so far as to describe it as fiction. He  submitted
    that the suicide of his  mother  in  the  manner  claimed  was  totally
    implausible and his explanation  for  his  attendance  at  the  funeral
    implausible. He referred to the appellant's  curious  ability  to  lose
    mobile phones. He drew attention  to  the  lack  of  any  reference  to
    depression or self harm whilst he  was  in  France  and  that  although
    treatment has been recommended by Dr Perrin, there was no evidence that
    the appellant was receiving  any  treatment  for  any  of  his  claimed
    problems other than paracetamol.

99. Ms Chapman referred to Dr Perrin's opinion that overall he  had  "found
    the appellant one of the few male, Muslim boys who  could  talk  openly
    and calmly about sex with men. Overall I found him  to  be  a  credible
    informant of his own history and functioning."  She  acknowledged  that
    there had been no further treatment as recommended  by  Dr  Perrin  but
    explained that he had been referred but because he had moved areas,  he
    was now awaiting referral to the community Mental Health Service from a
    different area. The lack of follow up treatment should not therefore be
    considered adverse to his claimed account.

100. Such discrepancies and contradictions as there were in the  appellant's
    evidence did not,  Ms  Chapman  submitted,  reflect  adversely  on  the
    overall credibility of the appellant's account but were reflections  of
    the fragmented manner  in  which  he  had  been  able  to  provide  his
    evidence, the trauma he was suffering from and that he was and  remains
    a minor. He had clarified that his relationship  with  Alicia  was  not
    exclusive; that his description of how he and  Karim  were  treated  by
    other boys was a difficult question  and  involved  difficult  concepts
    which may be difficult to translate. It was not known whether  he  gave
    an accurate explanation and in any event it is not possible to  'second
    guess' the motives of persecutors.

101. Ms Chapman submitted that his inability to find same-sex  partners  was
    plausibly related to his age; he would not be  admitted  to  gay  clubs
    because of his age, he cannot disclose his sexuality  to  the  Algerian
    community within which he mixes. He is  isolated  both  from  the  Arab
    community and as a gay Muslim.


Our Assessment


102. Applying the lower standard of proof we believe certain aspects of  his
    account for cogent reasons; we disbelieve other  aspects.  In  reaching
    our decision we have taken full account of the appellant's  youth,  the
    fragmentary manner in which is evidence was disclosed through no  fault
    of his own and the mental health diagnosis.

103. We have taken note of Dr Perrin's assessment of the appellant as  being
    overall a credible informant of his own  history  and  functioning.  We
    note that Dr Perrin says he is one of the few Muslim boys able to  talk
    openly and calmly about his sexuality. We do not know how many Algerian
    Muslim teenage boys Dr Perrin has interviewed.  Nor  do  we  know  what
    account Dr Perrin took of the situation in Algeria when  reaching  this
    opinion.

104. Dr Perrin has not commented upon how, having regard to  the  young  age
    of the appellant, with the limited education he has  had,  coming  from
    such a deeply conservative and religious background in a society  where
    the mere mention of homosexuality is  taboo,  where  his  homosexuality
    caused (according to him) his mother's death, he is able to  in  effect
    separate and disentangle his emotions to the extent that Dr  Perrin  is
    able to describe the appellant as he has.

105. We accept Dr Perrin's diagnosis that the appellant  is  suffering  from
    PTSD. His report is descriptive of the causes,  symptoms  and  triggers
    for the appellant's presentation  but  sets  out  no  analysis  of  the
    appellant's claim to be bisexual. There is no reference to difficulties
    he has had because of this, given his background. There is no reference
    to triggers or consequences for him psychologically. The report accepts
    uncritically the appellant's self description of  being  bisexual  and,
    significantly we consider, fails to identify anything in this that  may
    have resulted in or contributed to the appellant's  current  depressive
    or traumatic presentation; he concentrates on the appellant's  mother's
    death, the violence from his father and his treatment in Feltham. There
    is no analysis of the relationships he had whilst  in  France  and  the
    effect this may or may not have had upon him.

106. Although we accept that the appellant's  evidence  was  provided  in  a
    fragmentary way because of his depression, illness  and  problems  with
    interpreters, we do not accept that the appellant was discovered by his
    parents  as  claimed;  there   are   fundamental   contradictions   and
    inconsistencies in his account which cannot be explained by his age  at
    the time or poor recall.  He  has  added  to  his  account  as  it  has
    developed in order to bolster his claim to be gay.

107. We do not rule  out  the  possibility  that  he  may  have  had  sexual
    experiences with someone of his own sex when  younger  but  we  do  not
    accept that either of his parents was aware of this  or  if  they  were
    that it resulted in the extreme scene which he claims took  place  when
    the story in its final incarnation was that the appellant was lying  on
    the bed in his shorts.

108. As for  the  appellant's  description  of  his  relationship  with  his
    parents, by significant and  substantial  contrast  this  evidence  was
    clear, vivid and credible. We are satisfied that he was the  victim  of
    an abusive relationship with his father who was given to violence.

109.  We  do  not  accept  the  appellant's  assertion  that  he  could  not
    establish gay relationships in Europe because he could not  gain  entry
    to gay clubs; on his own evidence he claims he has had one relationship
    whilst in the UK. He  gave  evidence  of  being  able  to  establish  a
    heterosexual relationship in the UK despite  his  limited  English  and
    despite the taboos  within  the  Algerian  community  for  heterosexual
    relationships outside marriage. He met Shardi in Croydon.  Although  he
    claims he met  Hassan  in  Croydon,  he  gave  no  description  of  the
    circumstances of that meeting or any difficulties they did or  did  not
    have. His disclosure of that relationship was very late in  the  day  -
    during  his  oral  evidence,  despite  having  had  experienced   legal
    representation and he did not even mention it in the witness  statement
    submitted that day. Our view is that his account of meeting  Hassan  is
    fabricated.

110. The appellant's account of his relationship with  Karim  to  Dr  Perrin
    indicated that he considered on reflection that he had been raped,  yet
    there was no analysis by Dr Perrin of the extent to  which  that  event
    contributed to his PTSD. There was no  indication  from  the  appellant
    that he sustained any anxiety or problems whilst in  France.   Although
    he claimed that he was able to explore his sexuality in France, he gave
    no detail of this save for very brief details of two relationships over
    an 18 month period. His claim that he considers he had been  raped  did
    not appear to have any effect on his behaviour or  mental  health.   He
    did not describe any taunting or name calling whilst  in  Algeria.  His
    account of him and Karim being together varied,  with  no  explanation,
    between their meetings always being at Karim's home to include being at
    his home when his parents were out. He was evasive when asked questions
    as to how he and Karim managed to be alone at Karim's home  when  Karim
    came from a relatively large family. Overall we found his evidence with
    regard to his relationships to be vague, indeterminate and  lacking  in
    any adequate detail such as to indicate the nature and  extent  of  the
    relationship.

111. Reaching a decision on someone's sexual identity and how that has  been
    conducted is not an easy matter. But taking all of the evidence in  the
    round we accept that although he may have had some same-sex experiences
    when in Algeria, the fundamental expression of his sexual  identity  is
    as a heterosexual individual. Any same sex element was no more than  an
    early exploration that did not lead to any character identification  or
    formation and is of no continuing or lasting importance to him.

112. Applying our findings we are satisfied that the  appellant  is  not  at
    risk of being persecuted or  persecuted  for  a  Convention  reason  in
    Algeria. Even if he were gay or bisexual (which we are satisfied he  is
    not) he would not, on the basis of our conclusions with regard  to  the
    potential serious harm sustained by those who are gay or  perceived  to
    be gay in Algeria, be at risk of being persecuted.

113. We have found that the appellant's mother is deceased and that  he  had
    an abusive paternal relationship.  We  have  considered  the  issue  of
    tracing and KA. In the light of the statement by Ms Chapman set out  in
    paragraph 3 above, we have  not  addressed  this  issue  and  heard  no
    further submissions thereon.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision.

We re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on refugee grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

We continue that order (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker            Date
Schedule of documentary background material

In reaching our decision we have taken the following into account:


                I. Expert report of Alison Pargeter  13 June 2011
               II. Ksari.com 'Yizi-Ouzou: the Imam  of  the  mosque  El-Atik
                   placed in custody' 2 March 2010
              III. LGBT Asylum News 'Algeria: 2-year jail sentence  for  gay
                   imam' 13 April 2010
               IV. Country expert report of Dan Littauer
                V. Letter from Randa Lamri undated
               VI. UNHCR Refugee certificate of Al Omary, Imad Hussein
              VII. Changing attitude "Beirut, an imperfect  haven  for  LGBT
                   Refugees" 17 November 2011
             VIII. Letter from Ludovic Mohammed Zahed 14 May 2012
               IX. Witness statement of Ludovic  Mohammed  Zahed  23  August
                   2012
                X. Calem - International Network of Inclusive Muslim  "Islam
                   and inclusivity" undated
               XI. Calem "Interview France 24 - Ludovic Lotif Mohamed  Zahed
                   2 April 2011
              XII. Email from Adams Wahid Gay Middle East in French dated 15
                   May 2012 with translation
             XIII. Printout from Alouen.org dated 23 May 2012
              XIV. American Psychological Association -  Sexual  orientation
                   and homosexuality - 25 May 2012
               XV. COIS Report Algeria 3 November 2011
              XVI. Discover Algeria article undated
             XVII. SDGLN.com article 2 February 2011
            XVIII. In Brief article undated
              XIX. Gay men in Africa document undated
               XX. CNN - Algerian transsexual's memoires 9 July 2010
              XXI. US Department of State Country Reports  on  Human  Rights
                   Practices for 2011
             XXII. Asylumlaw.org article 19 July, year unknown
            XXIII. In North Africa Gays Light a  candle  for  visibility  10
                   October 2011
             XXIV. Extract for the UKBA Appeal and Litigation training team:
                   Stonewall and UGLGIG quotes  undated






