
EO (Deportation appeals: scope and process) Turkey [2007] UKAIT 00062


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 27 March 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Drabu
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Ms N Mallick, instructed by Duncan Moghal
For the Respondent:          Mr T Eicke, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor

(1) The word 'conferred' in s84(1)(f) has to be read in some sense  such  as
'confirmed'.  (2)  HC 1337 introduced a substantive  change,  not  merely  a
change of emphasis or clarity, into paragraph 364 of the Immigration  Rules.
 (3) Deportation decisions made before 20 July 2006 are made under,  and  on
appeal are  to  be  reviewed  in  accordance  with,  the  'old'  version  of
paragraph 364; deportation decisions made on or after 20 July 2006 are  made
under, and are to be reviewed in accordance with,  the  'new'  version.  (4)
Decisions  to  make  deportation  orders  and  decisions  to  issue  removal
directions under s10 now  need  to  be  carefully  distinguished.   (5)   In
determining an appeal against a deportation  decision  made  on  'conducive'
grounds on or after 20 July 2006 the Tribunal should first confirm that  the
appellant is liable to deportation  (either  because  the  sentencing  judge
recommended deportation  or  because  the  Secretary  of  State  has  deemed
deportation to be conducive to the public good); if  so,  secondly  consider
whether deportation would breach the appellant's rights  under  the  Refugee
Convention or the  ECHR;  if  not,  thirdly  consider  paragraph  364.   (6)
Paragraph 364 is only in issue if the appellant fails to establish  a  claim
under either Convention; and if an appeal is to be allowed  under  paragraph
364 the Tribunal must  identify  the  reasons,  state  why  they  amount  to
"exceptional circumstances", and state why  they  are  so  strong  that  the
appellant is able to establish  that  his  own  circumstances  displace  the
public interest.  (7)  Removal  decisions  under  s  10  (as  distinct  from
deportation decisions) carry a wider right of appeal on the ground that  the
discretion should have been exercised differently, but, given the  terms  of
s 92, that right can by no means always be exercised  from  within  the  UK.
(8) In determining an appeal against a decision (whether before or after  20
July 2006) to give directions under s 10 (as distinct  from  directions  for
removal of an illegal entrant) the Tribunal should  first  consider  whether
the decision shows, by its terms, that the decision-maker took into  account
the factors set out in paragraph 395C and  exercised  a  discretion  on  the
basis of them.  If it does not, the appeal should be allowed  on  the  basis
that it was not in accordance with the law and that the appellant  awaits  a
lawful decision by the  Secretary  of  State.   If  the  decision  was  made
properly, the Tribunal should secondly consider whether the removal  of  the
appellant would breach his rights under the Refugee Convention or the  ECHR,
and, if not, thirdly whether the discretion under paragraph 395C  should  be
exercised differently, bearing in mind that paragraph  395C  does  not  have
the restrictions contained in  the  'new'  paragraph  364.  The  process  is
somewhat similar to that under the 'old' paragraph 364.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, who arrived in the United Kingdom
    on  28  January  2004.    He   claimed   asylum   unsuccessfully,   and
    subsequently, also unsuccessfully, applied  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a businessman.  On  11  May  2005  in  the  Crown  Court  at
    Gloucester, on a plea of guilty, he was convicted on indictment of  two
    charges of sexual assault on a female and  on  2  August  2005  he  was
    sentenced to a conditional discharge for two years,  required  to  sign
    the Sex Offenders' Register for 2 years  and  he  was  recommended  for
    deportation.  On 23 January 2006 the Secretary of State decided to make
    a deportation order against him by virtue of s3(6) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  He appealed against that decision.  A panel  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal allowed his appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State
    sought and obtained an order  for  reconsideration.   Thus  the  matter
    comes before us.

 2. This appeal was listed (together with another, which  was  conceded  by
    the Secretary of State)  in  order  to  enable  the  Tribunal  to  give
    guidance on the approach to paragraph 364 of the Statement  of  Changes
    in Immigration Rules, HC 395 following its amendment in July 2006,  and
    on the scope of appeals against  deportation  decisions  taken  on  the
    ground that the appellant's  deportation  would  be  conducive  to  the
    public good, with the advantage of submissions made by counsel for  the
    Secretary of State who was fully instructed to deal with  all  relevant
    issues.

The legislation: deportation

 3. Section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 is headed "General Provisions for
    Regulation and Control".  Subsections (5) and (6) as in  force  at  all
    material times are as follows:

      "(5)  A person who is not a British citizen is liable to  deportation
             from the United Kingdom if -
            (a)  the  Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                 conducive to the public good; or
            (b)  another person to whose family he belongs is or  has  been
                 ordered to be deported.
      (6)   Without prejudice to the operation of subsection (5)  above,  a
             person who is not a British citizen shall  also  be  liable  to
             deportation from the United Kingdom if, after he  has  attained
             the age of seventeen, he is convicted of an offence  for  which
             he is punishable with imprisonment and  on  his  conviction  is
             recommended for deportation by a court empowered by this Act to
             do so."


    Section 5(1) is as follows:


       "(1)   Where  a  person  is  under  3(5)  or  (6)  above  liable  to
             deportation, then subject to the following provisions  of  this
             Act the Secretary of State may make a deportation order against
             him, that is to  say  an  order  requiring  him  to  leave  and
             prohibiting  him  from  entering  the  United  Kingdom;  and  a
             deportation order against a person shall invalidate  any  leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom given him  before  the
             order is made or while it is in force."


    The rest of s5 relates to the procedure for  deportation  and  contains
    provisions dealing specifically with those liable to deportation  under
    s3(5)(b).  Section 6  contains  supplementary  provisions  relating  to
    deportation  under  s3(6).   Schedule  3  to  the  Act  also   contains
    provisions about deportation.  We do not need to set them out.

The Immigration Rules

 4.  Part  13  of  the  Immigration  Rules  relates  to   deportation   and
    administrative removal under s10 of the 1999  Act.   We  are  primarily
    concerned with paragraphs 363 and 364.  Paragraphs  363-363A  summarise
    the circumstances in which a person becomes liable  to  deportation  as
    follows:

      "363. The circumstances in which a person is  liable  to  deportation
    include:
             (i)   where  the  Secretary  of  State   deems   the   person's
                 deportation to be conducive to the public good;
             (ii)      where the person is the spouse or  civil  partner  or
                 child under 18 of a person ordered to be deported; and
             (iii)     where a court recommends deportation in the case of a
                 person over the age of 17 who  has  been  convicted  of  an
                 offence punishable with imprisonment.
        363A.Prior to 2 October 2000, a person would have  been  liable  to
             deportation in certain circumstances in which he is now  liable
             to administrative removal. These circumstances  are  listed  in
             paragraph 395B below. However, such a person remains liable  to
             deportation, rather than administrative removal where:
             (i)  a decision to make a deportation  order  against  him  was
                 taken before 2 October 2000; or
             (ii)      the person has made a  valid  application  under  the
                 Immigration   (Regularisation   Period   for   Overstayers)
                 Regulations 2000."

 5. Before 20 July 2006, paragraph 364 was as follows:

      "364. Subject to paragraph 380 in considering whether deportation  is
             the right course on the merits, the  public  interest  will  be
             balanced against any compassionate circumstances of  the  case.
             While each  case  will  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the
             particular circumstances, the aim is an exercise of  the  power
             of deportation which is consistent  and  fair  as  between  one
             person and another, although one case will rarely be  identical
             with another in all material respects.  ...  Before a  decision
             to deport is reached the Secretary  of  State  will  take  into
             account all relevant factors known to him including:
            (i)  age;
            (ii) length of residence in the United Kingdom;
             iii) strength of connections with the United Kingdom;
              iv)  personal  history,  including  character,  conduct   and
                  employment record;
               v) domestic circumstances;
             vi) previous criminal record and the nature of any  offence  of
                 which the person has been convicted;
            vii) compassionate circumstances;
           viii) any representations received on the person's behalf."

    From 20 July 2006 paragraph 364 was changed by HC 1337 so as to read as
    follows:


      "364. Subject to paragraph 380, while each case will be considered on
             its merits,  where  a  person  is  liable  to  deportation  the
             presumption  shall  be  that  the  public   interest   requires
             deportation. The Secretary of State will consider all  relevant
             factors in considering whether the presumption is outweighed in
             any particular case, although it will only  be  in  exceptional
             circumstances that the public interest in deportation  will  be
             outweighed in a case where it would  not  be  contrary  to  the
             Human  Rights  Convention  and  the  Convention  and   Protocol
             relating to the Status of Refugees to deport.  The  aim  is  an
             exercise of the power of deportation which  is  consistent  and
             fair as between one person and another, although one case  will
             rarely be identical with another in all material respects.  ...
             ."


 6. The omitted  words  in  each  version  of  paragraph  364  concern  the
    transitional cases covered  by  paragraph  363A  (above)  and  are  not
    relevant for present purposes.  The reference to  paragraph  380  is  a
    reference to those whose deportation  would  breach  rights  of  theirs
    under either the Refugee Convention or the European Convention on Human
    Rights.

The legislation: appeals

 7. By s82(2)(j) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a
    decision to make a deportation order is a decision carrying a right  of
    appeal under s82(1).  Section 84(1) is as follows:

        "84      Grounds of appeal


        (1)      An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
             decision must be brought  on  one  or  more  of  the  following
             grounds-
             (a)  that the decision is not in  accordance  with  immigration
                 rules;
             (b)  that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 19B  of
                 the Race Relations Act  1976  (c.  74)  (discrimination  by
                 public authorities);
             (c)  that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human
                 Rights Act 1998  (c.  42)  (public  authority  not  to  act
                 contrary to Human Rights Convention) as being  incompatible
                 with the appellant's Convention rights;
             (d)  that the appellant is an EEA national or a member  of  the
                 family of an EEA national and  the  decision  breaches  the
                 appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in  respect
                 of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;
             (e)  that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with  the
                 law;
             (f)  that the person taking the decision should have  exercised
                 differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;
             (g)  that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom  in
                 consequence of the immigration decision  would  breach  the
                 United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention
                 or would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
                 Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the   appellant's
                 Convention rights."

 8. Section 86 is headed "Determination of appeal" and, so far as relevant,
    reads as follows:

      "86.  ...
          3) the Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks  that
             -
             (a)  a decision against which  the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
                 treated as being brought was not in accordance with the law
                 (including immigration rules), or
             (b)  a discretion exercised in making a decision against  which
                 the appeal is brought or is treated as being brought should
                 have been exercised differently.
      ...
      (5)   In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the  Tribunal  shall
dismiss the appeal.
       (6)    Refusal  to  depart  from  or  to  authorise  departure   from
             immigration rules is not the exercise of a discretion  for  the
             purposes of subsection (3)(b)."


 9. We need also to make reference to the predecessors of these provisions.
     The appellate structure set up by the 1971 Act, and repeated with  few
    changes (none of which were material) by the Immigration and Asylum Act
    1999, did not  specifically  enumerate  permitted  grounds  of  appeal,
    although there  were  some  restrictions  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Section 19 of the 1971 Act was, so far as relevant, as follows:

      "19.  Determination of appeals by adjudicators
      (1)    Subject  to  sections  13(4)  and  16(4)  above,  and  to  any
             restriction on the grounds of  appeal,  an  adjudicator  on  an
             appeal to him under this Part of this Act -
            (a)  shall allow the appeal if he considers -
                 (i)   that the decision or action against which the appeal
                     is brought was not in accordance with the law or  with
                     any immigration rules applicable to the case; or
                 (ii)  where the decision or action involved  the  exercise
                     of a discretion  by  the  Secretary  of  State  or  an
                     officer,  that  the  discretion   should   have   been
                     exercised differently; and
              b) in any other case, shall dismiss the appeal.
      (2)   For the purposes of subsection (1)(a) above the adjudicator  may
             review any determination of a question of  fact  on  which  the
             decision  or  action  was  based;  and  for  the  purposes   of
             subsection  (1)(a)(ii)  no  decision  or  action  which  is  in
             accordance with the  immigration  rules  shall  be  treated  as
             having involved the exercise of a discretion by  the  Secretary
             of State by reason only of the fact that he has been  requested
             by or on behalf of the appellant to depart, or to authorise  an
             officer to depart, from the rules and has refused to do so."

What is the scope of an appeal against a deportation decision?

10. A decision to make a deportation order  against  an  individual  is  an
    exercise of  the  Secretary  of  State's  discretion.   It  is  clearly
    amenable to challenge under a number of the grounds set out in  s84(1).
    If the Secretary of State purports to decide to deport a person who  is
    not in truth liable to deportation, there may be a successful appeal on
    (at least) the grounds that the decision is not in accordance with  the
    Immigration Rules and is "otherwise not in accordance  with  the  law".
    If he makes a decision to  deport  a  person  whose  deportation  would
    breach his rights under the Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, there may be  a  successful  appeal  on  the  same  grounds
    (because of paragraph 380) or the ground set out in s84(1)(g).  If,  in
    making his decision, he fails to comply with generally-applicable rules
    of administrative law, there may perhaps be a successful appeal on  the
    ground that the decision was "otherwise  not  in  accordance  with  the
    law".  So much is clear.

11. The question which concerns us is whether, if the  Secretary  of  State
    makes a decision which is not  unlawful,  there  is  scope  within  the
    appellate process for reviewing  the  exercise  of  his  discretion  in
    taking that decision.  Before the coming into force of  the  2002  Act,
    the answer to that  question  was  clearly  in  the  affirmative.   The
    Adjudicator or the Tribunal considering an appeal against a decision to
    make a deportation order was  to  allow  it  if  it  thought  that  the
    discretion should  have  been  exercised  differently.   The  provision
    relating to the allowing or dismissing of appeals in s86  of  the  2002
    Act, is very similar to that in s19 of the 1971 Act.   But  before  the
    Tribunal makes a decision there must be an  appeal,  and,  as  we  have
    seen, the possible grounds of appeal are set out in the 2002 Act, where
    the ground  relating  to  discretion  is  specifically  confined.   The
    possible ground of appeal in s84(1)(f) relates  only  to  a  discretion
    conferred by Immigration Rules.  We appreciate that it may well be that
    those  words  were  intended  merely  to  exclude  grounds   based   on
    discretions contained  only  in  the  plethora  of  published  policies
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Since the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Abdi (DS) v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 148 it has been clear that  an
    appellant may succeed by showing that the Secretary of State has failed
    to follow his own published policy.  If that is the case, however,  his
    decision is not in accordance with the law.  The Tribunal has no  power
    to substitute its own exercise of the Secretary of  State's  discretion
    in such cases.  But that purpose would seem to be achieved  by  s86(6),
    which is a re-enactment of s19(2) of the 1971 Act and its successor  in
    the 1999 Act.  The effect of those provisions is that, if the appellant
    cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules, the fact that the Secretary
    of State has announced a policy, incorporating a discretion,  will  not
    assist an appellant who  seeks,  in  the  Tribunal,  a  review  of  the
    exercise of the discretion: for the discretion  in  question  does  not
    count as a discretion for the purposes of s86.

12. Section 84(1)(f) goes much further.  By comparison with  the  preceding
    appellate structure, it appears to remove from  the  appellate  process
    consideration of any discretion not "conferred by  Immigration  Rules".
    Looked at from the opposite point of view, a person who seeks to  argue
    that a discretion should have  been  exercised  differently  apparently
    needs to show that the discretion is "conferred by Immigration  Rules".



13. The problem is, of course,  that  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  any
    discretions are conferred by Immigration Rules.  The Immigration  Rules
    are, in the words of s3(2) of the 1971 Act,  statements  of  the  rules
    laid down by the Secretary of State "as to the practice to be  followed
    in the administration of this Act".  The discretions are  conferred  on
    the Secretary of State by the Act or, perhaps  in  some  cases  by  the
    prerogative power that underlies it and is  preserved  by  s33(5).   In
    particular, the discretion to make a deportation order is conferred, as
    we have seen, in the clearest possible terms, by s5(1) of the Act.

14. Dealing with this issue in the course  of  this  appeal  presents  some
    difficulties.  On the one hand, the words of s84(1)(f) are  clear.   On
    the other hand, nobody seems to want them to bear their clear  meaning.
    Ms Mallick (and she may be  taken  to  represent  any  appellant  in  a
    similar situation) wishes to preserve a right of  appeal  allowing  the
    Tribunal  to  examine  the  exercise  of  the  discretion  to  make   a
    deportation order.  Mr Eicke, on instructions, does not take a contrary
    view.  He points out that if the words "conferred by Immigration Rules"
    are given their obvious meaning, the ground set  out  in  s84(1)(f)  is
    entirely nugatory.  There are no discretions which have  the  character
    described.  If we understood him correctly, his submission was that the
    words  of  s84(1)(f)  were  indeed  intended  to  exclude  only   those
    discretions not mentioned in Immigration Rules.

15. We are unaware of any principle of statutory interpretation which would
    enable us to disregard the only  possible  meaning  of  words  used  in
    primary legislation.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  doubt  that
    deportation appeals, in  particular,  have  proceeded  ever  since  the
    coming into force of the 2002 Act without this point being  taken,  and
    nobody wants to take it now.   We  are  entirely  unpersuaded  that  we
    should ignore the phrase or that the word "conferred" can have anything
    other than its ordinary and only meaning, which  is  "given".   Indeed,
    the register in which the word "confer" is used is a rather formal one:
    it is in our view inconceivable that the word could properly be used to
    attribute something to a person who already has it.

16. Bereft of assistance from the parties, it seems to us  that  there  are
    two and only two possible solutions.  One is that the closing words  of
    s84(1)(f) are to be given  their  ordinary  meaning,  even  though  the
    effect would be that no appeal could be brought on the ground  set  out
    in that subsection.  (Section 86(3)(b)  would  still  have  an  effect,
    because there are (for example) discretions to be exercised in relation
    to the family members of EEA nationals, which could  be  invoked  under
    the grounds set out in s84(1)(d).  And s86(6) would still  have  effect
    in relation to discretions contained in policies.)

17. The  only  other  solution,  which  we  tentatively  suggest,  is  that
    "conferred"  in  s84(1)(f)  is  a   misunderstanding,   misreading   or
    mishearing of the draftsman's word "confirmed" at a very early stage of
    the legislative process.  That reading would have the advantage  sought
    by everybody: it is the discretions (whatever their origins) that  form
    part of the process set out in the Immigration Rules that would be  the
    subject of  this  subsection.   But  to  seek  to  correct  an  Act  of
    Parliament is a serious matter.  So far as  we  are  aware,  there  has
    never been any constitutional examination of the process by  which  the
    Queen's Printer issues printed errata changing the  terms  of  statutes
    that have completed their passage through both Houses and received  the
    Royal  assent.   That  the   practice   exists,   however,   shows   an
    acknowledgement that mistakes of this sort are made in the haste of the
    modern legislative process.  So it is very  far  from  impossible  that
    something of the sort has happened here, even though it  has  not  been
    previously noticed.

18. Those, we think, are the two alternatives.  If there  is  a  third,  we
    should be glad to hear of it.  The first alternative solution is sought
    by nobody and would  put  an  end  to  virtually  all  appeals  against
    deportation decisions, this one included.  It  is,  however,  with  the
    greatest hesitation that we select the second alternative, and  proceed
    on the basis that paragraph 84(1)(f) of the 2002 Act should be read as:

        "that  the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have   exercised
        differently a discretion confirmed by Immigration Rules."

19.  That reading leaves open the possibility of an  appeal  succeeding  on
    the ground that a discretion conferred by the Act but  whose  existence
    is confirmed in the Immigration Rules, which contain  instructions  for
    exercising, should have been exercised differently.

Was there a substantive change in paragraph 364 in July 2006?

20. We have set out above the form of paragraph 364 before  and  after  its
    change by HC 1337 on 20 July 2006.  The present  appeal  is  one  of  a
    number in which the Secretary of State sought and obtained an order for
    reconsideration on the grounds including an allegation that the  change
    was not one of substance and that the  Tribunal  should  therefore,  in
    considering an appeal against a decision made before 20 July 2006, take
    the same factors into account as in an appeal against a later decision.
     Ground 1 of the grounds for reconsideration in the present appeal  was
    as follows:

      "1.   The Explanatory Memorandum to the recent Statement  of  Changes
             in Immigration Rules HC 1337 states that:


                 '7.2  Paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules  states  that
                     the public  interest  will  be  balanced  against  any
                     compassionate circumstances of the case.  It does  not
                     however articulate where the public interest lies.


                 7.3   In line with Home  Secretary's  written  ministerial
                     statement of the 23 May (Official Report, Column 80WS)
                     in relation to foreign national prisoners, this  Rules
                     change makes clear that the presumption shall be  that
                     the public interest requires deportation and  that  it
                     will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
                     public interest in deportation will be outweighed in a
                     case where it would not be contrary  to  the  European
                     Convention on Human Rights and the Refugee  Convention
                     to deport.


                 7.4   This rules  change  is  being  made  with  immediate
                     effect in order to clarify what constitutes the public
                     interest as soon  as  possible  and  to  maximise  the
                     protection of the public'.


            It is submitted that the  Explanatory  Memorandum  makes  clear
             that the purpose of the changes made by HC 1337 was to  clarify
             that the public interest has always favoured  deportation,  and
             this clarification is given effect in the amended paragraph 364
             by the  use  of  the  phrase  'where  a  person  is  liable  to
             deportation the presumption shall be that the  public  interest
             requires deportation'.   However,  it  is  submitted  that  the
             public  interest  always  required  that  criminals   with   no
             entitlement to be in the United Kingdom should be deported save
             in exceptional circumstances.


            It is therefore submitted  that  the  Tribunal  has  materially
             erred in failing to take into account the principles set out in
             HC 1337 and  to  recognise  the  presumption  that  the  public
             interest requires deportation.   It  is  submitted  that  as  a
             result of this initial misdirection in law,  the  determination
             as a whole is fundamentally unsafe."

21. As we have indicated, similar grounds were advanced on the Secretary of
    State's  behalf   in   a   considerable   number   of   reconsideration
    applications: there can be no doubt that the  view  set  out  in  these
    grounds was that taken by those responsible for making decisions on the
    Secretary of State's behalf.

22. That view is clear.  It is  a  view  that  the  change  of  wording  in
    paragraph 364 merely clarified the existing law: it did not change  it.
    It is, further, a view that the considerations going to the exercise of
    the discretion to deport were the same before and after the change.  If
    that is right, a number of things follow.  One  is  that  the  question
    whether the decision under appeal was made before or after  the  change
    would have no impact on the issues to be considered.  That is why  this
    argument is raised in the present appeal, where the decision  was  made
    before the change.

23. What is said in the grounds for  reconsideration,  however,  also  goes
    rather beyond being an assertion about  the  appropriate  standards  of
    review in the appellate process.  It appears also to  be  an  assertion
    about  the  Secretary  of   State's   decision-making   process.    The
    Immigration Rules are addressed primarily to decision-makers: so far as
    the appellate process is  concerned,  they  are  merely  the  point  of
    reference.  The Secretary of State's grounds for  reconsideration  must
    be taken as asserting that, despite the changes of  wording  introduced
    by HC 1337, the Secretary of State had  not  changed  its  practice  in
    deciding whether an individual should be deported or not.

24. The impact of the grounds for reconsideration in this and similar cases
    goes further still.  Whatever may be held to be the  legal  meaning  of
    the Immigration Rules as published, there can, it appears, be no  doubt
    that by these grounds the Secretary of State asserts that  he  intended
    to  make  no  change.   It  follows  that  the  explanations  given  to
    Parliament and the published explanatory note (which is  cited  in  the
    grounds)  are  asserted  as  having  been  intended  to  mean  that  no
    substantive change was taking place.

25. These assertions and arguments are entirely coherent.  In the light  of
    the grounds, we expected to hear submissions about the position  before
    and after HC 1337, and to be asked to interpret both in  the  light  of
    the statements made by the Secretary of  State  to  Parliament  and  in
    writing in the form of the explanatory memorandum.  Such was not to be.
     At the commencement of the proceedings  Mr  Eicke  told  us  that  the
    Secretary of State no longer relied on  ground  1.   The  Secretary  of
    State's  position  now  was  that  HC  1337  had  indeed  introduced  a
    substantive change to paragraph 364.

26. Taken in isolation, that concession or withdrawal is  not  particularly
    surprising.  Taken in context it is astonishing.   It  means  that  the
    Secretary of State was wrong  when,  at  the  time  these  and  similar
    grounds were being drafted, it was being asserted that there  had  been
    no change in the practice of primary decision-making.   It  also  means
    that the Secretary of State's explanations, intended, as it is asserted
    that they were intended,  to  convey  that  there  was  no  substantial
    change, are now to be taken as asserting the opposite.

27. Both rules and statements of  principle  have  to  be  made  in  words.
    Sometimes words are used with one intention, but a subsequent  judicial
    or other decision holds them to bear  a  meaning  different  from  that
    which was intended.  But here, the change in  meaning  comes  from  the
    user of the words himself.  The Secretary of State says that the  words
    he used in the rule, and the words he used in  explaining  it,  have  a
    meaning different from that which  he  previously  asserted  that  they
    bore.  It looks as though he knew neither what he was doing,  nor  what
    he meant to do.   More  seriously,  it  is  somewhat  alarming  if  the
    Secretary of State can effect  a  policy  change  by  changing  nothing
    except his own view of the meaning of his own words.

28. Assisted or not by the Secretary of State's prevarication, we  have  no
    doubt that the substantive meaning of paragraph 364 after amendment  by
    HC 1337 is very different from that  which  it  previously  bore.   The
    range of issues expressly falling for consideration in the exercise  of
    the discretion to make a deportation decision in  the  old  version  is
    such as to suggest a  general  duty  to  look  at  the  issues  already
    considered in the evaluation of the human rights  claim  and  to  apply
    what might  be  termed  a  lower  standard  to  them.   That  range  of
    considerations does not feature  in  the  new  version,  which  instead
    introduces a presumption in favour of deportation.

29. In the absence of express contrary provision, decisions made under  the
    Immigration Rules are made according to the rules in force at the  time
    when the decision is made, and on appeal are reviewed on the  basis  of
    the rules as they were at the time the decision was made.   Deportation
    decisions made before 20 July 2006 were made under paragraph 364 as  it
    was, and on appeal are to be reviewed in the light of paragraph 364  as
    it was.  Decisions made on or after July 2006 are made under  paragraph
    364 as amended, and on appeal are to be reviewed on that basis.

30. The decision in the present appeal was made  on  23  January  2006  and
    therefore the amended version of paragraph 364 does not  apply  to  it.
    Our substantive consideration of this appeal under the old  version  of
    paragraph 364 is at paragraphs 48-61.

The process of decision-making and the process on an appeal

31. It is clear from  both  s3(5)  and  (6)  of  the  1971  Act,  and  from
    paragraphs 363-364 of the Immigration Rules that the first question for
    a decision-maker is whether an individual is liable to deportation.  So
    far as concerns a person who has been recommended for deportation by  a
    criminal court, his liability for deportation has been effected by  the
    sentencing judge.  The liability for deportation as  a  member  of  the
    family of a deportee is parasitic upon a deportation decision  made  in
    respect of another person.  But the liability to deportation on "public
    good" grounds needs a little elaboration.  Contrary to  what  might  be
    supposed, it is clear throughout that the liability to deportation does
    not  arise  from  an  individual's  misconduct.   It  arises  from  the
    Secretary of State taking a view: a person  is  liable  to  deportation
    under s3(5)(a) if the Secretary of State deems his  deportation  to  be
    conducive to the public good.  In cases of this  sort,  therefore,  the
    first stage is the process by which the Secretary of State decides that
    a person's deportation is conducive to the public  good.   It  is  that
    decision of the Secretary of State which renders the individual  liable
    to deportation.

32. Now both that decision and  the  decision  of  a  sentencing  judge  to
    recommend deportation are decisions importing a discretion.   But  they
    are  not  appealable.   The  decision  that  a  person  is  liable   to
    deportation (as distinct from the decision that he is to  be  deported)
    is not a decision listed in s82(2).  So whatever view is taken  of  the
    meaning of s84(1)(f), an appellant has no scope for  arguing  that  the
    discretion exercised in rendering him liable to deportation should have
    been exercised differently.

33. If the person is liable to deportation for one of the reasons  set  out
    in s3(5) and (6) (and summarised in paragraph 363), the  next  question
    is whether he should be deported.  This, as we have said,  is  again  a
    discretionary decision.  It is to be made under s5(1) but on the  basis
    of paragraph 364.

34. On an appeal,  the  Tribunal  ought  to  consider  first,  whether  the
    appellant is liable to deportation.  In view of what  we  have  already
    said about that, this means that the Tribunal will need to  check  that
    the Secretary of State has deemed his deportation to  be  conducive  to
    the public good, or he is the family member of a person who  is  to  be
    deported, or he has been recommended  for  deportation  by  a  criminal
    court.  The Tribunal ought then  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant's deportation would breach any right of his under the Refugee
    Convention or the European Convention on Human  Rights:  if  it  would,
    there is no power to deport him, and, on its face, paragraph  364  does
    not apply to him.  It is only if an appellant is liable to deportation,
    and not prevented by one of the Conventions from being  deported,  that
    the exercise of the discretion  under  paragraph  364  comes  into  the
    matter at all.

35. In saying that, we largely endorse the view of the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal in CM [2005] UKIAT 103 and CW  [2005]  UKIAT  00110  that  the
    exercise of the discretion under paragraph 364 is  essentially  over  a
    wider field than the assessment of proportionality in the determination
    of rights under Article 8.  It must be, because paragraph 364  involves
    the exercise of a discretion in a case  where  the  individual  can  be
    deported: there is no room for the exercise of a discretion to deport a
    person who (because of his rights under Article 8) cannot be  deported.
    With the greatest respect, however, we differ from the views  expressed
    in those cases about the order in which the  Tribunal  should  approach
    the issues.  In CM at [38], cited also in CW at [37], the Tribunal said
    this:

        "[I]n applying Huang [2005] EWCA Civ 105 to deportation  cases,  as
        there  are  Immigration  Rules  which  apply  to  deportation,  the
        position under the Rules should be considered first.  If  the  case
        under the Rules fails, it is very difficult  to  see  what  factors
        under Article 8 are not subsumed already in paragraph 364.  Article
        8 should then be considered with Huang in mind, but it is difficult
        to see how a case  which  fails  under  the  Rules  here  could  be
        disproportionate under Article 8. However, the Article  focuses  on
        family and private life and respect for those interests is a  right
        which requires to be  outweighed  by  other  legitimate  interests:
        immigration control and the prevention of crime."

36. We have little difficulty with the underlying assumption  that  because
    the discretion under the Rules covers a wider field than the assessment
    of the appellant's human rights, it is unlikely that a claim that fails
    under the rules would succeed under Art 8.  It seems  to  us,  however,
    that the process envisaged in CM risks ignoring  the  provisions  about
    human rights  in  the  Rules  themselves.   As  we  have  shown  above,
    paragraph 364 is (in both versions) specifically subject  to  paragraph
    380; and it follows  that  the  application  of  paragraph  364  to  an
    individual case necessarily imports a consideration of the  appellant's
    human rights as a prerequisite to the possibility of  the  exercise  of
    the discretion under the rest of paragraph 364.  We appreciate that  it
    may sometimes be right in the  interests  of  judicial  economy  to  go
    straight to the end, and to say that a person's  claim  cannot  succeed
    even at its best or even if the jurisdiction is taken  at  its  widest.
    But that is not the logical way,  and  it  is  not  the  way  that  the
    phrasing of the Rules requires.

37. There is another reason why we think that, in an appeal,  human  rights
    issues should be treated before the discretion under paragraph 364.  As
    the phrasing of that  paragraph  makes  clear,  the  power  to  make  a
    deportation decision only exists in a case when the individual's  human
    rights do not prevent his deportation.   We  think  it  is  a  salutary
    exercise in considering the issues under paragraph 364 to remember that
    if the Tribunal is looking at the discretion under paragraph 364 it  is
    necessarily dealing with a  person  whose  human  rights  will  not  be
    breached by his removal.  Taking the issues in the logical order  helps
    to give the process under paragraph 364 its proper value.

38.  In  deciding  whether  the  discretion  should  have  been   exercised
    differently, it seems to us that the Tribunal is bound to bear in  mind
    the context in which it falls to be exercised at all.  If there is  any
    substance  in  the  ground  of  appeal  relating  to  the  exercise  of
    discretion, it is  a  ground  which  clearly  makes  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  The discretion which is to be reviewed is  not  the
    Secretary of State's general discretion to make  a  deportation  order,
    but the discretion considered in the  context  of  the  decision-making
    process set out in paragraph 364.  Paragraph 364 as it  now  is  (after
    the July 2006 amendment) sets out a clear context for the  exercise  of
    the discretion in deportation decisions and in our judgment it  is  not
    open to the Tribunal to substitute a discretionary  judgment  save  one
    based on the principles set out in paragraph 364.  The  starting  point
    is, as we have pointed out above, that a person liable  to  deportation
    has failed to establish that his human rights  (or  Refugee  Convention
    rights)  prevent  his  deportation.   Although   there   is   still   a
    discretionary decision to be made, the presumption is that  the  public
    interest requires deportation.  The  discretion  to  deport  him  will,
    therefore, be exercised  against  him  unless  there  are  "exceptional
    circumstances".  Further, the effect of those circumstances needs to be
    that the individual's  claims  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation that is deemed to arise  from  the  conclusions  about  him
    reached so far.  (An individual appellant is unlikely  to  be  able  to
    exploit, in an individual appeal, an  argument  based  on  the  aim  of
    consistency and fairness between one person and another.)

39. Of course each case must be decided on its own merits, but  we  venture
    to suppose that the cases where  it  can  properly  be  said  that  the
    discretion to make a deportation order exercisable under paragraph  364
    (as it now is) should be exercised differently are likely  to  be  rare
    indeed.  In reaching such a decision it seems to us that  the  Tribunal
    must set out what the "exceptional circumstances" are, why they are  to
    be regarded as particularly strong and why they enable the individual's
    claim to displace the public interest.

Other removals and the appeals process

40. As we have already indicated, the part of the Immigration Rules dealing
    with deportation deals also with "administrative removals", that is  to
    say removal of those liable to removal under s10 of the 1999 Act.  Such
    persons are most often those who have overstayed their leave.   We  set
    out the relevant paragraphs of the Immigration Rules in the form  which
    they had from 20 July 2006.

        "395A.   A person  is  now  liable  to  administrative  removal  in
              certain circumstances in which he would, prior to  2  October
              2000, have been liable to deportation.


        395B.    These circumstances are set out in section 10 of the  1999
              Act. They are:
              (i) failure to comply with a condition attached to his  leave
                 to enter or remain, or remaining beyond the time limited by
                 the leave;
              (ii) where  the  person  has  obtained  leave  to  remain  by
                 deception; and
              (iii) where the person is the spouse civil partner, or  child
                 under 18 of someone  in  respect  of  whom  directions  for
                 removal have been given under section 10.


        395C.    Before a decision to remove under  section  10  is  given,
              regard will be had to all the relevant factors known  to  the
              Secretary of State including:
              (i)      age;
              (ii)     length of residence in the United Kingdom;
              (iii)    strength of connections with the United Kingdom;
              (iv)     personal history, including character,  conduct  and
                  employment record;
              (v)      domestic circumstances;
              (vi)     previous criminal  record  and  the  nature  of  any
                  offence of which the person has been convicted;
              (vii)    compassionate circumstances;
              (viii) any representations received on the person's behalf.


           In the case of family members, the factors listed in  paragraphs
              365-368 must also be taken into account.


        395D.    No one shall be removed under section 10  if  his  removal
              would be contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
              the  Convention  and  Protocol  relating  to  the  Status  of
              Refugees or under the Human Rights Convention."


41. These provisions of the Immigration  Rules  have  had  effect  since  2
    October 2000.  In their case, the change on 20 July 2006 was  certainly
    not substantive.  The change was to  insert  into  paragraph  395C  the
    words which, as we have seen, were before that date in  paragraph  364.
    Until then, paragraph 395C had simply contained a  reference  to  those
    words in paragraph 364.  Following their deletion from  paragraph  364,
    they needed to be set out in full in paragraph 395C.

42. The "old learning", if we may  so  express  it,  on  those  subject  to
    removal under s 10 was  that  their  rights  of  appeal  were  severely
    limited.  They could appeal on the ground that they were not  in  truth
    liable to removal, or on the ground that their removal would breach the
    Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention, but little else  was
    available to them.  During the course of argument relating to the scope
    of the right of appeal against deportation decisions, it  emerged  that
    the Secretary of State's view was that the scope of an appeal against a
    decision to remove under s10  should  not  be  so  narrowly  construed.
    After taking instructions again over the short  adjournment,  Mr  Eicke
    confirmed that the Secretary of State's view  was  that  in  an  appeal
    against a decision to issue removal directions under s10  of  the  1999
    Act (which is an appealable decision under s82(2)(g) of the  2002  Act)
    all the grounds of appeal set out in paragraph 84(1) may  be  deployed,
    including that relating to the exercise of discretion.

43. We agree with this reading of the statutory  provisions;  but  this  is
    also an important concession.  That is why  we  record  it  here,  even
    though it has not immediate bearing on the matters we have to decide.

44. So far as the appellate process is concerned,  two  conclusions  follow
    from it.  The first  is  that,  where  the  decision  to  give  removal
    directions  under  s10  does   not   clearly   demonstrate   a   proper
    consideration of the matters set out in paragraph 395C and the exercise
    of a discretion to make the decision, the decision will be one which is
    challengeable on the ground that it is not in accordance with the  law,
    and the result should normally be that an appellant's appeal is allowed
    on that basis only, leaving the Secretary of State to make  a  new  and
    lawful decision in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

45. Secondly, if the decision was procedurally proper and was one which was
    open to the Secretary of State to make, the appellant can  nevertheless
    succeed in an appeal  by  showing  that  the  discretion  to  make  the
    decision, conferred by s10 of the Act and appearing also in  paragraphs
    395A to  D  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  should  have  been  exercised
    differently.

46. We do, however, need to point out in this context that a decision  that
    a person is to be removed by way of directions under s10 does not carry
    a general right of appeal from within  the  United  Kingdom.   That  is
    because s82(2)(g) is not in the list of immigration decisions  carrying
    that right in s92(2).  But there is an in-country right of appeal under
    s92(4) if the appellant "has made an asylum claim, or  a  human  rights
    claim, while in the United Kingdom".  "Asylum claim" and "human  rights
    claim" are phrases defined in s113 and are subject to amendments by the
    2006 Act which have not yet come into force.  What does  appear  to  be
    clear, however, is that, for example, an overstayer who  claims  asylum
    and is refused, and appeals, may, in  addition  to  grounds  of  appeal
    relying on his rights under the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, deploy an argument that, even if he has  no
    right to be in the United Kingdom, the Secretary of State's  discretion
    should have been exercised in such a manner as to allow him to stay.

47. We should also add that nothing we say here affects the process in  the
    case of the removal of illegal entrants  and  those  refused  leave  to
    enter.  Their liability to removal  arises  under  paragraphs  8-10  of
    Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act: paragraphs 395A ff of HC 395 do  not  apply
    to them.

The present case

48. As we have said, the  decision  against  which  the  present  appellant
    appeals was made on 23 May 2006, that is to say while the  old  version
    of paragraph 364 was in force.  Because of the  uncertainty  about  the
    effect of the change, to which we have referred above, which led to the
    view that decisions before and after 20 July 2006  should  arguably  be
    treated similarly, it was thought that the appellant's case was  itself
    one which would provide an up to date example of the operation  of  the
    appellate process.  That view, it is  now  clear,  was  mistaken.   The
    appellant's case is to be considered under the old version of paragraph
    364: the new version of paragraph 364 has no relevance to this  appeal.
    We are therefore concerned with whether the Tribunal panel which  heard
    this appeal made a material error of law, as asserted by  the  grounds,
    in allowing it.

49. In making its determination, the Tribunal panel set out the appellant's
    history, noting that he now 21 years  old  and  recording  his  claimed
    asylum and his application for leave to remain as a businessman.   They
    also noted that the appellant had a number of relatives in  the  United
    Kingdom including his sister and her husband, with whom he is a partner
    in business (we do not know whether lawfully or not).

50. The Tribunal panel set out extracts from the Judge's sentencing remarks
    as follows:

        "I accept entirely that you have not committed the most serious  of
        crimes and I accept entirely that you do not have a  long  criminal
        record.  These are, in one sense, minor offences, but  having  said
        that, they are two offences of  indecent  assault  on  women  which
        clearly caused  them  considerable  distress.   They  were,  in  my
        judgment, caused by you  as  a  result  of  your  loneliness,  your
        emotional immaturity and your isolation from your family in  Turkey
        [the Judge then imposed a conditional discharge for two years].  In
        other words, provided you keep out of trouble,  commit  no  further
        offences and do not offend again, you will hear no more about  this
        matter.  On the other hand, if within  the  two  year  period,  you
        commit any further offences, then you will be dealt with  for  this
        matter as well."

    Considering other possible ways of  dealing  with  the  appellant,  the
    Judge expressed a concern that the appellant's behaviour had been  very
    similar in respect of the two offences, which were committed  within  a
    period  of  less   than   two   weeks.    The   pre-sentence   report's
    recommendation of attendance of a sex  offender's  treatment  programme
    was not available because the appellant was then not yet 21.  The Judge
    concluded his sentencing with the following words:


        "I think that there is a significant and serious risk were  you  to
        remain in this country, that you may commit a  serious  offence  in
        the  future  and  it  is  on  that  basis  that  I  am  making  the
        recommendation for deportation."

    There have, in fact, been, so far as we are aware, no further offences.
     The Tribunal panel that heard  the  appeal  took  the  view  that  the
    recommendation for deportation was "no doubt at least in part"  because
    the Programme recommended in the pre-sentence report was unavailable.

51. The panel then embarked on its consideration of paragraph 364.   Having
    reminded  itself  of  the  appellant's  personal  characteristics,   it
    continued as follows:

        "14.     In undertaking what has been referred to as that balancing
             exercise required by paragraph 364 it is necessary  for  us  to
             give considerable weight to the public interest in the light of
             the offences in  the  light  of  the  offences  for  which  the
             appellant was convicted at Gloucester  Crown  Court.   We  find
             that there is something of an anomaly between the imposition of
             a two year conditional discharge for the offences  on  the  one
             hand and the recommendation for  a  deportation  on  the  other
             hand.  The primary reason given by the charge for that apparent
             anomaly was the concern that because the  appellant  could  not
             benefit  by  the  Sex  Offender's  Treatment  Programme,  there
             existed a significant and serious  risk  that  if  he  were  to
             remain in this country then he might commit a  serious  offence
             in the future.  However, the  passage  of  fifteen  months  has
             given the appellant the opportunity to demonstrate that he  has
             learnt his lesson  and  has  not  committed  any  offence,  and
             certainly not the serious offence that was of  concern  to  the
             trial judge.  To that extent, we must give the appellant credit
             for his good behaviour subsequent to the conviction.


        15.       We  acknowledge  that  this  appellant   has   no   legal
             immigration status in the United Kingdom at  the  present  time
             because his application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  business
             person was refused by the respondent on 23  January  2006.   It
             seems, however, that notice  of  decision  did  not  reach  the
             appellant either as it was sent at the same time as the  letter
             requesting representations against the making of a  deportation
             order.  The fact that the appellant has  no  legal  immigration
             status necessarily means that, as things stand at  the  moment,
             it would be necessary for him to leave the  United  Kingdom  in
             order to make an out-of-country application to return.   If  he
             is made the subject of a deportation  order  then,  during  its
             currency, he would not be permitted to make an application  for
             entry clearance.  Effectively, that will remove  him  from  the
             United Kingdom for the currency of the deportation order.  That
             is a significant penalty upon him.  In considering whether that
             exercise of the power of deportation is consistent and fair  as
             between one person and another, we have regard to the statement
             made by the respondent on 25 July  2006.   The  Home  Secretary
             then said:


                  'We have  said  that  where  people  have  been  given  a
                  custodial sentence over a given time, which we  have  not
                  specified, at present it is  one  year  for  non-European
                  Economic Area nationals and two years for EEA nationals -
                  there should be a presumption of deportation.  There will
                  be cases where, in any civilised society, we will  decide
                  that we ought not to implement that  because  of  certain
                  ... '.

             That statement does not lay down cast  iron  rules  but  it  is
             guidance available to us.   This  appellant  was  not  given  a
             custodial sentence let alone a sentence of one year.  That does
             not mean that a deportation  order  cannot  be  appropriate  in
             certain circumstances.  However, in our view, there would  need
             to be the most exceptional circumstances relating either to the
             appellant himself or to the offences before we could find  that
             a person sentenced to a two year  conditional  discharge  could
             reasonably be made the subject of a deportation order.   To  do
             so would be go outside the  general  guidelines  as  they  were
             explained to Parliament by the Home Secretary so recently.   We
             are unable to find the existence  of  such  facts  which  could
             justify going outside those guidelines in this case.

      16.  Accordingly, and having considered all  the  factors  laid  down
             under paragraph 364, we find that  the  decision  made  by  the
             respondent does not represent a proper exercise by him  of  the
             discretion granted by that rule  and,  accordingly,  is  not  a
             lawful decision.  Therefore the appeal  under  the  rules  must
             succeed and it is not necessary for us to proceed  to  consider
             the appeal under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention."

52. It appears that the Tribunal panel did not decide that  the  discretion
    should have been exercised differently.  It decided that  the  decision
    was not lawful: that is to say, presumably, that the Secretary of State
    had committed some legal error in making it.   What  that  error  could
    have been is somewhat obscure.  The statement  to  which  reference  is
    made was, as we have seen, one of a number  of  statements  made  about
    that time.  It does not say that only those who have been sentenced for
    periods of imprisonment will be regarded  as  liable  for  deportation:
    indeed, it is difficult to see how it could say that  in  view  of  the
    clear terms of s3(5) and (6) of the 1971 Act and  paragraph  363.   The
    panel appear to recognise that in their statement that "that  does  not
    mean  that  a  deportation  order  cannot  be  appropriate  in  certain
    circumstances".  But they then appear to proceed on the basis that  the
    deportation of a person who has been sentenced  as  the  appellant  has
    been is something which,  save  in  exceptional  circumstances,  cannot
    lawfully happen.  No reason for this is given at all.   As  we  pointed
    out at the hearing, it looks as though the  Tribunal  panel  construed,
    from  a  presumption  that  those  sentenced  to   certain   terms   of
    imprisonment should be deported, a presumption that those not sentenced
    to those terms of imprisonment should not be  deported.   There  is  no
    justification for that construction.  On the basis of it, however,  the
    Tribunal panel clearly made their decision.

53. That, in our judgment, is sufficient to disclose a  material  error  of
    law by them.   We  should,  however,  add  that  we  have  considerable
    concerns about their dissection of the sentence imposed  by  the  trial
    judge.  Generally speaking, as it seems to us,  a  sentence  should  be
    seen as a whole and it should be recognised that  the  Judge  may  well
    have adjusted some elements of a sentence because of  the  presence  of
    other elements.  One well known aspect of  that  is  the  principle  of
    totality, according to which  the  sentences  for  individual  offences
    sentenced at the same time will be adjusted in  order  that  the  total
    sentence properly reflects the offender's level of wrongdoing.  It  may
    or may not be the case that the Judge's recommendation for  deportation
    flowed from the fact that the Programme was  not  available.   But  one
    cannot treat those two elements of the sentence in isolation  from  the
    third element: the conditional discharge.  We do not know what part the
    decision to recommend for deportation played in the Judge's  fixing  of
    the other elements of the sentence.  The Tribunal panel come very  near
    to disregarding the recommendation for deportation because of  the  way
    in which it came about.  However, the position, which they should  have
    recognised, was that that recommendation was made, it was made as  part
    of a sentence tailored to the offences of which the appellant had  been
    convicted, it was not the subject of an appeal, and it  was  what  made
    the appellant liable to deportation under s3(6).

54. As Mr Eicke pointed out, there is an additional reason why the Tribunal
    panel should have placed no reliance at all upon the statement of which
    they set out a part in their determination.  It was made  on  26  July,
    well after the day of the decision, after the terms  of  paragraph  364
    had been changed, and apparently in relation to the new  regime.   Even
    if they had interpreted it correctly, therefore, it could not have  any
    bearing  on  the  decision  under  appeal.   Further  again,  Mr  Eicke
    submitted that the statement to which reference is made in the Tribunal
    panel's determination could not be traced as having been made, or  made
    on the date given by the panel.  Mr Eicke referred us  to  a  statement
    made on 3 May 2006 (before the date of  the  decision  in  the  present
    case) setting out the possibility of change to paragraph 364 and adding
    as follows:

        "Those proposals would replace the current practice of  considering
        for deportation only non-European Economic Area  nationals  with  a
        sentence of 12 months or more; EEA nationals with a sentence of  24
        months or more; cases in which  the  individual  has  three  lesser
        convictions in a five year period,  and  all  cases  in  which  the
        sentencing judge has recommended deportation (Hansard,  HC,  3  May
        2006, Col 972)."

    That statement makes it very difficult indeed to see how a  person  who
    had been recommended for deportation by the sentencing Judge  could  be
    regarded as a person in respect of whom the Secretary  of  State  could
    not properly decide to make a deportation order.

55. Amongst the sometimes rather incoherent arguments put on behalf of  the
    appellant in the written skeleton, in an attempt to save  the  Tribunal
    panel's determination is the following:

        "Alternatively the decision  made  by  the  AIT  was  clearly  made
        properly on the application of Paragraph 363 and Paragraph 364.   A
        person  is  liable  for  deportation  inter  alia,  where  a  Court
        recommends deportation in the case of a person over the age  of  17
        years  who  has  been  convicted  of  an  offence   punishable   by
        imprisonment.  The  appellant,  as  the  SSHD  noted  at  paragraph
        19(a)(ii) [apparently of his skeleton argument although we have not
        been able to trace the allusion] was not convicted  of  an  offence
        punishable with imprisonment but was given a conditional discharge.
         Therefore despite the Court recommendation the appellant  was  not
        "liable for deportation" under  paragraph  363  and  therefore  the
        decision to deport was not lawful.  Therefore any error of law  was
        not material."

    That argument is intelligible, but  clearly  wrong.   It  confuses  the
    individual punishment  of  an  offence  with  whether  the  offence  is
    "punishable with imprisonment".   Sexual  assault  is  punishable  with
    imprisonment  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  recommendation  for
    deportation  was  lawfully  made.   Another  argument  raised  on   the
    appellant's behalf is that:

        "The challenge of lawfulness of a  decision  can  be  to  the  SSHD
        deeming the person's deportation to be conducive the  public  good.
        The acts must impinge on the public domain in a real senses.  There
        must be some  public  interest  at  stake  in  favour  of  removal.
        Therefore the question is whether the offence is of  a  kind  which
        strikes at the heart of the community?  Such crimes such as  Arson,
        Rape of a stranger, Class A/B drugs, violent robbery can be said to
        be crimes that impinge in the public domain, other crimes  such  as
        handling, theft are not.

        If the SSHD decision is unlawful under paragraph 363, then there is
        no need for the decision-maker to look at paragraph 364,  (although
        it will good practice to do so  if  the  decision  is  wrong  under
        paragraph 363).  Paragraph 363 is prescriptive, so whilst the words
        in paragraph 363 state, 'the circumstances in  which  a  person  is
        liable to deportation include (i) ... .  (iii) ...  The rule is  in
        fact complete and prescribes the circumstances in  which  a  person
        becomes liable for deportation.  This is in contrast  to  Paragraph
        364, which confers the discretion and how that discretion is to  be
        exercised i.e taking all  relevant  factors  into  account,  fairly
        unconsistently.  The SSHD does not keep any statistics as to how he
        exercises  his  power  under  paragraph  364,  and  there  are   no
        guidelines provided to caseworkers as  to  what  weight  is  to  be
        provided to any particular factor,  in  such  circumstances  it  is
        difficult to see how any decision can be made  that  is  consistent
        and fair.  The burden of course of showing consistency and fairness
        is on the SSHD.  Where he is unable to do so, the challenge on  the
        exercise of discretion is made easier.  The task for the IJ  is  to
        review the SSHD decision, assessing whether he has  considered  all
        the relevant factors and accorded the appropriate  weight.  [s86(3)
        of the 2002 Act is then set out.]"

56. As we have explained above, the decision that makes a person liable for
    deportation is not itself an appealable decision.  It is  not  amenable
    either  to  the  grounds  set  out  in  s84(1)(f),  or  to  a  Tribunal
    determination of the form set out in s86(3)(b).  In any event,  in  the
    present case, the liability arose not from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    deeming the appellant's deportation to be conducive to the public good,
    but from the Judge's recommendation for his deportation.

57. We are entirely unpersuaded by Ms Mallick's  defence  of  the  Tribunal
    panel's judgment.   We  must  proceed  to  substitute  a  determination
    allowing or dismissing the appellant's appeal.

58. Both parties before us confirmed that there were no additional facts or
    evidence that we should take into account in  making  our  decision  on
    this appeal.  The appellant is now aged about 22.  He lived in  Turkey,
    the country of which he is a national, until he was over 18 years  old.
    He then came to the United Kingdom.  He has been here only  two  and  a
    half years, and has had no legal immigration status here.   Other  than
    his sister and her husband, the majority of his  family,  including  in
    particular his parents, remain  in  Turkey.   As  we  have  noted,  the
    sentencing Judge took the view that his offences were  partly  prompted
    by isolation from his family in  Turkey,  although  we  are  of  course
    unable to say whether that was part of the mitigation advanced  on  his
    behalf.  He has entered into a business partnership with his brother-in-
    law here although there is no reason to suppose that he is entitled  to
    engage in business or self-employment or to work whilst he is here.

59. So far as his rights under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights are concerned, there will be some  interference  with  his
    private  and  family  life  if  he  is  deported  to  Turkey,  but  the
    interference will be minimal.  He will lose the close contact with  his
    sister and brother-in-law, but will receive instead close contact  with
    the other members of his family.  He will not be working here,  but  he
    will be able to work there, with no doubts as to  the  legality  of  so
    doing, in Turkey.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  cannot
    maintain his private and family life in  Turkey.   He  has  a  criminal
    conviction, but even apart from that it does  not  appear  to  us  that
    there is anything in his case showing that he has a right to remain  in
    the United Kingdom despite the provisions of the Immigration Rules.  He
    is therefore not a person whose deportation is inhibited by  Article  8
    or by paragraph 380 of the Immigration Rules.

60. Looking now at paragraph 364 as it was at the date of the  decision  in
    this case, we take into account the same factors  again.   We  note  in
    addition that the  appellant  has  been  recommended  for  deportation,
    having been convicted on a plea of guilty to  two  offences  of  sexual
    assault.  Other than the  suggestion  that  these  offences  should  be
    regarded as minor and not themselves meriting deportation (a submission
    in  flat  contradiction  to  the  view  of  the  sentencing  Judge)  no
    substantial reason has been given  why  the  appellant  should  not  be
    deported.  We are entirely unpersuaded that the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion should have been exercised differently.

61. For the foregoing reasons, having  found  that  the  original  Tribunal
    materially erred in law, we substitute a determination  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal.

                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
