
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SYR (PTA; electronic materials) Iraq [2021] UKUT 00064 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2021                           |                              |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     SYR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Galliver-Andrew, instructed by
     Migrant Legal Project (Cardiff)
For the respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Presenting Officer

As paper is increasingly replaced by electronic forms of  communication,  it
is particularly important that judges engaged in the  permission  to  appeal
process, whether at First-tier or Upper Tribunal level,  satisfy  themselves
that they have the requisite materials  before  them  in  order  to  make  a
proper decision  on  permission.  Accordingly,  a  judge  should  not  grant
permission to appeal on the basis that the requisite  documentation  is  not
before him or her.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lever  who,
    following a hearing at Newport  on  2  September  2020,  dismissed  the
    appellant's protection  and  human  rights  appeals.   The  grounds  of
    challenge take issue with a number  of  credibility  findings  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lever  against  the  appellant.   Before  us
    today, Mr Lindsay  has  accepted  that  there  are  indeed  errors,  as
    articulated in at  least  some  of  the  grounds  of  challenge,  which
    together mean that the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lever
    cannot stand and that the decision needs to be re-made.  We agree  with
    what Mr Lindsay has said in that regard.  In those circumstances, it is
    unnecessary to go into the nature of the errors in any more detail.

 2. There was discussion between the Tribunal and the representatives as to
    whether the appropriate course would be to  remit  the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  or  retain  it  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
    necessary fact-finding exercise to be  undertaken.   Mr  Lindsay  urged
    upon us the latter course, on the basis that the appellant's appeal has
    already now been dealt with twice in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  on
    both occasions that Tribunal's decisions had to be set aside for errors
    of law.

 3. Whilst we understand that submission, we have concluded - in  agreement
    with Mr Galliver-Andrew- that the appropriate course is to remit.  As a
    result of the errors, none of the judge's findings of fact can  remain.
    Having regard to the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding  exercise,
    which  is  total,  we  consider  in  all  the  circumstances  that  the
    appropriate course is for this matter to be remitted.

 4. We will assume that those responsible for the management of the case in
    the First-tier Tribunal will take note of its history  in  assigning  a
    judge for the hearing of the remitted appeal.

 5. The matter to which we must finally turn  concerns  an  observation  in
    paragraph 3 of the grant of permission  to  appeal  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In that paragraph, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  stated
    that there was an issue about the nature of a letter, which was said to
    have emanated from Iraq, having been written on the appellant's  behalf
    by a lawyer in that country.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  said
    that  there  were  clear  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's   account
    regarding that letter; but then he said: "However it is  arguable  that
    the Judge did not properly deal  with  the  contents  of  the  lawyer's
    letter (this FTPA is digital and the complete file  is  not  available)
    ...".

 6. We enquired of Mr  Galliver-Andrew,  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, whether to his  recollection  the
    appeal was dealt with by means of the Core  Case  Data  (CCD)  process,
    which had recently been introduced in the First-tier Tribunal and which
    places documents in that Tribunal's records in electronic as opposed to
    hard-copy form.  Mr Galliver-Andrew's response was that so  far  as  he
    could recall the matter may have been dealt with in that way.   On  the
    other hand, it may have been dealt with digitally in  some  other  form
    since, as the Vice President remarked during the hearing, by that  time
    in 2020 the Covid-19 pandemic was in progress. That  had  led  to  very
    different systems being adopted by the First-tier Tribunal  in  various
    jurisdictions, including the taking of material from parties by digital
    as opposed to hard-copy means.

 7. Whichever  is  the  situation  in  this  case  matters  not.   What  is
    important, however, is that  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  should
    not have granted permission on the basis  that  he  did  not  have  the
    requisite documentation before him.  One can easily see how that  could
    lead to improper grants of permission, with the resulting waste of time
    and resources on the part of the parties and the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    fact that, for the reasons that we have given, the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision did contain errors of  law  should  not  be  taken  to
    condone the approach which the  First-tier  Tribunal  permission  judge
    adopted in relation to the lawyer's letter.

 8. As we move to a world  in  which  paper  is  increasingly  replaced  by
    electronic forms of communication, it is  particularly  important  that
    judges engaged in the permission process, whether it be at  the  First-
    tier or the Upper Tribunal level, satisfy themselves that they have the
    requisite materials before them in order to make a proper  decision  on
    permission.  No doubt this will be taken up by  those  responsible  for
    such matters in the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The appellant's appeal  is  accordingly  allowed.   We  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the matter de novo for  a
    fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on all issues.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                               Signed   Mr Justice Lane


                               18 February 2021




                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
