
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On  23 October  and 13 November 2012          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                       OLUFISAYO OLATUBOSHUN OGUNDIMU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Hooper, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. The expectation is that it  will  be  an  exceptional  case  in  which
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted where the
      lodging of the application for permission is more than 28 days out  of
      time. Where, in such a case, a judge is minded  to  grant  permission,
      the preferable course is to provide an opportunity to  the  respondent
      to make  representations.  This  might  be  achieved  by  listing  the
      permission application for oral hearing.


   2. The introduction of the new Immigration Rules (HC 194) does not affect
      the circumstance that when considering Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
      Convention "for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent  all  or  the
      major part of his or her childhood and youth in  [this]  country  very
      serious reasons are required to  justify  expulsion."  The  principles
      derived from Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546 are still be applied.

   3. Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules conflicts with the Secretary
      of State's duties under Article 3 of the UN Convention on  the  Rights
      of the Child 1989 and section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009. Little weight should be attached  to  this  Rule
      when consideration is being given to the assessment of proportionality
      under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

   4. The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' in paragraph  399A
      of the Immigration Rules imports a concept  involving  something  more
      than merely remote or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of  proposed
      deportation or removal. It involves there being a connection  to  life
      in that country. Consideration of whether a person has  'no  ties'  to
      such a country must  involve  a  rounded  assessment  of  all  of  the
      relevant circumstances and is not to be limited to  'social,  cultural
      and family' circumstances.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  29  September  1984.  He
   lawfully entered the United Kingdom on 7 July 1991, aged six, in order to
   join his father, who has been settled  and  mainly  resident  here  since
   1961. He was granted indefinite leave to remain on the 29 June  1999.  He
   had thus been resident in the United Kingdom for 21 years at the time  of
   the hearing before us and for about three quarters of his life.

2. The appellant has  had  a  troubled  youth  with  a  difficult  education
   history, including significant periods spent in special needs schools. He
   first appeared before a juvenile court  on  criminal  matters  in  August
   1999, when he was handed a 12 month conditional discharge  for  obtaining
   property by deception. He had six further appearances before the juvenile
   court, being handed a variety of sentences including Supervision  Orders,
   Community Rehabilitation Orders and an Action Plan Order.  Between  March
   2003 and April 2009 he appeared on a  further  12  occasions  before  the
   criminal courts as an adult,  mainly  for  driving  and  drug  possession
   offences. These were generally dealt with by way of fines  and  community
   penalties.

3. However, on the 18 December 2008  the  appellant  was  sentenced  at  the
   Croydon Crown Court following a plea of guilty to a charge of  possessing
   a Class C controlled drug with intent to supply - namely  cannabis.  This
   offence was committed on the 21 October 2008 along with  another  offence
   of possessing a Class A controlled drug.  The appellant was committed for
   sentencing to the Crown Court for supplying cannabis, where a sentence of
   imprisonment for eight months was passed, and forfeiture was  ordered  of
   drugs, cash and three mobile phones. On the 24 April 2009  he  was  dealt
   with by the Croydon Magistrates for possession of the Class A  drugs  and
   given a conditional discharge. This offence was  committed  at  the  same
   time as the matter dealt with at the Crown Court; it is not apparent  why
   the two matters were not dealt with at the same time.  It is  clear  from
   the information we have seen that, at that  time,  the  appellant  had  a
   cocaine addiction that he was supporting by selling cannabis.

4. On the 8 April 2010 the Secretary of State made a decision to deport  the
   appellant as a persistent offender. He  appealed  this  decision  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal.  In doing so he relied  on  the  fact  of  his  long
   residence and that he is the father of, and maintains a relationship with
   a British citizen child born on the 24 August 2004, JT.

5. On the 24 June 2010 the appeal was heard by a  Panel  comprising  of  FtT
   Judge Warren Grant and Mr AF Sheward (non-legal  member).  The  appellant
   did not attend the hearing and no other witnesses gave oral  evidence  on
   his behalf. The appeal was dismissed in a  determination  promulgated  on
   the 29 June 2010. The appellant drafted and lodged  his  own  grounds  of
   appeal against this decision, but permission to appeal was refused by the
   First-tier Tribunal on the 4 August 2010. It was  not  renewed  to  Upper
   Tribunal within the required time limit. A deportation order  was  signed
   against the appellant on the 13 July 2011.

6. The appellant was detained by  the  immigration  authorities  on  the  12
   September 2011. He subsequently obtained legal representation and on  the
   19 September and 31 October 2011 representations were made on his  behalf
   in reliance on his family and private life in  this  country,  requesting
   that the deportation order  be  revoked.  On  the  18  January  2012  the
   Secretary of State made a decision refusing  to  revoke  the  deportation
   order, and certified the appellant's application under section 94 of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, thus  depriving  him  of  a
   further in country right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

7. Removal directions were set and the appellant was due to  be  removed  to
   Nigeria on  the  23  February  2012.  However,  having  had  yet  further
   representations rejected by the Secretary of State, the appellant brought
   an application for judicial review on the day he was due to  be  removed.
   As a consequence, the Secretary of State deferred the directions made for
   his removal.

8. At this stage his present legal team realised that he had  not  exhausted
   his appellate remedies  from  the  adverse  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and so, on the 5 March 2012, he made an out of time  application
   to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal of 29 June 2010. This application was granted  by
   an Upper Tribunal Judge on the 14 March 2012.

The grant of permission to appeal

9. When granting permission to appeal  the  judge  stated  as  follows  [the
   names having been anonymised by us]:

        "3. I have the benefit of very full grounds  drawn  by  experienced
        counsel. They are all arguable but I am particularly  concerned  by
        the ground  complaining  that  the  Tribunal  gave  no  reason  for
        attaching no weight to the evidence in the form of (sic) letter  to
        the Secretary of State (the subsequent witness  statement  was  not
        signed) from one [Ms CT] who introduced herself as  the  mother  of
        the appellant's son and said that the  appellant  "has  been  apart
        (sic) his life, he sees him regularly and is also  responsible  for
        his school and wealthfair (sic)". Clearly  if  [Ms  CT's]  evidence
        was, or should have been, accepted then it  is  at  least  arguable
        that the determination was deficient.


        4. The application is very late. It should have  been  received  no
        later than 26 August 2010 but it was received on 5  March  2012.  A
        main reason for the application being late is  that  the  appellant
        acted on advice suggesting a different remedy.


        5. My powers in these circumstances are wide. I remind myself  that
        there is at the core of this claim an arguable assertion  that  the
        best interests of the child have not been considered properly and I
        extend time"

10. Before we became seized of the appeal there had been  a  hearing  before
   another  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  during  which  the  Secretary  of  State
   expressed concern at the grant of permission to appeal having  been  made
   so long after the expiry of time to renew the application.

11.  We understand those concerns  but  it  is  common  ground  between  the
   parties that:-

        i. There is no power to revoke a grant of permission to  appeal  if
           the judge had power to grant it.
       ii. The signing of the deportation order did not deprive  the  judge
           of the power to grant permission to appeal;  section  104(5)  of
           the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  stating  that
           only appeals brought against decisions of the types referred  to
           in sections 82(2) (a), (c), (d), (e) or (f) are to be treated as
           finally determined upon the making of a deportation  order.  The
           appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision
           of a type referred to in section 82(2)(j) of the 2002 Act.
      iii. The only remedy available to the Secretary of State to challenge
           an inappropriate exercise of discretion to  extend  time  and/or
           grant of permission to appeal is by way of judicial review. That
           course had been considered in this case and a decision was  made
           not to challenge it.

12. Nevertheless, we consider  it  appropriate  to  make  some  observations
   about the grant of permission to appeal out of time.  The  appellant  was
   required, by rule 21 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
   2008 ["2008 Rules"], to make his application for permission to appeal  to
   the Upper Tribunal no later than seven working days  after  the  date  on
   which the First-tier Tribunal's refusal of permission was sent to him. He
   was required, therefore, to have filed his application by the  26  August
   2010.  Under rule 21(6) an applicant who is out of time  must  include  a
   request for an extension of time and the reason why the  application  was
   not provided in time.

13. The Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction to extend the time  for  the  filing
   of  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  pursuant  to  its  case
   management powers set out in rule 5 (3)(a) of the 2008 Rules. Whilst  the
   judge granting permission was correct to state that he had 'wide  powers'
   when considering whether to extend time, those powers must  be  exercised
   having regard to the 'overriding objective' (rule 2(3)).

14. Rule 2(1) of the 2008 Rules provides that the  overriding  objective  of
   the Rules is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases 'fairly  and
   justly'. That requirement is not limited in its effect to the  giving  of
   due consideration to the position of each of the parties to a  particular
   appeal, it allows interests of a wider scope to be considered. This  must
   include the public interest in there being finality to litigation,  which
   is a significant interest of both parties to  litigation  in  immigration
   appeals where the time limits are stricter than in other chambers of  the
   Upper Tribunal.

15. The Secretary of State bears the difficult administrative and  financial
   burden of maintaining effective immigration control. One reason  for  the
   strict time limits is so that the UKBA can be  clear  when  a  claimant's
   appeal rights are exhausted and thereafter proceed to take the  necessary
   enforcement action.

16. Factors relevant to the exercise of  discretion  to  extend  time  under
   rule 5(3)(a) of the 2008 Rules will include, but are not limited to:  (i)
   the length of any delay, (ii) the reasons for the delay, (iii) the merits
   of the appeal and (iv) the degree of prejudice to the respondent  if  the
   application is granted.  The merits of the appeal cannot be decisive (see
   the reasons given in Boktor and Wanis [2011] UKUT 00442).

17. Here the grounds in support of the application for permission to  appeal
   out of time explained that the  appellant  had  been  misadvised  by  his
   previous representatives who advised him that he should proceed by way of
   fresh representations rather than pursue  a  right  of  appeal  and  that
   consequently a clear  error  of  law  in  the  FtT's  decision  had  been
   overlooked.

18. In YD (Turkey) [2006] EWCA Civ 52 the Court of  Appeal  was  considering
   both an application for a stay of  removal  and  an  application  for  an
   extension of time for lodging an appeal to the Court of Appeal against  a
   decision of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal,  the  applicant  having
   failed to apply to the AIT for permission to appeal in  time.  Brooke  LJ
   (with the  agreement  of  Moore-Bick  and  Wilson  LJJ),  summarised  his
   conclusions on the issue of whether to grant  an  extension  of  time  as
   follows [paragraph 41]:
        "(3) Every day that passes from the time when the  AIT  is  without
        jurisdiction is likely to weaken the chance  of  this  court  being
        willing to grant an extension of time, and it would be rare for the
        court to grant an extension of time for two months or more: it will
        have to be satisfied that  a  significant  injustice  has  probably
        occurred;
        (4) The court will only grant such  an  extension  if  in  all  the
        circumstances (including the considerations set out in CPR 3.9)  it
        is just to do so. The appellant will have to present a strong  case
        that he is likely to achieve ultimate success on his appeal against
        the original immigration decision for such an exceptional course to
        be justified."
19. We see no reason why this general principle ought  not  also  to  be  of
   equal application when consideration is being given to  applications  for
   an extension of time to apply for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

20. There must always be a reason  shown  why  time  limits  have  not  been
   complied with and the  longer  the  period  of  non-compliance  the  more
   powerful those reasons should be. Whilst each case must be determined  on
   its own facts, given  the  strict  time  limits  in  immigration  appeals
   generally and the reason behind those time  limits,  the  expectation  is
   that it will be an exceptional case where permission to be appeal  should
   be granted where  there  has  been  a  significant  delay  in  filing  an
   application; by significant delay we would certainly include  any  period
   more than 28 days out of time.

21. Where a judge is minded to grant permission to appeal in such  cases  he
   or she should specifically  consider  whether  removal  action  has  been
   initiated and whether there are other reasons why the grant of permission
   would prejudice  the  public  interest  in  effective  administration  of
   immigration control. As permission is  normally  granted  on  the  papers
   without a hearing and without an opportunity for the respondent to  raise
   objections, we also consider that  the  preferable  course  is  that  the
   respondent is given an opportunity to make representations on  the  grant
   of permission in cases where the  delay  exceeds  28  days.  Perhaps  the
   easiest way to achieve that is to list  the  permission  application  for
   oral hearing on seven days clear notice. In such cases the  claimant  may
   need to substantiate any reason why the claim is made  late,  by  way  of
   evidence.

22. We observe that in this case the appellant was already  challenging  his
   removal and the rejection of the representations as a fresh claim and  we
   recognise, for reasons given below, that there was a  strong  claim  that
   the FtT decision contained a serious error of law. There was substance in
   the contention that the previous representatives had failed to advise the
   appellant of that error of law  as  a  basis  of  seeking  permission  to
   appeal.

Revised Decision letter

23. On the 16 August 2012, following the grant of permission but before  the
   error of law hearing, the Secretary of State, in light  of  HC  194  [the
   amendments made to the Immigration Rules  that  took  effect  on  9  July
   2012], provided a further letter setting out her reasons  for  concluding
   that the appellant's deportation should be maintained and  why,  applying
   these new Rules, in her view it would not lead to a breach of  Article  8
   ECHR.

24. The Secretary of State noted that the appellant had  been  convicted  of
   30 offences of which three remained unspent. She concluded that paragraph
   398(c) was of application to the appellant because his deportation  would
   be conducive to  the  public  good  as  a  consequence  of  him  being  a
   persistent offender. The Secretary of State then  gave  consideration  to
   the application of paragraphs 399(a), 399(b) and 399A of the Immigrations
   Rules.

25. In relation to paragraph 399(a) the Secretary of State concluded that:-

        i. The appellant is not in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
           with JT (his son);
       ii. JT is a British citizen living in the United Kingdom;
      iii. It is unreasonable to expect JT to leave the United Kingdom.;
       iv. There is another family member who is able to care for JT in the
           United Kingdom, that being his mother, CT.


26. As to paragraph 399(b), it was concluded that:-

        i. The appellant is not in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
           with JD (his claimed partner);
       ii. JD is a British citizen living in the United Kingdom;
      iii. The appellant has been living in the United Kingdom  with  valid
           leave continuously for at least 15 years  immediately  preceding
           the immigration decision;
       iv. There are no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's  family
           life with JD continuing outside the United Kingdom.


27. In relation to paragraph 399A the Secretary of State concluded that:-

        i. The appellant has lived for 20 years continuously in the  United
           Kingdom  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
           decision;
       ii. The appellant has not demonstrated that  he  has  'no  ties'  to
           Nigeria.


28. The Secretary of State finally concluded that there were no  exceptional
   circumstances in the appellant's case so as to warrant a  departure  from
   the above stated position and that, as a consequence, his  removal  would
   not lead to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

Error of Law

29. On the 23 October 2012 we heard argument on the  issue  of  whether  the
   First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of  an  error  of  law
   such that it ought to be set aside. At the  end  of  the  submissions  Ms
   Kiss, representing the Secretary of State, accepted that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had erred in law at paragraph 18 of its determination. We agreed
   that this was so and now give our reasons for coming to this conclusion.

30. There was no dispute before the First-tier Tribunal as to the date  that
   the appellant first arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom,  or  that  he  had
   remained continuously  living  here  since  1991.  When  considering  the
   application of Article  8  ECHR  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  as
   follows:

        "[18] On the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  us  we  have  found
        negligible evidence of private and  family  life.  The  appellant's
        sister attended at the case management review  hearing  and  stated
        that their father was in Nigeria and would not  return  before  the
        date for the full hearing but no family member attended the hearing
        to give evidence on behalf  of  the  appellant.  We  find  that  he
        clearly lives with his parents but that he is an adult and that his
        relationship with his parents and his siblings does not  go  beyond
        normal emotional ties beyond adults. The fact that his father is in
        Nigeria shows that he visits that country and there is  nothing  to
        stop any of the appellant's  close  family  members  from  visiting
        Nigeria or even going to live there is they wish. The  consequences
        of the removal of the appellant will not be sufficiently  grave  so
        as to engage the Convention. Even if  the  Convention  were  to  be
        engaged his removal would be in accordance with the law; and  would
        have the legitimate aim of protecting the public against those  who
        commit crimes. There is nothing in the appellant's personal history
        in the form of compassionate circumstances which would outweigh the
        duty imposed upon the Secretary of State to prevent  crime  and  to
        protect the public. In this context we refer  to  paragraph  35  of
        Samaroo and another v SSHD [2001] EWCA Civ 1139 and to paragraph 65
        of N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1094. The judgmental  issue  is
        whether  in  a  democratic  society  it  would  be  necessary   and
        proportionate to the legitimate aim and if we have to go on to make
        a finding in respect of proportionality we  find  that  removal  is
        proportionate."


31. Insofar as the First-tier Tribunal concluded  that  Article  8  was  not
   even  engaged  and  that  there  would  be  no   interference   requiring
   justification, we have no doubt that it made a serious error of  law.  In
   AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801, and in particular paragraphs 26-28, the
   phrase "consequences of such gravity" in the  Razgar  question  (2)  were
   found to posit no particularly high threshold.

32. Had the tribunal correctly directed itself it  would  have  been  clear,
   even on the limited facts before it, that the only conclusion open to it,
   given that the appellant had lived here since the  age  of  six  and  for
   nearly 20 years, was that Article 8(1) was engaged. This was a case where
   the tribunal of its own motion, irrespective of  anything  the  appellant
   advanced or failed to advance in his home made grounds of  appeal,  ought
   to have considered and applied the decision of the Grand Chamber  of  the
   European Court of Human Rights in the case Maslov v Austria  [2008]  ECHR
   546.

33. In Maslov the applicant had resided in Austria for 18  years  since  the
   age of six and had appeared before the juvenile courts on multiple counts
   of aggravated gang  burglary  and  attempted  aggravated  gang  burglary,
   forming a gang, extortion, assault and unauthorised  use  of  a  vehicle,
   committed between November 1998 and June 1999. He  was  sentenced  to  18
   months' imprisonment, 13 of which were suspended  on  probation.  He  was
   subsequently sentenced to 15 months imprisonment on  eighteen  counts  of
   aggravated burglary and attempted aggravated burglary.  When  fixing  the
   sentence the court observed that the  applicant,  although  still  living
   with his parents, had completely escaped their educational influence, had
   repeatedly been absent from home and  had  dropped  out  of  school.  The
   applicant had also failed to  comply  with  the  order  to  undergo  drug
   therapy. On 3 January 2001 the Vienna Federal Police Authority imposed  a
   ten  year  exclusion  order  on  the  applicant.  Having  regard  to  the
   applicant's convictions, it found that it  was  contrary  to  the  public
   interest to allow him to  stay  in  Austria  any  longer.  The  applicant
   appealed, submitting  amongst  other  things  that  the  exclusion  order
   violated his rights under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention as  he
   had come to Austria at the age of six, his entire family lived in Austria
   and  he  had  no  relatives  in  Bulgaria.  Following  a  succession   of
   unsuccessful appeals to the Austrian courts he was deported to  Sofia  in
   December 2003. He subsequently applied to the ECtHR.  The  Grand  Chamber
   held that there had been a violation of Article 8.

34.  In  coming  to  its  conclusion  the  Court  considered   whether   the
   interference with the  applicant's  private  and  family  life  could  be
   justified under Article 8(2). It  set  out,  in  paragraph  57,  criteria
   relevant to that exercise where an offence is committed by an  applicant.
   The Court then elaborated on those criteria in passages  that  should  be
   very familiar to all judges  making  these  decisions.  We  emphasis  the
   following two paragraphs:


        "74. Although Article 8 provides  no  absolute  protection  against
        expulsion for any category of aliens (see �ner,  �  55),  including
        those who were born in the host country or  moved  there  in  their
        early childhood, the Court has already found that regard is  to  be
        had to the special situation of aliens who have spent most, if  not
        all, their childhood in the host country, were brought up there and
        received their education there (see �ner, � 58 in fine).


        75. In short, the Court considers that for a  settled  migrant  who
        has lawfully spent all or the major part of his  or  her  childhood
        and youth in the host country very serious reasons are required  to
        justify expulsion. This  is  all  the  more  so  where  the  person
        concerned committed the offences underlying the  expulsion  measure
        as a juvenile."

35. It was thus in June 2010 trite law that in cases of  the  present  kind,
   where there has been long residence since  childhood,  the  private  life
   claim will succeed unless there are "very  serious  reasons...to  justify
   expulsion". That  remains  the  case:  see  for  example  MW  (Democratic
   Republic of Congo) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1240 Sullivan LJ  at  paragraph
   75 and the reported decision of the Upper Tribunal in Masih  (deportation
   - public interest - basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC).

36. The First-tier Tribunal in  the  instant  appeal  singularly  failed  to
   direct itself in accordance with Maslov; failed to recognise the strength
   of the private life claim by reason of long residence  alone;  failed  to
   identify the need for very serious reasons to justify the expulsion  and,
   accordingly, failed to determine the human rights appeal lawfully.  As  a
   consequence of these serious flaws, the decision cannot stand. For  these
   reasons we set aside the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
   indicated that we would remake the  decision  ourselves  on  13  November
   2012.

Admission of the appellant's spent convictions

37. One of the appellant's grounds of appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  was
   that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a  further
   error of law in that it had relied on convictions of the  appellant  that
   were spent and should have been excluded from consideration.




38. Section 7(3) of the Rehabilitation of Offenders  Act  1974  provides  as
   follows:

        "If at any stage in any proceedings before a judicial authority  in
        Great Britain ... the authority is satisfied, in the light  of  any
        considerations which appear to it to  be  relevant  (including  any
        evidence which has been or may thereafter be put before  it),  that
        justice cannot be done in the case except by admitting or requiring
        evidence  relating  to  a  person's   spent   convictions   or   to
        circumstances ancillary thereto, that authority may  admit  or,  as
        the case may be, require the evidence in  question  notwithstanding
        the provisions of subsection  (1)  of  section  4  above,  and  may
        determine any issue to which the evidence relates in disregard,  so
        far as necessary, of those provisions"

39. It is for the Secretary of State to satisfy us that  justice  could  not
   be done without admitting the appellant's spent  convictions  (AA  (Spent
   convictions) Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00027). We concluded that she has done
   so on the facts of this case.

40. In a case of this sort,  where  the  Secretary  of  State  relies  on  a
   persistent course of conduct rather than  a  single  serious  offence  to
   justify deportation, it is of  importance  to  look  at  the  appellant's
   offending behaviour as a whole. It is the Secretary of State's case  that
   the appellant's offending behaviour escalated and would  continue  to  do
   so. It would be artificial in such circumstances  to  consider  only  the
   most very recent convictions.  We therefore directed that we would  admit
   the whole  of  the  appellant's  criminal  record  when  we  re-made  the
   decision, in order to  obtain  a  complete  picture.  The  weight  to  be
   attached to spent convictions is  a  very  different  matter,  but  their
   relevance is the information they throw on the  strength  of  the  public
   interest in deporting the appellant for his most recent offending.

41. We also observe that where persistent criminal conduct is relied on,  it
   is important for the judge to have the full Criminal Record Office  print
   out rather than just a summary of the dates of convictions. The full list
   assists discovery of when the  offending  occurred,  whether  it  was  in
   breach of a Community Order, whether the appellant was  on  bail  at  the
   time of  the  offending,  and  other  data  about  the  sequence  of  the
   offending. We pointed out at the hearing that  any  suggestion  that  the
   Data Protection Act restricted disclosure of such information to a  court
   is misconceived.

Other Case Management issues

42. At the error of law hearing it appeared  that  other  information  about
   the appellant's  personal  and  family  life  and  the  strength  of  his
   connection with his child might be  needed,  including  material  in  the
   possession of local social services.  We were aware  that  the  appellant
   relied on a very full report of an independent social worker who had made
   a home visit to see the appellant with JT.

43. In order to assist in the case management of  this  appeal  we  directed
   there be a consolidated bundle of evidence produced by the  appellant  no
   later than 5pm on 5 November 2012. We also  directed  that  both  parties
   inform the Tribunal in writing by 10 am on 6 November 2012:-

       i.     Which witness they required to attend  for  cross  examination
          and
      ii.  Whether any further directions for the  production  of  documents
          was sought.


   We made provision for a 'For Mention' hearing on the 6 November, in order
   to ensure   that the re-making hearing the following week  would  proceed
   without difficulty. We expressed the hope that Ms Kiss would  retain  the
   conduct of the case on behalf of the Secretary of State  given  the  care
   she had clearly taken to prepare for it hitherto.

44. By way of the facsimile received by the Tribunal at  10.45am  on  the  5
   November the appellant's solicitors made an application for an  extension
   of time in relation to the direction that  they  produce  a  consolidated
   bundle. They did not indicate that they wished to  cross-examine  any  of
   the witness' relied upon by the Secretary of State.

45. In response to the directions, the Secretary of State served  a  witness
   statement of a Ms Laura Best. The Secretary of State failed, however,  to
   inform the Tribunal in writing which witnesses, of those included in  the
   material before us on the 23 October 2012, she  required  to  attend  for
   cross-examination. At the For Mention hearing Mr Bramble  indicated  that
   he had only very recently taken over the file as Ms Kiss was  unavailable
   for reasons which we fully understand.  He provided no explanation as  to
   why the Secretary of State had not complied with the  directions  of  the
   Tribunal and agreed  that  the  appellant  ought  to  be  given  a  short
   extension of time in which to file and serve  a  consolidated  bundle  of
   evidence. He indicated that as far as he was aware the Secretary of State
   did not require the  attendance  of  the  appellant's  witnesses  at  the
   hearing,  although  by  way  of  caveat  he  noted  that  the  up-to-date
   statements of the witnesses had yet to be filed.

46. A consolidated bundle, absent witness statements, was  received  by  the
   Tribunal on the morning of the 8 November, in compliance with the amended
   timetable. Shortly thereafter, on the same day, the Tribunal  received  a
   further bundle containing (i) witness statements prepared for an  earlier
   hearing before the Upper Tribunal, and (ii)  updated  witness  statements
   for all but one the appellant's witnesses. There was no updated statement
   from CT, who is the mother of JT. We were made aware that there was  some
   tension between her and the appellant's current partner JD.

The hearing on 13 November

47. At the outset of  the  hearing  Mr  Allan,  who  now  appeared  for  the
   Secretary of State, indicated that although the Secretary  of  State  had
   received the consolidated bundle, she had  not  received  the  additional
   bundle containing the witness statements. Ms Hooper  confirmed  that  she
   had been instructed that such statements had been served on the Secretary
   of State by facsimile, for the attention of Ms Kiss.

48. As a consequence we delayed the start of  the  proceedings  to  give  Mr
   Allan the opportunity to consider these  statements.  We  note,  however,
   that many of the statements contained within this bundle  had  previously
   been filed and served by the appellant for the  purposes  of  use  at  an
   earlier hearing before the Upper Tribunal. As detailed above, there were,
   additionally, short supplementary statements from  all  but  one  of  the
   witnesses relied upon by the appellant.

49. Upon the resumption of the hearing Mr Allan indicated that he wished  to
   cross-examine the appellant and all of  his  witnesses.  We  directed  Mr
   Allan's attention to the directions of the 23 October, and the failure of
   the Secretary of State to comply with those directions by  informing  the
   Tribunal  in  writing  which  witnesses  would  be  required  for  cross-
   examination. Mr Allan responded by stating that he had  important  points
   to put to the witnesses and that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  had
   opportunity, prior to the day of the hearing, to consider the  additional
   witness statements and consequently to know whether there was a need  for
   the witnesses to be cross examined.

50.  We rejected Mr Allan's request. The Secretary  of  State  was  provided
   with detailed witness statements from the  appellant,  and  each  of  his
   witnesses, several months prior to the hearing of this  appeal.  In  such
   circumstances, it is clear that the Secretary of State was in a position,
   at least a week before the hearing, to be able to properly identify which
   of those witnesses she wished to cross-examine. The Upper Tribunal had by
   this stage had three hearings following the grant of permission; the need
   for expedition and efficient use of court time was obvious. Where  either
   party fails to co-operate with the Tribunal or respond to directions they
   must expect to bear the consequences of their  own  failure  to  properly
   prepare for the hearing.

51. CT was not present at the hearing, nor was there any  need  for  her  to
   be. If we were to accede to Mr Allan's request to allow her to be  cross-
   examined, it would have necessitated a further adjournment of the appeal.
   Mr Allan could not rely on the fact that the Secretary of State  had  not
   seen all of her evidence until the morning of the hearing.

52. However, given that the other witnesses were present at the hearing  and
   that some of what was said in their statements was new, we indicated that
   we would allow cross-examination of the appellant,  his  father  and  JD,
   despite the Secretary of State's failure to comply with the directions.

The further evidence

The evidence of the appellant

53.  In  evidence  the  appellant  adopted  the  contents  of  his   witness
   statements as being true and accurate. He was then  tendered  for  cross-
   examination. In cross-examination he confirmed that he  had  returned  to
   Nigeria on only one occasion since his arrival in the United Kingdom, for
   two weeks with his sister and father. He had  travelled  there  in  order
   attend the wedding of a friend of his father's  and  stayed  in  a  hotel
   whilst there. He thought that his father  had  travelled  to  Nigeria  on
   three occasions in total. He was unaware of any  relatives  he  may  have
   there.

54. The appellant's attention was then drawn to his  offending  history.  He
   accepted he had made 'big mistakes' in the past and  that  he  had  twice
   been sentenced to terms of imprisonment, although on the  first  occasion
   this sentence had been varied on appeal. He thought that he had  been  18
   or 19 years old when he was last sentenced to a term of imprisonment.  He
   then confirmed that he had been born in 1984 and that he must  have  been
   21 or 22 years old at the time of his imprisonment in 2008. The appellant
   was then asked when he thought his attitude to offending had changed.  He
   stated that at the time of his son's birth he had  gone  to  college  and
   taken help from probation officers in order to  try  and  'get  off'  the
   drugs. He accepted that he had 'slipped up' a few times since  the  birth
   of his son, but asserted that he had stayed out of trouble entirely since
   2008 'save for a little bit of trouble a few weeks ago'. He accepted that
   he had recently been cautioned for possessing cannabis, but  stated  that
   he did not use cannabis often.

55.  The  appellant  was  then  asked  a  series  of  questions  about   his
   relationship with CT. He stated that his son had been born prematurely at
   33 weeks on 24 August 2004, and that he had been in a  relationship  with
   CT for approximately one and a half years prior  to  the  birth.  He  had
   lived with CT and her parents prior to the birth and subsequently he, his
   son and CT had moved into their own accommodation. He had  moved  out  of
   this family home when his son was aged three or four. He agreed that this
   would have been in 2008. He had then been in a relationship with  someone
   else, which lasted approximately one year,  before  he  had  started  his
   relationship with JD in 2005 or 2006.

56. At this time it was  pointed  out  to  the  appellant  that  there  were
   internal  inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  about  the  timing  of  his
   relationships. The appellant responded by stating that he had 'got a  few
   bits mixed up', and that he knew he had been  with  JD  for  seven  years
   because  her  daughter,  TS,  was  two  or  three  years  old  when   his
   relationship to JD had begun; she is  now  nine  years  old.  He  further
   asserted that he thought JT to have been  two  years  old  when  he  [the
   appellant] had left that family home he had shared with him and CT. He is
   now required, by the immigration  service,  to  live  and  sleep  at  the
   address he shares with JD and TS.  He does not go round to CT's house  to
   see his son. Either his father or brother regularly picks up JT. He  [the
   appellant] sees his son at his father's or brother's house. His father or
   brother then drops his son back with CT. They also occasionally  pick  up
   JT's half-sister. These arrangements have been in place for approximately
   a year. The only time he has been to CT's house since  his  release  from
   immigration detention was the occasion on which Ms  Christine  Brown,  an
   independent social worker, came to the house. He  does  not  go  to  CT's
   house because Ms JD does not  like  him  doing  so.  There  is  animosity
   between JD and CT.

57. The appellant continued by stating that that JD  is  now  pregnant  with
   his child. He had initially lived with JD after his release from criminal
   detention, but he had left JD a couple of months after the hearing before
   the First-tier Tribunal [approximately August 2010], and returned to live
   with CT. He had then left CT and returned to  live  with  JD  in  October
   2011.

58. In response to questions from the tribunal the appellant  accepted  that
   he had been selling cannabis in  2008  to  fund  his  cocaine  habit.  He
   further stated that he had been put on a supervision requirement in  2008
   and that he had 'not touched' cocaine since that time. He  accepted  that
   when he was arrested in October 2008 he was still addicted to cocaine. He
   also  accepted  that  his  recent  caution  for  possession  of  cannabis
   contradicted the assertion made in his witness  statement  of  July  2012
   that he was clear of drugs and would remain so. He indicated that he  had
   taken cannabis on a couple of other occasions in the past year because he
   had felt down and could not sleep.

The evidence of JD

59. JD adopted the contents of her witness statements and was  tendered  for
   cross-examination. She stated that she and the appellant had  been  in  a
   relationship for  seven  years  and  he  had  first  moved  in  with  her
   approximately five or six years ago. She and the appellant had  split  up
   for about a year, and had subsequently 'got back together last  September
   or October [2011]'.

60. The witness continued her evidence  by  stating  that  she  and  CT  are
   cousins, and that they do not now talk to each other as a result  of  the
   appellant's transfer of affections. She knows JT. Her  daughter's  [TS's]
   father picks her up at the weekends. This relationship  is  informal  and
   not regulated by the courts. She is not aware of the appellant having any
   family members in Nigeria. She is aware that the appellant  had  recently
   been arrested for smoking cannabis. The witness then  asserted  that  the
   appellant is not currently using cocaine. Whilst she could  not  identify
   any physical differences in the appellant,  his  behaviour  was  markedly
   different from the time he had used cocaine, notably that he now does not
   go out socially at all.

The evidence of Mr Ogundimu senior

61. The appellant's father adopted the contents of  his  witness  statements
   and was tendered for cross-examination. In cross-examination he confirmed
   that he had  attended  the  wedding  in  Nigeria  of  his  late  sister's
   daughter. Since the appellant's arrival in the  United  Kingdom  he  [the
   appellant] had only visited Nigeria on one occasion. He told us that  his
   niece  (whose  marriage  he  had   attended   in   Nigeria),   lives   in
   Massachusetts, USA and that she had returned to Nigeria in order to marry
   there.

62. It was noted by Mr Allan that the witness had stated that  he  had  also
   returned to his family village  in  Nigeria.  The  witness  responded  by
   stating that by 'family village' he  had  meant  the  village  where  his
   family were from. The  witness  further  stated  that  his  brothers  and
   sisters had all now passed away, and that he had only an elderly 95  year
   old aunt living in the family village. He agreed  that  that  there  were
   other distant family members living in Nigeria, although he was not asked
   who these were. He confirmed that  he  had  been  living  in  the  United
   Kingdom for 52 years and that he had not kept in contact with  people  in
   Nigeria. The witness further confirmed that the appellant now lives  with
   JD.

63. In response to questions from the tribunal, the witness stated that  his
   parents and their siblings had all passed away, save for the 95 year  old
   aunt referred to earlier.

The respondent's case

64. In his submissions Mr Allan relied on  the  reasoning  set  out  in  the
   Secretary of State's letter of the 16 August 2012. He submitted that,  as
   a consequence of the provisions of  paragraph  A362  of  the  Immigration
   Rules, the Tribunal were required to  determine  the  appeal  brought  on
   Article 8 grounds on the basis of the rules which are now in force,  this
   being despite the decision under challenge having been made over two  and
   a half years ago.

65. He maintained that the Secretary of State had been correct  to  conclude
   that he was a  persistent  offender  and  that,  consequently,  paragraph
   398(c) is of application. Reliance was also placed on the fact  that  the
   appellant had recently been cautioned for possession of cannabis, and  it
   was asserted that the appellant's  evidence  that  he  no  longer  had  a
   cocaine habit could  not  be  relied  upon.  It  was  submitted,  in  the
   alternative, that even if the appellant does not currently have a cocaine
   habit, his previous cannabis drug habit had progressed to a cocaine habit
   and there was no reason to think that this would not happen again.

66. The tribunal  invited  Mr  Allan  to  address  it  on  the  question  of
   proportionality, in particular in relation to the application of  Maslov.
   In response Mr Allan asserted that the Immigration Rules ought now to  be
   treated as the executive's statement of where the proportionality balance
   lies in any given individual case and that, as a consequence, there  need
   not be a separate consideration of  the  Maslov  criteria  because  those
   criteria had been absorbed within the considerations  in  paragraph  398.
   Upon the tribunal attempting to seek justification for  this  submission,
   Mr Allan indicated that he would need to take specific  instructions.  In
   written submissions from the Secretary of State of the 27  November  2012
   it was stated that "The Respondent has  carefully  considered  the  broad
   principles set out in Maslov and other Strasbourg and domestic  case  law
   in formulating the new rules."

67. In relation to paragraph 399(a) Mr Allan asserted that given that CT  is
   JT's primary carer she would be able to care for JT and that consequently
   the appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b).
   At this stage Ms Hooper indicated that it was accepted that CT  was  able
   to care for JT.

68. As to paragraph 399(b), Mr Allan submitted that the  appellant  had  not
   demonstrated that he is in a subsisting relationship with JD; there being
   no evidence that they shared accommodation, or  that  the  appellant  had
   been financially maintaining JD. He also reminded the tribunal  that  the
   appellant had been unable to give a consistent timeline as  to  when  the
   relationship with JD had begun or as to  when  they  had  started  living
   together.  He  asserted  that,  in  any  event,  the  appellant  had  not
   established this relationship was genuine. He reminded the tribunal  that
   the appellant had admitted living with CT in 2010 purely to  bolster  his
   position with the immigration  authorities.  It  was  submitted,  in  the
   alternative, that there were no insurmountable obstacles to JD living  in
   Nigeria.

69. In relation to paragraph 399A Mr Allan accepted that the  appellant  had
   lived in the United Kingdom for 20 years as  required  by  the  rule  but
   asserted that he could not establish that he  has  no  ties  to  Nigeria,
   given that he has an aunt, and other unspecified relatives, living  there
   and that he has cultural ties  to  the  country.  He  asserted  that  the
   immigration rule was phrased so as to preclude an applicant who  has  any
   ties to the country to which he is being deported,  irrespective  of  how
   limited those ties were and whether they could be seen  to  be  effective
   ties.

70. The tribunal invited Mr Allan  to  make  submissions  on  the  issue  of
   whether the Secretary of State's decision was in accordance with the  law
   (including the United Kingdom and Strasbourg jurisprudence in relation to
   Article 8). In response he stated that  the  immigration  rules  are  the
   executive's perception of where the balance lies in Article 8  cases  and
   that if those rules were satisfied then this appellant ought  to  succeed
   in his appeal. We postulated whether this would still be  the  case  even
   if, on a hypothetical scenario, the appellant was a cocaine supplier.  Mr
   Allan stated that it would, as long as the appellant had  not  previously
   been convicted of an offence for which he  had  received  a  sentence  of
   imprisonment of more than four years. He  re-iterated  that  it  was  the
   Secretary of State's submission that a consideration of  the  immigration
   rules was, save for in exceptional cases,  determinative  for  Article  8
   purposes.

The appellant's case

71. In response Ms  Hooper  submitted  that  the  appellant  should  not  be
   treated as a persistent offender and that, although he had  now  admitted
   using cannabis on a few occasions in the past year, it would  not  be  in
   the public interest  to  deport  him.  She  asserted  that  even  if  the
   appellant could be  described  as  a  persistent  offender,  the  aim  of
   deporting persistent offenders is to stop a further escalation  in  their
   offending. She noted that the escalation in the appellant's offending had
   dissipated since 2008.

72. In relation to the issue of whether the appellant  is  still  a  cocaine
   user, she submitted that he had offered to take  a  drug  test  in  order
   prove his case in this  regard  and  that,  in  such  circumstances,  the
   evidence that he no longer takes cocaine should be accepted.

73. As to paragraph 399(b) of the  Immigration  Rules,  Ms  Hooper  asserted
   that the appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  JD.
   She reminded the tribunal that Ms JD is now pregnant with the appellant's
   child. She further asserted that, although the appellant's evidence as to
   the dates of his relationship with JD had not been clear,  it  was  plain
   when looking at his evidence as  a  whole  that  he  was  'hopeless  with
   dates'. She submitted that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  JD
   moving to, and living in, Nigeria with the appellant, in  particular  the
   fact that she has a British citizen daughter who has regular contact with
   her father.

74. In relation to paragraph 399A it was asserted that  the  appellant  does
   not have 'ties' to Nigeria of a type precluded by  paragraph  399A(a)  of
   the Rules.

75. In  conclusion,  Ms  Hooper  submitted  that  the  appellant  meets  the
   requirements of paragraphs 399(b) and 399A of HC 395 and that his  appeal
   ought to be allowed.

Further written submissions

76. In the course of the hearing, and in the light of (i) the importance  he
   attached to the new immigration rules as indicating  how  the  Article  8
   balance should apply and (ii) whether the rules should be interpreted  so
   as to reflect the criteria established by  the  European  Court  in  such
   cases as Maslov and the Supreme Court in such cases as ZH Tanzania [2011]
   UKSC 4, we asked Mr Allan:

          i. Whether the term 'ties' in paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration
             Rules ought to be interpreted consistently with the decision of
             the ECtHR in Maslov?;


         ii. Whether paragraph 399(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  excludes
             cases where another family member is able to  care  for  person
             D's child [where person D is the subject of deportation action]
             but where person D provides additional  care  which  the  child
             needs?

77. By way of written submissions dated 27 November 2012 we were informed:-

          i. 'No ties (including social, cultural or family)'  in  paragraph
             399A means "[t]aking account of their background  as  a  whole,
             the person has so little connection with  that  country  as  to
             mean that the consequences for them establishing a private life
             there would be unjustifiably harsh". We were  referred  to  the
             UKBA Guidance  (set  out  in  Chapter  13  of  the  Immigration
             Directorate Instructions) on the concept of  "no  ties",  which
             indicates that a decision maker "should  consider  whether  the
             person has  sufficient  knowledge  of  or  connections  to  the
             country of origin to be able to form an adequate  private  life
             in that country".


         ii. As to Paragraph 399(a)(i)(b), "[a]ssessing whether  a  parent's
             involvement is  'needed',  whilst  appropriate  in  family  law
             proceedings, would create a  new  and  inappropriate  test  for
             determining Article 8 considerations  in  deportation  cases...
             The person facing deportation can  succeed  under  these  rules
             where they can show no alternative family  member  is  able  to
             [provide adequate] care for the  child...  the  rules...reflect
             the possibility that...separation [between  parent  and  child]
             may not be in the child's best interest. "

        iii. The wording of paragraph 398  "[r]eflects  the  fact  that  the
             Rules cannot address the specific circumstances  of  all  cases
             and that deportation will not be the correct course  where  the
             person facing deportation can show the  impact  of  deportation
             will be unjustifiably harsh even having regard  to  the  public
             interest in deporting foreign criminals".

Legal Background

78. Sections 3(5) and 3(6) of the Immigration Act 1971  set  out  the  three
   circumstances in which a person is liable to  deportation,  only  one  of
   which is material in this appeal; where the Secretary of  State  deems  a
   person's deportation conducive to the public good. Section  5(1)  of  the
   1971 Act provides the Secretary  of  State  with  discretion  to  make  a
   deportation order against a person who is liable to deportation.

79. The immigration rules in force as  at  the  date  of  the  Secretary  of
   State's decision to make the deportation order  in  this  case  (8  April
   2010) stated as follows:


        "364. Subject to paragraph 380  [which  is  not  relevant  for  the
          purposes of this appeal], while each case will  be  considered  on
          its  merits,  where  a  person  is  liable  to   deportation   the
          presumption  shall  be   that   the   public   interest   requires
          deportation. The Secretary of State  will  consider  all  relevant
          factors in considering whether the presumption  is  outweighed  in
          any particular case, although  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
          circumstances that the public  interest  in  deportation  will  be
          outweighed in a case where it would not be contrary to  the  Human
          Rights Convention and the Convention and Protocol relating to  the
          Status of Refugees to deport. The aim is an exercise of the  power
          of deportation which is consistent and fair as between one  person
          and another, although one  case  will  rarely  be  identical  with
          another in all material respects..."


80. From the 9 July 2012 onwards the Immigration  Rules  were  substantially
   amended by HC 194 with the intention of creating a new framework for  the
   consideration of claims based on Article 8 ECHR  grounds.  Paragraph  364
   was deleted from the Rules and the following relevant  'new'  rules  were
   incorporated:

       "A362.  Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
             Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under  Article  8  will  only
             succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 9 July 2012
             are met, regardless of when the notice of intention  to  deport
             or the deportation order, as appropriate, was served.


        362. A deportation order requires the subject to leave  the  United
             Kingdom and authorises his detention until he  is  removed.  It
             also prohibits him from re-entering the country for as long  as
             it is in force and invalidates any leave to enter or remain  in
             the United Kingdom given him before the Order is made or  while
             it is in force.


        363. The circumstances in which a person is liable  to  deportation
             include:


             (i) where the Secretary of State deems the person's deportation
             to be conducive to the public good;
        ...

        397.  A deportation order will not be made if the person's  removal
             pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations
             under the Refugee Convention or the  Human  Rights  Convention.
             Where deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,
             it will only be in exceptional circumstances  that  the  public
             interest in deportation is outweighed.


        398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
             to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention, and


             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an  offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
             of at least 4 years;


             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an  offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
             of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or


             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to
             the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of State,
             their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
             persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard  for  the
             law,


             the Secretary of State in assessing that  claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does  not,  it
             will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
             interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors.


        399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who  is  in
             the UK, and


              (i)      the child is a British citizen; or


              (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at  least
              the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
              decision; and in either case


                 (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the UK; and
                 (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for
                 the child in the UK; or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen,  settled  in
             the UK, or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and


              i)  the  person  has  lived  in  the  UK  with   valid   leave
                 continuously  for  at  least  the  15   years   immediately
                 preceding the date of the immigration decision
                 (discounting any period of imprisonment); and


             ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
                 partner continuing outside the UK.




        399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
             if -


              (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
              20 years immediately preceding the date  of  the  immigration
              decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he  has
              no ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
              country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
              UK; or


              (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least
              half of his life living continuously in  the  UK  immediately
              preceding the date of the immigration  decision  (discounting
              any period of imprisonment) and he  has  no  ties  (including
              social, cultural or family) with  the  country  to  which  he
              would have to go if required to leave the UK."


Relevance of the 'new' immigration rules to our decision

81. The Secretary  of  State  submits  that  the  tribunal  is  required  to
   determine the issue of whether the appellant's deportation would lead  to
   a breach of Article 8 ECHR by reference principally to whether  he  meets
   the requirements of the 'new' rules. It was asserted  that,  if  he  does
   meet the requirements of those rules, then his appeal ought to be allowed
   because those rules reflect where the public interest lies;  however,  if
   he does not meet the requirements of the new rules then his appeal  ought
   to be dismissed.


82. The application of the new rules to appeals  against  decisions  of  the
   Secretary of State made prior to  the  9  July  2012  has  recently  been
   considered by the Upper Tribunal [Upper Tribunal Judges Storey and Coker]
   in the reported decision of MF (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]
   UKUT 00393 (IAC).  The tribunal was not persuaded that the new rules  had
   retrospective effect such that they were of application to  decisions  of
   the Secretary of State taken prior to 9 July 2012. It  further  concluded
   that the new rules were not conclusive of the Article 8 issue; there were
   two questions, (i) whether the decision is in accordance with  the  Rules
   and (ii) whether it is accordance with the  law  as  interpreted  by  the
   senior courts whose decisions are binding. The tribunal noted a number of
   respects in which the new rules appeared to apply tests  that  have  been
   disapproved of by the courts.

83. In the light of the submissions we have received we propose  to  analyse
   the case on  the  factual  findings  we  have  reached,  both  under  the
   provision of the new rules and the law applicable  at  the  time  of  the
   original decision. We agree with the panel's decision in MF that a  human
   rights claim that should have succeeded in  2010  applying  the  law  and
   policy then applicable should not be defeated by new provisions that  are
   in many respects considerably more restrictive.

84. However, we recognise that the issue may proceed on appeal to the  Court
   of Appeal. Further, in principle it may be open to the  SSHD  to  make  a
   fresh decision to deport applying the new  rules.  Here  the  substantial
   delay  in  this  appeal  coming  before  the  Upper   Tribunal   is   the
   responsibility of the appellant. We  therefore  propose  to  examine  the
   claim by reference to the new Immigration Rules as well as the principles
   of law binding on us concerned with the evaluation of Article 8 cases.


Our conclusions

85. There is no dispute  as  to  the  factual  foundation  relevant  to  our
   consideration of the  exercise  of  the  discretion  as  to  whether  the
   appellant's deportation would be conducive to the public  good.  We  have
   set out the appellant's criminal convictions in paragraphs two and  three
   above, save for one offence, which was committed just a few  weeks  prior
   to the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

86. On the 8 October 2012 the  appellant  was  arrested  for  possession  of
   Class B drugs, namely cannabis.  He  received  a  caution.  There  is  no
   suggestion that the cannabis was for anything  other  than  his  personal
   use. During his evidence the appellant also accepted  that  he  had  used
   cannabis on a couple of other occasions during the  past  year.  Although
   there was no police involvement on these occasions we take such acts into
   account when determining whether deportation of the  appellant  would  be
   conducive to the public good.

87. As of the date of the immigration  decision  the  Secretary  of  State's
   policy on this issue was set out in the January 2010 update  to  Chapters
   11 to 15  of  the  Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance.  It  is  now
   contained within Chapter 13 of the Immigration Directorate  Instructions,
   titled 'Criminality Guidance for Article 8 ECHR cases'. We have had  full
   regard  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  'policy'  when  coming  to   our
   conclusions.

88. The appellant committed a significant number of  offences  in  the  nine
   years up to and including 2008. Amongst such offences are those involving
   the use of drugs, including class A drugs, and one involving  the  supply
   of class C drugs. His  offending  could,  certainly  up  until  2008,  be
   considered to  be  persistent,  and  the  seriousness  of  his  offending
   escalated, with the offence committed  in  October  2008  being  serious.
   There can also be no doubt that dealing  in  class  B  drugs  to  fund  a
   cocaine addiction causes harm to society.

89. Looking at the appellant's circumstances as a whole we agree that, as  a
   first step in the decision making process, the  Secretary  of  State  was
   entitled to conclude in 2010 that his deportation would be  conducive  to
   the public good.  This means that the appellant can be lawfully  deported
   subject to the human rights claim.

90. In 2010 he had resided in the United Kingdom for 19 years and since  the
   age of six. Weighty reasons were required to justify his  deportation  in
   such circumstances. Further, he could point out  that  he  remained  drug
   free for two years at that stage. Had he remained offence free up to  the
   date of the hearing before us, a further two years, that would have  been
   a powerful factor in his favour. His admitted use  of  cannabis  detracts
   somewhat against that.

91. At the time of the First-tier hearing the appellant  had  not  explained
   his personal circumstances accurately to the Secretary of State, and  had
   not attended the hearing. We now have a much fuller understanding of  his
   personal life over the past few years.

92. In the light of the revised decision made in the summer of 2012 we  will
   first examine his case from the perspective of the new rules.

Application of the new rules to the appellant


93. The appellant's circumstances are such  that  paragraph  398(c)  of  the
   Rules is of application.  He has not been convicted  of  an  offence  for
   which he was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12  months
   and thus does not fall within the regime of  automatic  deportation,  but
   his deportation is  nevertheless  conducive  to  the  public  good  as  a
   persistent offender or someone the Secretary of  State  was  entitled  to
   conclude has caused serious harm by drug dealing.

94. As a consequence,  consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  whether  the
   appellant is entitled to the benefit of paragraphs 399(a), 399(b) or 399A
   and, if he is not, whether he has established that there are  exceptional
   circumstances that entitle him to remain (paragraph 398).

95. Although there is no dispute  that  the  appellant's  child,  JT,  is  a
   British citizen, or that the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship with this child, Ms Hooper accepted that the appellant could
   not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Rules  as  a
   consequence of the fact that CT 'is able to care for the child'.  We were
   concerned as to whether the new rules should be read literally so  as  to
   exclude any appellant from being granted leave to  remain  on  Article  8
   grounds under this rule if there was any person  able  to  care  for  the
   child, irrespective of whether the child's  welfare  and  best  interests
   required  regular  contact  with  the  parent  who  faced   removal.   We
   accordingly asked for written assistance on this issue from the Secretary
   of State; a summary of the question asked and answer received  being  set
   out in paragraphs 76 and 77 above.

96. Having done so we agree that the terms of paragraph 399(a) of the  Rules
   do not provide for a consideration of where the best interests of a child
   lies, and Ms Hooper was correct to concede that the appellant  could  not
   succeed under this limb. However, when we come below to make our  overall
   Article 8 assessment of the proportionality of the interference with  the
   family life of the remaining family members we propose to  attach  little
   weight to this aspect of the rules, as we consider that its terms are  in
   clear conflict with the respondent's duty under Article 3  UN  Convention
   on the Rights of the Child 1989 to make  the  child's  welfare  and  best
   interest a primary, albeit not the paramount, consideration. As  is  well
   known this duty has been imported into Article 8 considerations  by  case
   law, notably ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4, as well  as  section  55  of  the
   Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. We doubt whether it is  in
   any child's best interests to lose the contact and support with a  caring
   and devoted parent simply because someone else can be found to  care  for
   them.

97. We now turn to paragraph 399(b) of the Rules.  We  accept,  contrary  to
   the submissions of Mr Allan, that the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship with Ms JD. Whilst Mr Allan correctly  identified
   the fact that appellant's evidence in  relation  to  the  year  when  his
   relationship with JD began contained a  number  of  inconsistencies,  the
   same was true of much of his evidence regarding dates and times of events
   that had occurred in his life. At one point,  immediately  after  stating
   that he had been born in 1984, he gave evidence that he had been 21 years
   old in 2008.

98. The history of the appellant's relationship with  JD  was  confirmed  in
   the written and oral evidence of JD. She stated  that  she  is  currently
   living with the appellant, and that she has done so since  October  2011,
   although the relationship is older in origin and precedes the decision to
   deport. JD's evidence, which was tested  in  cross-examination,  and  was
   given clearly, consistently and with precision throughout. We  found  her
   to be an honest and truthful witness.

99. We further note that it was the appellant's  case  that  he  obtained  a
   variation of his bail conditions from the Secretary  of  State  in  order
   that he may live with JD, rather than with his father  whose  address  he
   was originally bailed to. Despite having been aware of this assertion for
   sometime, the Secretary of State  has  not  sought  to  put  forward  any
   evidence to contradict it. If the appellant's  evidence  in  this  regard
   were not accurate, it  ought  to  have  been  a  simple  matter  for  the
   Secretary of State to disprove it.

100. When coming to our conclusions as to the  nature  of  the  relationship
   between the appellant and JD we found the  evidence  of  Ms  Laura  Best,
   produced by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this appeal, to be
   of some significance. Ms Best is a Social Worker with the London  Borough
   of Bromley Safeguarding and Care Planning  Team.  She  is  the  allocated
   Social Worker for JD's daughter, TS. TS has been supported as a Child  in
   Need as a consequence  of  historical  domestic  violence  involving  her
   natural parents.

101. At paragraph 1.4 of her statement  of  the  29  October  2012  Ms  Best
   states [the anonymisation being ours]:

        "During my experience working with the family [the appellant] has a
        positive relationship with [TS] and  is  a  supportive  partner  to
        [JD]."

102. We also have before us evidence from the South  London  Healthcare  NHS
   Trust confirming that JD is currently pregnant, having conceived  in,  or
   around, September 2012. The evidence that the appellant is the father  of
   this child was not the subject of challenge at the hearing.

103. Looking at the evidence as a whole we accept that the appellant and  JD
   first entered into a relationship in approximately  2006,  and  that  the
   appellant lived with JD, save for the periods of time he spent in  prison
   and immigration detention, until June 2010. At this  time  the  appellant
   moved back to live with CT. He accepts that  he  did  so  in  an  attempt
   improve his position with the  immigration  authorities.  He  eventually,
   however, moved back to live with JD in October 2011, shortly after he had
   been released on bail from immigration detention.

104. We do not accept Mr Allan's contention that the appellant  is  engaging
   in the relationship with JD purely  for  the  purpose  of  enhancing  his
   prospects of remaining in the United Kingdom. The appellant accepts  that
   when he left JD in June 2010 he did so in the belief that by living in  a
   family unit with CT, and his British  citizen  child,  his  prospects  of
   remaining in the United Kingdom would be enhanced. Having done so, it  is
   difficult to understand on what basis  he  could  have  thought  that  by
   leaving CT in October 2011, prior to JD's  pregnancy,  his  prospects  of
   remaining here would be enhanced still further.  In  any  event,  we  are
   quite content that the evidence before us discloses, to  the  balance  of
   probabilities, that the appellant has a genuine affection for JD and that
   he left CT to move back in with JD as a consequence of this affection.

105. The Secretary of State accepts that JD is a British  citizen  and  that
   the  appellant  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  valid   leave
   continuously for at least 15 years immediately preceding the date of  the
   immigration decision (excluding any period of imprisonment) [paragraph 32
   of the Secretary of State's reasons letter of 16 August 2012].

106.  We  finally,  therefore,  turn  to  the  requirements   of   paragraph
   399(b)(ii) of the rule; whether there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
   family life with JD continuing outside the United Kingdom.

107. In her refusal letter the Secretary of State fails to  pay  any  regard
   to the circumstances of TS when considering this issue. TS is a nine year
   old British citizen (and therefore a citizen of the European Union).  She
   is the daughter of JD. The fact that her mother, JD, is her primary carer
   is corroborated by Ms Best's statement, and we accept that this is so.

108. In Sanade and others (British children  -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]
   UKUT 00048 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal [Blake P and UTJ  Jordan]  asked  the
   following question of the Secretary of State (recorded at paragraph 93 of
   the decision):

           "Does the respondent agree that in a case where  a  non-national
           parent is being removed and claims it is  a  violation  of  that
           person's human rights to be separated from a child with whom  he
           presently enjoys family  life  as  an  engaged  parent,  that  a
           consequence of the CJEU's judgment is that it is not open to the
           respondent to submit that an interference can be avoided because
           it is reasonable to expect the child (and presumably  any  other
           parent/carer who is not facing deportation/removal) to join  the
           appellant in the country of origin?  If not why not?"

109.  Mr Devereux, at that time the Assistant  Director  UKBA  and  Head  of
   European Operation Policy, responded as follows:


           "We do accept, however, that in a case  where  a  third  country
           national is unable to claim a right to reside on the  basis  set
           out above it will not logically be possible, when assessing  the
           compatibility of their removal or deportation with the  ECHR  to
           argue that any interference  with  Article  8  rights  could  be
           avoided by the family unit moving to a country which is  outside
           of the EU".

110. Having considered  the  Secretary  of  State's  response  the  Tribunal
   concluded (paragraph 95):


           "This means that where the child or indeed the remaining  spouse
           is a British citizen and therefore a  citizen  of  the  European
           Union, it is not possible to require them to relocate outside of
           the European Union or to submit that it would be reasonable  for
           them to do so..."


111. The Tribunal further clarified, when looking at the  particulars  facts
   of the case before it, that:


           "...as  British  citizens,  Mrs  Sanade  and  her  children  are
           citizens of the European Union and as such entitled to reside in
           the Union. The respondent properly accepts that they  cannot  be
           required to leave the Union as a matter of law..."


112. In the case of Izuazu [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC) the  Secretary  of  State
   has confirmed  that  the  response  continues  to  apply,  subject  to  a
   clarification that it only extends  to  the  British  citizen  spouse  or
   partner where there is in addition a British citizen child. This approach
   is consistent with the recent decisions of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  DH
   (Jamaica)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736,  and  of  the  CJEU  in  O,   S   -v-
   Maahanmuuttovirasto [C -356/11 and 357/11: 6 December 2012].


113. Thus, in this appeal, TS cannot  be  required  to  leave  the  European
   Union to join the appellant in Africa. She needs her mother in  order  to
   exercise her residence rights in the Union. To require her mother to join
   the appellant in Nigeria (a country with which she has  no  ties  of  any
   sort and has never visited) is either to require the child to  leave  the
   European Union,  or  the  mother  to  leave  the  child.  In  the  latter
   eventuality there is no evidence of anyone else able to  adequately  care
   for the child and so the first issue would be reopened.  It is  certainly
   unreasonable to expect either TS or JD to relocate  to  Nigeria.  In  our
   judgment the obstacles to the mother relocating  when  she  has  to  look
   after her young child in the United Kingdom are insurmountable,  whatever
   the term means.

114. For the  above  reasons  we  conclude  that  the  appellant  meets  the
   requirements of paragraph 399(b)(ii) and consequently that he  meets  all
   of the requirements of paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules.

115. In case we are wrong in our conclusions in relation  to  the  paragraph
   399(b) and, in any event, we go on and  consider  whether  the  appellant
   meets the requirements of paragraph 399A of the Rules.

116. The Secretary of State accepts,  in  paragraph  36(a)  of  her  reasons
   letter of the 16 August 2012, that the appellant has  lived  continuously
   in the United Kingdom for at least 20  years  immediately  preceding  the
   date  of  the   immigration   decision   (discounting   any   period   of
   imprisonment). It is  not  accepted,  however,  that  the  appellant  has
   demonstrated that he has 'no ties' to Nigeria.

117. The consistent evidence of the witnesses before the tribunal, which  we
   accept, is that the appellant has only once  visited  Nigeria  since  his
   arrival in the United Kingdom in 1991. We have before us copies of all of
   the passports held by the appellant since his arrival here. These provide
   support for his evidence, showing that he made a visit to Nigeria between
   8 August 2006 and 18 August 2006.

118. We accept  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  father  as  honest  and
   accurate. He told us that he, the appellant and  the  appellant's  United
   Kingdom based sibling, stayed in a hotel during this visit, and that this
   trip was made in order to attend the wedding of the appellant's  paternal
   cousin who was, at the time  and  still  is,  living  in  the  USA.  This
   evidence was not challenged by Mr Allan and we accept it. The appellant's
   father also stated (i) that he has a 95 year old aunt, and other extended
   family members, living in  Nigeria  (ii)  that  his,  and  his  parents',
   siblings, save for the aforementioned aunt, have all  passed  away  (iii)
   that he has been living in the UK for 52 years and (iv) that he  has  not
   kept in contact with 'people' in Nigeria since his arrival here.

119. Mr Allan seeks to persuade us that the meaning of the  words  'no  ties
   (social, cultural or family)' in paragraph 399A of the Immigration  Rules
   is such that the rule precludes reliance on it by those persons with even
   the most minimal of links to the country of proposed removal.

120. In approaching our consideration of the meaning of this rule we  remind
   ourselves of the guidance given by Lord Hoffmann in Odelola  v  Secretary
   of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230:


           "[4] Like any other question of construction,  this  [whether  a
           rule change applies to all undetermined applications or only  to
           subsequent applications] depends upon the language of the  rule,
           construed against  the  relevant  background.  That  involves  a
           consideration of the  immigration  rules  as  a  whole  and  the
           function which they serve in the administration  of  immigration
           policy."


121. In Mahad v ECO  [2009]  UKSC  16,  Lord  Brown,  when  considering  the
   question of construction of  the Immigration Rules, said as follows:

           "[10] The rules are not to be construed with all the  strictness
           applicable to the construction  of  a  statute  or  a  statutory
           instrument but, instead,  sensibly  according  the  natural  and
           ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising  that  they  are
           statements of the Secretary of  State's  administrative  policy.
           The respondent's counsel readily accepted that what she meant in
           her  written  case  by  the   proposition   "the   question   of
           interpretation is...what the Secretary  of  State  intended  his
           policy to be" was that the court's  task  is  to  discover  from
           words used in the Rules what the  Secretary  of  State  must  be
           taken to have  intended...that  intention  is  to  be  discerned
           objectively from the language used, not divined by reference  to
           supposed policy considerations. Still less is the  Secretary  of
           State's  intention  to  be  discovered  from   the   Immigration
           Directorates Instructions"


122. We take note  of  the  fact  that  the  use  of  the  phrase  "no  ties
   (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would
   have to go if required to leave the UK" is  not  exclusive  to  paragraph
   399A of the Rules; it is also used in paragraph 276 ADE, in  the  context
   of the requirements to met by an applicant for leave to remain  based  on
   private life in the United Kingdom when such  person  has  lived  in  the
   United Kingdom for less than 20 years.


123. The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' imports, we  think,
   a concept involving something more than merely remote and abstract  links
   to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.  It  involves  there
   being a continued connection to life in that country; something that ties
   a claimant to his or her country of origin. If this  were  not  the  case
   then it would appear that  a  person's  nationality  of  the  country  of
   proposed deportation could of itself  lead  to  a  failure  to  meet  the
   requirements of the rule. This would render the application of the  rule,
   given the context within which it operates, entirely meaningless.

124. We recognise that  the  text  under  the  rules  is  an  exacting  one.
   Consideration of whether a person has 'no  ties'  to  such  country  must
   involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances and is not
   to  be  limited  to  'social,   cultural   and   family'   circumstances.
   Nevertheless, we are satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  no  ties  with
   Nigeria. He is a stranger to the country, the  people,  and  the  way  of
   life. His father may have ties but they are not ties of the appellant  or
   any ties that could result in support to the appellant in  the  event  of
   his return there. Unsurprisingly, given the  length  of  the  appellant's
   residence here, all of his ties are with the United Kingdom. Consequently
   the appellant has so little connection with Nigeria so as  to  mean  that
   the consequences for him in establishing private life there at the age of
   28,  after  22  years  residence  in  the  United   Kingdom,   would   be
   'unjustifiably harsh'.

125. Whilst each case turns on its own facts, circumstances relevant to  the
   assessment of whether a person has ties to  the  country  to  which  they
   would have to go if they were required to leave the United  Kingdom  must
   include, but are not limited to: the length of time a person has spent in
   the country to which he would have to go if he were required to leave the
   United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country,  the  exposure
   that person has had to the cultural norms of that country,  whether  that
   person speaks the language of the country, the extent of the  family  and
   friends that person has in the country to which he is being  deported  or
   removed and the quality of the relationships that person has  with  those
   friends and family members.

126. Thus, for the reasons we have given above, if  we  were  deciding  this
   appeal solely in accordance with the provisions of the new rules,  as  we
   were invited to do by Mr Allen, we would allow  the  appeal  on  the  two
   bases we have indicated.

Application of Article 8 to the appellant

127. However, we go on to make a conventional Article 8 assessment.


128. It is plain, from our  conclusions  above,  that  in  addition  to  his
   private life the appellant has established a genuine family life  in  the
   United Kingdom with his son JT by CT, and in his relations  with  JD  and
   her daughter. The severity of  the  interference  with  his  private  and
   family life as a consequence of his deportation is such that Article 8 is
   engaged.

129. It is well established that for an interference with a right  protected
   under Article 8(1) to be necessary in a democratic society,  it  must  be
   proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued. The legitimate  aim  in  the
   present case is prevention of crime and disorder.

130. We then turn to the issue of proportionality. In  doing  so  we  remind
   ourselves that the weight the executive attaches to the  public  interest
   side of the balancing exercise can largely be gleaned from the new rules.
   When coming to our decision we have taken  full  account  of  appellant's
   criminal history at the date of the original decision to deport, and  his
   subsequent conduct up to the date of this decision.

131. We have also considered and applied  the  principles  set  out  in  the
   decisions of the Court of Appeal in N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA  Civ  1094,  OH
   Serbia [2008] EWCA Civ 694 and  RU  (Bangladesh)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  651;
   weighing in  the  balance  the  need  to  deter  foreign  nationals  from
   committing serious crimes by leading them to  understand  that,  whatever
   the other circumstances one consequence for them may well be deportation.
   We have further placed in the balance the role of a deportation order  as
   an expression of society's revulsion at serious crimes  and  in  building
   public confidence in the treatment of foreign citizens who have committed
   serious crimes.

132. In the light of his youth on arrival and his length of  residence  here
   we ask the central question posed by Maslov, whether  there  are  weighty
   reasons to justify his deportation despite his length  of  residence  and
   the family life he has established with his child, step child and partner
   in the UK.  This  private  and  family  life  was  established  when  the
   appellant was lawfully resident  with  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and
   substantial weight should therefore be attached to it.

133. For the reasons we have given above, it is not  reasonable  to  require
   the appellant's British  citizen  partner,  or  her  child,  to  move  to
   Nigeria. It is also accepted by the Secretary of State that it would  not
   be reasonable to require the appellant's child to move to Nigeria.

134. The appellant's deportation would render it unlawful for him to  return
   to this country whilst the deportation order is extant. As a consequence,
   the appellant's deportation would likely result in  him  being  separated
   from his family for a considerable period of time, and by  this  we  mean
   ten years or longer, save  for  visits  by  the  family  to  Nigeria  and
   indirect forms of communication.

135. By section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  we
   are obliged to treat the best interests of the appellant's child and  his
   step  child,  TS,  as  a  primary  consideration.  In  relation  to   the
   appellant's son JT we place weight on the  report  from  the  independent
   social worker, Christine Brown. Having done so we find that it is in  the
   best interests of the appellant's son that the appellant  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom. Ms Brown concludes that the appellant currently  provides
   much of his son's positive self-image and that he is  a  facilitator  for
   his son's social network being established and maintained away  from  the
   school environment. This, it is said, is of some importance  because  the
   appellant's son's childhood  progression  has  been  hindered.  Ms  Brown
   further concludes that the loss of the  appellant  would  compromise  his
   son's wellbeing.

136. As to TS, we note that the appellant has lived in  the  same  household
   as her for over half of her life. Her Social Worker  has  indicated  that
   the appellant has a positive relationship with TS,  and  we  accept  JD's
   evidence that that the appellant has a close  relationship  with  TS  and
   plays an active role in her care.

137. A central concern of ours has been whether the appellant  has  remained
   addicted to crack cocaine. That addiction led him to  engage  in  serious
   criminal conduct in the past and would pose an unacceptable risk  to  the
   public in the future.  In these  circumstances  we  would  not  take  his
   unsupported testimony as determinative on the issue. We have however also
   had the benefit of the evidence of JD, whom we found  to  be  an  honest,
   straightforward and reliable witness. We accept that she would have  been
   aware if the appellant had resorted to cocaine use and we  are  satisfied
   that he has not.

138. The appellant's case would have been considerably strengthened  had  he
   remained free  of  all  criminal  offending  since  his  release  from  a
   custodial sentence. Unfortunately he has smoked  cannabis  on  his  frank
   admission on more than one occasion  in  the  recent  past.   We  do  not
   consider that such conduct suggests a likely resumption of the use  class
   A drugs or that he would commit unrelated  offences  to  support  a  drug
   habit. Looking at the evidence as a whole we do not  consider  that  this
   conduct,  when  taken  together  with  his  criminal  history,  justifies
   interference with the appellant's substantial private and family life.

139. For these reasons we conclude that deportation of the  appellant  would
   not be proportionate to the legitimate aim. He is  not  now  persistently
   offending, and the addiction that led him to commit the  serious  offence
   in 2008 has been addressed. He must realise that if he were to take class
   A drugs again,  deal  in  drugs  or  commit  any  offence  of  equivalent
   seriousness or a sequence of lesser serious offences, then the assessment
   would be different, notwithstanding his  genuine  family  life  with  his
   partner and child.

140. However on the evidence before us, we  conclude  that  the  deportation
   would be unlawful under section 6 Human Rights Act 1998  and  accordingly
   not in accordance with the law within the  meaning  of  the  Nationality,
   Asylum and Immigration Act 2002.


Decision

   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside. We re-
   make the decision allowing the appellant's appeal. The decision to deport
   the appellant to Nigeria is neither in accordance with paragraphs  399(a)
   and 399A of the Immigration Rules, nor in accordance with the  law.  This
   is a decision of the panel.


                            Signed: M O'Connor
                                    [pic]
                        A Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                            Date: 23 January 2013





