

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

OO (Gay Men) Algeria CG [2016] UKUT 00065 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 23 and 24 September 2015                   |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

                                   Between


                                     OO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms R. Chapman of counsel (assisted by Ms U.  Dirie),
                 instructed by Luqmani Thompson & Partners, solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S. Singh, counsel instructed  by  the  Government
                 Legal Department.

   1.  Although  the  Algerian  Criminal  Code  makes  homosexual  behaviour
      unlawful, the authorities do not seek to prosecute gay men  and  there
      is no real risk of prosecution, even when the authorities become aware
      of such behaviour. In the very  few  cases  where  there  has  been  a
      prosecution for  homosexual  behaviour,  there  has  been  some  other
      feature that has given rise to the prosecution.  The  state  does  not
      actively seek out gay men in order to take any form of action  against
      them, either by means of prosecution or by subjecting gay men to other
      forms of persecutory ill-treatment.


   2. Sharia law is not applied against gay men in  Algeria.   The  criminal
      law is entirely secular and discloses no  manifestation,  at  all,  of
      Sharia law in its application.


   3. The only risk of ill-treatment at a level to become persecution likely
      to be encountered by a gay man in Algeria is at the hands of  his  own
      family, after they have  discovered  that  he  is  gay.  There  is  no
      reliable evidence such as to establish that a gay man,  identified  as
      such, faces a real risk  of  persecutory  ill-treatment  from  persons
      outside his own family.


   4. Where a gay man  remains  living  with  his  family  to  whom  he  has
      disclosed his sexual  orientation  in  circumstances  where  they  are
      prepared to tolerate that, his decision  to  live  discreetly  and  to
      conceal his homosexuality outside the family  home  is  not  taken  to
      avoid persecution but to avoid shame or disrespect being brought  upon
      his family. That means that he has chosen to live discreetly,  not  to
      avoid persecution but for reasons that do not give rise to a right  to
      international protection.


   5. Where a gay man has to flee his family home to avoid persecution  from
      family members, in his place of relocation he  will  attract  no  real
      risk of persecution because, generally, he will not live openly  as  a
      gay man. As the evidence does not establish that he will face  a  real
      risk of persecution if subsequently suspected to be  a  gay  man,  his
      decision to live discreetly and to conceal his sexual  orientation  is
      driven by respect for social mores and a desire  to  avoid  attracting
      disapproval  of  a  type  that  falls  well  below  the  threshold  of
      persecution. Quite apart from that, an Algerian man who has a  settled
      preference for same sex relationships may well continue  to  entertain
      doubts as to his sexuality and not to regard himself as a gay man,  in
      any event.

   6. For these reasons, a gay man from  Algeria  will  be  entitled  to  be
      recognised as a refugee only if he shows that,  due  to  his  personal
      circumstances, it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect him
      to relocate within Algeria to avoid persecution from  family  members,
      or because he has a particular characteristics that  might,  unusually
      and contrary to what is generally to be expected, give rise to a  risk
      of attracting disapproval at the highest level of the  possible  range
      of adverse responses from those seeking to express  their  disapproval
      of the fact of his sexual orientation.


                                  Decision

1. In this determination the Upper Tribunal addresses the current situation
   in Algeria in order to determine the  appellant's  appeal  and  to  give
   country guidance upon the risks faced in that country by gay men.


2. We should make clear, at the outset, that the Tribunal has made an  order
   under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  the
   effect of which is that nothing is to be published that may lead  to  the
   identification of the appellant.


3. The appellant, who was born in 1995, left Algeria  in  2008  and,  having
   spent just over a year and a half in France then travelled to the  United
   Kingdom, arriving concealed in the back  of  a  lorry  in  mid  2010.  He
   claimed asylum on the basis of facing  a  real  risk  of  persecution  in
   Algeria as  a  gay  or  bisexual  man.  His  appeal  was  dismissed  but,
   permission to appeal having been granted, his claim was considered afresh
   by the Upper Tribunal which resulted in the country guidance decision  OO
   (gay men: risk) Algeria [2013] UKUT 00063 (IAC).  The  appeal  now  comes
   before the Upper Tribunal once again as a consequence of an order of  the
   Court of Appeal, made with the consent of the parties on 19 January  2015
   in which it was said that:


         "The appeal is hereby allowed to the extent that  the  decision  of
         the Upper Tribunal of 25 March 2013 in this appeal be set aside and
         the appeal be remitted to the Upper Tribunal (IAC) for  the  issues
         of the risk to  gay  men  in  Algeria  generally  and  whether  the
         Appellant's claim to be bisexual is  credible  to  be  heard  by  a
         differently constituted Tribunal."


4. Therefore, this decision  replaces  the  country  guidance  presently  in
   place.

5. The Tribunal heard oral evidence from the appellant and from one  of  the
   two expert witnesses, Dr David Seddon. The Tribunal  has  had  regard  to
   written evidence from another country expert,  Ms  Alison  Pargeter,  and
   received oral and written evidence from Dr Ludovic  Zahed  who,  although
   not presented as an expert witness, is someone  who  is  well  placed  to
   express an informed view upon the  matters  we  must  consider,  for  the
   reasons we give below. The Tribunal has also had regard to a  wide  range
   of documentary  evidence  which  is  identified  in  the  annex  to  this
   decision.


6. In support of his factual account of his experiences in Algeria  and  his
   claim to be a bisexual man, both of which are disputed by the respondent,
   the appellant relies upon a further  range  of  evidence,  including  the
   expert evidence of Dr David  Bell,  a  consultant  psychiatrist  who  has
   examined issues concerning the appellant's mental health and, as will  be
   relevant to our assessment of his credibility, how that impacts upon  his
   ability to give oral evidence effectively and reliably.


7. In this determination we consider first the question  of  risk  faced  by
   gay men generally in Algeria before addressing the separate  question  of
   the appellant's own credibility and his claim to be a refugee.


8. In advancing  her  final  submissions,  Ms  Chapman  confirmed  that  the
   appellant does not pursue in these proceedings any claim under article  8
   of the ECHR and so, although there is reference to that in  her  skeleton
   argument, we need concern ourselves only with the appellant's  protection
   claim.

   The Legal Framework

9. Article 1A(2) of the Geneva Convention  provides  that  a  refugee  is  a
   person who:

      "... owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for  reasons  of
      race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular  social  group
      or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is
      unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail  himself  of  the
      protection of that country..."


   In this appeal the Convention reason in play is the appellant's  asserted
   membership of a particular social group, that being gay or  bisexual  men
   in Algeria. It is uncontroversial that gay and bisexual  men  in  Algeria
   are capable of constituting a particular social group and so the question
   is whether, as a consequence, the appellant  would  face  a  well-founded
   fear of persecution on that account.

10. Article 9 of the Qualification Directive provides:


      Article 9
      Acts of persecution
      1. Acts of persecution within the meaning of article 1 A of the Geneva
      Convention must:
      (a) be sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition as to
      constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in particular the
      rights from which derogation cannot be made under Article 15(2) of the
      European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
      Freedoms; or
      (b) be an accumulation of various measures, including violations of
      human rights which is sufficiently severe as to affect an individual
      in a similar manner as mentioned in (a).
      2. Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1, can, inter alia,
      take the form of:
      (a) acts of physical or mental violence, including acts of sexual
      violence;
      (b) legal, administrative, police, and/or judicial measures which are
      in themselves discriminatory or which are implemented in a
      discriminatory manner;
      (c) prosecution or punishment, which is disproportionate or
      discriminatory;
      (d) denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate or
      discriminatory punishment;
      (e) prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform military service
      in a conflict, where performing military service would include crimes
      or acts falling under the exclusion clauses as set out in
      Article 12(2);
      (f) acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature."

11. Any assessment of a protection claim of this type  is  informed  by  the
   leading case of HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD  [2010]  UKSC  31.  In
   particular, at para 82, under a heading "The approach to be  followed  by
   tribunals",  per Lord Rodger:


      "When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-founded
      fear of persecution because he is gay, the  tribunal  must  first  ask
      itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is gay, or that
      he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in his country  of
      nationality.


      If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it  is  satisfied  on
      the available evidence that gay  people  who  lived  openly  would  be
      liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.
      If so, the tribunal  must  go  on  to  consider  what  the  individual
      applicant would do if he were returned to that country.
      If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be exposed to a
      real  risk  of  persecution,  then  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution - even if he could avoid the risk by living "discreetly".
      If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant would
      in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask
      itself why he would do so.
      If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to  live
      discreetly simply because that was how he himself would wish to  live,
      or because of social  pressures,  eg,  not  wanting  to  distress  his
      parents or embarrass his  friends,  then  his  application  should  be
      rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to  persecution
      and the Convention does not offer  protection  against  them.  Such  a
      person has no well-founded fear of persecution  because,  for  reasons
      that have nothing to do with  any  fear  of  persecution,  he  himself
      chooses to adopt a way of life which means that  he  is  not  in  fact
      liable to be persecuted because he is gay.
      If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material  reason
      for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a  fear  of
      the persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as a  gay
      man, then,  other  things  being  equal,  his  application  should  be
      accepted. Such a person has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  To
      reject  his  application  on  the  ground  that  he  could  avoid  the
      persecution by living discreetly would be to  defeat  the  very  right
      which the Convention exists to protect - his right to live freely  and
      openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By admitting  him  to
      asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without
      fear of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to that right by
      affording  the  applicant  a  surrogate  for   the   protection   from
      persecution which his country  of  nationality  should  have  afforded
      him."


12. As we shall see, in Algeria  homosexual  behaviour  is  criminalised  by
   legislation. It is established by the decision of the Court of Justice of
   the European Union (CJEU) in XYZ v  Minister  voor  Immigratie  en  Asiel
   (Case C-199/12 to C201/12) that:


      "... the mere existence of legislation criminalising  homosexual  acts
      cannot be regarded as an act affecting the applicant in  a  manner  so
      significant that it reaches the level of seriousness necessary  for  a
      finding that it constitutes persecution within the meaning of  article
      9(1) of the (Qualification) Directive.
      ...
      ... However, a term of imprisonment which  sanctions  homosexual  acts
      and which is actually applied in the country of  origin  which  adopts
      such legislation must be regarded  as  being  a  punishment  which  is
      disproportionate or discriminatory and  thus  constitutes  an  act  of
      persecution."

13. Ms Chapman pursues  a  further  argument  in  this  regard,  that  being
   founded upon the judgment in the European Court of Human  Rights  (ECtHR)
   of Judge De Gaetano in M.E. v  Sweden  (Application  no  71398/12  [2014]
   ECtHR). Although Judge Gaetano agreed with the outcome arrived at by  the
   Court, and so did not dissent from that, he  considered  that  there  was
   simply no need for the court to adopt, at para 50 of the judgement of the
   Court, the  reasoning  of  the  ECJ  in  respect  of  laws  criminalising
   homosexuality that in practice are not applied. In his "separate opinion"
   he therefore departed from the text agreed by the other  six  judges  who
   agreed it, and said:


      "The reference to the judgement of the ECJ in the names Minister  voor
      Immigratie en  Asiel  v  X,  Y  and  Z  in  paragraph  50  is  totally
      unnecessary  for  the  determination  of   the   present   case.   The
      controversial statement (admittedly made in the  specific  context  of
      Council Directive 2004/83/EC) to the effect that  "criminalisation  of
      homosexual acts per se does not constitute an act of persecution could
      be seen as somewhat undermining the standards set by the Court as  far
      back  as  the  1980's  in  connection  with  the  criminalisation   of
      homosexual acts and the resulting violation of Article 8 (see  Dudgeon
      v the United Kingdom no. 7525/76, 22 October  1981  paras  40  to  46;
      Norris v Ireland no. 10581/83, 26 October 1988, paras 38 and 46 to 47)
      and the consequent irrelevance, for the  purpose  of  a  violation  of
      fundamental human rights, of whether or not  such  laws  are  in  fact
      applied or applied sporadically."


   However, in our view, for a number of reasons, quite apart from the  fact
   that Ms Chapman made clear that she pursued no claim under article  8  of
   the ECHR, that submission leads nowhere. First, in this separate  opinion
   Judge Gaetano simply expresses an opinion of what might be the  position.
   Second, as he recognised, the ECJ was concerned with  the  Directive  and
   not the ECHR. Third, the only firm view expressed is that the  issue  was
   irrelevant for the purpose of  determining  the  application  before  the
   Court. Fourth, and in any event, the assessment to be made is a  holistic
   one: all of the circumstances are to be considered. It is  not  simply  a
   question of whether laws carrying a possibility of prison  sentences  are
   in fact enforced. The question is whether the  existence  of  such  laws,
   whether enforced or not by the state authorities, impact upon  those  who
   fall within their scope in a  manner  giving  rise  to  persecution.  For
   example, the existence of such laws, even if in practice not enforced  by
   the prosecuting authority, might theoretically encourage other  forms  of
   persecutory ill-treatment to be perpetrated against  gay  men  by  people
   other than state agents. Finally, if the position is that there is  shown
   to be no real risk that an unenforced law would impact  in  any  negative
   way at all then it is hard to see how any rights protected  by  the  ECHR
   could be infringed.


14. Before leaving X,Y and Z  we  must  deal  with  one  further  submission
   advanced by Ms Chapman. In short, she submitted that the ECJ took a  step
   further than did the UK Supreme Court (UKSC) in HJ (Iran)  at para 70:


      "... it is important to state that requiring members of a social group
      sharing the same sexual orientation to  conceal  that  orientation  is
      incompatible with the recognition of a characteristic  so  fundamental
      to a person's identity that the persons concerned cannot  be  required
      to renounce it."


   If we understand correctly the point being made, it  is  the  absence  in
   that observation of any requirement that there be persecution  threatened
   or deployed to secure that requirement  to  conceal  sexual  orientation.
   However it is plain from the opening paragraph of  this  section  of  the
   judgment  that  no  such  departure  from  the  HJ  (Iran)  approach  was
   signalled:


      "...the referring court asks essentially whether article 10 (1)(d)  of
      the  Directive....  Must  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that   it   is
      unreasonable to expect that, in order to avoid persecution, an  asylum
      seeker must conceal his homosexuality..."



Evidence of Dr David Seddon

Introduction


15. Dr Seddon is a well-known and respected country  expert  with  extensive
   experience of Algeria going back more than 30 years, although he told  us
   his interest in issues of sexual identity in Algeria  first  arose  about
   two years ago.  He has a distinguished academic background  and  provided
   oral and written evidence in the previous country guidance case also.  He
   has made visits to Algeria in 2001, 2008 and 2012  and  before  that  had
   lived in Algeria for a period of time. Over the  last  15  years  he  has
   spent a total of 3 months in Algeria. He has maintained  an  interest  in
   general country conditions in Algeria and  we  accept  that  he  is  well
   placed to express an expert view. Having said  that,  we  recognise  also
   that his expert view can be informed only by  the  relevant  up  to  date
   evidence that is available to him, evaluated through  the  prism  of  his
   extensive knowledge of the country and its citizens.


16. Dr Seddon has provided a lengthy written report  and  has  responded  in
   writing to questions arising from it that were posed  by  the  respondent
   for him to answer. His oral evidence was extensive, taking most of a  day
   of the two day hearing. This evidence has, of course,  been  assessed  in
   the context of the evidence as a whole,  including  the  appellant's  own
   evidence of his experiences in Algeria, and the submissions  advanced  on
   his behalf which we examine in detail below.  However, it  is  convenient
   for us to make clear what we made of Dr Seddon's evidence as we summarise
   the significant aspects of it. We record  here  that  we  take  the  same
   approach when considering the evidence of each witness who  has  provided
   evidence in this appeal.


17. At the beginning of his oral evidence, Dr Seddon  was  asked  about  the
   material upon which he based his expert opinion. He recognised that there
   was a real paucity of hard evidence available concerning the  matters  he
   discusses in his report. He said that the difficulty faced is  that  much
   of what occurs in this respect takes place within the family and very few
   cases are well documented. He said  that  he  had  examined  local  press
   reports as well as international reports but found very little to assist.
   He  therefore  founded  his  view  upon  what  little  was  available  in
   documentary reports, his own personal experiences of living  in  Algeria,
   although that was some considerable time ago, since when he  has  made  a
   few relatively brief visits, and anecdotal evidence provided by  Algerian
   nationals he had spoken to, although generally  they  were  speaking  not
   about what had happened to themselves but to others whose  accounts  they
   were passing on "second hand".


18.  Dr  Seddon  placed  reliance  also  upon  conversations  with  contacts
   associated with Algeria.  He had been unable to  establish  contact  with
   the two individuals he knew who remained in Algeria, but  he  had  had  a
   long conversation with an Algerian gay  man  who  now  lives  in  France.
   However it emerged during the oral evidence that  this  person  had  left
   Algeria more than ten years ago.   Finally,  Dr  Seddon  drew  upon  four
   determinations of the First-tier Tribunal where appeals had been  allowed
   on the basis that gay men faced risk on return. We are aware that he also
   had regard, in reaching his conclusions, to the fact that the documentary
   evidence includes very brief details of a number of cases  in  which  the
   respondent has recognised as refugees gay men from Algeria so that  there
   was no need for them to pursue appeals in respect of their asylum claims.

Prosecutions of gay men

19. The Algerian  criminal  code  criminalises  all  homosexual  acts,  both
   private and public, although more  severe  penalties  are  available  for
   public acts or where one participant is under 18 years of age. Dr  Seddon
   summarises the provisions of the code as follows:


         "Thus, according to Article 338 of Algeria's Penal Code, people who
         participate in homosexual acts may be punished by  two  months'  to
         two years' imprisonment and to a fine  of  500  to  2,000  Algerian
         dinars (DIN) (see Sodomy Laws 21 Apr. 2005; ILGA Apr. 2007, 6).  If
         one participant is under 18 years of age,  the  punishment  of  the
         older participant can be increased to three years' imprisonment and
         a 10,000 DIN (see Sodomy Laws 21 Apr  2005;  ILGA  Apr.  2007,  6).
         According to Article 333, when 'an outrage to public  decency'  has
         consisted of an act against nature with an individual of  the  same
         sex, the penalty is punishable by a prison term of six  months'  to
         three years' imprisonment, and a fine of 1,000 DIN  to  10,000  DIN
         (Sodomy Laws 21 Apr. 2005)."


20. It is unambiguously clear, however,  that  prosecutions  for  homosexual
   behaviour are extremely rare. Dr Seddon adopted the  observations  of  Ms
   Pargeter, set out in an earlier report prepared by her, and we  take  him
   to express agreement with what she said:


           "... same-sex activity is illegal in Algeria and is a punishable
           offence; also ... whilst the state imposes such legislation,  it
           is 'rare' for it to prosecute people for homosexuality,  largely
           because homosexuality is a taboo subject and is  something  that
           is kept hidden (para 11). She referred  to  one  prosecution  in
           2010 - which was also reported in the media. ...


           She explained the apparent  contradictions  of  a  situation  in
           which homosexuality is illegal and thus not tolerated officially
           by the state, but where prosecutions  are  relatively  rare,  by
           commenting that practising homosexuals are fearful of widespread
           homophobia in Algerian  society,  and  so  practice  secretly  -
           living 'an almost underground existence'. Homosexuals, she said,
           faced severe social  stigma  and  in  many  cases,  where  their
           orientation became known, their own families disowned  them,  as
           they deemed them to have brought shame  upon  the  family  as  a
           whole.  She  stated  that  responses  ranged  from  mockery  and
           isolation to outright hostility."


21. Dr Seddon added, in his report:

             "Prosecutions, in this sense, are arguably, by any definition,
             relatively rare. Even if  prosecutions  are  considered  rare,
             relatively rare or very  rare,  however,  this  does  not,  of
             course, mean that criminal prosecutions  do  not  take  place,
             just that they do not occur 'often' or in 'many' instances."

    At para 5.14 of his report, Dr Seddon  assembles  what  information  is
    available to him of actual prosecutions having taken place.  In  recent
    years just three were identified:

        i. A commentator, Mr Dan Littauer, has referred in  a  report  that
           was before the last Tribunal hearing in 2012, to "a young lawyer
           being imprisoned and judged according to these laws" in February
           2008, although no further details are given;


       ii.  Mr Littauer referred also to  a  young  Imam  or  cleric  being
           convicted in 2008 of violation of Article 338  of  the  Criminal
           Code with a minor, although there is no evidence he had actually
           served a prison sentence;

      iii.  A well-publicized case in 2010 of a gay imam  being  imprisoned
           for 2 years. The cleric  was  a  36  year  old  man  charged  in
           February 2010 and  was  "caught  in  flagrante  delicto  in  the
           mosque". However the report of that case in  LGBT  Asylum  News,
           reproduced by Dr Seddon in his report, states that:


             "The facts date back, in fact, to February when  the  faithful
             warned the police about the acts  of  the  Imam.  He  will  be
             detained and interrogated by the prosecutor and then placed in
             custody. Yesterday,  the  prosecution  sought  against  him  a
             sentence of ten years."


      From which it appears that the Imam  had  not  even  been  taken  into
      custody. There is no subsequent report or other  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal that he was ever subjected to  a  term  of  imprisonment  or,
      indeed, ever convicted, despite being found,  apparently,  engaged  in
      homosexual conduct in a mosque. Dr Seddon said in oral  evidence  that
      he had "trawled" for evidence that the Imam had been  put  in  custody
      but was unable to find  any.  However,  he  said  that   he  "strongly
      expected him to be imprisoned" even though there was no evidence  that
      he was and the evidence available suggested that he had  not  in  fact
      been taken into custody. Dr Seddon made no mention of  that  ambiguity
      in his report.


22. It is on the basis of this, frankly,  scant  and  unpersuasive  evidence
   that  Mr Littauer concluded  that  "Articles  338  and  333  are  applied
   regularly" and in part placing reliance on that,  Dr Seddon feels able to
   conclude that:


             "So, prosecutions for homosexuality do  take  place,  even  if
             only rarely or relatively rarely, and those found  guilty  are
             evidently subjected to fines and/or prison sentences"

23. We are satisfied that it is unambiguously clear that the  evidence  that
   Dr Seddon identifies does not  support  his  view  that  a  person  whose
   homosexual behaviour  comes  to  the  attention  of  the  public  or  the
   authorities can expect to be prosecuted. In fact, the evidence he  relies
   upon points the other way as  there  is  evidence  that  the  authorities
   choose not to prosecute even where there appears to be cogent evidence of
   behaviour of a type made unlawful by the Criminal Code. A good example of
   this is found in one of the four determinations of appeals allowed by the
   First-tier Tribunal examined by Dr Seddon in his report, which we examine
   below. Indeed, in two of the three examples  that  have  been  identified
   above, there is no reliable evidence before us that a prison sentence was
   served.


24. It follows from this that we are also satisfied that  Dr  Seddon's  view
   that terms of imprisonment are,  in  practice,  applied  in  Algeria  for
   homosexual behaviour is one that is simply not  sustainable  and,  as  we
   shall see, we can find nothing in the other evidence before the  Tribunal
   to justify or support such a view.

Sharia Law

25. In his written response to questions posed by the respondent, Dr  Seddon
   indicated that gay men in Algeria were also at risk because  Sharia  law,
   which "effectively underpins the criminal law in Algeria as  it  does  in
   all areas of the law" provided for  particularly  severe  punishment  for
   those found to be homosexuals. In his written report he said this:


           "The majority of Algerians are Sunni Muslims, and  Algeria  also
           practices Sharia's (Islamic) law, which regards homosexuality as
           anathema. Homosexuality is not only a sin, but a  crime  against
           God (Allah) under Islamic law. ...


           In the Hanafi madhhab or  tradition,  the  homosexual  is  first
           punished through harsh beating, and if he/she repeats  the  act,
           the death penalty is to be applied. As for the Shafi`i school of
           thought, the homosexual receives the same punishment as adultery
           (if he/she is married) or fornication  (if  not  married).  This
           means, that if the homosexual is married, he/she  is  stoned  to
           death, while if single, he/she is whipped 100 times...


           Some scholars, basing their views  on  the  Qur'an  and  various
           hadith  (accepted  commentaries),  hold  the  opinion  that  the
           homosexual should be thrown from a high building  or  stoned  to
           death as a  punishment  for  their  crime,  but  other  scholars
           maintain that they should be  imprisoned  until  death.  Another
           view is that between two males, the  active  partner  is  to  be
           lashed a hundred times if he is unmarried, and killed if  he  is
           married; whereas the passive partner is to be killed  regardless
           of his marital status."


    Dr Seddon set out in his report an extract from that of Mr Razi Isalam,
    which he quotes with approval:


           "The goal of the  Islamic  fundamentalists  in  Algeria  is  the
           establishment of a religious state where every aspect of life is
           determined by the principles of the Koran and Muslim  tradition.
           This means the  enforcement  of  Sharia  law,  where  apostates,
           queers and adulteresses are stoned to death."

26. There are, however, formidable difficulties  with  that  evidence.  When
   pressed in oral evidence, Dr Seddon conceded that he was unable, in fact,
   to identify any way at all in which Sharia law manifested itself  in  the
   implementation of the entirely secular criminal law code.  He  said  that
   his written evidence "was not well phrased" and that what he had intended
   to convey, as confirmed in  his  written  response  to  the  respondent's
   questions was that:


           "the Sharia  law  effectively  underpins  the  criminal  law  in
           Algeria as it does in all areas of the law."

   We are satisfied that this also is to seriously overstate  the  influence
   of Sharia law upon  the  application  of  the  criminal  law.  Dr  Seddon
   accepted in oral evidence that the evidence in fact  does  not  establish
   that Sharia law is applied to gay men  and  nor  is  there  any  reliable
   account, certainly in the last ten years, of a gay man  being  stoned  to
   death or thrown from a high building. Such things simply do not happen in
   Algeria today. Instead, he qualified  his  evidence  by  saying  that  he
   agreed that Algerian Criminal law is secular and distinct. He was  unable
   to point to any example of a gay man suffering  punishment  under  Sharia
   law.


27. Having said that, we do accept that hard-line  views  taken  by  Islamic
   fundamentalists are not immaterial. At para 5.32 of his report, Dr Seddon
   provides details of one more recent example of a risk of  persecution  of
   gay men in Algeria being  recognised.  In  2013,  eight  members  of  the
   Algerian National Ballet, which was performing in  Ottawa  and  Montreal,
   were recognised as refugees and granted asylum in Canada after  deserting
   the tour  and  seeking  protection  on  the  basis  that  they  had  been
   threatened by Algerian Islamists who "equated ballet  with  homosexuality
   and depravity". It might be noted  that  the  reports  available  do  not
   assert that the dancers were in fact gay men, just that the men  claiming
   asylum in Canada said they had received threats from  Algerian  Islamists
   who "equate ballet with homosexuality". Also, as with  the  case  of  the
   Iman found having sex with a youth in the mosque, we consider  that  this
   was regarded as a high profile incident likely to be a matter of  general
   public interest and not an example of a single man seeking to  conduct  a
   private  consensual  act  in  a  manner  not  likely  to  attract  public
   attention.

Risk of targeted or arbitrary attacks or abusive treatment by police

28. Dr Seddon has also provided written and oral  evidence  about  the  risk
   faced by gay men in Algeria of being subjected to targeted  or  arbitrary
   attacks on account of being perceived to be gay or of being  arrested  by
   police on suspicion of engaging in homosexual behaviour, whether that  be
   after having been found in a compromising situation with a  male  partner
   or being detained in an area known to be one where gay men seek  out  gay
   partners, although not charged with any offence. He says that there is  a
   risk that gay men detained by police are at risk  of  being  ill-treated,
   even if no charge is brought. He suggests that  this  was  a  significant
   aspect of risk not adequately considered in the previous country guidance
   decision:


         "What is not discussed by  the  Tribunal  but  is  of  considerable
         importance,  even  though  poorly  documented  (perhaps  almost  by
         definition), is the number of arbitrary and/or targeted arrests  of
         LGTB persons made by  the  police,  when  those  arrested  are  not
         formally  charged  but  are   detained   for   some   time,   often
         incommunicado and garde a  vue,  without  legal  representation  or
         family visits, and sometimes ill-treated or even  tortured.  To  my
         knowledge, on the basis of conversations in Algeria with  those  in
         the LGBT community, such arrests are made relatively frequently but
         rarely receive any publicity, for obvious reasons, except that they
         serve to terrorise the LGBT community. They rarely result in formal
         prosecutions."

   and that:

         "... in my opinion, the evidence suggests that the  LGBT  community
         and  gays  in  particular,  are  often  subject  to  persecution  -
         systematic  harassment  causing  serious  harm  with  no  effective
         protection - by the police in Algeria.

29. This point was repeated and emphasised elsewhere in Dr Seddon's  written
   report, at paragraph 5.19:

         This fear is, in my opinion, justified and reasonable; for there is
         certainly evidence in the public domain of police brutality towards
         homosexuals in the public domain. According to an article in the UK
         Gay News, the police and military reportedly 'harass and  brutalise
         gay people  with  impunity'  (21  Feb.  2005).  Also,  one  of  the
         witnesses in this hearing, Mr Littauer, stated that 'if  you  admit
         that you are gay (by complaining to the  police)  you  are  opening
         yourself  to  further  violence  by  the   police   and   potential
         blackmail...' (para 28).  He also said that there were places where
         people could perhaps meet for sex, but even there  it  carries  the
         risk of arrest, blackmail, abuse, attack...' (para 29).  Presumably
         he meant here 'by the police'.

30. The difficulty with that analysis is that, although  Dr  Seddon  asserts
   that there is evidence to support that  view,  on  examination,  reliable
   evidence is simply absent. The only quoted source relied upon is over ten
   years old and is itself a bare assertion of the attitude of  the  police,
   entirely unsupported by any evidence or cited examples of such  behaviour
   by police. In the extract above, Dr Seddon insists that there is evidence
   of violence being used but any search for documented actual  examples  of
   that occurring leads nowhere.


31. Similarly, although Dr Seddon appears to accept that  there  are  places
   in Algeria where gay men can  meet  for  sex,  the  so  called  "cruising
   areas":


         "... even there it carries the risk of  arrest,  blackmail,  abuse,
         attack... by the police."

   again, it is impossible to identify any  reliable  evidential  foundation
   for this assessment that  stands  up  to  scrutiny,  only  the  anecdotal
   unattributed accounts we have referred to above  which  are,  of  course,
   impossible to examine in any detail as they are presented as a collective
   view expressed by unidentified persons. In oral evidence, Dr  Seddon  was
   able to identify just one account of a gay man  being  beaten  by  police
   when detained while "cruising" in a gay pick  up  area,  that  being  his
   contact who now lives in France. But that person left Algeria  more  than
   ten years ago and Dr Seddon confirmed, specifically, that despite all  of
   his research he was unaware of any specific example of such  an  incident
   since then.


32. In oral evidence, having confirmed that, in fact,  he  was  not  himself
   aware of any example in the last five years of a gay man  being  arrested
   for homosexual behaviour but not being charged, although  suffering  ill-
   treatment while detained,  Dr Seddon said that as there was  very  little
   evidence that gay men have been assaulted in public, he has  relied  upon
   what he referred to as anecdotal evidence, explaining that:


         "none of those I spoke to had experience  of  this  themselves  but
         they told me what others had  told  them  about  what  happened  to
         them."

    Recognising also that he was unable to draw upon the country reports to
    which one would generally have resort in a search for confirmation that
    abuses take place:

         "... reputable NGO's like Amnesty  International  and  Human  Right
         Watch are "very  clear  about  the  risks  to  women  from  Islamic
         fundamentalists and others in Algeria (but) are  remarkably  silent
         on  violence  against  homosexuals  and  the  LGBT  community  more
         generally"


33. We observe that this, incidentally, deals with one  submission  advanced
   to explain the absence of reports of ill-treatment being meted out to gay
   men in Algeria, being that representatives  of  those  NGOs  were  denied
   access to Algeria and so had no opportunity to collect evidence. But,  of
   course, that does not prevent the harvesting of evidence from gay men who
   have left Algeria and the ability to report upon abuses in  the  case  of
   other vulnerable groups means that difficulty  in  having  access  cannot
   explain the absence of reports of persecution or harassment of gay men in
   Algeria.


34. Although Dr Seddon accepts that evidence of  violence  directed  at  gay
   men is "undeniably patchy and much of it is to be  found  in  the  social
   media and "alternative" sources rather than in official publications", he
   seeks to explain this on the basis that gay men are  reluctant  to  speak
   out because of:


         "...  the  criminalisation  of  their   sexual   inclinations   and
         practices, and the violence to which  they  are  subjected  by  the
         Algerian authorities and by third parties  in  the  wider  Algerian
         society  including,  (but  by  no   mean   confined   to)   Islamic
         fundamentalists."


35. Thus, it is said that there is no real evidence of violence to  gay  men
   but this is because, due to fear of being subjected to violence, they  do
   not speak out as victims. It seems to us, however, that there is evidence
   of gay  men  continuing  to  leave  Algeria  to  re-establish  themselves
   elsewhere, particularly in France, and so this does not explain  why,  if
   routinely subjected to such violent adverse attention,  such  persons  do
   not continue to speak out when safely established outside Algeria.


36. Under a heading "Evidence of Violence", Dr Seddon collects  together  in
   his report such evidence as he has  been  able  to  assemble  of  violent
   attacks on gay men in Algeria.


37. First, he refers to a Reuters  report  of  19  June  1998,  that  France
   granted asylum to an Algerian transsexual  who  had  been  threatened  by
   Islamic fundamentalists and then sexually abused by police when he sought
   their help. Next he places reliance upon  writings  of  2  December  2004
   entitled "Behind the Mask" that recorded the case of  a  man  whose  real
   name is unknown who had reported that two gay friends had been killed  by
   Islamic fundamentalists in 1994 and 1996  and  of  having  witnessed  the
   public stoning of a gay man in  2001.  The  author  of  this  piece  also
   provided an account of himself being beaten up and threatened with  death
   after he was found having sex with another man after which he fled to the
   United Kingdom to claim asylum.


38. These accounts are of incidents that all took place more than ten  years
   ago and the accounts published in Behind the Mask  are  un-particularised
   and lacking in any of the detail that would enable them to  be  verified.
   Dr Seddon does not say whether  the  asylum  claim  made  in  the  United
   Kingdom was successful or, if it was not, the reasons why the account  of
   being at risk on return was, presumably, not found to be made out.


39. Next, in seeking to set out a body of evidence such as to  illustrate  a
   risk of attacks upon gay men, Dr Seddon relies upon an article written in
   2005 by Ramzi Isalam of his own experiences  in  Algeria.  As  a  lengthy
   extract is reproduced in the report, it is clear that  some  reliance  is
   placed upon it. But, again, in our  judgement  this  falls  significantly
   short of comprising reliable evidence.  Mr Isalam asserts that:


         "Algeria is not a  safe  place  for  queers.  Gay  sex  is  totally
         illegal; punishable by up to two years'  imprisonment.  Arrest  and
         torture by the police and  military  are  ever  present  dangers...
         Islamic terrorists target gays for  beatings,  torture  and  extra-
         judicial execution..."

   However, there is not before the Tribunal a single  reliable  example  of
   the extra-judicial execution of a gay man  and,  again,  the  account  of
   prevalent attacks on gay men is un-particularised  and  apparently  based
   upon vague anecdotal evidence rather than upon accounts  of  events  that
   have actually occurred. Further, Mr Isalam is a man whose asylum claim in
   the United Kingdom, made as long ago as 2003, was unsuccessful. Dr Seddon
   does not disclose whether he pursued an appeal but, if  he  did,  it  was
   plainly not a successful one because Mr Isalam says in the extract:


         "I could now face deportation to Algeria"

40. Continuing in his search for evidence in support of accounts of gay  men
   facing violent attacks in Algeria, Dr  Seddon  draws  upon  the  Refworld
   report of 30 July 2007 but in doing so does not accurately reproduce what
   was  written.  Dr  Seddon  says  that  the  report  from  "The  Web  site
   365gay.com", cited in the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board  report,
   states that ""honour killings" take place  (18 July  2005)"  whereas  the
   phrase actually used by that source was:  ""honour  killings"  have  been
   attempted (18 July 2005)". Indeed, in oral evidence Dr  Seddon  confirmed
   that he was not aware of any example of a gay man in  Algeria  being  the
   victim of an honour killing.


41. Next in his written report, Dr Seddon refers to a  report  published  in
   "Pink News" on 24 October 2007, saying:


             "... that the High Court in London  had  overturned  an  order
             that a gay man from Algeria seeking asylum in the UK should be
             repatriated. The Home Office had argued the  27-year-old  man,
             referred to as B, would be safe from persecution as long as he
             was "discreet" about his  homosexuality.  However  Mr  Justice
             Collins disagreed, saying that B, who  has  been  fighting  to
             remain in the UK since 1996, was at risk of persecution..."


    If it is to be inferred from that summary of the judgment of Collins  J
    in R (B) v SSHD [2007] EWHC 2528 that Dr Seddon considered that  to  be
    correct then he was wrong to do so as the judgment said nothing of  the
    kind. This was an application for judicial review of a decision of  the
    respondent that further submissions advanced on the applicant's  behalf
    did not amount to a fresh claim such as to generate a  fresh  right  of
    appeal if those submission were refused. Collins J was  satisfied  that
    the further submission were sufficiently different to amount to a fresh
    claim because the applicant had developed a way of living in the United
    Kingdom as an openly gay man and he  had  an  established  relationship
    with a male partner, neither of  which  factors  informed  the  earlier
    decision under challenge. The judge did not make  a  finding  that  the
    applicant "was at risk of persecution" and that Dr Seddon felt able  to
    say so discloses a fundamental misunderstanding of the judicial process
    in play. In fact, Collins J observed at para 29 of his judgment:


         "It is important to  note  that  the  evidence  of  persecution  of
         homosexuals in Algeria is not strong if one bears in mind what  has
         to be established in order to show persecution within  the  meaning
         of the Refugee Convention."


   Therefore, reliance upon this judgment takes the appellant's case no
further at all.


42. Apart from this, in asserting that there is a real risk of  gay  men  in
   Algeria being subjected to violent attacks, Dr  Seddon  relies  upon  the
   four determinations of the First-tier Tribunal that have been  identified
   in which gay Algerian men  were  successful  in  their  appeals.  It  is,
   therefore, necessary to examine  those  determinations  to  see  why  the
   appeals succeeded. There follows our assessment of  those  determinations
   and of the reasons that led to the appeals being allowed.


43. In the first of those  determinations,  [D1],  the  appeal  was  allowed
   because the appellant's attempt to avoid harm from family members  failed
   when brothers managed to track him down to the place of relocation where,
   incidentally, he had been living with his gay partner for  about  a  year
   during which this cohabiting gay couple were  able  to  pursue  work  and
   study. Thus the appellant faced a real  risk  of  harm  because,  as  the
   respondent accepts, there is not a sufficiency  of  protection  available
   from persecutory ill-treatment at the hands of family members and,  here,
   attempts at internal re-location had failed to put the  appellant  beyond
   the reach of the only source of such ill-treatment, members  of  his  own
   family.


44. Pausing there, it might be observed that during  the  months  that  this
   appellant lived with his male partner in the place to which he had  moved
   to  avoid  adverse  attention  from  his  family  members,  there  is  no
   suggestion that they encountered difficulty from anyone else as two young
   men living together, although they did not make it known that they were a
   gay couple, explaining that they were friends sharing the flat.


45. In the second determination, [D2], the appeal was allowed for  a  number
   of reasons which, taken cumulatively, established a real risk of harm  on
   return such as to amount to persecution. The First-tier Tribunal accepted
   not just that the appellant was a gay man who  had  been  imprisoned  for
   attacking one of those convicted for his gang rape when aged just 13, but
   that having refused to assist a  terrorist  group  on  his  release  from
   prison with the murder of a prison guard, his brother  had  been  stabbed
   and crucified by the group in retaliation for his refusal to assist after
   which the appellant had helped a rival group  whom  he  had  assisted  in
   identifying  ten  terrorists  who  were  apprehended  and  taken  to  the
   barracks. Significantly, the Tribunal found it to  be  reasonably  likely
   that the appellant was, as a consequence, wanted by the  authorities  for
   his involvement with the execution of those ten apprehended men and  that
   his failure to attend a tribunal hearing to which he had  been  summonsed
   before he left Algeria would be seen as "an  anti-government  act"  which
   would lead to ill-treatment, Further,  the  tribunal  accepted  that  the
   appellant would be at real risk of harm from  the  families  of  the  ten
   executed men and that there was a real risk of suicide should he  now  be
   returned to Algeria. Although the Tribunal found that the appellant would
   be at risk on account of his sexuality, that was because  he  would,  for
   the reasons just given, come to the adverse attention of the  authorities
   on return for other reasons and not simply  because  he  was  a  gay  man
   living in Algeria.


46. The circumstances in the third appeal, [D3],  were  that  the  appellant
   feared  reprisals  from  persons  who  had  been  sentenced  to  2  years
   imprisonment for a homophobic attack upon him as they were  about  to  be
   released. He had remained at home even though his father became aware  at
   the trial of his sexual relationship with another  boy.  The  appeal  was
   allowed because  the  appellant  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to
   relocate to avoid being ill-treated by those who sought revenge for their
   imprisonment because he was "extremely young and  suffering  from  mental
   health issues". The trial judge had rejected the defence advanced by  the
   attackers that the attack was justified because they had come across  the
   appellant in the park having sex with his boyfriend  and  such  behaviour
   was unacceptable in a Muslim country. It is notable  also  that  although
   this appellant was said to be having sex with a male partner in a  public
   park, it was his attackers who were prosecuted and jailed and  no  action
   was contemplated against him.


47. In the fourth appeal referred to in Dr Seddon's report, [D4], the  judge
   allowed the appeal on the basis that the appellant, who  was  a  gay  man
   working in Algeria as a prostitute, was arrested in 1998  by  police  for
   having sex with another man in an area known for that activity,  although
   the judge accepted that he had been arrested  not  for  prostitution  but
   simply "for  engaging  in  homosexual  conduct"  with  another  man.  The
   appellant was jailed for a year and suffered sexual abuse  while  serving
   that sentence. In reaching that conclusion the  judge  had  accepted  the
   view expressed by Dr Seddon who had provided  a  report  in  that  appeal
   also. The judge concluded that:

         "I find the authorities are prepared to take action against men for
         homosexual activity as in the Appellant's case."

   What is though, remarkable, is  that  there  is  no  discussion  in  the
   determination, at all, of the fact that by any  view  such  prosecutions
   are extremely rare. Thus, if the judge's attention  had  been  drawn  to
   that he appears not to have considered it to be a significant matter  in
   this particular appeal.


48. What can be drawn from a review of these  determinations  is  that  each
   discloses some feature additional to the basic situation of a gay may  in
   Algeria being at risk of persecutory ill-treatment simply  on  the  basis
   that his sexuality had become known to others. Put another way,  in  none
   of these cases was an appeal allowed for that  reason  alone.  Thus,  the
   fact that some such claims have succeeded before the First-tier  Tribunal
   says nothing about the position generally concerning gay men in Algeria

The range of adverse responses to homosexual behaviour

49. Dr Seddon is clear that the most  significant  risk  to  a  gay  man  in
   Algeria is from his own family. It is not at all hard to accept that view
   because it is within the family that a son's behaviour is  under  closest
   scrutiny and, given what Dr Seddon and the other  expert  witnesses  have
   said about the shame and dishonour perceived to be brought upon a  family
   on account of having a gay son, we have no difficulty in  accepting  this
   to be the case. Dr Seddon said:


         "...  the  most  violent  reactions  to  discovery  of   homosexual
         behaviour... are usually within the family."


50. It was Dr Seddon's oral  evidence  that,  outside  the  family  context,
   while any display of  homosexual  behaviour  was  likely  to  attract  an
   adverse response from those confronted with it,  there  was  a  range  of
   responses possible. At one end of that range, the man thought to  be  gay
   might be subjected to expressions of disapproval, name calling  or  other
   forms of harassment and at the other there was a risk of violent attack.


51. This echoes his written evidence in that, although  Dr  Seddon  regarded
   violent incidents of the sort depicted in the four determinations we have
   examined above as "the tip of the iceberg" he said also::


         "Almost all  sources  agree,  however,  that  there  is  widespread
         societal discrimination in Algeria against  and  general  hostility
         towards homosexuality and  homosexuals,  and  several  sources  (as
         indicated above) suggest that this sometimes takes a violent form."

   And he added in his written response to questions that some gay men  were
   driven into unwelcome marriages:

         "for fear of family shame, social opprobrium and hostility  towards
         them for their inclinations and sexual orientation."

52. Dr Seddon notes the view expressed in the US  State  Department  Country
   Report  on  Human  Rights  Practices  2008  that  there   was   "societal
   discrimination against homosexuals"  and  that  "while  some  homosexuals
   lived openly, the vast majority did not; but the  conclusion  reached  in
   the US report, with which Dr Seddon disagrees, was  that:

         "there was no reported violence or official discrimination."


     That brought from Dr Seddon this view, expressed at  para  6.3  of  his
report:


         "If it is accepted that there is 'no evidence of violence' -  which
         I dispute - or of 'official discrimination' - which I dispute  even
         more strongly,  given  the  criminalisation  of  homosexuality  and
         practice as a direct result by definition by many state officials -
         then the  argument  that  homosexuals  are  liable  to  persecution
         becomes difficult to maintain, as it undermines the  argument  that
         homosexuals are ever at real  risk  of  serious  harm,  and  merely
         suffer societal discrimination and harassment, or in  the  view  of
         some sources, merely social disapproval."


53. Other commentators have expressed a view that  gay  men  generally  face
   expressions of disapproval falling short of violence. Dr Seddon  recorded
   also, without expressing any disagreement, Ms Pargeter's  view  that  the
   appellant, being a gay man facing ill-treatment from  family  members  in
   response to his sexual  identity,  could  move  to  another  district  of
   Algiers or to another city in Algeria to get away  from  his  father  but
   that, as a homosexual or bisexual man:


      "... he would continue to face social stigma and hostility, and  would
      be forced to conceal his sexuality."


   There are, in that reproduced comment of Ms Pargeter, two  issues  to  be
   explored. First, the likely reaction to those  thought  to  be  gay  men,
   which here Ms Pargeter speaks of in terms of social stigma and hostility,
   and the quite separate issue of  the  reasons  why  a  gay  man  who  has
   established himself away from the potential violence to be experienced at
   the hands of family members who have become aware of his sexuality should
   choose to live discreetly in a place of relocation where, if that is  the
   correct assessment of the situation, at worst he faces social  stigma  or
   hostility.

Reasons for discretion or concealment of sexual identity

54. Dr Seddon, who has more  than  30  years  of  experience  of  monitoring
   country conditions in Algeria, said that he had never himself come across
   an example of a gay man living openly as such. He recognises though, that
   although most gay  men  live  discreetly  in  Algeria,  concealing  their
   sexuality, not all do. In his written evidence he said:

         "The fact that some homosexuals do behave as such 'openly', risking
         being discovered in a relationship or, more usually, seeking casual
         encounters in parks and other  venues  where  such  activity  takes
         place, does not, in my opinion, indicate that the risk of discovery
         does not carry with it the real risk of  serious  harm.  There  are
         clearly some homosexuals  who  dare,  against  the  odds,  to  live
         'openly', in this way, not ignoring but defying the  real  risk  of
         persecution..."


    And in a written response to the respondent's questions:

         "It would be easier for someone with a LGBTI sexual orientation  to
         live in certain neighbourhoods or even to behave "openly"  in  such
         neighbourhoods, but only a tiny minority would be able to  live  in
         these affluent areas of Algiers in any case, and only  a  very  few
         indeed are prepared to risk openly LGBTI type  behaviour,  even  in
         these areas. There are not, to my knowledge, any  such  residential
         "gay communities" or "gay quarters" anywhere in Algeria...."

   He said also:

         "All the  available  evidence,  I  suggest,  taken  in  the  round,
         indicates that homosexuality is a real but officially, socially and
         culturally hidden issue in Algeria - criminalised and a  matter  of
         sin, shame and taboo - as far as the vast majority are concerned."

55. Dr Seddon has addressed an issue which is  something  of  a  puzzle.  If
   prosecutions for homosexual behaviour are extremely rare and if  it  were
   found to be the case that the scant evidence of violent attacks upon  gay
   men is  because  such  violence  generally  does  not  take  place  as  a
   manifestation of disapproval of homosexual behaviour, why is it that  gay
   men in Algeria do not live openly? Expressing  agreement  with  the  view
   stated by Mr Zahed, whose evidence we consider in detail below, Dr Seddon
   wrote of:


         "... many people not referring to themselves as  'gay'  because  of
         the extreme taboo in society - in fact, in Algeria, people who  are
         homosexual do not generally consider themselves to be  'gay';  they
         might have a sexual relationship with another man but will not  say
         they are 'gay'."

   He continued:

         "This is, to my mind, an important point on which it may  be  worth
         elaborating. It could be argued that in a  culture  which  severely
         represses what it regards  as  sexual  deviation  and  impropriety,
         including extra-marital heterosexual  relations,  but  particularly
         regards same  sex  relations  as  anathema,  even  the  concept  of
         homosexuality as  a  distinctive  and  easily  recognisable  sexual
         orientation (and even more so the concept  of  "gay"  or  the  term
         "gay") is difficult to grasp, even by  those  who  have  homosexual
         feelings or inclinations


         Furthermore, even those who  are  homosexually  inclined  may  feel
         guilt or doubts about their own sexuality when virtually the  whole
         of society is so hostile towards homosexuality; the same may be the
         case with those who are bisexually  inclined.  The  widespread  and
         almost universal condemnation and hostility  means  not  just  that
         being 'openly gay' is virtually impossible (and at the  very  least
         dangerous) but also that admitting to being homosexual or  bisexual
         become difficult, even to ones-self.

   Of deployment of the term "anathema", Dr Seddon added:

         "I use  this  religious  term  advisedly,  as  there  is  a  strong
         proscription against homosexuality (as same-sex relations)  in  the
         Islamic tradition, as we see below. This is far stronger than  mere
         societal disapproval.

56. At para 4.15 of his report, Dr  Seddon  reproduced,  without  expressing
   any disagreement, a view previously expressed by Dr Zahed:


         "He referred to many people not referring to  themselves  as  "gay"
         because of the extreme taboo in society  -  in  fact,  in  Algeria,
         people who are homosexual do not generally consider  themselves  to
         be "gay"; they might have a sexual relationship  with  another  man
         but will not say they are "gay". He referred to interviews  he  has
         conducted in France with refugees who are established  and  do  not
         need to justify their identity and could in  theory  say  they  are
         "gay", but do not do so because of the high societal  pressure:  it
         is impossible for them to classify themselves as "gay" "because  it
         is like a perversion."


57. We consider this evidence to be significant. It is plain  that  for  gay
   Algerian men who have moved to France there appears  to  be  no  obstacle
   preventing them from living openly if that is what they choose to do. The
   fact that the evidence before us indicates that  they  generally  do  not
   choose to live openly as gay men indicates that  it  is  not  a  fear  of
   persecution that leads them to live discreetly but other  reasons  to  do
   with self-perception and how they wish to be perceived by others.


58. In oral evidence, Dr Seddon emphasised the importance of what he  called
   the religious aspect and the social class and educational  background  of
   the family. Families with traditional religious views  or  values  regard
   homosexuality not just as a crime but as a shame on the family although:

         "... other families are more relaxed. It depends upon the degree of
         religiosity."


   And Dr Seddon referred to the view of his contacts, who are mostly middle
   class or educated men, that life as gay men in  Algeria  was  easier  for
   them than it would be for working class gay men, although  life  remained
   difficult, even for them. He considered that social class was a  relevant
   factor in assessing the position of gay men in Algeria.


59. Dr Seddon said also that it must be emphasised that Algeria  is  a  very
   conservative society in which neither  homosexuality  nor  extra  marital
   relationships were  discussed.  He  observed  that  it  has  always  been
   difficult for homosexuals to admit to their sexuality. He said that  over
   the last 15-20 years it can be seen that Algerian society has become much
   more conservative as is  evidenced  by  radical  views  on  alcohol,  the
   veiling of women and music becoming ever tougher.


60. It emerged from Dr Seddon's oral evidence that although any  concept  of
   a gay "community" in Algeria was effectively illusory, as it existed only
   in the world of internet sites and social media sites rather than by  gay
   people coming together as a group to meet and interact in  person,  there
   had been one surprising exception. There is an  annual  event,  known  as
   "TenTen Day", which involves those sympathetic to the gay cause  lighting
   a candle at a specified time on the same day in October each  year.  When
   asked about this Dr Seddon  confirmed  it  was  indeed  an  annual  event
   although he was unable to estimate the scale of support it attracted.  He
   volunteered the information that although generally  this  is  a  private
   affair, involving people lighting candles in the safety of  their  homes,
   in one recent year there had been also a march  through  the  streets  of
   Algiers by approximately twenty people, it  being  clear  that  this  was
   behaviour in support of gay  rights.  There  was  no  violence  or  other
   trouble generated by this public display, and although Dr Seddon  thought
   that a "ringleader" had  been  arrested,  there  was  no  information  to
   suggest that he was charged,  prosecuted  or  otherwise  ill-treated.  Dr
   Seddon said that he had not intended to supress this single manifestation
   of a gay rights organisation in Algeria acting publicly  but  offered  no
   explanation why it was not mentioned in his report, although he was aware
   of it.

61. As we have seen, Algeria is  a  deeply  conservative  society  in  which
   people respect the strict  religious  values  expected  to  be  observed.
   Responding to a question as  to  what  could  an  unmarried  heterosexual
   couple do that a homosexual couple could not, in his  written  answer  he
   responded to a different question altogether, saying:

          "Heterosexual couples, if married, would be able to openly express
         their affection for each other, in a variety  of  ways  that  LGBTI
         individuals and couples could not; they could go out together  with
         a reasonable expectation that they would not be harassed, assaulted
         and persecuted."

  Asked about this in oral evidence, Dr Seddon agreed that open displays of
  affection such as kissing would not  be  acceptable  even  by  a  married
  heterosexual couple. When pressed on what a unmarried heterosexual couple
  could do that a homosexual couple could not, again, instead he  chose  to
  address a different question, saying that a married  heterosexual  couple
  could show each other affection by "smiling and leaning at  each  other",
  adding that "kissing was possible" although he had also  just  said  that
  kissing in public would not be acceptable.

62. In  any  event,  given  that,  effectively,  even  married  couples  are
   expected to, and do, behave in a manner that respects social  mores  when
   out together in public in Algeria, such as when eating at a restaurant or
   out shopping together, Dr Seddon observed in his oral  evidence  that  it
   was "not obvious" why two gay men in such a situation  should  act  in  a
   "demonstrably gay" manner.

Internal relocation

63. Dr Seddon recorded in his report, without expressing  any  disagreement,
   Ms Pargeter's view that the appellant, being a gay man  (now)  who  would
   face ill-treatment from family members because of  his  sexual  identity,
   could move to another district of Algiers or to another city  in  Algeria
   to get away from his father, but that as a homosexual or bi-sexual man:


         "... he would continue to face social  stigma  and  hostility,  and
         would be forced to conceal his sexuality."

Risk on return from authorities

64. At paragraph  7.15  of  his  written  report,  Dr  Seddon  identified  a
   different category of risk to which the appellant might be  exposed  upon
   return to Algeria:

         "If OO were to be removed  successfully  to  Algeria  he  would,  I
         suggest, face questions at immigration as a failed  asylum  seeker.
         If he were to be open about his orientation and  inclinations,  and
         his intention to live openly as a homosexual and  bisexual,  he  is
         likely to be arrested and detained for at least some time, probably
         incommunicado and without a lawyer, as homosexuality is a  criminal
         offence in Algeria. He might then be brought to trial and sentenced
         on the  basis  of  his  avowed  sexuality.  During  his  period  of
         detention he might be ill-treated, raped and  otherwise  physically
         and sexually abused, if the evidence already cited of what  happens
         to at least some homosexuals in prison is to be believed."

65. But there is no evidential basis, at all, for the  suggestion  that  the
   appellant would face questioning on return on account of being  a  failed
   asylum seeker and that this would lead to disclosure of his sexuality  so
   that he would be arrested, detained and ill-treated.

Evidence of Ms Alison Pargeter

66. Ms Pargeter, who is an analyst and consultant specialising in  political
   and security issues in North Africa and the Middle East,  maintains  also
   an interest in "political Islam and radicalisation". As a Senior Research
   Fellow at the Royal United Services Institute in London she is  presently
   engaged with a project concerned with Islamic movements in North  Africa.
   In her report she provides a full account of her academic background  and
   the work she has completed. We accept that she is well placed to  express
   an expert view of the matters to be addressed although, as was  the  case
   with Dr Seddon, her expert view can be informed only by the  relevant  up
   to date evidence that is available to her, in the light of her  knowledge
   of conditions in Algeria.

Prosecutions for homosexual behaviour

67. Ms Pargeter's evidence in this regard echoes that of Dr Seddon:


             "... as stipulated in my original report ... prosecutions are
             rare. This is because the state is broadly secular in
             orientation and as such does not actively seek out and
             prosecute homosexuals."


68. Her report identifies four examples of prosecutions  over  the  last  12
   years:


             "As well as the case cited in my original report of  the  imam
             of the El-Atick mosque in Tizi Ouzu who, in  March  2010,  was
             convicted alongside his companion, and sentenced to two  years
             imprisonment and a fine of  20,000 dinars after they had  been
             discovered engaged in a homosexual act, there have been  other
             prosecutions. In September 2003 the Liberte newspaper reported
             that a military judge was imprisoned by the military  tribunal
             of Blida on charges of "fraud and homosexuality". In June 2010
             two Islamists were caught in what the press described  as  "an
             act against nature" in a car in a forest near to Misserghin in
             Oran.  The two men were arrested and sent before a Tribunal in
             December 2013 the police  arrested  a  local  official  and  a
             student  in  Imzouren  after  they  were  discovered  in   the
             official's  car  "in  the  process  of  indulging  in   sexual
             intercourse" The pair  were  prosecuted  for  "homosexuality",
             "indecent  assault"  and  "attempted   bribery".   They   were
             initially convicted to three years each in prison although  in
             January 2015 had their sentences reduced to  eighteen  months.
             Therefore, although it happens rarely, homosexuals in  Algeria
             run the risk of being arrested  and  prosecuted  if  they  are
             caught having sex."

   But, as we have seen, other reports concerning the Imam reproduced in  Dr
   Seddon's report raise doubts that he was ever taken into custody at  all,
   although he was confident that he had been. In any event, that was a high
   profile case that had attracted the adverse attention of members  of  the
   congregation. The prosecution in 2003 was before a military tribunal of a
   judge who had also been accused also  of  fraud.  Of  the  account  of  a
   prosecution said to involve "two Islamists" no details are given of their
   actual status in that respect nor, significantly, what the outcome was of
   the tribunal hearing referred to.  Similarly,  the  final  example  of  a
   prosecution in 2003 was said to be of a person who had a form of official
   status and was not said to be  simply  for  homosexuality  but  also  for
   attempted bribery. Therefore, in each of those cases, an  examination  of
   what  is  known  about  them  discloses  some  feature  that  illustrates
   something more than a  simple  accusation  of  homosexual  behaviour  and
   reinforces Ms Pargeter's earlier view that the state  does  not  actively
   seek out and prosecute homosexuals. Indeed, at para 3i of her report,  Ms
   Pargeter says that the appellant:


         "... would be highly unlikely to face persecution by the state..."

69. Ms Pargeter reports also the case of:


          "two young homosexual students at  Es-Sania  University  who  were
         arrested and accused of  having  breached  customs  and  traditions
         after they announced on Facebook their support for marriage for all
         and also declared their wish to marry in Algeria".


    However, she does  not  suggest  that  any  prosecution  or  conviction
    followed and, significantly, there is  no  suggestion  that  these  two
    openly gay men were subjected to any ill-treatment while in  the  hands
    of police nor, indeed, that they suffered any persecutory ill-treatment
    from anyone else.


Arrests of gay men not resulting in prosecution

70. In answer to the respondent's written questions  as  to  how  the  LGBTI
   community was treated by the police, Ms Pargeter said that:


         "Although the police do not actively hunt down homosexuals, they do
         make arrests. As an Algerian  security  official  stated,  in  2011
         there  were  1,330  sexual  offences  involving   "deviancy"   i.e.
         homosexuality".


71. We make the following observations about that evidence. The official  is
   not identified and we do not know what his position was, nor  whether  he
   had access to reliable statistical information. The footnote provided  by
   Ms Pargeter leads to a document written in Algerian  and  so  it  is  not
   possible to explore this further. Other evidence before the Tribunal  was
   to the effect that  there  were  no  statistics  available.  Further,  it
   appears to be common ground that prosecutions  for  homosexual  behaviour
   are extremely rare. If it be the case that 1,330 gay men were arrested in
   2011 on account of their sexuality, then the absence of any  accounts  of
   ill-treatment while in  police  custody  before  being  released  without
   charge is striking.

Violence against gay men

72. While read as a whole, it is plain from Ms Pargeter's  written  evidence
   that she considers that gay men do face a risk of violence or, at  least,
   a risk of the threat of violence,  her  report  discloses  a  paucity  of
   evidence  of  violence  in  fact  being  perpetrated  against  gay   men.
   Responding in writing to a question  posed  by  the  respondent,  whether
   LGBTI groups have  recorded  any  data  on  violence  against  the  LGBTI
   community, Ms Pargeter responded, simply:


             "Not as far as I am aware."

    Given  that  such  groups  include  Abu  Nawas,  an  organization  that
    describes itself as "a group of Algerian militants for  the  rights  of
    LGBT persons" (according  to  the  Refworld  report  identified  by  Ms
    Pargeter), the absence of any attempt to record and  quantify  accounts
    of such attacks is hard to understand, if  such  attacks  routinely  or
    regularly take place. Ms Pargeter points out that there are no reliable
    statistics as to the size of Algeria's LGBTI community  but  refers  to
    one local press source that advanced an estimate that the number of gay
    men in Algeria is about 500,000.


73. Ms Pargeter says that it is difficult to quantify the  extent  to  which
   persecution and violence against gay  men  "is  an  issue"  because  "the
   taboos surrounding homosexuality prevent reporting" and because  gay  men
   are said to be fearful of going to police to seek  assistance.  She  says
   that:


           "Algerian homosexuals regularly cite their fear of  assault  and
           homophobic attacks."


74. But, of course, the real question is whether  that  oft  cited  fear  is
   well founded. In support of her  conclusion  that  gay  men  declined  to
   report abuse suffered by them  because  of  fear  of  reprisal  from  the
   authorities, Ms Pargeter cites the US State Department  report  for  2014
   and concludes that:


           "... homosexuals remain soft targets and are unlikely to  secure
           adequate protection from the police  if  they  are  attacked  or
           assaulted. Indeed, they may even find  themselves  subjected  to
           further abuse at the hands of the law enforcement agencies."


   It is notable that the section of the US  State  Department  report  upon
   which she draws speaks of the asserted fear of reprisals  but  offers  no
   example of such a consequence actually occurring.

Attitudes towards homosexuality

75. It is the evidence of  Ms  Pargeter  that  both  official  and  societal
   attitudes towards homosexuality in  Algeria  are  severely  adverse.  She
   points out that in September 2014 Algeria  voted  against  the  UK  Human
   Rights Council's resolution to combat violence and  discrimination  based
   on sexual orientation and gender identity. Unfortunately, the  full  text
   of the resolution is not provided and it may be noted  that  although  24
   countries supported the resolution  no  fewer  than  15  countries  voted
   against it and the Tribunal has not been provided  with  details  of  any
   reasons for doing so that may have been given.

76. Ms  Pargeter  quotes  in  illustration  of  official  attitudes  towards
   homosexuality in Algeria comments made  by  "a  member  of  the  official
   religious establishment" that:

           "Homosexuality is a sexual inversion  that  goes  against  human
           nature that is based upon natural relations  between  males  and
           females."


    and of "a spokesman for the Ministry of Religious Affairs" that:


           "there is nothing positive about this unnatural act...  we  must
           encourage demographic growth and  therefore  encourage  marriage
           between men and women."


   which comments are entirely consistent with the  other  evidence  before
   the Tribunal as to the intolerant attitude the  religious  establishment
   in Algeria has taken.


77. At paragraph 2i of her report, Ms Pargeter observed that:


           "Although some reports suggest that there is a growing degree of
           tolerance towards homosexuals in the big cities,  by  and  large
           society remains overtly hostile to homosexuality  and  continues
           to view it as a perversion  and  a  disease  that  needs  to  be
           cured."


   The reports suggesting a growing degree of tolerance in  big  cities  in
   Algeria are not discussed in the report and the footnote that presumably
   identifies the source of those comments provides a web address  that  is
   ineffective. As Ms Pargeter did not attend to give oral evidence it  was
   not possible to explore this any further. However, later in  her  report
   we find this:

           "This is not to say that all of Algerian society  is  completely
           hostile  to  expressions  of  homosexuality.  There  is  growing
           tolerance towards homosexuals in some urban areas, especially in
           the upmarket districts of the big  cities  where  attitudes  are
           generally more liberal and westernised. It  is  in  these  areas
           that one can find venues that  attract  a  gay  crowd.  Although
           these venues are not openly gay and do not advertise  themselves
           as such, there are a handful of cafes,  nightclubs  and  meeting
           points that are known locally as places where gay  and  lesbians
           can meet and socialise or where they can watch gay  singers  and
           performers.  Providing  the  clientele  of  such   places   keep
           themselves to themselves and are discrete,  they  are  generally
           ignored. .... "


   and a little later in her report:


             "In  poorer  neighbourhoods  and  outside  the   big   cities,
             meanwhile, there is no such tolerance. In these  areas,  where
             religion and conservatism are pervasive,  society  is  overtly
             hostile  to  any  expression  of  homosexuality   and   anyone
             discovered to be a homosexual would be at real risk of assault
             and abuse."


78. Ms Pargeter went on to describe the so called "cruising areas":


             "There are also specific areas in the big cities where gay men
             can go to pick up other men. This includes the  Sahat  Souhada
             and parts of the Casabah in Algiers as well as the seafront on
             Oran and some local parks and streets. "


   But, although those areas are identifiable as  such  because,  presumably
   they are used by gay men, she added this caveat:


           "However, engaging in  such  activities  is  not  without  risk.
           Anyone frequenting such places is liable to  be  chased  by  the
           police or to suffer abuse and harassment."


79. In her written response  to  the  respondent's  questions,  Ms  Pargeter
   added this:


         "... there are no specific areas where  homosexuals  tend  to  live
         although it is generally easier for them to reside in more affluent
         neighbourhoods where attitudes are relatively more tolerant than in
         poorer more conservative ones."


   She recorded also that Deutsche Welle reported in December 2013 that:


         "despite the fact that some homosexuals they  had  spoken  to  said
         that they felt they had slightly  more  freedom  to  express  their
         homosexuality these  days,  in  general  Algerian  society  rejects
         homosexuals and considers them to be "diseased and deviant""


  Again, unfortunately, the foot note for that source  does  not  deliver  a
  route to the material and so we know no more about it.


80. Ms Pargeter reinforced the point made elsewhere in the  evidence  before
   us that:

         "Algerian society is extremely  conservative  and  traditional  and
         considers homosexuality as a gross transgression of social norms.
         ...
         Furthermore, Algerian society is  still  very  male  dominated  and
         places great value on traditional male attributes such as  physical
         strength and virility. Any signs of effeminacy or homosexuality are
         generally considered as a betrayal of these values and codes.... "

   And she quoted a  spokesmen  for  the  gay  interests  group  Abu  Nawas
   Association:

           "Being homosexual for  a  guy  is  to  degrade  oneself  to  the
           inferior level of a woman."


    Although she added this:


           "Interestingly, while homosexuality is generally  not  accepted,
           there is somewhat  greater  tolerance  afforded  to  the  active
           partner in the sexual act as opposed to  the  passive  one.  One
           young Algerian homosexual explained:

           "People say you are a fag... it's an insult for someone who gets
           buggered, who gets penetrated. But  it's  not  for  someone  who
           buggers the other because someone who buggers  is  considered  a
           macho, a real man... They'll let him off even if [they think] he
           is  depraved  but  he's  still  respected,  his   authority   is
           respected... whereas someone who gets  buggered  not  only  gets
           penetrated but he's got to live with the shame."


81. A  number  of  observations  can  be  made  about  this.  First,  it  is
   reasonable to assume that Ms  Pargeter  included  this  material  in  her
   report because she considered it  to  be  of  significance  and  possibly
   representative of views held, being contained in a section of her  report
   under a heading "Algerian Society and Attitudes  towards  Homosexuality".
   Second, the young Algerian homosexual concerned spoke of the response  to
   homosexuality as being subjected to name calling of a derogatory  nature.
   Thirdly, in the context of this view of the position, it seems  that  the
   fact of being involved  in  a  sexual  act  with  another  man  does  not
   necessarily lead to exposure to unrestrained  disapproval.  A  person  so
   engaged who is perceived to be a dominant participant may,  it  is  said,
   even earn respect for his manliness and "authority".


82. Ms Pargeter went  on  to  say  of  these  comments  made  by  the  young
   homosexual male:


      "This reflects the fact that in Algeria  as  in  other  parts  of  the
      region, there has  traditionally  been  some  tolerance  of  same  sex
      relations between men arising from the extremely tight restrictions on
      heterosexual activity before marriage. However, this type of same  sex
      intercourse  is  considered  something  different   to   homosexuality
      itself."


83. Focussing upon the impact of family pressures upon how gay  men  conduct
   themselves, Ms Pargeter provides the following  analysis  which,  in  our
   judgement is important:


      "Given that in Algeria, as elsewhere in the Arab world, the family  is
      valued extremely highly, anyone not conforming to  traditional  family
      values tends to be shunned and stigmatised. Homosexuals are deemed not
      only to have brought shame  upon  themselves,  but  upon  their  whole
      families. In addition, there is a tendency to blame  the  families  of
      homosexuals for not having brought them up properly and having  failed
      to adequately rein in what are often considered to be youthful wayward
      tendencies. As such, it is not uncommon for families to try  to  force
      their homosexual children to marry  in  order  to  uphold  the  family
      honour. When homosexuals reject such a proposition,  they  often  find
      themselves abused and disowned.
             ...
      Likewise, the Muftah organisation has commented "Outing oneself within
      one's family is still unthinkable for most lesbian and  gay  Algerians
      because of social norms and binding traditions."

84. It might be added that the last paragraph is taken  from  a  publication
   identified by Ms Pargeter as "Gay & Lesbian Mobilization in Algeria:  the
   Emergence of a Movement" which also includes the  following  observation,
   having discussed the fact that  the  criminal  code  makes  unlawful  any
   homosexual behaviour:


      "But, the way  homosexuality  is  treated  is  first  and  foremost  a
      question of custom.  Society  punishes  gay  and  lesbian  persons  by
      marginalizing them. In fact, few Algerians  are  aware  of  the  penal
      articles criminalizing homosexuality. They are  rarely  enforced,  and
      few complaints are filed..."


85. In response to the respondent's enquiry as to what  factors  may  impact
   upon a gay man's decision to "come out", Ms Pargeter said:

        "This is a difficult question to answer given that "coming  out"  is
        an individual matter related to personal choice. However,  Algerians
        from richer and more westernised families  may  find  it  easier  to
        reveal their sexuality than those from poorer backgrounds.  This  is
        because the middle class and the elite in Algeria  tend  to  have  a
        more westernised lifestyle and to be relatively more open-minded."


   But she added:


      "However, this does not mean that families will accept their  children
      coming out  as  homosexual...  for  the  vast  majority  of  families,
      regardless of their background, having a  family  member  who  is  gay
      would still be considered shameful and as a slight to  family  honour.
      As such middle class families and those from the elite may well  react
      negatively and even violently towards their children  if  they  reveal
      their homosexuality.
             ...


      ... such shame would be felt all the more  keenly  by  those  who  are
      religious  given  that  Islam  is  explicit  in  its  condemnation  of
      homosexuality."

Range of responses to gay men recognised as such

86. As did Dr Seddon, Ms Pargeter recognised that there could be a range  of
   responses experienced by gay men in Algeria facing disapproval on account
   of their sexuality on the part of those with whom they come into contact.
   Ms Pargeter speaks variously of those reactions :


      "Societal  responses   to   homosexuals   range   from   mockery   and
      stigmatisation to outright hostility."

   so that  gay men risk being:


      "shunned and stigmatised"


   and might:

      "suffer abuse and harassment" when using cruising areas


   And, drawing this together in her written response to questions posed  by
   the respondent:


      "Anyone openly displaying  their  homosexuality  anywhere  in  Algeria
      would be at risk of mockery, harassment and possible abuse."

87. Asked about how a gay man would be treated, if recognised as such,  when
   shopping or at a restaurant, Ms Pargeter said:


      "If it were known that the couple were gay or if they manifested their
      sexuality and  their  relationship  then  they  may  well  be  mocked,
      insulted,  refused  service  and   possibly   asked   to   leave   the
      establishment. It should be noted that in more upmarket urban areas  a
      gay couple may find it slightly easier than in  poorer  neighbourhoods
      where attitudes are more rigid. In such neighbourhoods a couple openly
      displaying their homosexuality may be at risk of physical attack."


Forced marriages


88. In her response to the written questions Ms Pargeter  said  that  it  is
   well known in the Arab world that a forced marriage is a family's way  of
   restoring its honour and avoiding scandal when it is  discovered  that  a
   family member is gay. She reports that the Abu Nawas group  has  asserted
   that:


      "one often hears about forced marriages of homosexuals among the LGBTI
      community in Algeria although it notes that rather than  being  forced
      marriages per se, in many cases, homosexuals end up agreeing  to  such
      unions in order to satisfy their families."

Discrimination against gay men

89. Ms Pargeter quotes one source, identified by  a  footnote  that  reveals
   only Arabic script, as saying that a  majority  of  lawyers  and  doctors
   "refuse to have anything to do with the community as if homosexuality was
   an infectious  disease".  She  extracts  also  from  the  2014  US  State
   Department report the  observation  that  LGBT  activists  reported  that
   access to health services could be difficult because health professionals
   often treated LGBTI patients "unprofessionally". However, in her  written
   response to the respondent's questions as to how a person thought  to  be
   LGBTI would be treated when seeking medical attention,  including  access
   to HIV treatment she said,:


      "This  would  not  be  an  issue  and  they  would  receive  treatment
      regardless of their sexuality".


90. Ms Pargeter says that gay men face discrimination in the  workplace  but
   recognises that there is very little in the way of  evidence  to  support
   that view. She says that "anecdotal  evidence  would  suggest  that  such
   discrimination exists". In support, she offers only the comments  of  one
   young gay man who  reported  that  he  had  experienced  "verbal  attacks
   including insults sarcasm and being undermined". It is  not  possible  to
   explore that evidence any further because the footnote  identifying  that
   source takes  one  to  a  lengthy  document  written  in  Arabic  and  no
   translation is provided.

Living as a gay man in Algeria

91. The starting point of Ms Pargeter's evidence is her view that:


         "In practice gay men can live together in Algeria. This is  because
         it is quite normal in Algerian  society  for  young  men  to  share
         accommodation. However, if it were to become  known  that  two  man
         sharing a house or flat were homosexual and  living  as  a  couple,
         they would face severe social  stigma  and  could  find  themselves
         chased out of the area. In such a scenario they would be vulnerable
         to harassment and attack."

    But Ms Pargeter offers no example  or  illustration  of  this  actually
    having happened. Therefore, this is what she expects  to  happen,  even
    though she does not point to any example of that being the case.

92. Speaking of general restrictions upon public displays of affection,  not
   limited to gay couples, Ms Pargeter said:


         "It would be impossible for gay men to engage in any sort of public
         display of affection  without  attracting  severe  disapproval  and
         hostility. However, the same applies to heterosexual couples. Given
         the conservative nature of society, all forms of physical affection
         are frowned upon."


   and concluded that:


         "While  homosexuals  in   Algeria   are   not   hunted   down   and
         systematically  persecuted  by  the  state,  they   are   certainly
         subjected to severe societal disapproval and stigma and are  always
         soft targets for anyone wishing to harass them or attack them. As a
         result homosexuals in Algeria are forced to conceal their sexuality
         or else put themselves at risk of  discrimination  and  persecution
         including the threat of physical violence."


93. Two things are notable about these conclusions.  It  is  striking  that,
   despite the fact that Ms Pargeter says  that  gay  men  are  always  soft
   targets for harassment and attack, she offers no evidence at all of  such
   attacks actually taking place. Secondly, she speaks  of  "the  threat  of
   physical violence" rather than the actual manifestation of violence.


94. In responding to written questions posed by the respondent, Ms  Pargeter
   reiterated that the conservatism of society prevented public displays  of
   affection by either gay or heterosexual couples but she said that while a
   heterosexual couple could live together if they were married (obviously):


         "while men can share accommodation as friends and commonly  do  so,
         if it became known that a couple living  together  were  homosexual
         they would be at risk of harassment, insults and possible  physical
         abuse. They could also well be chased out of the neighbourhood."


Evidence of Dr Ludovic Zahed

95. Dr Zahed has provided written and oral  evidence.  We  are  particularly
   grateful for the effort he made to appear  in  person,  having  travelled
   from France to do so. We can deal with his  evidence  relatively  briefly
   but in so doing do not intend to suggest that we consider it to be in any
   way unimportant simply because  he  is  not  put  forward  as  an  expert
   witness.  Indeed, we recognise that he has maintained a close interest in
   the issues under consideration and, as he  is  himself  a  gay  man  from
   Algeria, he has personal experience upon which to draw.


96. Dr Zahed now lives in  France,  where  he  is  Director  of  the  "CALEM
   International  Cabinet"  which  he  described   as   being   a   research
   organisation concerned with issues of identification in  terms  of  being
   gay and Muslim. The organisation provides  training  courses  for  Imams,
   that  take  place  in  France,  South  Africa  and   Asia,   and   issues
   publications. His personal role is to co-ordinate conferences and he  was
   also the founding Imam of an "inclusive mosque" established in Paris.  He
   last visited Algeria in 2009 but cannot now return because he fears  that
   he would face imprisonment because he is known as "an inclusive Imam" and
   a gay man who has given interviews in the Algerian media advocating same-
   sex marriages. He told us that  his  activist  contacts  in  Algeria  now
   number "less than ten individuals".


97. In his  written  evidence,  Dr  Zahed  described  how  homosexuality  in
   Algeria is still faced with utter silence and denial although  in  recent
   years  there  have  been  more  vocal  homophobic  utterings   from   the
   authorities. Because of this, he says, more and  more  gay  men  are  now
   hiding their sexuality and refraining from behaviour  that  might  reveal
   that they are gay. In common with the other country witnesses,  Dr  Zahed
   accepts that:


         "(the) authorities do not seem to be  actively  going  after  LGBTI
         individuals and arresting them..."

      and that:

      "... the strategy of the government is not to officially crack down on
      homosexuals..."


   He said that:


         "... LGBTI individuals in Algeria  are  afraid  of  being  socially
         ostracised, being rejected from  their  families  and  friends  and
         losing their jobs in case they are outed, which would mean a social
         death for them."


98.  He spoke of  anti-gay  themes  in  public  broadcasting,  although  the
   example he gave was that of a private TV Channel, Hogar TV, which has now
   closed down, he thought because of funding issues, suggesting that it was
   unable to generate sufficient revenue.


99. It became clear from Dr Zahed's oral  evidence  that  his  absence  from
   Algeria since 2009 meant that he felt unable  to  speak  with  confidence
   about life as a gay man in that country. He said that since then "it  has
   changed a lot" and he could not tell us what behaviour  would  and  would
   not, specifically, be tolerated.


100. Asked if a gay couple could "come out"  to  their  families,  Dr  Zahed
   said that it was difficult to provide a precise answer. He said  that  it
   was possible in some households in some circumstances, explaining that in
   some open-minded families it was possible to  come  out.  He  added  that
   levels of education and  the  family's  religious  views  would  also  be
   relevant. If the family is secular then it would be easier for a gay  son
   to "come out" to his family.


101. In his written response to the respondent's  questions,  Dr  Zahed  had
   been asked to describe the treatment to which a person  seen  to  be  gay
   would be subjected. He said they would experience:


         "... prejudice, rejection, sometimes forced marriage (such as a gay
         cousin of mine) sometimes even death threats."


   Asked about this answer in oral evidence, it being pointed  out  that  he
   had not included that such a person would be exposed to violence, he said
   that receipt of death  threats  and  facing  the  prospect  of  a  forced
   marriage did amount to violence.


102. In his written evidence Dr Zahed had said that gay men will  experience
   discrimination in the  workplace.  He  was  asked  in  oral  evidence  to
   identify the evidence he relied upon in making that  assertion.  He  said
   only that he had studied this for over twenty  years  and  he  knew  that
   there was discrimination, but  he  was  unable  to  point  to  any  other
   evidence in support.


103. Views expressed by Dr Zahed of his experiences as a gay man  have  been
   published in a document entitled "Life as a Gay Imam Isn't As Bad  As  It
   Sounds" (page D481 of the bundle) dated 14 February 2014. This reports an
   interview with Dr Zahed in which he said that he had "come  out"  to  his
   family when he was about 21 years old, although, even as a child, he  was
   called names like "faggot" and so "everybody knew, but  we  didn't  speak
   about it". Asked what happened when he finally told his family he said:


         "I packed a suitcase, because I thought they would throw me out.  I
         prepared for the worst, but before I could finish one  sentence  my
         father said calmly, "Stop, we are going to accept you  like  that."
         He knew I had tried everything to get rid of my homosexuality. I am
         HIV positive, and when I later told them about that my  mother  was
         more OK with me being HIV-positive than me being gay.  Yes  it  was
         horrible. She was horrible to me at the time, but it  passed.  When
         it passed it was weird because I had to  reinvent  myself.  Because
         they didn't reject me, I had to find a new place in the  family  as
         the "real me".

Evidence of Zoheir Djazeiri

104. Zoheir Djazeiri is a nom de plume of this witness, who has  provided  a
   witness statement but did not attend to  give  oral  evidence.  His  true
   identity cannot be disclosed because, as an Algerian  citizen  who  is  a
   former chairman of Abu Nawas, the first group campaigning for gay  rights
   in Algeria, he considers himself to be at risk if identified. That is not
   simply because he is a prominent gay man but because  his  activities  in
   promoting gay rights will be seen, he believes, as campaigning in  favour
   of what is an illegal activity. We are satisfied that his safety will not
   be compromised because of the discussion of his  brief  written  evidence
   that follows but we do make an order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 that should anyone be able to  draw
   inferences from what we say that might enable him to be identified,  then
   he is not to be identified or referred to by any name other than the  one
   that appears above.


105. Having secured funding to continue his work  in  Lebanon,  Mr  Djazeire
   has recently returned to Algeria "just to pack  up  and  leave"  after  a
   period of absence from his country of nationality. He says that  his  two
   colleagues with who he worked under the banner of  Abu  Nawas  have  also
   decided to leave Algeria and have moved to Belgium and  France  where  he
   believes they may have been granted asylum.


106. Mr Djazeire has been a gay rights activist  for  about  ten  years.  He
   describes Algerian society as being very homophobic. He says that such is
   the extent of disapproval of homosexuality from family members that:


         "...you will finish by hating yourself and hating to be alive."

  He describes how, in 2010, a  friend  killed  herself  after  her  family
  discovered that she was a lesbian and said they wanted to force her  into
  an unwelcome marriage.


107. Mr Djazeire detects a deterioration in the  situation  of  gay  men  in
   Algeria over the last few years. Whereas previously homosexuality  was  a
   taboo subject, now:


         "... the subject has become attractive in the media as well  as  in
         the street..."


108. According to Mr Djazeire, recent years have been "the worst period  for
   the LGBTI community" and he says that:


          "homosexuals are increasingly assaulted  and  fear  has  become  a
         permanent companion of our community."


109. It will be seen from this summary  of  the  witness  statement  he  has
   provided, that this witness does not seek to descend  into  any  detailed
   discussion of the issues we have to examine and this  evidence  does  not
   take the matter very much further.


The documentary evidence

110. There  is  a  substantial  body  of  documentary  evidence  before  us,
   although neither party has specifically referred to very much  of  it  in
   submissions. However, much of what is relevant to be drawn  from  it  has
   been reviewed by the witnesses whose evidence we have already  considered
   and so it is not necessary for us to revisit all  of  that  material.  We
   have, of course, had regard  to  all  of  the  documentary  evidence  but
   identify the following matters, in particular.


111. As we have seen, the, US State Department Human Rights Report,  updated
   on 3 April 2014 states that:


         "While some LGBTI persons lived openly, the vast majority did  not,
         and most feared reprisals from their families  or  harassment  from
         authorities."

    Which is yet another illustration that  it  is  the  asserted  fear  of
    reprisals, rather than the actual manifestation of it, that is said  to
    impact upon how gay people in Algeria conduct themselves.

112. The current Country of Origin Information Report, published by UKBA  on
   17  January 2013, reports that "LGBTI  issues  is  a  subject  considered
   taboo" but:

         "However, in practice, it is not tightly restrained by  the  State,
         unless minors are involved. There are not many homosexuals that are
         condemned, and the minority is not sought after by the authorities.
         The representative of Liberte did not know whether the authorities,
         in practice, tended to act with tolerance or not."


113. At para 21.10 of the COIR is an extract from  the  Swedish  FFM  Report
   from 2012:


         "The Swedish FFM Report 2012, were informed by ?Representatives  of
         the newspaper Libert, that: "The topic is very  sensitive  and  is
         not discussed in the press. It is hard to live as a  homosexual  in
         Algeria,  and  those  who  are,  generally  act  very   discreetly.
         Acceptance among families varies. Homosexuals who  do  not  conceal
         their sexual orientation risk verbal harassment. There are no clubs
         for homosexuals. Sexual intercourse between individuals of the same
         sex may render a prison  sentence  in  accordance  with  the  Penal
         Code."


114. It is noted in the Amnesty International report  of  25  February  2015
   that although Algeria has become a member of the UN Human Rights Council,
   it continued to refuse to issue visas to representatives  of  UN  bodies,
   Amnesty  International  itself  and  others.  In  February  2014  Amnesty
   International issued a joint statement, together with organisations  such
   as Human Rights Watch, in which it was said that:


         "Algeria  remains  the  only  country  among  its  neighbours  that
         generally restricts access to human rights organisations..."


115. The respondent draws  attention  to  a  report  by  the   Human  Rights
   Campaign Foundation concerning "the  state  of  human  rights  for  LGBTI
   people in Africa", published in October 2013, which report includes  this
   discussion of the views of a young lesbian  woman  in  Algeria,  under  a
   heading "A gradually evolving society":


         "Some, though not many, gay Algerians  are  lucky  enough  to  have
         "open-minded family  members",  Amelle  explained.  Her  aunt,  for
         example, "often asks me why I don't have a girlfriend", she said.


         Thanks to television, which offers Algerian society a  window  onto
         the world beyond  its  borders,  mentalities  in  the  country  are
         starting to change. "Especially with what happened in France -  gay
         marriage being legalised - that opened up a  debate  here,"  Amelle
         said. "I have several colleagues who say they  aren't  against  it.
         Things are evolving, and it's a relief".


116. The respondent has submitted also a Landinfo report dated  4  September
   2014 in which the following extract, which chimes with observations  made
   by the expert witnesses that we have discussed above, is to be found:


           "In Algeria, sexual  relations  between  men  are  not  uncommon
           (although  impossible  to  quantify),  both  before  or   during
           marriage (Daum 2014, Gourlay  2009).  The  reason  for  this  is
           partly the family-oriented  culture's  control  over  women  and
           their sexuality,  and  therefore  women  are  not  available  to
           unmarried (heterosexual) men. In such  cases,  sexual  relations
           between men are not necessarily expressions of  preference,  but
           are contextually sensitive sexual  practices  to  which  society
           turns a blind eye, as  it  does  not  threaten  the  established
           gender roles and the institution of marriage."

   And, our attention having been drawn to this report,  we  reproduce  also
   the following extract, concerning the issue of  marriages  being  entered
   into by gay people in Algeria, although neither expert  witness  referred
   to it:

             In the light of religious views on marriage being a duty,  one
             must assume that it is not  uncommon  for  gay  men  to  marry
             women, in order to hide their sexual  orientation  and  escape
             the questioning and pressure from their  families  and  social
             networks. The fact that gay people marry is not necessarily  a
             response to direct or indirect pressure; given the fundamental
             role  of  marriage  in  Algerian  society,  as  well  as   the
             respectability and significance  that  marriage  and  children
             provide, it is fully  possible  to  wish  to  marry  and  have
             children, even if one's sexual preference is for people of the
             same sex."


117. The same Landinfo report addresses the consequences for a  gay  man  of
   "coming out":

         "Given  the   significant   degree   of   social   stigma   against
         homosexuality and being gay in Algerian society,  there  is  little
         room to express one's gay identity (coming out of  the  closet)  to
         family members and  social  networks.  A  family  member  revealing
         themselves as homosexual will weaken the  family's  reputation  and
         expose the family to  slander,  accusations  and  potential  social
         marginalisation....


         It is not possible to predict  family  members'  reactions  when  a
         person comes out or is exposed as gay within the  immediate  family
         network. According to the International HIV/AIDS  Alliance  (2005),
         examples of reaction include


            . Social marginalisation  and  exclusion  (for  example,  being
              excluded from  and  shunned  by  the  family  during  visits,
              celebrations, etc.)
            .  Isolation,  restricting  freedom  of   movement   or   other
              controlling behaviour from the family's side
            . Hurtful language ("you are  no  longer  my  son",  "you  have
              brought shame to the family")
            . Various attempts to alter behaviour (for example,  hiring  an
              exorcist to drive out  the  "curse"  or  a  psychologist  who
              believes homosexuality can be cured)
            . Pressure to marry, cover up or prevent future scandals
            . Use of physical violence
            . Disowned by the family (temporary or permanent)


         The activist  Zouheir  Djazeiri  .....  explains  that  if  one  is
         exposed, one is  obliged  to  leave  home  to  avoid  one's  family
         becoming victims of a public scandal


         It is still not certain that the family will react in such a way if
         a family member is revealed to be gay. The activist Nabil....  Says
         that after he had left his family as a result of coming out as gay,
         he is reconciled with them today. However, he  adds  that  this  is
         generally unusual in an Algerian context."


118. This reinforces the concept of the range of responses  to  be  expected
   that was described by Dr Seddon. Two observations  might  be  made  about
   this evidence. First, it is clear that the context being considered is  a
   domestic one, as the focus here is upon the  reaction  from  the  family.
   This is not concerned with reactions from others  after  a  gay  man  has
   moved away from his family. Second, while that range,  according  to  the
   Landinfo report, includes the use of physical  violence,  a  footnote  to
   that possibility adds this:


         "... The activist interviewed by Daum (2014) had  been  exposed  on
         Algerian TV and said, in direct response to the journalist, that he
         does not fear physical violence or being killed, but that  he  does
         fear being exposed to his mother and his community. .."


119. Before concluding our review of the  documentary  evidence,  we  should
   record that mid-way through the hearing the respondent produced a  letter
   from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office dated 23  September  2015,  that
   had just been received by Mr Singh. This comprised a brief report upon  a
   meeting that took place on 26 May 2015 between "members of the diplomatic
   community" and others  "at  which  a  representative  of  Algerian  LGBTI
   organisations said that life in Algeria was becoming more  difficult  for
   the gay community and many feared for their safety,  compelling  them  to
   leave the country". This letter, from the Desk Officer, Algeria,  Morocco
   and Western Sahara, reproduced some extracts from report we  have  looked
   at above and concluded:


             "It is our informal and  anecdotal  assessment  that,  despite
             illegality, there is no extensive  systematic  persecution  or
             prosecution  of  LGBTI  individuals  by  the  Algerian  state.
             Rather, it is a social stigma in Algerian society  that  makes
             life difficult for LGBTI persons in Algeria and  prompts  them
             to leave."


120. Ms Chapman raised concerns about the late submission of  this  document
   but we did admit it. However, it adds very little, if anything at all, to
   the body of evidence before us and, as Ms Chapman pointed out,  the  fact
   that she had no opportunity of testing that evidence in cross examination
   reduces further the weight that can properly be given to it.

Submissions on behalf of the appellant on the Country Guidance issue

121. Ms Chapman submits that gay men living  in  Algeria  are  subjected  to
   discriminatory ill-treatment that amounts to acts of persecution  falling
   within Article 9 of the Qualification  Directive.  The  reason  for  that
   persecution, she submits, is that a gay man in Algeria is a member  of  a
   particular social group within the definition of Article 10. In advancing
   that submission she points out that the definition of  persecution  found
   in the Qualification Directive is narrower than that set out in the UNHCR
   Handbook.


122. Ms Chapman takes as her starting point that engaging  in  a  homosexual
   act is illegal and, if prosecuted, a gay man  faces  imprisonment  and  a
   fine. Further, Algeria is a strict Islamic society in  which  Sharia  law
   demands strict penalties for homosexual behaviour, including the prospect
   of being stoned to death.


123. Perhaps recognising that hard evidence of physical ill-treatment  being
   meted out to gay men in Algeria is scant, a key aspect of her submissions
   is that in X,Y & Z the decision of the ECJ establishes  that,  while  the
   criminalisation of homosexual acts does not in itself constitute  an  act
   of persecution, where terms of imprisonment are  actually  applied,  that
   must  be  regarded  as  a  punishment  that   is   disproportionate   and
   discriminatory and so persecutory. As there is  evidence  that  terms  of
   imprisonment have been imposed, therefore, she argues, the test laid down
   by the ECJ has been met.


124. As has been discussed above, that  submission  is  developed  into  two
   separate strands that are drawn from it. First, in M.E. v  Sweden,  Judge
   De Gaetano reasoned that the  decision  of  the  ECJ  in  XYZ  undermined
   standards set by the ECtHR recognising in such circumstances a  violation
   of rights protected by the ECHR,  whether  or  not  the  law  is  applied
   sporadically or at all. Therefore, the very fact that homosexual acts are
   criminalised is prima facie evidence  of  a  breach  of  protected  human
   rights. We have explained why we do not accept that analysis.


125. Secondly, in oral submissions, Ms  Chapman  submitted  that,  correctly
   understood, the effect of the decision of the ECJ in XY & Z  was  that  a
   requirement to conceal sexuality, as  is  evidenced  in  Algeria  by  the
   absence of any gay men living openly as  such,  amounts  to  persecution.
   Again, we  have  explained  above  why  we  are  unable  to  accept  that
   submission.


126. In  seeking  to  establish  that  the  evidence  has  demonstrated  the
   existence of state sponsored  persecution  of  gay  men  in  Algeria,  Ms
   Chapman points to the following matters, submitting that  taken  together
   they constitute state sponsored discrimination at a level  sufficient  to
   amount to persecution:


        a.  public pronouncements by State Officials, such as the  Minister
           of Religious Affairs, who spoke of homosexuality in terms  of  a
           war  against  those  supporting   "moral   decadence   and   the
           destruction of the family";
        b. The  fact  that  Algeria  voted  against  the  UN  Human  Rights
           Council's resolution, discussed above;
        c. An ever present risk facing gay  men  of  arbitrary  arrest  and
           detention, and of suffering serious ill-treatment at  the  hands
           of police during detention;
        d.  The  fiercely  adverse  media  comments  directed  at  the  gay
           community;
        e. The eight dancers from the Algerian National  Ballet  recognised
           as refugees in Canada, and the official  reaction  from  Embassy
           officials;
        f. The deeply homophobic attitude of the religious authorities;
        g. Overt public hostility to homosexuality;
        h. The need for gay men to lead a  double  life,  concealing  their
           sexuality and being unable to live openly as gay men;
        i. The risk of attack or assault for gay men recognised to be such;
        j. The absence of a gay community, other than on-line;
        k. Discriminatory barriers to access by  gay  men  to  doctors  and
           lawyers.


127. Ms Chapman submits that  the  absence  of  "official  reports"  of  the
   manifestation of acts of persecution is due, in part, to  the  fact  that
   human rights observers are denied access to Algeria. She places  reliance
   also upon the confirmation by the respondent that she  has  accepted  the
   claims of twelve persons seeking asylum as gay men from Algeria and  that
   in five more cases, appeals to the First-tier Tribunal have been allowed.
   Four of those appeals have been discussed by Dr Seddon in his report  and
   the determinations have been made available.

Submissions on behalf of the respondent on the Country Guidance issue

128. The respondent's position is that  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
   does not disclose a risk of persecutory harm  to  gay  men  generally  in
   Algeria. Although homosexual acts  are  criminalised,  the  law  is  very
   rarely enforced and when it is  there  is  usually  some  aspect  of  the
   particular case  that  explains  why,  exceptionally,  a  prosecution  is
   proceeded with. This is in response, in Mr  Singh's  submission,  not  to
   acts of homosexuality but to what  is  perceived  to  be  dissident  acts
   against the state and a challenge to accepted social mores,  for  example
   in the case of the open expression of views on gay marriage and the cases
   that have been referred to in the evidence concerning a judge,  an  Imam,
   persons described as "Islamists" or "officials".


129. Mr Singh invites the Tribunal to follow closely the  approach  set  out
   by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31,  which  we  have
   examined above. He takes issue with the analysis offered by Ms Chapman of
   the decision of the ECJ in X, Y & Z and does not accept that the judgment
   in that case has taken the matter any further so that, although  speaking
   in terms of "a requirement to  conceal"  sexuality,  there  was  still  a
   requirement that such requirement be in order to avoid persecution.


130. Mr Singh accepts that there is little  evidence  of  open  displays  of
   "gayness" but submits that it is established by the evidence that this is
   not because of a need  to  avoid  exposure  to  violence  or  other  ill-
   treatment sufficiently serious to cross the  threshold  into  persecution
   but  because  of  deep  rooted  societal   disapproval   and   entrenched
   conservative and religious pressures which, if offended,  are  likely  to
   result not  in  persecution  but,  as  articulated  by  Ms  Pargeter,  in
   "mockery, harassment and possibly abuse" which, he submits, falls  short,
   on the evidence, of persecution.


131. Developing that submission, Mr Singh argued that the  evidence  clearly
   established that there would be a range of responses to open displays  of
   homosexuality and the reaction would also  vary  depending  upon  factors
   such as whether the family concerned is secular or not, well-educated and
   middle class and whether the areas in which those concerned were residing
   was a poor neighbourhood where families lived in very close proximity  to
   each other or whether they had the space and privacy afforded  by  middle
   class residential areas where families did not live "cheek by jowl".


132. Addressing the witness evidence, Mr Singh submitted that  the  evidence
   of Dr Zahed should be approached with caution. He invited the Tribunal to
   conclude that this was not a "completely independent" witness as  he  was
   involved with the training of gay activists. He had not been  to  Algeria
   since 2009 and his opinions might be thought to be "discursive".  On  the
   other hand, Mr Singh noted that Dr Zahed's evidence was  that  not  every
   openly gay man, which we  take  to  mean  no  more  than  a  man  who  is
   recognised to be a gay man, was at risk  in  Algeria  today.  Whether  he
   faces any real risk on that account will depend upon the range of factors
   he had identified.


133. In Mr Singh's submission, the evidence of  Dr  Seddon  should  also  be
   treated with caution for the following  reasons.  He  had  not  lived  in
   Algeria for 30 years and has made just three relatively brief  visits  in
   the last fifteen years. He relied in part upon information provided by  a
   source who himself had not lived in Algeria for more than ten  years.  He
   had strayed beyond his remit as an independent  country  expert  and  had
   taken to himself the assessment of the appellant's  credibility,  without
   having heard oral evidence from him, and has expressed the view that  the
   Upper Tribunal should allow the  appeal.  That  meant,  according  to  Mr
   Singh,  Dr  Seddon  had  become  an  informed  advocate  supporting   the
   appellant's appeal  rather  than  a  truly  independent  expert  witness.
   Finally, as Dr Seddon frankly  and  properly  accepted,  his  views  were
   founded upon very little in the way of sourced verifiable accounts and to
   a significant extent upon what he described as anecdotal evidence.


134. Having said that, Dr Seddon had  accepted  in  his  evidence  that  not
   every gay man recognised as such in Algeria would on that account  be  at
   risk. It would depend, he had said,  upon  matters  such  as  his  family
   circumstances, social class, level of education and the  religious  views
   of his family. Mr Singh pointed out that while in his report,  Dr  Seddon
   emphasised a risk of violence as a reaction to an openly gay man, in  his
   oral evidence he was clear that there could be a range of  responses  and
   that evidence of gay men in fact being subjected to violence  is  sparse.
   It cannot therefore be said, he submitted, that there is a real  risk  of
   gay men suffering  a  violent  response  to  their  sexuality  if  it  is
   disclosed or perceived.  Similarly, although Dr Seddon had written in his
   report about gay men being denied access to medical treatment, there  was
   no evidence of that actually being the case.


135. Thus, in Mr Singh's submission, there is  scant  evidence  of  gay  men
   being subjected to violence but there is evidence of them being subjected
   to  social  stigma,  which  does  not  amount  to  persecution.  It   was
   significant, he suggested, that the reports of NGOs  ,who  are  adept  at
   publishing reports of violence, do not provide any  reports  of  that  in
   Algeria suffered by gay men.


136. Addressing the conundrum: if there is no real risk of  gay  men  living
   openly as such coming to harm on that account, why do so few choose to do
   so, Mr Singh argues that the answer is to be found in the  deeply  rooted
   conservative and religious disapproval of homosexuality. This means  that
   gay men choose to live discreetly not to avoid persecution but  to  avoid
   themselves and their families attracting societal  disapproval  that  may
   manifest itself in ways that fall short of amounting to persecution.


137. Having said that, Mr Singh made clear that it was not the  respondent's
   case that a protection claim by  a  gay  man  from  Algeria  could  never
   succeed. It is accepted that most problems experienced arise  within  the
   family and there is evidence of violence arising as a consequence, at the
   hands  of  family  members,  and  the  respondent  accepts  there  is  no
   sufficiency of protection available in those circumstances from the state
   authorities. But it may well be open to the gay man  coming  out  to  his
   family to  avoid  a  violent  reaction  from  his  family  by  relocating
   elsewhere and, although he may well become to be recognised in his  place
   of relocation as a gay man and so attract  disapproval  there  also,  the
   evidence simply does not establish, in Mr  Singh's  submission,  that  he
   will generally face a response in those  circumstances  that  amounts  to
   persecution. However, there may be some characteristic of the  individual
   that means that there is  no  reasonable  and  safe  internal  relocation
   option and that explains why the respondent has granted asylum claims  to
   a number of gay men from Algeria.

Discussion

138. As we have seen, at the beginning  of  his  oral  evidence,  Dr  Seddon
   recognised that there was a real paucity of "hard evidence", in the sense
   of verifiable  sourced  illustrative  examples  of  the  consequences  he
   considered flowed from a man being recognised in Algeria to be gay.  None
   of the witnesses who gave oral or written evidence to  the  Tribunal  has
   suggested otherwise. On behalf of the appellant it is suggested that  the
   reason for the absence of such evidence of gay men in Algeria  having  in
   fact suffered physical ill-treatment is that much of what occurs  happens
   within the family and gay men do not report abuse to the  police  because
   they have no expectation of receiving an appropriate response. That  does
   not, though, explain for example why even the organisations focused  upon
   gay rights issues make no attempt to record reports of violent attacks or
   other abuses perpetrated upon gay men in Algeria.


139. It is the respondent's position that the absence of  such  evidence  is
   because such abuse simply does  not  generally  occur  and  so  there  is
   nothing to report. We do not  accept  that  the  absence  of  reports  of
   violence directed at gay men in Algeria  can  be  explained  away  simply
   because NGOs who monitor human rights issues face restrictions in  access
   to the country because, as we have observed, they are able  to  catalogue
   other  human  rights  concerns  in  respect  of  other  disadvantaged  or
   vulnerable groups, including women. Also, it might be thought that  those
   most likely to be  a  fertile  source  of  information  about  such  ill-
   treatment are those gay men who have felt compelled to leave Algeria  and
   move to live in another country where they face no restrictions at all in
   terms of expression of their sexuality.


140. The shortage of evidence of such matters  in  the  form  of  verifiable
   examples of such events actually having occurred  does  not,  of  course,
   disqualify informed or expert witnesses from expressing a view.  But  any
   opinion offered  must  be  scrutinised  in  the  light  of  the  evidence
   available and in the light of the reasoning that led to it  being  formed
   by the witness. This is what we  seek  to  do  in  our  analysis  of  the
   evidence.

Prosecutions of gay men in Algeria

141. It is unambiguously clear that  prosecutions  of  gay  men  in  Algeria
   under the criminal code for homosexual acts are extremely rare. Thus,  as
   a starting point, as Dr Zahed observed:


           "(the) authorities do not seem to be actively going after  LGBTI
           individuals and arresting them..."


   and that:


           "the strategy of the government is not to officially crack  down
           on homosexuals..."

   As we have observed, it is also clear that the evidence  that  Dr  Seddon
   identifies  simply  does  not  support  his  view  that  a  person  whose
   homosexual behaviour  comes  to  the  attention  of  the  public  or  the
   authorities can expect to be prosecuted. In fact, the evidence he  relies
   upon points the other way as  there  is  evidence  that  the  authorities
   choose not to prosecute even where there appears to be cogent evidence of
   behaviour of a type made unlawful by the Criminal Code.

142. It is clear from our analysis of the evidence set  out  above  that  in
   those rare cases where there is an arrest and prosecution for  homosexual
   behaviour, in each of those cases, an examination of what is known  about
   them discloses some feature that illustrates something more than a simple
   accusation of homosexual behaviour. This reinforces the view expressed by
   Ms Pargeter, agreeing with that of Dr Zahed,  that  the  state  does  not
   actively seek out and prosecute homosexuals, which led  her  to  conclude
   that the appellant:


         "... would be highly unlikely to face persecution by the state..."


143. It follows from this that we do not accept Dr  Seddon's  evidence  that
   terms of imprisonment are, in practice, applied in Algeria for homosexual
   behaviour.  Nor is there any evidence to suggest that  the  existence  of
   such laws,  generally  unapplied  in  practice,  motivate  or  facilitate
   persecutory behaviour towards gay men in  Algeria  by  non-state  agents.
   Therefore, the mere existence of the criminal law relating to  homosexual
   acts does not in itself constitute persecution of gay men in Algeria.


Sharia Law

144. Although Sharia law as it is understood in Algeria provides for  severe
   punishments in response to homosexual  behaviour,  the  criminal  law  is
   secular and wholly distinct. There is no reliable account,  certainly  in
   the last ten years, of a gay man being punished in accordance with Sharia
   law. Dr Seddon confirmed in oral evidence that he was unable to point  to
   any example of a gay man suffering punishment under Sharia law.  Although
   he said also that Sharia law "underpinned" the criminal law it  is  clear
   that, in fact, there is no actual manifestation  of  Sharia  law  in  the
   operation of the criminal law in Algeria.

Risk of targeted or arbitrary attacks on gay men  or  abusive  treatment  by
police


145. The respondent accepts that gay men do  sometimes  experience  violence
   at the hands of family members when their  homosexuality  becomes  known,
   whether that is because they have decided to "come out" to their families
   or because they have been discovered to be gay for  other  reasons.  This
   was emphasised by Dr Seddon in his  evidence.  He  said  that  "the  most
   significant risk" to a gay man in Algeria was from  his  own  family  and
   that:


           "... the most  violent  reactions  to  discovery  of  homosexual
           behaviour... are usually within the family."


146. The reason for this is not hard to find. Dr Seddon explained that:


           "...  it is within the family that feelings about  personal  and
           sexual behaviour tend to run deepest in Algerian society-  where
           the honour of the family is at stake, and the  notion  of  shame
           and dishonour most acutely felt  when  norms  (and  particularly
           sexual norms) are contravened."

147. We accept this evidence and are satisfied that gay men  may  well  face
   an  extremely  hostile  reaction   from   family   members   when   their
   homosexuality is discovered that may escalate into violence. There  is  a
   risk of that being the case throughout Algerian society but it  is  clear
   from the evidence that that is especially the case in the  less  affluent
   and densely populated neighbourhoods where,  typically,  values  will  be
   conservative and non-secular and households are under close scrutiny from
   neighbours.


148. Such men, in seeking to relocate beyond the  reach  of  their  families
   may, therefore, have experienced such physical ill-treatment and may well
   entertain a fear of encountering similar ill-treatment from strangers  in
   their chosen place of relocation should they  be  recognised  to  be  gay
   there as well. But, it is clear from our analysis of  the  evidence  that
   such fear, even if  sincerely  held,  is  not  well-founded.  Absent,  of
   course, in the place of relocation is any notion of family honour  to  be
   protected or preserved and there will be no concern  from  persons  other
   than relatives of the  possibility  of  shame  being  brought  upon  them
   because a  person  now  living  in  their  neighbourhood  is  thought  to
   contravene social mores.


149. We have carried out, above, a  rigorous  examination  of  the  evidence
   identified by the witnesses and drawn to  our  attention  in  submissions
   concerning the risk of gay men being subjected to violent attacks.  There
   is very little reliable evidence of that  happening  outside  the  family
   home, either at the hands of the authorities or by members of the  public
   with whom gay men may have to engage. There is also very little  evidence
   of family members attempting to seek out a  gay  son  who  has  left  the
   family home to re-establish himself elsewhere. Indeed, even if one  looks
   where one would expect there to be motivation to record  such  incidents,
   nothing is disclosed. Asked whether LGBTI groups have recorded  any  data
   on violence against the LGBTI community, Ms Pargeter responded, simply:

      "Not as far as I am aware."

150. The absence of any attempt to record  and  quantify  accounts  of  such
   attacks, is hard to understand, if such attacks  routinely  or  regularly
   take place. Dr Seddon insisted in his evidence that there is evidence  to
   support his view that there is a  risk  of  such  violent  attacks  being
   carried out but on  examination,  reliable  evidence  is  simply  absent.
   Similarly, although Dr Seddon accepts that there are  places  in  Algeria
   where gay men can meet  for  sex,  the  so  called  "cruising  areas"  he
   cautioned that:


      "... even there it carries  the  risk  of  arrest,  blackmail,  abuse,
      attack..." by the police.


   But,  again,  it  is  impossible  to  identify  any  reliable  evidential
   foundation for this assessment that stands up to scrutiny.  We  recognise
   that in the absence of hard evidence, Dr Seddon had little option but  to
   rely upon what he described as anecdotal evidence but, quite properly, he
   recognised that:


         "... none of those I spoke to had experience of this themselves but
         they told me what others had  told  them  about  what  happened  to
         them."

151. Dr Seddon did rely upon the determination of the four  appeals  by  gay
   Algerian men that were allowed by the First-tier Tribunal. That, however,
   takes the matter no further forward because,  for  the  reasons  we  have
   explained, in each of those cases there were other reasons,  quite  apart
   from the fact of  the  appellant  being  a  gay  man,  that  led  to  the
   consequences that enabled those appellants to establish that they  had  a
   well-founded fear of persecution.


152. Therefore, in the absence of any reliable evidence of it  occurring  in
   fact, it has not been established, even to  the  low  standard  of  proof
   applicable, that gay men in Algeria in reality face a real risk of  being
   subjected to violent attack by the  authorities  or  by  members  of  the
   public who may come to know that a man is gay.


153. The issue of the  perception  of  a  gay  man  of  the  risk  of  being
   subjected to violent attack as opposed to the real risk of that  in  fact
   happening was touched upon by Ms Pargeter in her  written  evidence.  She
   said:


           "While  homosexuals  in  Algeria  are  not   hunted   down   and
           systematically persecuted  by  the  state,  they  are  certainly
           subjected to severe societal  disapproval  and  stigma  and  are
           always soft targets for anyone wishing to harass them or  attack
           them. As a result homosexuals in Algeria are forced  to  conceal
           their sexuality or else put themselves at risk of discrimination
           and persecution including the threat of physical violence."


      Although Ms Pargeter says that gay men are  always  soft  targets  for
      harassment and attack, she offers no evidence at all of  such  attacks
      actually taking place. Significantly, she speaks  of  "the  threat  of
      physical violence" rather than the actual manifestation of violence.

The range of responses to homosexual behaviour


154. It should be recognised at the outset  that  Algeria  is  an  extremely
   conservative society where behaviour is regulated  by  reference  to  the
   strict Islamic values endorsed by the state. It is not just open displays
   of affection by gay men that are not  tolerated  but  such  behaviour  by
   heterosexual couples also, particularly  between  unmarried  heterosexual
   couples. As explained by Ms Pargeter:


         "It would be impossible for gay men to engage in any sort of public
         display of affection  without  attracting  severe  disapproval  and
         hostility. However, the same applies to heterosexual couples. Given
         the conservative nature of society, all forms of physical affection
         are frowned upon."


155. Each of the expert and well informed witnesses agreed that there  could
   be a range of responses  experienced  by  gay  men  recognised  as  such.
   Although in most, possibly  nearly  all,  cases  this  would  involve  an
   expression of disapproval, the evidence falls a very long  way  short  of
   establishing that the response  can  generally  be  expected  to  be  one
   involving physical ill-treatment. Ms Pargeter  spoke  of  that  range  of
   responses as follows:


      "Societal  responses   to   homosexuals   range   from   mockery   and
      stigmatisation to outright hostility."

   so that  gay men risk being:


      "shunned and stigmatised"


   and might:

      "suffer abuse and harassment" when using cruising areas"


   And, drawing this together in her written response to questions posed  by
   the respondent, she said:


      "Anyone openly displaying  their  homosexuality  anywhere  in  Algeria
      would be at risk of mockery, harassment and possible abuse."

156.  The evidence of Dr Zahed was that:

"... LGBTI individuals in Algeria are afraid of being socially ostracised,
      being rejected from their families and friends and losing their jobs
      in case they are outed, which would mean a social death for them."


157. Dr  Seddon  reproduced  in  his  own  report,  without  expressing  any
   disagreement, the view expressed by Ms Pargeter that the appellant, being
   a gay man facing ill-treatment from family members because of his  sexual
   identity, could move to another district of Algiers or to another city in
   Algeria to get away from his father, but that  as  a  homosexual  or  bi-
   sexual man:


         "... he would continue to face social  stigma  and  hostility,  and
         would be forced to conceal his sexuality."


158. Dr Seddon spoke of the range of responses  to  displays  of  homosexual
   behaviour outside the family context extending from  one  end  as  simple
   expressions of disapproval to the other end to what he referred to as:


      "a risk of violent attack"


   adding that although almost all sources agree that  there  is  widespread
   social discrimination on Algeria against and  general  hostility  towards
   homosexuality:


      "... several sources... suggest that this sometimes  takes  a  violent
      form."

   although the sources relied upon are those we have  discussed  above  and
   found not to provide any real support for that conclusion.

159. The view expressed by the US State Department report  on  Human  Rights
   Practices of 2008 is that  there  was  "societal  discrimination  against
   homosexuals" and that "while some  homosexuals  lived  openly,  the  vast
   majority did not" but the conclusion reached in the US report, with which
   Dr Seddon disagrees, was  that:

      "there was no reported violence or official discrimination."

   And at para 21.10 of the COIR is an extract from the Swedish  FFM  Report
   of 2012 that includes:

      "... Homosexuals who do not  conceal  their  sexual  orientation  risk
      verbal harassment."


160. Finally, in this regard, we have discussed above  the  Landinfo  report
   that expresses the view that the range of responses can be expected to be
   from  social  marginalisation  such  as   been   excluded   from   family
   celebrations and being subjected  to  hurtful  language  to  the  use  of
   physical violence, but as we have discussed above,  that  is  within  the
   family context and this reinforces that violence, where it does arise  in
   response to discovery of homosexuality,  is  likely  to  be  within  that
   family context.

161. We have seen also that the view has been expressed  by  those  offering
   expert opinion that few gay men will be able to  "come  out"  and  remain
   with their families but that those that are accepted  are  likely  to  be
   from middle class, well-educated secular families.


162. Drawing all of  this  together  we  are  satisfied  that  the  evidence
   clearly demonstrates that there will be a range of responses to  displays
   of homosexual behaviour outside the family context, but while the risk of
   a physical attack cannot be excluded, generally the response will  be  at
   the lower end of that range.  Where the response is at the upper  end  of
   the possible range of responses,  that  is  likely  to  be  because  open
   displays of affection in public are simply not tolerated, whether that be
   by heterosexual couples or homosexual couples.

Are gay men in Algeria able to live openly as such?

163. Several sources of evidence to which we were  referred  have  discussed
   or emphasised the importance of appreciating that gay men in Algeria  may
   well not identify themselves as such. Dr Seddon referred  in  his  report
   this observation by Dr Zahed:


         ""He referred to many people not referring to themselves  as  "gay"
         because of the extreme taboo in society  -  in  fact,  in  Algeria,
         people who are homosexual do not generally consider  themselves  to
         be "gay"; they might have a sexual relationship  with  another  man
         but will not say they are "gay".

Reinforcing this point, Dr Zahed referred to interviews he had conducted  in
   France with refugees who are established and face no obstacle  to  living
   openly as gay men but choose not to because, according to  Dr  Zahed,  of
   the

      "high societal  pressure:  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  classify
           themselves as "gay" "because it is like a perversion.""

164. Ms Pargeter confirmed in her evidence  that  it  is  "quite  normal  in
   Algerian society for young men to share accommodation" but she said  that
   if it became known that they were living together as a homosexual couple:


      "they would face severe social stigma and could find themselves chased
      out of the area. In such  a  scenario  they  would  be  vulnerable  to
      harassment and attack"


   Although, as we have observed, she offered no example or illustration  of
   that actually having occurred.


165. The view expressed by the US State Department Human  Rights  Report  as
   updated on 3 April 2014 is that:


      "... while some LGBTI persons lived openly, the vast majority did not,
      and most feared reprisals  from  their  families  or  harassment  from
      authorities"


   Although no information followed of the nature of such harassment. It  is
   significant, therefore, that  this  evidences  is  an  asserted  fear  of
   consequences rather than any evidence  that  such  consequences  in  fact
   materialised.


166. This discussion of the  reasons  that  might  explain  why,  given  the
   absence of any reliable evidence  of  gay  men  facing  persecutory  ill-
   treatment outside the family context, very few gay  men  choose  to  live
   openly as such, is informed, therefore, by a number of considerations. It
   is said that gay Algerian men, as a consequence  of  cultural,  religious
   and societal views, do not generally identify themselves as gay, even  if
   their sexual preferences lead them to prefer same sex  relationships.  It
   is said that even men  with  settled  sexual  preferences  for  same  sex
   relationships may well continue to entertain doubt about their sexuality.
   Second, gay men recognise the intense  and  deep  rooted  near  universal
   disapproval  of  homosexuality  that  obtains  in  Algeria.  Third,  near
   universal adherence to and respect for established social  and  religious
   mores including the expectation that men of a marriageable age will marry
   and produce children leads gay men to choose to marry. This was explained
   in the 2014 Landinfo report that suggests that it may  be  misleading  to
   speak of such marriages as being "forced":

      "In the light of religious views on marriage being a  duty,  one  must
           assume that it is not uncommon for gay men to  marry  women,  in
           order  to  hide  their  sexual  orientation   and   escape   the
           questioning  and  pressure  from  their  families   and   social
           networks. The fact that gay people marry is  not  necessarily  a
           response to direct or indirect pressure; given  the  fundamental
           role  of  marriage  in  Algerian  society,  as   well   as   the
           respectability  and  significance  that  marriage  and  children
           provide, it  is  fully  possible  to  wish  to  marry  and  have
           children, even if one's sexual preference is for people  of  the
           same sex."


167. The reality of the position is that there is no reason at all to  doubt
   that there are in Algeria gay men who have left  their  family  homes  in
   order to escape intense family disapproval of  their  sexuality,  whether
   that was expressed in persecutory terms or not. The absence  of  evidence
   of gay couples living openly as such leads to the  inevitable  conclusion
   that they  choose  to  live  discreetly.  As  Ms  Pargeter  observed,  in
   practice, gay men "can live together in Algeria" and it is "quite  normal
   for young men to share accommodation".


168. The absence of reliable  evidence  of  adverse  reactions  to  gay  men
   living away from  their  families  of  a  type  sufficiently  serious  to
   constitute persecutory ill-treatment demonstrates that the choice to live
   discreetly as a gay man is not  generally  driven  by  a  need  to  avoid
   persecution. In living in a manner that does not  require  others  to  be
   confronted with open displays of the affection a gay couple have for each
   other such a couple are  doing  no  more  than  what  is  demanded  of  a
   heterosexual couple. That two gay men do not  volunteer  the  information
   that they are living together not simply sharing accommodation as friends
   but living together as sexual partners, gay men are acting discreetly  to
   avoid social pressures of the type contemplated in HJ (Iran) v SSHD  that
   does not give rise to a sustainable claim for asylum. Put another way,  a
   gay man who did live openly as such in Algeria may well attract upsetting
   comments; find his relationships with friends or work colleagues damaged;
   or  suffer  other  discriminatory  repercussions  such  as   experiencing
   difficulty in dealing with some suppliers or services. But none  of  that
   amounts to persecution.


169. We make one further observation in respect of this. There  is  evidence
   that gay men in Algeria do not  identify  themselves  as  being  gay  and
   continue to entertain doubts about their  sexuality  even  if  they  have
   recognised within themselves a preference for same sex relationships. The
   evidence of the expert witnesses suggests  that  may  be  driven  by  the
   conditioning to which they have been subjected in growing up in a society
   that holds the fiercely negative views  of  homosexuality  that  we  have
   discussed above. Plainly, a person who does not consider  himself  to  be
   gay would not wish to inform others that he is. That may also be part  of
   the explanation why Algerian men do not seek to make known that they have
   a preference for same sex relationships. That may help  to  explain  also
   the evidence of such men, whom one  would  normally  refer  to  as  "gay"
   living in France who choose to live discreetly despite the absence of any
   risk at all of persecution should they "come out" as gay.

Risk on return as a failed asylum seeker

170. We can deal with this  asserted  risk,  raised  by  Dr  Seddon  in  his
   report, briefly. Other than his bare assertion to this effect,  there  is
   no evidence before us to support the suggestion that  a  person  returned
   involuntarily as a failed asylum seeker  would,  on  that  account,  face
   questioning or interrogation at the point of return, or the  prospect  of
   detention during which he faces a real risk. We  are  satisfied  that  no
   such risk exists.


   Country Guidance


171. The discussion of the situation for  gay men in Algeria is  complicated
   by the fact that both country experts who have  provided  evidence  agree
   that  men  in  Algeria  who  have  a  settled  preference  for  same  sex
   relationships do not identify themselves as gay men  in  the  sense  that
   term is used in Europe and much of the world. Such a  person  is  likely,
   according to the expert evidence, to continue to entertain  doubts  about
   his sexuality and to feel ashamed of his sexual  preferences.  Therefore,
   where we refer to gay men in Algeria, it must be remembered that term  is
   used  to  identify  a  man  whose  sexual  preference  is  for  same  sex
   relationships rather than a person who would wish to be known as a gay or
   homosexual man if there were no risk involved in letting that be known.


172.  Although  the  Algerian  Criminal  Code  makes  homosexual   behaviour
   unlawful, the authorities do not seek to prosecute gay men and  there  is
   no real risk of prosecution, even when the authorities  become  aware  of
   such behaviour. In the very few cases where there has been a  prosecution
   for homosexual behaviour, there has been  some  other  feature  that  has
   given rise to the prosecution. The state does not actively seek  out  gay
   men in order to take any form of action against them, either by means  of
   prosecution or by subjecting gay men to other forms of  persecutory  ill-
   treatment.


173. Sharia law is not applied against gay men  in  Algeria.   The  criminal
   law is entirely secular and discloses no manifestation, at all, of Sharia
   law in its application.


174. Algeria  is  an  extremely  conservative  society  where  behaviour  is
   regulated by reference to the  strict  Islamic  values  endorsed  by  the
   state. It is not just open displays of affection by gay men that are  not
   tolerated but such behaviour by heterosexual couples  also,  particularly
   between  unmarried  heterosexual  couples.  Because  there   is   general
   adherence  to  strict  Islamic  doctrine,  which   includes   a   similar
   intolerance to extra-marital sexual relations, young unmarried men do not
   have access to women and so may have resort to same-sex liaisons. This is
   not seen  as  homosexual  conduct  but  pragmatism  in  achieving  sexual
   gratification. Indeed, there is some evidence that where one of the  same
   sex partners is perceived to be "dominant" he will be admired  as  virile
   and masculine.


175.  There are, undoubtedly, gay men in Algeria and there is no  reason  to
   suppose that they do not represent a similar proportion of the population
   as in other countries. Therefore, it is remarkable that there  is  little
   evidence of gay men living openly as such anywhere in Algeria. That  much
   is accepted by the respondent.


176. It is conceded by the respondent that where a gay man does face a  real
   risk of persecution, which, when such occurs, is likely to  be  from  his
   own family members, there is no sufficiency of protection available  from
   the police or other state authorities.


177. There is a real risk of violent and persecutory  ill-treatment  of  gay
   men from family members,  motivated  by  the  deep  sense  of  shame  and
   dishonour perceived to be brought upon the family as a consequence of  it
   becoming known in the neighbourhood that there is within the household  a
   gay son. There is a risk of  that  being  the  case  throughout  Algerian
   society but it is clear from the evidence that  that  is  especially  the
   case in the less affluent and  densely  populated  neighbourhoods  where,
   typically, values will be conservative and non-secular and households are
   under close scrutiny from neighbours.   But once the gay son has left the
   family home and re-established himself elsewhere there is  no  real  risk
   that family members will pursue him to that place of relocation,  and  so
   generally that risk of persecution can be avoided by the availability  of
   a safe and reasonable internal relocation alternative.


178. Typically, a gay man in Algeria will first encounter problems when  his
   family becomes aware that he is gay, either because he "comes out" to his
   family, perhaps when resisting pressure  to  marry,  which  is  something
   expected of all Algerian men when they reach marriageable age, or because
   his sexual orientation has come to the attention of  family  members  for
   other reasons. In such a situation, some, but certainly not all, gay  men
   may face a real risk of ill-treatment from family  members  of  a  nature
   such as to cross the threshold into persecution. There is  some  evidence
   that "caring and concerned" fathers will beat or  otherwise  "discipline"
   gay sons in an attempt to "straighten them out" for their own good.  Very
   few families will be prepared to accept and tolerate the fact of a  son's
   homosexuality. Those that do are likely to be educated,  secular,  middle
   class families, living in more prosperous lower density areas.


179. Where, exceptionally, a family is prepared to accept the  homosexuality
   of their son that  does  not  enable  the  son  to  manifest  his  sexual
   orientation outside the family home. He will choose to conceal it, not to
   avoid persecution, (there being no adequate  or  sufficient  evidence  of
   such taking place) but to protect the reputation of his family within the
   local neighbourhood and because he is likely to feel  ashamed  of  having
   the sexual preferences that he does  and  will  wish  to  avoid  damaging
   relationships with friends, work colleagues and others.


180. As there is no sufficiency of protection available, the  next  question
   is whether the gay son whose family  is  not  prepared  to  tolerate  him
   living as a gay man, can relocate elsewhere  in  Algeria  to  avoid  ill-
   treatment from family members and if so whether it will be reasonable  to
   expect him to do so. If it is not reasonable then,  having  travelled  to
   the UK, he will be entitled to international protection.


181. That question, of whether there  is  a  safe  and  reasonable  internal
   relocation option, is  a  difficult  and  complex  one  in  the  Algerian
   context.  Generally,  there  will  be  no  real   difficulty   preventing
   relocation and there is no indication that  disapproving  family  members
   have  the  means,  inclination  or  reach  to  cause  difficulties  after
   relocation. But where such a person has established himself elsewhere  in
   Algeria, as marriage is expected of all Algerian  men,  in  pursuance  of
   what is seen as an "Islamic duty to procreate", it may  well,  sooner  or
   later, become apparent that he has not adhered to the norms expected  and
   that is likely to generate suspicion that he is a gay man.

182. There is no real risk of gay men being subjected to violence  or  other
   persecutory ill-treatment outside the family home, either at the hands of
   the authorities or by members of the public with whom  gay  men  have  to
   engage. There is an absence of reliable evidence of that occurring.


183. Very few gay men live openly as such in Algeria. Gay Algerian  men,  as
   a consequence of cultural, religious and societal views, do not generally
   identify themselves as gay, even if their sexual preferences lead them to
   prefer same sex relationships. Even  Algerian  men  with  settled  sexual
   preferences for same sex relationships may  well  continue  to  entertain
   doubt about their sexuality. Second, gay men recognise  the  intense  and
   deep rooted near universal disapproval of homosexuality that  obtains  in
   Algeria. Thus, Algerian gay men who have moved to France where,  plainly,
   they face no obstacle to living openly as such, generally choose  not  to
   because they refuse to categorise themselves as gay, even though there is
   no persecutory disincentive to doing so.


184. The fact that there is very little evidence of gay  men  living  openly
   in Algeria invites the conclusion  that  must  be  because  the  risk  of
   persecutory ill-treatment likely to be attracted is such  as  to  prevent
   that from happening. But the expert and other country evidence  does  not
   establish that, in fact, there  is  any  real  risk  outside  the  family
   context of such persecutory ill-treatment  being  meted  out  to  persons
   suspected as being gay. The expert evidence  indicates  that  a  gay  man
   recognised as such is very likely to attract  an  adverse  response  from
   those by whom he is encountered as he goes about his daily business.  But
   that adverse reaction is not reasonably likely be such as  to  amount  to
   persecution, being on a range of responses from a  simple  expression  of
   disapproval, mockery or name calling up to the  possibility  of  physical
   attack. But there is simply no reliable evidence  of  the  expression  of
   disapproval  being  expressed  in  such  circumstances  generally   being
   otherwise than at the lower end of that range of responses.


185. That gives rise to a conundrum. If there is no evidence of  persecution
   of gay men who have  escaped  ill-treatment  from  family  by  relocating
   elsewhere, why is there no evidence of  gay  men  feeling  able  to  live
   openly? Alternatively, is  the  absence  of  evidence  of  physical  ill-
   treatment of gay men due to the fact that there are  no  gay  men  living
   openly?


186. The answer, in our judgement, is as follows:


        a.  The only risk of ill-treatment at a level to become persecution
           likely to be encountered by a gay man in Algeria is at the hands
           of his own family, after they have discovered that  he  is  gay.
           There is no reliable evidence such as to establish  that  a  gay
           man, identified as such, faces a real risk of  persecutory  ill-
           treatment from persons outside his own family.


        b. Where a gay man remains living with his family to  whom  he  has
           disclosed his sexual orientation in circumstances where they are
           prepared to tolerate that, his decision to live  discreetly  and
           to conceal his homosexuality outside  the  family  home  is  not
           taken to avoid persecution but  to  avoid  shame  or  disrespect
           being brought upon his family. That means that he has chosen  to
           live discreetly, not to avoid persecution but for  reasons  that
           do not give rise to a right to international protection.


        c. Where a gay man has to flee his family home to avoid persecution
           from family members, in his place of relocation he will  attract
           no real risk of persecution because, generally, he will not live
           openly as a gay man. As the evidence does not establish that  he
           will face a real risk of persecution if  subsequently  suspected
           to be a gay man, his decision to live discreetly and to  conceal
           his sexual orientation is driven by respect for social mores and
           a desire to avoid attracting disapproval of a  type  that  falls
           well below the threshold of persecution. Quite apart from  that,
           an Algerian man who  has  a  settled  preference  for  same  sex
           relationships may well continue to entertain doubts  as  to  his
           sexuality and not to regard himself as a gay man, in any event.


 187. Underpinning these conclusions is recognition that Algerian society is
      governed by strict Islamic values which all  citizens,  including  gay
      men, in practice respect, even if only for pragmatic reasons.

 188. This gives rise to a compromise which in some senses is unsatisfactory
      but, as a matter of  law,  does  not  give  rise  to  a  right  to  be
      recognised  as  a  refugee.  Algerian  society,  including  the  state
      authorities,   effectively   tolerates   private   manifestations   of
      homosexual conduct, both between young unmarried men and gay  men  who
      have established themselves away from the family home, provided  there
      is no public display of it. Gay men choose to live discreetly  not  to
      avoid persecution, because there is no evidence that there is any, but
      because they recognise that the society they live in is a conservative
      one, subject to strict  Islamic  values,  that  is  unable  to  openly
      embrace the existence of the practice of homosexuality, just as  women
      are expected to submit to Islamic requirements such  as  being  veiled
      and accepting other limitations upon their ability to act as they  may
      wish to.


 189. The evidence before us indicates that as a result  of  societal  views
      and  conditioning,  Algerian  men  with  a  preference  for   same-sex
      relationships generally do not in fact regard themselves  as  gay  men
      and so have no reason to identify themselves  as  such  to  others  by
      conducting themselves in a manner that has  come  to  be  regarded  as
      "living openly" or discreetly. Therefore, choosing not to live  openly
      as gay men is not due to a fear of persecution but other reasons to do
      with self-perception and how they wish to be perceived by others.


 190. For these reasons, a gay man from  Algeria  will  be  entitled  to  be
      recognised as a refugee only if he shows that,  due  to  his  personal
      circumstances, it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect him
      to relocate within Algeria to avoid persecution from  family  members,
      or because he has particular characteristics that might, unusually and
      contrary to what is generally to be expected, give rise to a  risk  of
      attracting disapproval at the highest level of the possible  range  of
      adverse responses from those seeking to express their  disapproval  of
      the fact of his sexual orientation.


Determination of OO's appeal


 191. It is the appellant's case that he is at risk on return to Algeria  on
      account of his sexuality. He is a gay man although, as he has also had
      relationships with women, he now describes himself as bisexual. In the
      light of the country guidance findings set out above,  his  protection
      claim cannot succeed  on  that  account  alone.  We  must,  therefore,
      examine his account of his experiences in Algeria and make findings of
      fact. There are two credibility findings to be made. First, in respect
      of his factual account of the events that he said led to his  need  to
      leave  Algeria  and  second,  in  respect  of  his  sexuality  as  the
      respondent does not accept that he is a gay or bisexual man at all.

 192. The submissions of the parties can be summarised briefly, although  we
      do not repeat the submissions  advanced  in  respect  of  the  country
      guidance issues. For the appellant, Ms Chapman submits that we  should
      accept the appellant's asserted sexual orientation and she  points  to
      the evidence of Drs Perrin and Bell and the letter from  Nabil  Diafi,
      an outreach worker, each of whom accept what the appellant says  about
      this. Making allowances for any contradictions in his evidence for the
      reasons identified by Dr Bell, she submits that  we  should  find  the
      appellant to be a credible witness in respect of his  account  of  his
      experiences in Algeria. It follows from that, she  submits,  that  the
      appellant will be at risk on return as a gay or bisexual man who could
      not return to his family so that he would be homeless  and  unable  to
      form or pursue open relationships with other men.


 193. For the  respondent  Mr  Singh  submits  that  the  contradictory  and
      inconsistent account given by the appellant is explained  not  by  any
      difficulty in giving evidence  about  these  events  but  because  the
      appellant has fabricated his entire  account  of  his  experiences  in
      Algeria. Mr Singh submitted that so extensive  is  the  inconsistency,
      contradiction and implausibility in the  appellant's  account  of  his
      experiences in Algeria that it is simply impossible to accept that  he
      has shown to be reasonably likely that which he says has occurred.

 194. We heard oral evidence from the appellant. His account  has  been  set
      out on a number of occasions. The most recent statement  is  dated  15
      September 2015, which he adopted as his evidence in chief. He  adopted
      also what had been written in earlier statements  of  February,  March
      and June of 2011 and March 2012. We heard detailed oral evidence  from
      the appellant  at  some  considerable  length.  However,  for  present
      purposes the following summary of his account will suffice, taken from
      his most recent statement:


      "When I was about 12 to 13, I developed a  friendship  with  an  older
           boy, Karim, who led me into a  sexual  relationship.  Homosexual
           relationships are illegal and regarded as sinful in Algeria. One
           day in 2008, my parents came home unexpectedly and caught us  in
           an undressed state together. They were shocked. My mother  threw
           herself from the balcony, from the third floor. I fled. I passed
           and saw the broken body of  my  mother  outside  as  I  fled.  I
           thought my father would kill me  if  he  caught  me.  I  had  no
           opportunity to embrace my mother. The  next  day  I  could  only
           observe her funeral from a distance, without  revealing  myself.
           My father did subsequently find me in a park and stabbed me  but
           I escaped again. I then left Algeria. I left to escape my father
           and  the  consequences  of  being  discovered  in  a  homosexual
           relationship which caused my mother to kill herself."


 195. The appellant explained how, after being stabbed by his father when he
      was encountered in the park, he went to hospital  to  have  the  wound
      stitched after which he caught a train to the  coast  where,  after  a
      short stay, he was able to travel by boat to Spain.  Although  he  had
      only a very small amount of money he was able to make  those  journeys
      because he boarded the train without a ticket and the people  smuggler
      whose boat took him to Spain took pity on him and so  allowed  him  to
      travel for free, although the other eleven passengers paid  for  their
      passage. After spending four days in Spain,  the  appellant  travelled
      with some Moroccan people he had met to France. He stayed in Marseille
      between November 2009 and June 2010 during  which  time  he  supported
      himself with money he made  by  selling  cigarettes.  After  that,  he
      decided to travel to the United Kingdom. With a friend,  he  travelled
      to Belgium when they boarded the lorry that  brought  them  into  this
      country.

 196. Before assessing the issue of credibility, we must have regard to  the
      evidence of Dr David Bell, who is a consultant  psychiatrist  who  has
      been commissioned by the appellant's solicitors to  prepare  a  report
      which is now before the Tribunal, being dated 8 September 2015.

 197. Having set out a summary of the events that brought the  appellant  to
      the United Kingdom as an unaccompanied minor, Dr Bell records that the
      appellant was granted discretionary leave to  remain  until  his  18th
      birthday but he notes that although now 20 years  old,  the  appellant
      remains in the care of Croydon Social Services as a Care Leaver  which
      Dr  Bell  regards  as  "an  acknowledgement  of  the  degree  of   his
      psychological vulnerability".  Before embarking upon his analysis,  Dr
      Bell said:


           "I am also informed by Miss Bye (the appellant's  solicitor  who
           commissioned the report from Dr Bell)  that  [Mr  OO]  has  been
           fairly chaotic in his manner but consistent in his  story.  Miss
           Bye also informs me that he is finding it very difficult to cope
           in general and cannot remember things, is unable to  concentrate
           and has complained of sleep disturbance and  hallucinations  and
           that he has been referred to mental  health  services.  However,
           because  of  his   frequent   changes   of   address   and   his
           forgetfulness, it has been  difficult  for  him  to  get  proper
           assessment and treatment."


 198. Dr Bell referred to a report prepared in 2011 by Dr Perrin, a clinical
      psychologist, who recorded an account of  the  appellant's  "traumatic
      experiences in Algeria and also on the journey to the United  Kingdom"
      and of his "quite severe traumatic experience whilst in Feltham (Young
      Offenders' Institution) where he was attacked by other  prisoners  and
      also by the guards" and concluded that  the  appellant  suffered  from
      post-traumatic stress disorder and Depressive Episode. Dr Perrin found
      the appellant to be credible and accepted all that he said.


 199. Next, Dr Bell carried out a review of the appellant's medical records,
      disclosing incidents of self-harm and alcohol abuse  as  well  of  him
      reporting having "heard voices" since his  time  in  France.  Dr  Bell
      concluded:


           "These records indicate that [Mr OO] has  suffered  from  severe
           psychological disorder at least since 2010 and in all likelihood
           before. The  alcohol  consumption  and  drug  taking  should  be
           understood in relation to this disorder. As far as I can tell he
           has  never  had  appropriate  specialist  treatment   for   this
           disorder."


 200. Dr Bell met the appellant for an  interview  that  lasted  about  1  
      hours. He said:


           "At the start of the interview it was clear, as I  have  already
           indicated, that I was dealing with a man who was quite seriously
           disturbed..."

      And a little later:
           "His attention, concentration and memory are all very  poor.  He
           forgets things all the time and is constantly making lists..."


 201. Dr Bell's conclusions are set out at some lengths and include:


           "It is clear to me that [Mr OO] suffers from Severe  Psychiatric
           Disorder. His condition would satisfy  the  diagnostic  criteria
           for Severe Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder... I refer here to the
           intrusive thoughts,  flashbacks,  dissociation,  claustrophobia,
           anxiety,  panic  attacks,  typical  post   traumatic   dreams...
           disturbances of attention and concentration, sleep  disturbance,
           marked volatility of  mood  (that  is,  surges  of  unmanageable
           rage),    paranoid     ideation,     hallucinations     ...noise
           sensitivity..."


      Adding:


           "... in this case, there have been a series of traumatic  events
           over an extended period of time. I  refer  here  to  the  sexual
           experience he described at the age of about thirteen  which  may
           amount to abuse or even rape, the events surrounding the suicide
           of his mother and the subsequent violent attack by  his  father,
           the journey from Algeria to Spain which was a  highly  traumatic
           event both in terms of being removed from his  country  and  the
           experience of the  journey  in  which  he  was  exposed  to  the
           possibility of death and witnessed deaths  of  others  and  then
           living rough as a very young person in Spain  before  moving  to
           France.
           ...
           Thus, in my view, the more appropriate diagnosis is  of  Chronic
           Traumatised State."


 202. Pausing there, we observe that the appellant's oral evidence  in  this
      appeal is not easy to reconcile with Dr  Bell's  conclusion  that  the
      appellant's first sexual experience with Karim amounted to  rape.  The
      appellant said:

      "The first time we were playing around. It was a joke. It  was  at  my
           home."

 203. The consequence, according to Dr Bell, is that:


           "... although [Mr OO] is  technically  an  adult,  he  functions
           psychologically as a minor..."


 204. Dr Bell added to his diagnosis as the report  proceeded.  He  detected
      and diagnosed also "typical Survivor Syndrome" as  well  as  "Dj  vu
      phenomenon" and "a significant degree of Dissociation".  Dr  Bell  was
      satisfied that the appellant is  "primarily  homosexual"  although  he
      found that "there was some confusion about his sexual identity", and:


           "It is of great importance in this regard that [Mr OO] has "come
           out" as gay/bi-sexual."

       Finally, Br Bell said:


           "I think it is already clear from  what  I  have  stated  in  my
           report  that  he  is  highly  compromised  in   his   attention,
           concentration  and  memory,  as  a  result  of  his  psychiatric
           disorder. In my opinion he would be very limited indeed  in  his
           ability to give cogent evidence."


 205. Dr Bell referred to the earlier report prepared by Dr Perrin  in  June
      2011, but does not mention that Dr Perrin said of  the  appellant,  at
      para 5.1.2 of his report:

      "He had no difficulties suggestive of memory problems. He was able  to
           recall and describe painful material  from  his  past  including
           sexual and violent experiences..."

 206. We have had careful regard to all that Dr Bell has said in his report.
      The question  for  us  is  not,  of  course,  whether  any  particular
      diagnosis is correct but whether the matters  to  which  Dr  Bell  has
      referred to impact  upon  the  assessment  of  the  evidence  that  we
      received from the appellant on this occasion.

 207. The appellant gave extensive oral evidence before us.  Mindful  of  Dr
      Bell's concerns, we made clear that the appellant could take  a  break
      whenever he, or Ms Chapman, thought necessary. However, the  appellant
      demonstrated no difficulties in giving his  evidence  which,  although
      riddled  with   inconsistency   and   contradiction,   was   delivered
      confidently, coherently and in a manner that disclosed  no  difficulty
      at all in responding to all questions.  There  was  no  indication  of
      anxiety, loss of  concentration  or  lack  of  understanding.  We  are
      entirely satisfied that the appellant fully understood  the  questions
      he was asked to respond to and that his answers were those he intended
      to provide, some of which  he  clarified  by  volunteering  additional
      information. We have no doubt at all that  his  participation  in  the
      hearing was not in any way compromised  by  any  of  the  difficulties
      identified by Dr Bell.


 208. There are formidable difficulties with the appellant's evidence.


 209. At the very core of his claim is his account of his relationship  with
      Karim. In his oral evidence he said both  that he first met Karim when
      he was 13 years old and, later,  that he was just six years  old  when
      he first met Karim, whose family occupied a flat in the same building,
      after which they had grown up together and gone to the same school. In
      his statement dated 15 February 2011 he said that he had  known  Karim
      since he, the appellant, was 10 or 11 years old. That is a significant
      inconsistency because by the time the appellant was 10 or  11  he  had
      left school.


 210. It might be observed also that the account recorded by  Dr  Perrin  of
      how the appellant and Karim first met  sits  uneasily  with  what  the
      appellant now says about this:


      "When he was a child selling food,  then  later  other  goods  in  the
           street for his mum, he attracted the attention of older boys and
           sometimes men. They would try to befriend him. He was not  alone
           in that regard, as men and older boys approached  other  younger
           kids on the street. One such boy who was about 15 or 16  (Karim)
           befriended [the appellant] who  was  then  12  or  13  years  of
           age..."


 211. The appellant has said both that his father would  not  usually  allow
      his mother to leave the house and that she went out to visit  friends,
      to do the shopping and to pay for the electricity.  In  his  statement
      the appellant said that some evenings his mother would go out  to  see
      her  friends.  That  is  simply  impossible  to  reconcile  with   his
      contradictory evidence of a controlling father who would not  let  her
      leave the house.


 212. The appellant's evidence before us was that before  his  parents  were
      married his father would take drugs and was "always drunk". When asked
      why his mother would want to marry someone  who  took  drugs  and  was
      drunk all the time the appellant said that "he was good to her".


 213. At the last hearing the appellant's evidence was that he and Karim had
      sex together at Karim's family home but in his oral evidence to us  he
      said that they only ever had sex at his own home and never at  Karim's
      home, explaining this was because Karim had a number of brothers  also
      living at home. Despite all that Dr Bell has said, it is very hard  to
      accept that such an error of recollection can be explained away if the
      appellant were giving evidence of events that had in fact occurred.


 214. The appellant told us that it was some time between 2.30 pm and  4  pm
      that his parents came  home  and  found  him  and  Karim  having  sex.
      However, he said also that Karim was at that time still  attending  at
      school and would be there in the afternoons and that he himself  spent
      the days on the streets selling food that his mother had made, but  he
      initially offered no explanation why, on that  particular  day,  Karim
      was not at school and he was not selling  his  mother's  food  on  the
      streets.


 215. Asked for an explanation, the appellant said he did not have  to  sell
      food on that day because his mother  had  told  him  they  had  enough
      money. But in oral evidence he said that his father had no income  and
      gave his mother no money who was, therefore, only  able  to  keep  the
      household going and to put food on the table from the income  produced
      by the sale by the appellant of the food  that  she  prepared.  It  is
      simply not credible that the appellant's mother should say  that  they
      would not need to do on that particular day something  that  otherwise
      would be essential to provide the family income. It was because of the
      need to earn money that the appellant was taken out of school.


 216. In any event, as he knew that his parents had gone to  the  mosque  at
      noon and would generally return  after  three  or  four  hours  it  is
      impossible to  understand  why  the  appellant  would,  at  about  the
      anticipated time of return of his parents, be in a  state  of  undress
      with Karim while having sex.


 217. The appellant said first that when his parents returned to the flat he
      and Karim were undressed from the waist down and were having  sex.  On
      seeing this his mother threw herself out of  the  window  and  as  his
      father went to the window he and Karim rushed out of the apartment  to
      make their escape.  When  asked  how  he  could  have  run  away  when
      undressed, the appellant said, contradicting his earlier account, that
      he was not in fact undressed  from  the  waist  down  but  had  merely
      lowered his shorts.  Therefore,  he  was  able  to  leave  immediately
      without waiting to find some clothes. That, however, is impossible  to
      reconcile with his oral evidence as reflected in this exchange:


      Q: What were you wearing when you were found?
      A: We had jumpers on top but without trousers.
      Q: Did you have underwear?
           A: No.


 218. He said in oral evidence that having fled  from  his  home  he  stayed
      initially in a local park, known as Red Park, wearing the clothes that
      he had when he fled. Asked about this he said,  for  the  first  time,
      that he had found some trousers in a waste bin.


 219. It is notable that the appellant's  account  was  silent  as  to  what
      happened to Karim, even though he said that they  fled  together  when
      his parents returned. The appellant said that  Karim  lived  with  his
      family in the same block of flats, on a different floor. Therefore, it
      seems improbable that Karim would return to his own  home,  which  was
      known to the appellant's father. Yet the appellant makes no suggestion
      that he looked to see if Karim also had moved to the  Park,  which  he
      said was the obvious place to sleep, given the circumstances.


 220.  That  gives  rise  to  another  difficulty   with   the   appellant's
      credibility. If Red Park was the obvious place to sleep out in and  he
      knew that his father would wish to do him harm, which is  why  he  had
      fled, it is difficult to see why he should stay there,  close  to  his
      home, where the risk on that account would be greatest.


 221. A significant contradiction in the appellant's  evidence  is  that  in
      oral evidence the appellant said that  he  saw  his  mother's  "broken
      body" as he fled from the apartment block after she had thrown herself
      out of the window but in his witness statement he said:


      "I heard what happened from other people."

 222. Similarly, in  his  witness  statement  dated  15  February  2011  the
      appellant said that after his  mother  had  thrown  herself  from  the
      window of their third floor flat:

      "My father went to see what had happened, and  it  was  then  that  we
           escaped. I ran from the house. He then chased after me,  but  he
           could not catch me."

 But in oral evidence he was clear that his father did not chase after him.
       We do not accept, had this been an event that had occurred, that  the
       appellant would be unclear as to whether or not he was chased by  his
       father as he fled from the flat.


 223. The appellant has given a contradictory and  inconsistent  account  of
      his mother's funeral. It is not in dispute that his  evidence  at  the
      earlier hearing was  that  he  discovered  the  arrangements  for  the
      funeral when he heard about this when attending the mosque.  His  oral
      evidence now is that he knew that the funeral would take place the day
      following his mother's death and would start from the local mosque and
      so he had no need to be told of the arrangements.  Also,  whereas  his
      evidence previously had been that the cemetery where his mother was to
      be buried was a two hour bus ride away, his evidence now  is  that  it
      took him 1  hours to walk from the mosque to the cemetery.

 224. The appellant said that his father found him in Red Park, where he had
      been sleeping rough. He said his  father  was  an  Iman  at  a  nearby
      mosque, although he did not know if that was  a  paid  position.   The
      park was close to both the family home and the mosque. As  that  meant
      that there was plainly a risk that the appellant would  encounter  his
      father, that choice of refuge is lacking in credibility. He  described
      how his father stabbed him in the shoulder after which he  managed  to
      get away from him, saying only that he ran away, and walked for  about
      1  hours to the nearest hospital. Asked how he manged to do that,  as
      he  was  bleeding  from  a  stab  would  that  needed  urgent  medical
      attention, he said, for the first time, in oral evidence that a passer-
      by provided some cloth torn from his  own  T-shirt  and  bandaged  the
      wound so that the bleeding was stopped so that he was able to make the
      journey to the hospital.


 225.  Whilst it is entirely plausible that the appellant may have been able
      to complete his train journey without a ticket, we find his account of
      being offered a free journey on  the  boat  that  took  him  to  Spain
      completely  lacking  in  credibility.  This  was  a  small  boat  that
      accommodated just twelve passengers. The persons organising  the  boat
      were traffickers doing this for profit. The appellant accepted that  a
      significant sum had been paid by each  of  the  other  passengers  for
      their place on the boat. The explanation  that  the  traffickers  took
      pity upon the appellant and so allowed him to travel  without  payment
      is one that we do not accept is reasonably likely to be true.  He  had
      been in this area for just three days and we do not  accept  that  was
      time enough for a relationship to be forged to produce such a  gesture
      of generosity.


 226. The appellant claims to have had homosexual relationships  with  three
      men since leaving Algeria. Although those relationships were  said  to
      have lasted for up to 18 months the appellant was unable  to  remember
      the surnames of  any  of  these  men.  In  respect  of  one  of  those
      relationships, during which the appellant said that he  and  his  male
      partner lived together, he said that he  did  not  look  at  the  post
      delivered to that address, which would have revealed the name, because
      someone else's post was nothing to do with him. We do not accept  that
      the appellant would be unaware of those names or unable to recall them
      had  his  account  of  the  relationships  be  true.  Similarly,   his
      explanation for having no record of contact details, which is that  he
      managed to lose his mobile phone on three separate  occasions  shortly
      after each relationship ended, is one that we  do  not  accept  to  be
      true.


 227. These are some of the contradictions or inconsistencies  disclosed  by
      the appellant's evidence. We do not accept that they can be  explained
      away by the matters raised by Dr  Bell.  Even  if  the  appellant  had
      engaged in some sexual contact with a male person in Algeria,  whether
      that be his friend Karim or anyone else, the evidence  indicates  that
      such behaviour would not be unusual nor indicative  of  homosexuality.
      The appellant has also formed relationships  with  women  and  has  no
      current male partner in the United Kingdom and  there  is  absent  any
      evidence at all to support his asserted sexual orientation, other than
      a letter from an outreach worker, prepared for these  proceedings,  in
      which it is said that the appellant disclosed  the  fact  that  he  is
      bisexual and the opinions of Dr Bell  and  Dr  Perrin,  both  of  whom
      accepted all that the appellant had told them an. . Absent also is any
      real detail of the  few  same  sex  relationships  the  appellant  has
      described, he being unable to provide the surname of any of his former
      partners, even though he said that those relationships persisted  over
      a period of months during which they were living together at hostels.


 228. In his letter, incidentally, the outreach  worker,  who  has  been  in
      contact with the appellant since 2010, said:


      "I am currently still in contact with [Mr OO]; we occasionally meet in
           Finsbury Park and other places, he looks very  positive  and  in
           good health. No concerns."



 229. In his oral evidence the appellant explained  that  he  had  not  told
      Algerian friends about his sexual orientation because:

      "I have maybe only three friends in the Algerian community. If I  told
           them I was gay or bisexual they wouldn't understand and would be
           very disrespectful to me and they would call me names."

We do not accept that would be  sufficient  to  motivate  a  suppression  of
      sexual identity by the appellant. We are satisfied that the reason  he
      has not told friends and associates that he is gay is because he  does
      not regard himself, in truth to be a gay or bisexual man.

 230. As we have observed, there are two separate credibility issues  to  be
      resolved. The first is the appellant's account of  events  in  Algeria
      and the second is his asserted homosexuality or bisexuality. We  shall
      address each in turn.


 231. The appellant has given a contradictory,  inconsistent  and  sometimes
      implausible account of events which, if they had in fact occurred,  it
      would be reasonable to expect a more consistent account to  be  given,
      even allowing for the difficulties described by Dr  Bell.  We  do  not
      accept that these contradictions arise because of  any  difficulty  in
      recollection or in responding to questions. We find  that  the  events
      described by the appellant are a fiction and have been  fabricated  to
      manufacture a basis upon which to advance an asylum claim.


 232. It does not follow from that finding of fact that we must  necessarily
      also reject his claim to be a gay or bisexual man. However, it is  for
      the appellant to establish the facts upon  which  he  seeks  to  rely,
      albeit the burden of proof facing him is a low one. For the reasons we
      have given we find that he has failed  to  discharge  that  burden  in
      respect of his asserted sexuality and so we find as a fact that he  is
      not a gay or bisexual man and so will not face any difficulty on  that
      account upon return to Algeria.


 233. In any event, even if we were wrong to reject his account of  his  own
      sexual orientation, as we have rejected his  factual  account  of  the
      events that he claimed led to the need for him to  leave  Algeria,  in
      view of our conclusions in respect of  the  position  of  gay  men  in
      Algeria his claim for international protection would fail even  if  we
      were wrong about his sexuality. The appellant has proved himself to be
      a resourceful individual who has produced  an  income  in  Algeria  by
      selling food on the streets when he was a child and supported  himself
      in  France  by  selling  cigarettes  on  the  streets,   an   activity
      sufficiently successful  to  enable  him  to  pay  for  accommodation.
      Therefore, on the basis of our findings of facts there is no  obstacle
      to the appellant returning to live with his family in Algeria  or,  if
      he prefers, to establish himself elsewhere.


 234. We are reinforced in our conclusion that the appellant cannot  succeed
      in this appeal by returning to the approach set out in  HJ  (Iran)  by
      Lord Rodger to be followed in assessing claims of this nature. We have
      found the first question to be addressed,  which  is  whether  we  are
      satisfied on the evidence that he is gay or would be treated as gay by
      others upon return to Algeria, delivers a negative answer. But even if
      we were wrong about that, the process of addressing the questions that
      follow demonstrates that the appeal cannot succeed. We have found that
      there is no evidence before the tribunal to support the assertion that
      gay men living openly in Algeria would be liable to persecution, other
      from family members while remaining in the family home. However, there
      will generally be available  a  safe  and  reasonable  alternative  in
      relocating outside the family home.


 235. That is sufficient to establish that the appeal must fail but, for the
      sake of completeness we will address the remaining questions posed  by
      Lord Rodger. We recognise that the Algerian context is unusual because
      the evidence indicates that very few gay men do live  openly.  If  the
      appellant were to be returned to Algeria as a gay man we are  entirely
      satisfied that he would live discreetly and so not attract  any  level
      of disapproval from others. He would do  so  not  in  order  to  avoid
      persecution, because there is no real risk of  such,  but  because  he
      would choose to do so, as do other men in Algeria  with  a  preference
      for same sex relationships, because  that  is  how  he  himself  would
      choose to live, because of social and societal pressures that  do  not
      amount to persecution


 236. Ms Chapman confirmed that the  appellant  does  not  pursue  in  these
      proceedings any claim under article 8 of the ECHR and so there  is  no
      need for us to address it.


      Summary of decision


      The appeal is dismissed.






                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    5 January 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern





                                    ANNEX

                 Schedule of Documentary Evidence Considered

                  Expert Reports before the Upper Tribunal

|Date             |Source                                                   |
|2011             |Report of Dan Littauer                                   |
|2011             |Report of Dr Ludovic Zahed                               |
|08 June 2011     |Report of Dr S Perrin                                    |
|13 June 2011     |Report of Alison Pargeter                                |
|14 May 2012      |Letter of Dr L Zahed                                     |
|13 June 2015     |Report of Dr D Seddon                                    |
|29 July 2015     |Report of Alison Pargeter                                |
|08 September 2015|Report of Dr David Bell                                  |
|09 September 2015|Report of Dr Ludovic Zahed                               |
|16 September 2015|Report of Dr David Seddon                                |
|16 September 2015|Response of Dr David Seddon                              |
|18 September 2015|Response of Alison Pargeter                              |
|18 September 2015|Response of Dr Ludovic Zahed                             |

              Material referred to in Expert Reports/Responses

|Date             |Source                 |Description                      |
|10 August 2010   |Reuters                |Hardline Islam steps out of      |
|                 |                       |shadows in Algeria               |
|13 September 2013|JOLPRESS (Paris)       |Algeria: a blogger publishes a   |
|                 |                       |manifesto for Homosexuality      |
|15 December 2014 |AlAraby                |Algeria flirts with              |
|                 |                       |rehabilitation of Islamist foes  |
|06 January 2015  |Algerie-Focus          |Oran Sida: Les mentalities       |
|                 |                       |commencent a changer en Algerie  |
|16 January 2015  |Le Monde               |En Algerie, les islamistes       |
|                 |                       |radicaux a l'air libre           |
|14 February 2015 |Le Soir d'Alerie,      |Le minister des affaires         |
|                 |Actualities            |religieuses a Oran: L'imam       |
|                 |                       |implique dans une affaire de     |
|                 |                       |pratiques homosexuelles a ete    |
|                 |                       |radie                            |
|25 August 2015   |The Independent        |Being gay in the Islamic State:  |
|                 |                       |men reveal chilling truth about  |
|                 |                       |homosexuality under Isis         |

                 Country Documents before the Upper Tribunal

|Date             |Source                 |Description                       |
|                                                                           |
|Undated                                                                    |
|Undated          |Embassy of PDR Algeria |Constitution                      |
|Undated          |Law Texts              |Algerian Law affecting LGBT       |
|Undated          |Letter                 |From Randa Lamri, Sweden          |
|Undated          |Avert                  |Gay men in Africa and HIV/AIDS    |
|Undated          |In Brief               |Homosexuality in the UK           |
|                                                                           |
|2001                                                                       |
|2001             |Amnesty International  |Crimes of hate, conspiracy of     |
|                 |                       |silence                           |
|                                                                           |
|2006                                                                       |
|08 August 2006   |ILGA Europe            |Keynote address by Louise Arbour  |
|                 |                       |UNHCHR                            |
|                                                                           |
|2007                                                                       |
|31 May 2007      |Ramzi Isalam           |Death to Deviants                 |
|30 July 2007     |IRB of Canada          |Algeria: treatment of homosexuals |
|                                                                           |
|2008                                                                       |
|06 March 2008    |UN Human Rights Council|Summary by HCHR                   |
|                                                                           |
|2010                                                                       |
|13 April 2010    |LGBT Asylum News       |Algeria: two-year jail sentence   |
|                 |                       |for gay Imam                      |
|09 July 2010     |CNN                    |Algerian transsexual's memoires   |
|                 |                       |reveal life of discrimination     |
|13 September 2010|LGBT Asylum News       |Being gay in Algeria today        |
|09-10 October    |CALEM                  |France 24 interview with Dr L     |
|2010             |                       |Zahed and information about the   |
|                 |                       |organisation                      |
|30 December 2010 |Court of Appeal Order  |MB (Algeria) v Secretary of State |
|                 |with related statement |for the Home Department           |
|                 |and letter             |                                  |
|                                                                           |
|2011                                                                       |
|2011             |USSD                   |Human Rights Report, Algeria      |
|2011             |Home Office API        |Sexual orientation issues in the  |
|                 |                       |asylum claim                      |
|Winter/Spring    |International Gay &    |Newsletter                        |
|2011             |Lesbian Human Rights   |                                  |
|                 |Commission             |                                  |
|25 January 2011  |UNHCR                  |Certificate: I H AI Omary         |
|02 February 2011 |San Diego Gay and      |In Algeria, a gay blog breaks     |
|                 |Lesbian News (SDGLN)   |boundaries                        |
|02 March 2011    |Ksari                  |Tizi-Ouzou: the Imam of the Mosque|
|                 |                       |El-Atik placed in custody         |
|19 May 2011      |DW                     |EU asylum policy for gays and     |
|                 |                       |lesbians criticized by LGBT groups|
|11-16 June 2011  |Swedish Migration Board|The development in Algeria in the |
|                 |                       |shade of the Arabic Spring, and   |
|                 |                       |its consequences on migration     |
|10 October 2011  |Care2                  |In North Africa, gays light a     |
|                 |                       |candle for visibility             |
|03 November 2011 |Home Office            |COI Report: Algeria               |
|17 November 2011 |Changing Attitudes     |Beirut, an imperfect haven for    |
|                 |                       |LGBT Refugees                     |
|                                                                           |
|2012                                                                       |
|2012             |Discover Algeria       |Lesbian, gay, bisexual,           |
|                 |                       |transgender law and rights in     |
|                 |                       |Algeria                           |
|May 2012         |Alouen                 |Print out                         |
|15 May 2012      |Gaymiddleeast.com      |Email from Adams Wahid            |
|25 May 2012      |American Psychological |Sexual orientation and            |
|                 |Association            |homosexuality                     |
|19 July 2012     |Asylum Law             |Sexual minorities & HIV status    |
|11 October 2012  |France24               |Being gay in Algeria: I'll never  |
|                 |                       |live with the one I love          |
|22 October 2012  |UNHCR                  |Guidelines on International       |
|                 |                       |Protection No.9, Claims to Refugee|
|                 |                       |Status based on Sexual Orientation|
|19 November 2012 |Erasing 76 Crimes      |Lively gay community in Algeria   |
|                 |                       |gains visibility                  |
|                                                                           |
|2013                                                                       |
|2013             |USSD                   |Algeria Human Rights Report       |
|                 |                       |(extract)                         |
|Spring 2013      |Northwestern Journal of|From 'Kill the Gays' to 'Kill the |
|                 |International Human    |Gay Rights Movement': the Future f|
|                 |Rights                 |homosexuality legislation in      |
|                 |                       |Africa                            |
|17 January 2013  |Home Office            |COI Report: Algeria (extract)     |
|May 2013         |UNHCR                  |Beyond Proof: credibility         |
|                 |                       |assessment in EU asylum systems   |
|                 |                       |(extract)                         |
|07 May 2013      |Colours and Shapes     |Online posting                    |
|23 May 2013      |Amnesty International  |Annual Report 2013: Algeria       |
|July 2013        |IRB of Canada          |Algeria: situation of sexual      |
|                 |                       |minorities 2010-July 2013         |
|14 September 2013|National Post, Canada  |Algerian refugees sought          |
|                 |                       |protection from Islamists who     |
|                 |                       |equate ballet with homosexuality  |
|                 |                       |and 'depravity'                   |
|                                                                           |
|2014                                                                       |
|2014             |Guardian Witness       |Algeria - They don't kill us      |
|2014             |Landinfo               |Algeria, conditions for gay men,  |
|                 |                       |HO translation                    |
|11 February 2014 |AI joint public        |Algeria: allow rights groups to   |
|                 |statement              |visit                             |
|14 February 2014 |Tofik Dibi             |Life as a gay Imam isn't as bad as|
|                 |                       |it sounds                         |
|27 February 2014 |USSD                   |2013 Human Rights Reports, Algeria|
|July 2014        |Human Rights First     |The state of human rights for LGBT|
|                 |Report                 |people in Africa                  |
|25 July 2014     |Freedom House          |Freedom in the World 2014 -       |
|                 |                       |Algeria                           |
|26 September 2014|Gay Star News          |UN Human Rights Council condemns  |
|                 |                       |violence and Discrimination       |
|                 |                       |against LGBTI people              |
|24 October 2014  |Erasing 76 crimes      |Sex, youth and politics in        |
|                 |                       |Algeria, Pierre Daum              |
|03 December 2014 |France24               |Behind the scenes with Algeria's  |
|                 |                       |first LGBT magazine               |
|15 December 2014 |Nuftah                 |Gay & Lesbian mobilization in     |
|                 |                       |Algeria: the emergence of a       |
|                 |                       |movement                          |
|                                                                           |
|2015                                                                       |
|11 February 2015 |Home Office            |API, sexual identity issues in the|
|                 |                       |asylum claim                      |
|25 February 2015 |Amnesty International  |Report 2014/15: Algeria           |
|May 2015         |ILGA                   |State sponsored homophobia: a     |
|                 |                       |world survey of laws              |
|12 May 2015      |Echorouk online        |Algeria's religious affairs       |
|                 |                       |minister commentary               |
|10 June 2015     |My East-West           |Margarida Santos Lopes, A former  |
|                 |                       |Salafi opened the first           |
|                 |                       |gay-friendly mosque in Europe     |
|26 June 2015     |USSD                   |Algeria Human Rights report for   |
|                 |                       |2014                              |
|13 August 2015   |Afamena                |Algeria: campaigns turn population|
|                 |                       |against homosexuals               |
|06 October 2015  |ILGA                   |Ten Ten: the 6th Algerian national|
|                 |                       |day against Homophobia and        |
|                 |                       |transphobia                       |
|02 November 2015 |El Watan               |Algeria - the Minister of         |
|                 |                       |Religious Affairs and WAKFS has   |
|                 |                       |announced the impending creation  |
|                 |                       |of a national observatory to      |
|                 |                       |Combat religious extremism        |







