
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MSM and others (wasted costs, effect of s.29(4)) [2016] UKUT 00062 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 October 2015                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                   MSM (1)
                               Suman Thapa (2)
                             Santosh Gurung (3)
                               Paul Gurung (4)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

          THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT (1) & (2)
                ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI (3) & (4)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the 1st Appellant: Mr Adam Tear, instructed by Duncan Lewis Sols
     For Mr S Chelvan and Ms V Hutton: Mr D Stacy,
     instructed by Clyde & Co
For the 2nd to 4th Appellants:  No appearance
For the Respondents:   Ms D J Rhee, instructed by Government Legal Dept


Section 29(4) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act 2007 results  in
the Upper Tribunal having powers in relation to the making of  wasted  costs
orders  (as  defined  in  section  29(5))  which  are  not  subject  to  the
limitations in s.29(3) or r.10 of the Tribunal Procedure (  Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                          ON ISSUE OF JURISDICTION


INTRODUCTION


 1. The question we are required to answer in these proceedings is  whether
    the Upper Tribunal acting in its appellate capacity has power, pursuant
    to Section 29 of the Tribunals, Courts &  Enforcement  Act  2007  ("the
    2007 Act") or otherwise, to make a  costs  order  in  proceedings  that
    began in the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) prior
    to the commencement on 20 October 2014 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration & Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 ("the FtT 2014
    Rules"). Both members of the Tribunal have substantially contributed to
    this decision.


 2. The case involving the first named Appellant (referenced as [2015] UKUT
    413) concerns an appeal by a national of Somalia, which began  life  in
    the First-tier  Tribunal  in  response  to  a  decision  of  the  First
    Respondent ("the Secretary of State") dated 2 January 2014, refusing an
    application for asylum.  This appeal was dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 18 March 2014.  Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    was subsequently  granted  and  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was set aside following  a  hearing  on  29  May  2014.  After
    hearings on 24 March and 28 April 2015 the Upper  Tribunal  remade  the
    decision allowing the First Appellant's appeal.


 3. The circumstances giving rise to the adjournment of the hearing  on  24
    March led to an application by the Secretary  of  State  for  a  wasted
    costs order. It is the contention of the First  Appellant's  solicitors
    and his counsel (who are separately represented) that:


          i) The Upper Tribunal does not have power to make  an  order  for
             wasted costs in the instant proceedings.


         ii) If the Upper Tribunal does have  such  power,  then  an  order
             should not be made because (a) the application  for  a  wasted
             costs order was made  out  of  time  and  there  has  been  no
             'formal' application to extend time and, in any event, (b) the
             circumstances of the case are such that it is not  appropriate
             to make such an order.


 4. Proceedings IA/13403/2012 (the Second Appellant herein);  OA/09812/2012
    and OA/09851/2012 (the Third and Fourth Appellants' herein)  relate  to
    appeals brought by nationals of Nepal.


 5. The Second Appellant's appeal against a decision made on  29  May  2012
    refusing him indefinite leave to remain was dismissed by the First-tier
    Tribunal on 18 February 2013. In a decision of the 9 May 2013 the Upper
    Tribunal  found  no  error  of  law  in   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination. However, the Second Appellant pursued an appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal, which subsequently remitted the matter  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. By way of a decision of  the  18  September  2014  the  Upper
    Tribunal allowed the Second Appellant's appeal as a  consequence  of  a
    concession made by the Secretary  of  State.    Thereafter  the  Second
    Appellant made an application "for costs under r.10(3) and  r.10(5)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008"  in  which  it  was
    submitted that it was unreasonable of the Secretary of State  to  delay
    making the concession until the day of the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.


 6. The proceedings by the Third and Fourth Appellants' (who are  brothers)
    arose out of decisions of the Second Respondent dated 22 December  2011
    refusing their applications to settle in the United Kingdom with  their
    father, a Gurkha veteran. Their appeals were dismissed  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 21 November 2012, a decision confirmed  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 24 May 2013. The appeals were subsequently remitted by  the
    Court of Appeal for rehearing by the Upper Tribunal and were thereafter
    allowed on 8 October 2014.  The Third and Fourth Appellants' solicitors
    made an application for costs under r.10(3) and r.10(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the Upper Tribunal Rules"),  on
    the basis that it was unreasonable of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    delay making a concession central to the outcome of  the  appeal  until
    the day of the hearing.


 7. The Respondent in  the  proceedings  involving  the  Third  and  Fourth
    Appellants' initially opposed the application for costs  on  the  basis
    that the Upper Tribunal did not have power to make a costs order.  This
    position was abandoned by the Respondent at the hearing before us  when
    the Secretary of State and Entry Clearance Officer adopted, for all the
    appeals, the submissions as to jurisdiction set out in support  of  the
    application for wasted costs in [2015] UKUT 413.


 8. The solicitors for the Second, Third and Fourth Appellants did not have
    any instructions to attend the hearing before us on  15  October  2015.
    They indicated that  they  adopted  the  submissions  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State in [2015] UKUT 413 that the Upper Tribunal does have
    a jurisdiction to make an order for costs where the proceedings  before
    the First-tier Tribunal were begun prior to 20 October 2014.


 9. We heard submissions from Ms Rhee instructed by  the  Government  Legal
    Department, Mr Tear instructed by Duncan Lewis solicitors for the First
    Appellant and by Mr Stacy instructed by Clyde &  Co  on  behalf  of  Mr
    Chelvin  and  Ms  Hutton,  counsel  for  the  First  Appellant  in  the
    substantive proceedings heard before the Upper Tribunal on 24 March and
    27 April 2015.  The parties prepared for the hearing on the basis  that
    our consideration would be confined to that of jurisdiction.


THE LEGISLATION


10. Section 29 of the 2007 Act provides in material part as follows:


       S.29 costs or expenses


         "(1) The costs of and incidental to -


              (a) all proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal, and


             (b)  all proceedings in the Upper Tribunal  shall  be  in  the
                  discretion of the Tribunal in which the  proceedings  take
                  place.


         (2)  The relevant Tribunal shall have full power  to  determine  by
             whom and to what extent the costs are to be paid.


         (3)  Sub-sections (1) and  (2)  have  effect  subject  to  Tribunal
             Procedure Rules.


         (4)  In any proceedings mentioned in sub-section (1), the  relevant
             Tribunal may -


             (a)  disallow, or


             (b)   (as  the  case  may  be)  order  the  legal   or   other
                  representative concerned to meet, the whole of any  wasted
                  costs or such  part  of  them  as  may  be  determined  in
                  accordance with the Tribunal Procedure Rules.


         (5)  In sub-section (4) "wasted costs" means any costs incurred  by
             a party -


             (a)  as a result of any improper,  unreasonable  or  negligent
                  act or  omission  on  the  part  of  any  legal  or  other
                  representative or any employee of such  a  representative,
                  or


             (b)  which, in the light of any such act or omission occurring
                  after they were incurred, the relevant Tribunal  considers
                  it is unreasonable to expect that party to pay.


         (6)  In this section "legal or other representative",  in  relation
             to a party to proceedings, means any person exercising a right
             of audience or right to conduct the proceedings on his behalf.


         (7)  [...]"


11. Rule 10 of the Upper Tribunal (  Procedure  Rules)  2008  (as  amended)
    ("The Tribunal Procedure Rules") is in these terms:


         "(1) The Upper Tribunal, may not make an order in respect of  costs
         (or, in Scotland, expenses) in proceedings transferred or  referred
         by, or on appeal from, another tribunal, except:


              aa) in a national security certificate appeal, to  the  extent
                  permitted by paragraph (1A);


                   a) in proceedings transferred by or on appeal from,  the
                      Tax Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal; or


                   b) to the extent and in the circumstances that the other
                      Tribunal had the power to make an order in respect of
                      costs (or, in Scotland, expenses).


          (1A)    [...]


               2) [...]


               3) In other proceedings, the Upper Tribunal may not  make  an
                  order in respect of costs or expenses except -


                   a) in judicial review proceedings;


                   b) [revoked]


                   c) under section 29(4) of the 2007  Act  (wasted  costs)
                      and costs incurred in applying for such costs;


                   d) if the Upper Tribunal considers that a party  or  its
                      representatives has acted unreasonably  in  bringing,
                      defending or conducting proceeding;


                   e) [...]


                   f) [...]"


12. Rule 9 of the FtT 2014 Rules is as follows:


         "9. - Orders for payment of costs and interest  on  costs  (or,  in
         Scotland, expenses)


               1)  If  the  tribunal  allows  an  appeal,  it  may  order  a
                  Respondent to pay by way  of  cost  to  the  Appellant  an
                  amount no greater than -


                  (a)  any fee paid under the fees order that has  not  been
                      refunded; and


                  (b)  any fee which the Appellant is or may  be  liable  to
                      pay under that Order.


               2) The Tribunal may otherwise make an  order  in  respect  of
                  costs only -


                  (a)  under Section 29(4) of the 2007  Act  (wasted  costs)
                      and costs incurred in applying for such costs; or


                  (b)  if a  person  has  acted  unreasonably  in  bringing,
                      defending or conducting proceedings."


13.  Rule  23A  of  the  now  repealed  Asylum  and  Immigration   Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 ("AIT 2005 Rules") provided:


         "23A


               1) Except as provided for in paragraph (2), the Tribunal  may
                  not make any order in respect of costs (or,  in  Scotland,
                  expenses) pursuant to Section 29 of the Tribunals,  Courts
                  & Enforcement Act 2007, power to award costs.


               2) If the  Tribunal  allows  an  appeal,  it  may  order  the
                  Respondent to pay to the Appellant an  amount  no  greater
                  than -


                  (a)  any fee paid under the Fees Order that has  not  been
                      refunded; and


                  (b)  any fee which the Appellant is or may  be  liable  to
                      pay under that Order. "


14. Rule 23A was inserted from 15 February 2010.  The power  in  r.9(2)  of
    the FtT 2014 Rules is not applicable in appeals before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal coming into existence before 20 October 2014.


15. Rule 9(2) was considered by the Tribunal in Cancino (costs - First-tier
    Tribunal - new  powers)  [2015]  UKFTT  00059  (IAC).   The  head  note
    includes the unambiguous statement at [3] as follows:


         "Transitionally, Rule 9 of the 2014 Rules applies only  to  appeals
         coming into existence subsequent to the  commencement  date  of  20
         October 2014.  It is of no application to appeals  pre-dating  this
         date. "


SUBMISSIONS


16. Ms Rhee acknowledges in  her  skeleton  argument  that  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules, when read together, give rise to some doubt as  to  whether  the
    Upper Tribunal has the power to make  an  order  for  wasted  costs  in
    [2015] UKUT 413, given that the appeal in the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    heard under the regime imposed by  the  AIT  2005  Rules.  She  further
    observes that the words "in other proceedings" in r.10(3) of the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules appear to exclude "proceedings... on appeal from another
    Tribunal" (per r.10(1)) from the scope  of  the  proceedings  in  which
    there is power to make an order for wasted costs under r.10(3).


17. Nevertheless, Ms  Rhee  submits  that  there  is  a  proper  basis  for
    concluding that the Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction to  make  an  order
    for wasted costs pursuant to s.29(4) of the 2007 Act,  irrespective  of
    the terms of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules.  Whilst  acknowledging  that
    s.29(3) of the 2007 Act provides that the powers of the Upper  Tribunal
    and the First-tier Tribunal to make orders for costs are to have effect
    subject to the Tribunal Procedure Rules, she observes that s.29(4) goes
    on to make further and express provision that in any proceedings in the
    First-tier  Tribunal  or  Upper  Tribunal,  the  relevant  Tribunal  is
    empowered to disallow or order "wasted costs" - as defined  by  s29(5).
    She submits that this is not defeated by the fact that s.29(4) provides
    the power to make an order for "the whole of any wasted  costs  or  any
    such part of them as may be determined in accordance with the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules"(emphasis added). The emphasised words do  not,  it  is
    asserted, serve to qualify the existence of the  powers  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal but rather to specify that the  amount  of  the  costs  to  be
    awarded is to be determined  in  accordance  with  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules.


18. At the hearing Ms Rhee argued that primacy must be given to the  parent
    2007 Act.  Rule 10 must be interpreted by reference to s.29 of the 2007
    Act and any ambiguity must be resolved by reference to the latter.


19. In his written submissions on behalf of Duncan Lewis,  Mr  Tear  argues
    that applying HMRC v Kenneth Colquhoun FTC/36/2010 it is clear that the
    Upper Tribunal, in appeals from the First-tier Tribunal, only  has  the
    cost powers that the First-tier Tribunal had in respect of  the  appeal
    before it (as per r.10(1)).  He accepts that  the  Upper  Tribunal  may
    have  additional  powers  in  other  proceedings  by  virtue   of   the
    application of r.10(3), postulating in his oral submissions  that  such
    other proceedings would include matters which had been remitted to  the
    Upper Tribunal by the Court of Appeal, as is the case with  the  Second
    to Fourth Appellants.


20. Mr Stacy submitted that s.29(1) and s.29(2) of the 2007 Act are  to  be
    read by reference to s.29(3).  Consequently, the Upper Tribunal's costs
    powers are dependent entirely upon the extent to which such powers  are
    provided for in the Upper Tribunal Rules.  When questioned  as  to  the
    purpose of s.29(4), he  maintained  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's  costs
    powers are by reference to the Procedure Rules and that s.29(4) is  not
    a stand-alone power.   He accepted that there had been no  argument  in
    Cancino on the issue of whether s.29(4) conferred  such  a  stand-alone
    power.


21. Mr Stacy also turned to R  (LR)  v  FtT  HESC  (and  Hertfordshire  CC)
    (costs) [2013] UKUT 0294 (AAC) ("the Hertfordshire  CC  case")  placing
    particular reliance on paragraph 17 thereof and the observation therein
    that the Immigration and Asylum Chamber had no power to make  an  order
    for costs except for a limited power requiring the state  to  reimburse
    fees recently introduced on immigration appeals,  where  those  appeals
    proved to be successful.


22. Quite correctly, Mr Stacy also drew our attention to the decision in  R
    (on the application of Okondu and Abdussalam) v SSHD (wasted costs) IJR
    [2014] UKUT 377 (IAC) (Green J and UTJ Gill) in which it was concluded,
    at paragraph [10], that the Upper Tribunal had power "to make a  wasted
    costs order in all proceedings whether  they  are  in  the  context  of
    judicial review or otherwise". He sought, however, to  distinguish  the
    case on the basis that the Upper Tribunal was considering the issue  of
    costs in the context of judicial review  proceedings,  submitting  that
    the Tribunal had intended to say no more than the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    power to make wasted costs orders in  all  proceedings  falling  within
    r.10(3), whether  they  are  in  the  context  of  judicial  review  or
    otherwise, and not those referred to in  r.10(1), which it did not give
    consideration to.


DISCUSSION


23. We have been required to consider the application of the provisions  of
    section 29(4) of the  2007  Act  without  assistance  from  any  direct
    authority on the point apart from the unreported decision by the  Upper
    Tribunal in ECO-Islamabad v Hussain (OA/16276/2013) which we  refer  to
    in a little more detail below.  Despite the assertions to the  contrary
    we have found the decisions in Colquhoun, the  Hertfordshire  CC  case,
    Okondu and Cancino to be of little assistance in  resolving  the  issue
    before  us.   Although  we  are  grateful  to  the  parties  for  their
    submissions, they too have only been of limited help.


24. The Tribunal in Colquhoun gave consideration to the issue  of  expenses
    (costs) following the successful appeal by HMRC against a  decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  14  January  2010  arising   out   of
    proceedings in Scotland.  HMRC applied for expenses  under  r.10(6)  of
    the Upper Tribunal Rules.  In coming to its conclusions,  the  Tribunal
    observed that r.10(1)(a) of those Rules gave it power to award expenses
    in proceedings on  appeal  from  the  Tax  Chamber  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


25. Mr Colquhoun had challenged the reasonableness of HMRC  in  instigating
    the appeal.  In its analysis of the framework of r.10 and  the  varying
    powers therein, the Tribunal observed at [9]:


         "Rule 10(3)(d) relates to the situation where  the  Upper  Tribunal
         considers that a party or its representative has acted unreasonably
         in bringing or defending or conducting the proceedings.  That  must
         be reference back to other proceedings; at the  beginning  of  Rule
         10(3).  This provision too, cannot be relevant.  In any event we do
         not consider (and it has  not  been  suggested  by  HMRC)  that  Mr
         Colquhoun acted unreasonably in bringing, defending  or  conducting
         the proceedings."


26. Thus the Tribunal had no need to consider the entirety of section 29 of
    the 2007 Act in order to establish whether it power to make  the  order
    sought;  there was no dispute that  it  had  jurisdiction  pursuant  to
    section 29(1) of that Act.


27. As to the  decision  in  Okondu,  this  was  made  in  relation  to  an
    application for judicial review. Although the Tribunal cited s.29(4) of
    2007 Act, no issue as to jurisdiction arose on the circumstances of the
    case. The statement at paragraph 11 therein that  "the  power  to  make
    wasted costs orders applies to all proceedings whether they are in  the
    context of judicial review or otherwise" was obiter  and,  for  obvious
    reasons, made  without  a  detailed  legal  analysis  of  the  relevant
    provisions.


28.  The decision in the Hertfordshire CC was concerned  with  the  correct
    approach to costs in applications for judicial review of  decisions  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal,  heard  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  panel
    comprising Sullivan LJ, the  Vice  President  of  UTIAC  and  UTJ  Ward
    cautioned in paragraph 1 of its decision against attempts to apply  the
    decision more widely than the  category  of  case  with  which  it  was
    concerned.


29. The Tribunal scrutinised the application of section 29(3) of  the  2007
    Act and rule 10 of the Upper Tribunal Rules, concluding at [27]:


         "... while there may be unexplored issues  around  the  interaction
         between s.29(4) and the rules of some of chambers, we do  not  feel
         the need to explore them  here.   Whatever  the  position  is  with
         regard to judicial review cases coming to the Upper  Tribunal  from
         such Chambers, it is also the case in  relation  to  the  far  more
         numerous category of statutory appeals and does not appear to cause
         difficulty, thus we attach little weight to the point".


30. It is clear from what it said above  that:  (i)  the  decision  in  the
    Hertfordshire CC case was not intended to give  guidance  save  for  in
    relation to the issue of costs in application for  judicial  review  of
    decision made by the First-tier Tribunal and (ii), insofar  as  it  did
    give guidance, that did  not  include  the  ambit  of  s.29(4)  or  its
    interaction with the Upper Tribunal Rules.  For  this  reason  we  have
    found it to be of little assistance  in  resolving  the  jurisdictional
    issue before us.


31. We next turn to the decision of the Presidents of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and First-tier Tribunal (IAC) in Cancino. This is a  reported  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal  in  which  the  Tribunal  was  required  to
    determine an application for wasted costs  made  by  the  appellant  in
    proceedings which came into effect before 20 October 2014. At paragraph
    5 of its decision the Tribunal observed:


        "Judges and practitioners should be aware that rule 9 of  the  2014
        Rules contains the only powers to award costs  exercisable  by  the
        First-tier Tribunal. Thus rule 9 establishes an  exclusive  regime.
        These powers are not amplified in any way by section 29 of the 2007
        Act. This is the effect of  section  29(3).  However,  rule  9  and
        section 29  co-exist.  We  shall  elaborate  on  this  relationship
        below."


32. After a detailed consideration of the transitional  provisions  to  the
    2014 Rules, the operation of r.9 thereof, its relationship to s.29  (5)
    and s.29(6) of the 2007 Act, and the relevant costs  provision  in  the
    2005 AIT Rules, the Tribunal dismissed the appellant's  application  on
    the basis that because the proceedings had begun prior  to  20  October
    2014, the 2005 AIT Rules applied to it and,  consequently,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction  to  award  'wasted  costs'.   It  is
    evident that the Tribunal heard no argument on the ambit s.29(4) of the
    2007 Act and inevitably this resulted in an absence of any analysis  on
    this aspect.


33. In ECO-Islamabad v Hussain, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen  dismissed  an
    appeal against the FtT's determination allowing an appeal  against  the
    ECO's decision refusing an application by a married partner  to  settle
    in the UK. We do not need to concern ourselves with the detail  of  the
    grounds. The  respondent's  representative  applied  for  wasted  costs
    against the  ECO  on  the  basis  that  it  was  unreasonable  to  seek
    permission to  appeal  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  The  ECO
    responded with argument that there was no power to award wasted  costs.
     After examining  s.29(3)  and  r.10  of   Procedure  Rules  the  judge
    concluded that there was a power to make a wasted costs order with this
    analysis after observing the limitation in r.10(1)(b):


         "...even if there is on the face of it no scope within Rule 10  for
         a wasted costs order  by UT(IAC) in a statutory appeal,  the  point
         concerning the ambit of s.29(4) remains and it is relevant to  note
         paragraph 11 of [Okondu] where the Upper Tribunal considered it  to
         be clear from s.29 and Rule 10 that the power to make wasted  costs
         orders applies  to  all  proceedings  whether  in  the  context  of
         judicial review or otherwise."


    The extent of the submissions made is not clear from the  decision;  we
    note that following the hearing the Presenting Officer  was  given  the
    opportunity of making submissions  and  although  he  appears  to  have
    responded, the detail of his argument is not evident.


34. We reach these conclusions.  Specific provision is made in  s.29(4)  of
    the 2007 Act as to the ambit of the Tribunal's powers (and by  this  we
    include both  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal)  in
    relation to wasted costs - which are thereafter defined in s.29(5).


35. In Cusack v. London Borough of Harrow [2013] 1 WLR 2022, Lord Neuberger
    said of the interpretation of documents, at [58]:


         "Interpretation of any document ultimately involves identifying the
         intention  of  Parliament,  the  drafter,  or  the  parties.   That
         intention must be determined by  reference  to  the  precise  words
         used, their particular documentary and factual context, and,  where
         identifiable, their aim or purpose".


36. The meaning of an instrument, including an Act of  Parliament,  is  the
    meaning that it would convey to a reasonable reader with the background
    knowledge reasonably available to the audience to whom  the  instrument
    was addressed (see Attorney-General of  Belize  v  Belize  Telecom  Ltd
    [2009] 1 WLR 1988 at [16]).


37. Where the words of a statutory provision when  set  in  proper  context
    admit of only one meaning then that is the meaning that must  be  given
    to such words. However where such words are grammatically ambiguous, an
    assessment of the reasonableness of the consequences  of  the  opposing
    constructions may be an aid to the correct construction (see Gartside v
    IRC [1968] AC 553 at 612 per Lord Reid).


38. We have not found this decision straightforward  but  for  the  reasons
    that follow we are persuaded that the construction of s.29 urged by the
    Secretary of State is the correct one supported by a plain  reading  of
    the legislation when set in the proper context. Thus we  conclude  that
    s.29(4) results in the Upper Tribunal having powers in relation to  the
    making of wasted costs orders (as defined in section 29(5))  which  are
    not subject to the limitations in  s.29(3)  or  r.10  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules.  There  is  nothing  on  the  face  of  s.29(4)  which
    specifies that the powers granted thereby are subject any statutory  or
    other provision, including the Tribunal Procedure Rules.  We agree with
    Ms Rhee that the words "as may be determined  in  accordance  with  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules", found in s.29(4), do not operate to restrict
    the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to make an order for wasted costs, but
    rather relate to the amount of any such order.


39. Section 29(3) provides in clear terms  that  the  discretionary  powers
    afforded by s.29(1) and s.29(2)  are  "subject  to  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules" (emphasis added).  If it had been the intention of Parliament to
    equally restrict the powers provided in s.29(4),  it  is  inconceivable
    that it would not have used equally clears  words  to  achieve  such  a
    result. Alternatively, if  it  was  intended  that  s.29(4)  should  be
    subject to the Tribunal Procedure Rules, this could have been  achieved
    by simply saying so in s.29(3) i.e. by stating  that  "Subsection  (1),
    (2) and (4) have effect subject to the Tribunal Procedure Rules."  This
    omission is in our view significant.


40.  The  reference  in  s.29(4)  to  "  ...any  proceedings  mentioned  in
    subsection (1)" does not limit the effect on the  Tribunal's  power  to
    make a wasted costs order. This expression is no more than  a  drafting
    shorthand for identifying that such power exists in "all proceedings in
    the  First-tier  Tribunal"  and  "in  all  proceedings  in  the   Upper
    Tribunal", thus negating the need for the drafter to re-state  this  in
    full.


41. There is a distinction in the 2007 Act between costs generally  and  an
    order for wasted costs and we do not find this at all to be surprising.
    The existence of a wasted costs  jurisdiction  also  has  the  manifest
    advantage of serving the interests of the Tribunal in  discharging  its
    obligations in respect of  the  overriding  objective  in  r.2  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules. Despite the duty on  all  representatives  to
    the Tribunal, representation can be of variable quality and in a  small
    minority of cases falls below acceptable  standards.  The  Tribunal  is
    expected to operate in an informal way but that is  not  to  say  there
    should not be minimum standards. The wasted costs regime  is  not  only
    compensatory in nature, but also punitive (see Ridehalge  v  Horsefield
    [1994] Ch 205 at 227E) - something  which  is  not  a  feature  of  the
    general costs jurisdiction.


42. In our view, it is significant that there  is  similarity  between  the
    language of s.29(4) and the  approach  taken  to  the  jurisdiction  of
    costs, and wasted costs, in civil proceedings; such jurisdiction  being
    conferred by section 51 of the Senior Courts Act 1981. Section  51,  in
    its  component  language  and  structurally,  discloses   no   material
    differences to the  provision  conferring  the  costs  jurisdiction  on
    Tribunals by the 2007 Act. In Metcalf v Mardell [2003] 1 AC 120,  their
    Lordships gave consideration to the issue of  whether  a  wasted  costs
    order should be imposed against counsel because of  counsel's  improper
    allegations of fraud in the absence of reasonable  credible  evidential
    material, in circumstances in which counsel was precluded from giving a
    full answer to the application because of legal professional privilege.
    In setting out the courts costs powers, Lord Hobhouse gave his  opinion
    as follows at [47]:


         "47 My Lords, this appeal has raised for consideration  the  wasted
         costs jurisdiction of civil courts under section 51 of the  Supreme
         Court Act 1981 as amended by the  Courts  and  Legal  Services  Act
         1990... . Section 51 is a  provision  dealing  generally  with  the
         jurisdiction to make orders as to costs including a  general  power
         to determine by whom and to what extent costs  of  the  proceedings
         are to be paid: section 51(3). The "wasted costs"  jurisdiction  is
         supplementary  and  subsection  (6)  empowers  the  court  both  to
         disallow costs which have been wasted by a legal representative  as
         between the lawyer and of any wasted costs." (emphasis added)


43. In Wagstaff v Colls [2003] 4 Costs L.R.  535,  the  plaintiff  appealed
    against the refusal of his application for a wasted costs order. He had
    made the application following the compromise  of  proceedings  against
    the defendant relating to partnership assets. On appeal the court  was,
    inter alia, required to determine whether, following the  making  of  a
    Tomlin order which had stayed the  proceedings,  the  proceedings  were
    extant - as the first instance judge had concluded; if the  proceedings
    were existing, whether the stay needed  to  be  lifted  to  enable  the
    plaintiff to pursue the wasted costs  application.  It  was  held  that
    there were proceedings in existence for the  purpose  of  invoking  the
    jurisdiction conferred by s.51 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 (as it was
    then known) so that the wasted costs application could be pursued. When
    giving the leading judgment Ward LJ said at [49]:

         "There are two further reasons which support this conclusion. There
         is nothing to prevent an application for a wasted costs being  made
         and entertained after a final order has  been  made  and  perfected
         entering judgment for or  against  the  claimant.  That  serves  to
         emphasise the free standing nature of the  application  for  wasted
         costs. There is no reason for proceedings concluded  by  compromise
         to be treated differently. Secondly, it is noticeable that in  Rofa
         a party was added to the action which had been stayed  without  any
         need for the stay to be lifted. Again I cannot see why it should be
         any different here."  (emphasis added).



44. In summary therefore  we  conclude  that  the  terms  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules do not restrict the power provided to the  Tribunal  by
    s.29(4) to make a wasted costs order.  Such a power is a free  standing
    one and is not caught by the restriction in s.29(3).


45. On this basis we are satisfied that we have  power  to  make  a  wasted
    costs order in the applications before us  and  we  will  relist  these
    matters for consideration of whether to do so. The Secretary  of  State
    and the second, third and fourth appellants are directed to  file  with
    the Upper Tribunal and serve on the other parties within 21 days of the
    date of the sending out of this decision any additional submissions  to
    be relied on. The ECO and first appellant are to have  the  opportunity
    to respond within 21 days of receipt of such further submissions. If it
    is the view of the parties that decisions on the  applications  can  be
    made without the need for a further hearing they are invited to say so.



     [pic]
     ........................................
     Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson











