
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   SM (withdrawal of appealed decision: effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 00064
                                    (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                                   Between

                                     SM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C. McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

(1)  Rule 17 (withdrawal) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 does  not  enable  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  withhold  consent  to  the
withdrawal by the Secretary of State of the decision against which a  person
appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

(2)  Where such a decision is withdrawn in appellate proceedings before  the
Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  that  Tribunal
continues to have jurisdiction under the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement
Act 2007 to decide whether the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
should be set aside for error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  in
the appeal, notwithstanding the withdrawal of the appealed decision. Such  a
withdrawal is not, without more, one of the ways in which  an  appeal  under
section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ceases to  be
pending.

(3)  When re-remaking a decision in a 2002 Act  appeal  where  the  decision
against which a person appealed has  been  withdrawn  by  the  Secretary  of
State, the Upper Tribunal will need to decide whether:-

     (i) to proceed formally to  dismiss  (or,  in  certain  circumstances,
    allow) the appeal; or


    (ii)  to  determine  the   appeal   substantively,   including   (where
    appropriate) making a direction under section 87 of the 2002 Act.


(4)  In deciding between (i) and (ii) above, the Upper Tribunal  will  apply
the overriding objective in rule 2 of the 2008 Rules, having regard  to  all
relevant matters, including:-

    (a) the principle that the Secretary of State  should,  ordinarily,  be
    the primary decision-maker in the immigration field;


    (b) whether the matters potentially in issue are such as to require the
    Tribunal to  give  general  legal  or  procedural  guidance,  including
    country guidance;


    (c) the reasons underlying the Secretary of State's withdrawal  of  the
    appealed decision;


    (d) the appeal history, including the timing of the withdrawal; and


    (e) the views of the parties.


                                  DECISION

1.     Does rule 17 (withdrawal) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008   require  the  Secretary  of  State  to  obtain  the  Upper
    Tribunal's consent, before the Secretary  of  State  may  withdraw  the
    decision against which a person appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal?
    What is the effect on appellate  proceedings  in  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal of the withdrawal by the Secretary
    of State of that decision? Both questions arise starkly in the  present
    case, which began as long ago as May 2010.  As will be seen, they admit
    of no easy answers.

A.   THE APPELLANT'S APPEAL HISTORY

2.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 12 January 1983, said  she
    entered the United Kingdom on 11 April 2006, as a visitor.  She claimed
    asylum on 22 April 2010.  The basis of her claim was that the appellant
    had married a Pakistan citizen in that country,  who  had  subsequently
    moved to the United Kingdom and whom she came here to see in 2006.  Her
    husband behaved abusively  towards  her,  as  a  result  of  which  the
    appellant moved  to  an  address  in  Nottingham,  where  she  began  a
    relationship with another Pakistan national, bearing him a  son  on  17
    January 2010.  Before  that,  her  husband  had  returned  to  live  in
    Pakistan.  She said she feared that he would  kill  her,  were  she  to
    return, for having had another man's baby.

3.   On 11 May 2010 the respondent  Secretary  of  State  decided  that  the
    appellant should  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom,  by  way  of
    directions, pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.   The  respondent  did  not  believe  the  assertion   that   the
    appellant's husband would be interested in harming her.  Alternatively,
    the respondent considered that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to return to a different area of Pakistan.

4.   The appellant appealed against the removal  decision  and  on  30  June
    2010, her appeal was heard at Manchester by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cruthers.  The judge dismissed the appeal, in a determination served on
    5 July 2010.

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal having been granted,  on  30
    March 2011 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal, finding that  the  determination  of  Judge  Cruthers  did  not
    contain an error of law.   Amongst  the  grounds  advanced  before  the
    Deputy  Judge  were  that  there  had  been  no  consideration  by  the
    respondent or the First-tier Tribunal Judge of the  best  interests  of
    the appellant's  son,  as  required  by  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009; and that the First-tier Judge had
    also failed to deal with the submission that, if returned,  mother  and
    son faced a significant danger of ostracism in Pakistan.

6.     The latter issue caused the Court of Appeal to  grant  permission  to
    appeal against the Deputy Judge's decision and on 15 November 2011,  by
    consent, the Court ordered the case to be remitted to  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal  for  a  "fresh  hearing".   A
    statement of reasons records that the  parties  were  agreed  that  the
    Deputy Judge's decision was "infected by an error of law",  as  regards
    the failure to deal with the issue of ostracism.  This was particularly
    so, given that the judgment in SN (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 181  had  been  placed  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, together with  a  written  argument  on  the
    issue.  In SN, the Court of Appeal had remitted an appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal  to  determine  whether  "ostracism  of  a  mother   with   an
    illegitimate child is a danger in Pakistan ".

7.   On 2  February  2012  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  found  that  the
    decision of the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge involved the making  of  an
    error of law.  She set his decision aside, with the announced intention
    that the Upper Tribunal would proceed to re-make the  decision  in  the
    appeal against the immigration decision of May 2010.  In  this  regard,
    she noted the passage in the statement of  reasons  where  the  parties
    agreed "that the matter should now be remitted to the Upper Tribunal...
    for it to determine the appeal afresh (subject to the  preservation  of
    the factual findings reached by Immigration Judge Cruthers)".

8.   On 11 June 2013 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  gave  directions  with
    regard to the filing  of  certain  evidence,  in  connection  with  the
    forthcoming hearing.  It appears that information had been supplied  on
    behalf of the appellant, to the effect that a further child was due  to
    be  born  to  her  in  July  2013,  following  a  number  of   previous
    miscarriages.  In particular, the directions required information to be
    filed as to the nationality of the existing son and of the child due to
    be born in July.  It further appears that, at this stage, matters  were
    proceeding on the basis that the  appeal  might  be  suitable  for  the
    giving of country guidance on the issue  of  ostracism  of  women  with
    illegitimate children in Pakistan.

9.   A case management hearing took place on 26 September 2013 before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Dawson.  At that hearing, Ms Isherwood,  the  Presenting
    Officer, informed the Tribunal that the respondent wished  to  withdraw
    the removal decision of May 2010 (see [3] above), on the basis that  it
    had been made without regard to the respondent's duty under section  55
    of the 2009 Act.  Counsel for  the  appellant,  Mr  McCarthy,  however,
    contended that the consent of the Upper  Tribunal  was  required  under
    Upper Tribunal rule 17, in order for the respondent to withdraw the May
    2010 decision; and that such consent should not be granted.

10.  The questions set out in [1] above have arisen with some  frequency  in
    this Chamber, since its inception on 15 February  2010.   In  order  to
    address them, on 7 November 2013, the present panel  convened  to  hear
    oral submissions from Mr McCarthy and  Ms  Isherwood,  based  on  their
    respective skeleton arguments, which had been served in accordance with
    our directions.  At that hearing, it became evident that  the  Tribunal
    would be assisted by further written submissions and further directions
    were, accordingly, given for  such  submissions  to  be  lodged  by  21
    November.  The Tribunal wishes to acknowledge the quality of  the  oral
    and written submissions, which it has received.


B.   RELEVANT PRIMARY AND SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION ETC

11.   At  this  point,  it  is  necessary  to  lay  out  relevant  statutory
    provisions  (we  underline  and  put  in  bold  those   of   particular
    significance):

         "Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

         82.  Right of appeal: general
E+W+S+N.I.
         This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Notes has no associated
         (1)  Where an immigration decision is made in respect of  a  person
             he may appeal to the Tribunal.

         (2)  In this Part "immigration decision" means-

             (a)  refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,

             (b)  refusal of entry clearance,

             (c)  refusal of a certificate of entitlement under section  10
                  of this Act,

             (d)  refusal to vary a person's leave to enter  or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom if the result of the  refusal  is  that
                  the person has no leave to enter or remain,

             (e)  variation of a person's leave to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom if when  the  variation  takes  effect  the
                  person has no leave to enter or remain,

             (f)  revocation under section 76 of  this  Act  of  indefinite
                  leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,

             (g)  a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
                  Kingdom by way of directions under section 10(1)(a),  (b),
                  (ba) or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33)
                  (removal of person unlawfully in United Kingdom),

             (h)  a decision that an illegal entrant is to be removed  from
                  the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8
                  to 10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971  (c.  77)
                  (control of entry: removal),

             (i)  a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
                  Kingdom by way of directions given by virtue of  paragraph
                  10A of that Schedule (family);

             (ia) a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
                  Kingdom by way of  directions  under  paragraph  12(2)  of
                  Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77) (seamen and
                  aircrews),

             (ib) a decision to make an order under section 2A of that  Act
                  (deprivation of right of abode),

             (j)  a decision to make a deportation order under section 5(1)
                  of that Act, and

             (k)  refusal to revoke a deportation order under section  5(2)
                  of that Act.

         ...

         84.  Grounds of Appeal

             This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Notes has no associated
         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration  decision
             must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-

             (a)  that the decision is not in accordance  with  immigration
                  rules;

             (b)  that the decision is unlawful by virtue of Article 20A of
                  the  Race  Relations   (Northern   Ireland)   Order   1996
                  (discrimination by public authorities);

             (c)  that the decision is unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to act
                  contrary to Human Rights Convention) as being incompatible
                  with the appellant's Convention rights;

             (d)  that the appellant is an EEA national or a member of  the
                  family of an EEA national and the  decision  breaches  the
                  appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in respect
                  of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;

             (e)  that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the
                  law;

             (f)  that the person taking the decision should have exercised
                  differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;

             (g)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom  in
                  consequence of the immigration decision would  breach  the
                  United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention
                  or would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights
                  Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
                  Convention rights.

         ...

         85.  Matters to be considered


         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).
              ...

         (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1), 83(2) or  83A(2)  against  a
             decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about  any  matter
             which it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,
             including evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the
             date of the decision.


         (5)  But subsection (4) is subject to  the  exceptions  in  section
             85A.
         ...

         86.  Determination of appeal


         (1)  This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1),  83  or
             83A.


         (2)  The Tribunal must determine -


             (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether  or  not
                  by virtue of section 85(1)), and


             (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.


         (3)  The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks that
             -


             (a)  a decision against which the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
                  treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with  the
                  law (including immigration rules), or


             (b)  a discretion exercised in making a decision against which
                  the appeal is brought  or  is  treated  as  being  brought
                  should have been exercised differently.
              ...

         (5)  In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the Tribunal shall
             dismiss the appeal.
         ...


         87.  Successful appeal direction


         (1)  If the Tribunal allows an appeal under section 82, 83  or  83A
             it may give a direction for the purpose of  giving  effect  to
             its decision.


         (2)  A person responsible for making an immigration decision  shall
             act in accordance with any relevant direction under subsection
             (1).
         ...


         (4)  A direction under subsection (1) shall be treated as  part  of
             the Tribunal's decision on the  appeal  for  the  purposes  of
             section 11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.
              ...

         99.  Sections 96 to 98:  appeal in progress


         (1)  This section applies  where  a  certificate  is  issued  under
             section 96(1) or (2), 97 or 98 in respect of a pending appeal.


         (2)  The appeal shall lapse.
         ...


         104.  Pending appeal


         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period -


             (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and


             (b)  ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                  abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).


         (2) An appeal under section 82(1) is not finally determined for the
             purposes of subsection (1)(b) while-


              (a)  an application for permission to appeal under section  11
              or 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 could
              be made or is awaiting determination,


             (b)    permission to appeal under either of those sections  has
              been granted and the appeal is awaiting determination,


             ...


         (4)  An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he is
             in the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if the
             appellant leaves the United Kingdom.


         (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is
             in the United Kingdom shall be treated  as  abandoned  if  the
             appellant is granted leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom (subject to subsections (4B) and (4C)).


         (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far  as  it
             is brought on the ground relating to  the  Refugee  Convention
             specified in section 84(1)(g) where the appellant-

             (a)  is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
                  for a period exceeding 12 months, and

             (b)  gives notice, in accordance with any relevant  procedural
                  rules (which may include provision about timing), that  he
                  wishes to pursue the appeal in so far as it is brought  on
                  that ground.

         (4C) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far  as  it
             is brought on the ground specified in section  84(1)(b)  where
             the appellant gives notice, in accordance  with  any  relevant
             procedural rules (which may include provision  about  timing),
             that he wishes to pursue the appeal in so far as it is brought
             on that ground.

         (5)  An appeal under section 82(2)(a), (c), (d), (e) or  (f)  shall
             be treated as finally determined if  a  deportation  order  is
             made against the appellant.


         Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007


              12. Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal

         (1)  Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in  deciding  an
             appeal under section 11, finds that the making of the decision
             concerned involved the making of an error on a point of law.


         (2)  The Upper Tribunal -


             (a)  may (but need not) set aside the decision of  the  First-
                  tier Tribunal, and


             (b)  if it does, must either -


                  (i)  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
                      directions for its reconsideration, or


                  (ii) re-make the decision.


         (3)  In acting under subsection (2)(b)(i) the  Upper  Tribunal  may
             also-


              ...


              (b)  give  procedural  directions  in  connection  with   the
             reconsideration of the case by the First-tier Tribunal.


         (4)  In acting under subsection 2(b)(ii), the Upper Tribunal -


             (a)  may make any decision which the First-tier Tribunal could
                  make  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  re-making   the
                  decision, and


             (b)   may  make  such  findings  of  fact  as   it   considers
                  appropriate.








              Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005


         17. Withdrawal of appeal


         (1) An appellant may withdraw an appeal -


             (a)  orally, at a hearing; or


             (b)  at any time, by filing written notice with the Tribunal.


         (2)  An appeal shall be treated  as  withdrawn  if  the  respondent
             notifies the Tribunal that the decision (or, where the  appeal
             relates to more than one decision, all of  the  decisions)  to
             which the appeal relates has been withdrawn.
         ...


         (3)  If an  appeal  is  withdrawn  or  treated  as  withdrawn,  the
             Tribunal must serve on the parties a notice  that  the  appeal
             has been recorded as having been withdrawn.


         18.  Abandonment of appeal


         (1)  Any party to a pending appeal must notify the Tribunal if they
             are aware that an event specified in -


             (a)  section 104(4), (4A) or (5) of the 2002 Act; or


             (b)  regulation 33(1A) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
                  Area) Regulations 2000 ('the 2000 Regulations'), or, on or
                  after 30 April 2006, paragraph 4(2) of Schedule 2  to  the
                  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
                  ('the 2006 Regulations'), has taken place.


         (1A) Where  section  104(4A)  of  the  2002  Act  applies  and  the
             appellant wishes to pursue his appeal, the appellant must file
             a notice with the Tribunal -


             (a)  where section 104(4B) of the 2002 Act applies, within  28
                  days of the date on which the appellant received notice of
                  the grant of leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom for a period exceeding 12  months;  or  (b)  where
                  section 104(4C) of the 2002 Act applies, within 28 days of
                  the date on which the appellant  received  notice  of  the
                  grant of leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.


         (1B) Where the appellant does  not  comply  with  the  time  limits
             specified in paragraph (1A) the  appeal  will  be  treated  as
             abandoned in accordance with section 104(4) of the 2002 Act.
         ...


         (1F) Where an appellant has filed a notice under paragraph (1A) the
             Tribunal will notify the appellant of the  date  on  which  it
             received the notice.


         (1G) The Tribunal will send a  copy  of  the  notice  issued  under
             paragraph (1F) to the respondent.


         (2)  Where an appeal is treated as abandoned  pursuant  to  section
             104(4) or (4A) of the 2002 Act or  Regulation  33(1A)  of  the
             2000 Regulations, or paragraph 4(2) of Schedule 2 to the  2006
             Regulations, or finally determined pursuant to section  104(5)
             of the 2002 Act, the Tribunal must -


             (a)  serve on the parties a notice  informing  them  that  the
                  appeal  is  being  treated   as   abandoned   or   finally
                  determined; and


             (b)  take no further action in relation to the appeal.




         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


         2.   Overriding objective and  parties'  obligation  to  co-operate
             with the Upper Tribunal


         (1)  The overriding objective of these Rules is to enable the Upper
             Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.


         (2)  Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes -


             (a)  dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to
                  the importance of the case, the complexity of the  issues,
                  the anticipated costs and the resources of the parties;


             (b)  avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in
                  the proceedings;


             (c)  ensuring, so far as practicable,  that  the  parties  are
                  able to participate fully in the proceedings;


             (d)   using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  effectively; and


             (e)   avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with   proper
                  consideration of the issues.


         (3)  The Upper Tribunal must seek to give effect to the  overriding
             objective when it -


              (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or


              (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.


         (4)  Parties must -


               (a)  help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  further  the  overriding
             objective; and


              (b) co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally.
         ...


         5.   Case management powers


         (1)  Subject to the provisions  of  the  2007  Act  and  any  other
             enactment, the Upper Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.


         (2)  The Upper Tribunal may give a direction  in  relation  to  the
             conduct or disposal of proceedings at any  time,  including  a
             direction amending, suspending or  setting  aside  an  earlier
             direction.
         ...




         17.  Withdrawal


         (1)  Subject to paragraph (2), a  party  may  give  notice  of  the
             withdrawal of its case, or any part of it -


             (a)  at any time before a hearing to consider the disposal  of
                  the proceedings (or, if the Upper Tribunal disposes of the
                  proceedings without a hearing, before that  disposal),  by
                  sending or delivering to  the  Upper  Tribunal  a  written
                  notice of withdrawal; or


             (b)  orally at a hearing.


         (2)  Notice of withdrawal will not take  effect  unless  the  Upper
             Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except in relation  to  an
             application for permission to appeal.
         (3)  A party which has withdrawn its case may apply  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal for the case to be reinstated.
         ...


         (5)  The Upper Tribunal must notify each party in  writing  that  a
             withdrawal has taken effect under this rule.
         ...


         17A. Appeal treated as abandoned or finally determined in an asylum
             case or an immigration case


         (1)  A party to an asylum case or an immigration  case  before  the
             Upper Tribunal must notify the Tribunal if they are aware that
             -


             (a)  the appellant has left the United Kingdom;


             (b)  the appellant has been granted leave to enter  or  remain
                  in the United Kingdom;


             (c)  a deportation order has been made against the  appellant;
                  or


             (d)  a document listed in paragraph 4(2) of Schedule 2 to  the
                  Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  has
                  been issued to the appellant.


         (2)  Where an appeal is treated as abandoned  pursuant  to  section
             104(4) or (4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
             2002 or paragraph  4(2)  of  Schedule  2  to  the  Immigration
             (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  or  as  finally
             determined pursuant to  section  104(5)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the Upper Tribunal must  send
             the parties a notice informing them that the appeal  is  being
             treated as abandoned or finally determined.


         (3)  Where  an  appeal  would  otherwise  fall  to  be  treated  as
             abandoned pursuant to  section  104(4A)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, but the appellant  wishes  to
             pursue their appeal, the appellant  must  send  or  deliver  a
             notice,  which  must  comply  with   any   relevant   practice
             directions, to the Upper Tribunal and the respondent  so  that
             it is received within thirty days of the  date  on  which  the
             notice of the grant of leave to enter or remain in the  United
             Kingdom was sent to the appellant.
         ...


         Practice Statements - Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-
             tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal (as at 25 September 2012)


         7 Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal


         7.1  Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (In
             accordance with the relevant Practice Directions)  to  re-make
             the decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).


         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


                  (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party
                 before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other
                 opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


                 (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which
                 is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to  be
                 re-made is such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
                 the First-tier Tribunal.


        7.3    Re-making rather than remitting will nevertheless constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where  an  error  of
             law is found, even if some further fact-finding is necessary."




C.   ANSWERING THE QUESTIONS

 Main question (1):     Does  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 require the Secretary of State to  obtain  the  consent
of the Upper Tribunal to the withdrawal by the Secretary  of  State  of  the
decision against which a person appealed to the First-tier Tribunal?

12.   For our purposes, the key elements of rule 17 of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules are that "a party may give notice of the withdrawal of its  case,
    or on any part of it" and that (except in relation  to  an  application
    for permission to appeal), such notice "will not take effect unless the
    Upper Tribunal consents to the withdrawal" (rule 17(1) and (2)).

13.  In the present proceedings, Mr McCarthy submitted  that  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, an integral component of the Secretary of State's  "case"  is
    the immigration decision, against which an appeal under section  82  of
    the 2002 Act has  been  brought.   For  the  respondent,  Ms  Isherwood
    submitted that "the decision appealed  against  is  [the  respondent's]
    alone to withdraw and is not properly to be regarded  as  part  of  the
    'case' covered by UT Rule 17.  The reasons for  that  decision  (and/or
    for instituting or resisting an appeal to the UT) are that  case  (sic)
    and are subject to Rule 17 of the UT rules": [22] of  the  respondent's
    written submissions.

14.  It is uncontroversial that wide and  important  powers  of  immigration
    control are conferred upon the Secretary of State  by  the  Immigration
    Acts (as defined in section 61(2) of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007);  in
    particular, sections 1 (general principles), 3 (general provisions  for
    regulation and control), 3A (further provision as to leave  to  enter),
    3B (further provision as to leave to remain) and 4  (administration  of
    control) of the Immigration Act 1971.  In addition, it may be the  case
    that further powers in the area of immigration lie with the  respondent
    by virtue of the Royal Prerogative (see eg Munir v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 32).  In any event, the  submission
    that Upper Tribunal rule 17 empowers the  Upper  Tribunal  directly  to
    prevent the Secretary of  State  from  exercising  the  decision-making
    powers on immigration matters needs, we find, to be rested on extremely
    firm foundations.

The Chichvarkin cases

15.   In  R  (on  the  application  of)  Evgenyi  Chichvarkin  and  Antonina
    Chichvarkina v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]  EWHC
    1858, the Divisional Court was faced with a judicial  review  challenge
    to the Secretary of State's  withdrawal  of  an  immigration  decision,
    against which the applicant husband and wife had appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal. At [53] of its judgment, the Divisional Court noted that
    leading Counsel for the applicants "accepted that the power to withdraw
    was not derived from rule 17 [of the First-tier  Tribunal  Rules]:  the
    power to withdraw arises as a matter of general  public  law,  for  the
    decision-maker has the implied power, subject to general principles  of
    public  law,  to  withdraw  any  decision  taken   under   statute   or
    prerogative, unless such power is excluded".  The "principles of public
    law" were found by the Divisional Court (and, on appeal, by  the  Court
    of Appeal: [2011] EWCA Civ 91) not to embrace the proposition, advanced
    on behalf of Mr Chichvarkin and his wife, that the Secretary  of  State
    could withdraw a decision in the immigration field only if she conceded
    that that decision was wrong: [48] of the  Divisional  Court  judgment;
    and, in particular, it was not unlawful for her to withdraw a  decision
    "if done for the purpose of avoiding the Tribunal becoming the  primary
    decision-maker": [36] of the Court of Appeal judgment.   The  Court  of
    Appeal held:-

         "It is not inconsistent with  the  statutory  scheme  or  with  the
         policy and purposes of the legislation for the Secretary  of  State
         to withdraw a decision because he considered it appropriate for the
         original application to be  reconsidered  or  a  new  claim  to  be
         considered by him, as  primary  decision-maker,  in  the  light  of
         matters advanced in the appeal or of other developments" [39].


16.  Both the  Divisional  Court  and  the  Court  of  Appeal,  accordingly,
    rejected  the  submission  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had   acted
    unlawfully in withdrawing an immigration decision made in  response  to
    Mr Chichvarkin's application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Investor)
    Migrant, in light of the fact that, in his grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, he and his  wife  had  contended  that
    requiring them to leave the United Kingdom  "would  be  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the  Human  Right  Act  1998  and  contrary  to  the  UK's
    obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention": [20] of the  Divisional
    Court's judgment.  The effect of  the  withdrawal  of  the  immigration
    decision was  that  the  Tribunal  treated  the  appeal  as  withdrawn,
    pursuant to rule 17(2) of the 2005 Rules.


The position in judicial review

17.  In the course of its judgment,  the  Divisional  Court  in  Chichvarkin
    drew attention to the position in judicial review:-

         "We note that it is practically an  every  day  occurrence  in  the
         Administrative  Court  for  the  SSHD,  having  given   preliminary
         consideration to a claimant's challenge to a  decision  by  way  of
         judicial review, to withdraw the challenged decision, with  a  view
         to reconsideration.  In a number of  cases  a  favourable  decision
         follows;  but  in  many  instances  the  SSHD   makes   a   further
         unfavourable decision but, taking advantage of the reconsideration,
         she is able to deal more fully and/or accurately with the facts and
         matters advanced by the claimant.  The claimant may accept the  new
         unfavourable decision, but  if  he  restores  his  challenge  in  a
         further claim for judicial review,  the  proceedings  may  well  be
         better focussed, and more  efficiently  and  promptly  handled,  by
         reason of the procedure followed" [46].

18.  The Divisional Court's reference to the  position  in  judicial  review
    is, we consider, significant for the purposes of construing  the  scope
    of Upper Tribunal rule 17.  Amongst the functions of the Upper Tribunal
    is that of judicial review (see section 15 et  seq  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Inquiries Act 2007).  Part 4 of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules
    deals specifically  with  judicial  review  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  However, rule 17 falls within Part  2  (General  powers  and
    provisions) and applies in relation to judicial review proceedings,  as
    well as to the Upper Tribunal's  appellate  proceedings.   We  are  not
    aware of any suggestion, let alone  practice,  in  this  or  any  other
    Chamber of the Upper Tribunal, to the effect that rule 17 requires  the
    Secretary of State (or any other decision-maker whose decision is under
    challenge) to obtain the consent of the Tribunal in order  to  withdraw
    the decision challenged in a judicial review.  It is difficult  to  see
    how rule 17 could properly be read to require the Secretary of State to
    obtain consent to withdrawing a decision which has  given  rise  to  an
    appeal under  the  2002  Act,  without  also  accepting  that  rule  17
    necessitates such consent in judicial review proceedings.


Social security decisions and appeals

19.    It is also instructive to look briefly  at  the  position  in  social
    security and child support appeals. Section 8 of  the  Social  Security
    Act 1998 provides that, subject to the provisions of Chapter II of  the
    Act, "it shall be for the Secretary of State ... to  decide  any  claim
    for a relevant benefit ... and ... to make any decision that  falls  to
    be made under or by virtue of a relevant enactment". Section 9 provides
    for revision of decisions by the Secretary of State. By subsection (6):

        "(6) Except  in  prescribed  circumstances,  an  appeal  against  a
        decision of the Secretary of State shall lapse if the  decision  is
        revised under this section before the appeal is determined."


20.  Section 10 makes provision for  certain  decisions  to  be  superseded;
    that is to say, replaced by new decisions, generally having effect from
    the date of the supersession (in contrast to revised  decisions,  which
    continue to operate as from the date of the "original" decision).   The
    Social Security and Child Support (Decisions and  Appeals)  Regulations
    1999 (SI  1999/991)  make  further  specific  provision  regarding  the
    relationship between decisions and appeals.  These  include  regulation
    3(4A):

        "(4A) Where there is an appeal against  an  original  decision  ...
        within the time prescribed by Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,  but  the
        appeal has not  been  determined,  the  original  decision  may  be
        revised at any time."


21.   Regulation 30 prescribes circumstances, as permitted  by  the  opening
    words of section 9(6), where a revised  decision  does  not  cause  the
    appeal to lapse. These are where  the  revised  decision  is  not  more
    advantageous to the appellant than the decision before it was revised.

22.   This admittedly outline account of  the  legislative  framework  of  a
    different  jurisdiction  is  instructive,   in   that   it   emphasises
    Parliament's concern to ensure that any limitations on the  executive's
    decision-making  powers  are  precisely  delineated  in  the   relevant
    legislation. The precision of the provisions  to  which  we  have  just
    referred stand in marked contrast  with  the  terminology  employed  in
    Upper Tribunal rule 17. Furthermore, the existence of this  legislation
    in the social security jurisdiction means that  the  issue  of  whether
    rule 17(2) enables the Upper Tribunal to prevent the Secretary of State
    from  withdrawing  appealed  decisions  simply  does  not  arise.   The
    relationship between  tribunal  and  executive  functions  is  governed
    clearly and expressly by the  relevant  legislation,  which  leaves  no
    scope for a decision  to  be  withdrawn  without  being  superseded  or
    revised.  As a result, the respondent's stance in the present  case  on
    the interpretation of Upper Tribunal rule 17 can find no support in  at
    least one major jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal.


Conclusions on main question (1)

23.  For all these reasons, we find  that  -  far  from  resting  on  strong
    foundations - the submission on behalf of the  present  appellant  that
    the word "case" in  Upper  Tribunal  rule  17  encompasses  the  actual
    decision appealed, has  not  been  made  out.   In  so  concluding,  we
    nevertheless acknowledge Mr McCarthy's submission that, on the facts of
    the  present  appeal,  the  respondent's  decision  to   withdraw   the
    immigration decision of May 2010 has  a  direct  correlation  with  the
    respondent's case before the Upper Tribunal, at least so far as Article
    8 of the ECHR is concerned.  The respondent appears to accept that  the
    2010 decision lacked a necessary element; namely, consideration of  the
    best interests of the appellant's son.  For reasons which we shall give
    in due course, that fact is not without significance in  answering  the
    question of how the Upper Tribunal should proceed, following withdrawal
    of the immigration decision.  However, such a  connection  between  the
    decision and the "case" is not such as to justify an interpretation  of
    the rule, which would directly interfere with  functions  conferred  on
    the Secretary of State by Parliament in the immigration field.  Clearer
    wording would be  needed  before  it  could  be  held  that  a  general
    procedure rule in subordinate legislation imposes a  direct  fetter  on
    the discharge of those functions.

24.  There is a reported case in which this Chamber proceeded on  the  basis
    that Upper Tribunal rule 17(2) does require the Tribunal's  consent  to
    the withdrawal of  the  appealed  decision.   In  CS  (Tier  1  -  home
    regulator) USA [2010] UKUT 163 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal was faced  with
    a transitional appeal against a decision  of  the  AIT  to  dismiss  an
    appeal against refusal of leave to remain as a student:-

         "7.  Reconsideration was ordered by SIJ Waumsley in December  2009.
             The matter now comes before us as an appeal to  the  UT  under
             the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  s.10.  At  the
             outset Mr Laverty Senior Home Office Presenting Officer sought
             to withdraw the decision in order for the  respondent  to  re-
             determine it, as he submitted that the Guidance had  not  been
             properly applied by the IJ and the interpretation reached  was
             contrary to the terms of  the  Guidance.  He  recognised  that
             under Rule 17(2) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
             Rules 2008 No. 2698, he required  the  consent  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal to do so. We indicated that  we  did  not  give  that
             consent and would determine the appeal ourselves."

25.  We  do  not  consider  that  CS  materially  supports  the  appellant's
    submissions on this issue.  The Tribunal in that appeal was faced  with
    a concession by the Presenting Officer.   No  such  concession  is,  of
    course, advanced before us.  As a result, the Tribunal in  CS  did  not
    need to engage with any contrary argument, such as is now advanced.  In
    any event, CS is not reported for what it says about consent under rule
    17.


Main question (2):     What is the effect on appellate  proceedings  in  the
Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal of  the  withdrawal  by
the Secretary of State of the  decision  against  which  a  person  appealed
under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal?


26.  Embedded within this main question,  are  two  further  questions.  The
    first is:

    (1)  Does the withdrawal of the decision bring an appeal in  the  Upper
         Tribunal automatically to an end in a 'jurisdictional' sense?










    Error of law stage


27.  There is a measure of agreement between the parties on this issue.   In
    its initial task under section 12 of the 2007 Act, the  Upper  Tribunal
    plainly  does  not  lose  jurisdiction,  following   the   respondent's
    withdrawal of the decision against which a person appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Section 12(1) concerns the making by the Upper Tribunal
    of a finding as to whether the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    "involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law".   Although  the
    Tribunal's discharge of that function may be affected  by  the  reasons
    why the respondent withdrew the decision, such a  withdrawal  does  not
    deprive the Upper Tribunal of that function.


         Re-making stage

28.  A more challenging issue is the  effect  of  withdrawal  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal's function under section 12(2) of the 2007 Act.   Following  a
    finding that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  did  involve  legal
    error, the Upper Tribunal must decide whether to set aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision and, if it does, must either remit the case to
    the First-tier Tribunal or  re-make  the  decision  (here,  the  appeal
    against the respondent's immigration decision).  By the  terms  of  the
    Practice Statement 7, the expectation is that,  in  many  if  not  most
    cases, the Upper Tribunal will proceed to re-make the decision,  rather
    than remitting it to the First-tier Tribunal.  As can be seen from Part
    A above, that was the intention of  both  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    present case and, it would appear, the Court of  Appeal,  in  remitting
    the case to us.

29.  We find that, at the re-making stage, there is, again, jurisdiction  in
    the Upper Tribunal to proceed pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(ii)  of  the
    2007 Act.  The key provision is section 104 of the 2002  Act.   Section
    104 is plainly intended  by  the  legislature  to  be  a  comprehensive
    statement of the ways in which appeals brought under section 82 may  be
    brought to an end.  As can be seen, such an appeal ceases to be pending
    when it is "finally determined, withdrawn  or  abandoned  (or  when  it
    lapses under section 99)" (section 104(1)(d)).  There is no  indication
    in that section (or elsewhere in the 2002 Act) that the  withdrawal  of
    the decision appealed is one of the ways in which the appeal is brought
    to an end.  On the contrary, the existence of section 104(4B) and  4(C)
    strongly indicates to the contrary. Those provide for an  exception  to
    statutory abandonment of an appeal on the grant of  leave,  insofar  as
    the appeal is brought on Refugee Convention or discrimination  grounds.
    Since the grant of leave to enter or remain  must,  in  practice,  have
    either followed, or else  impliedly  include,  the  withdrawal  of  the
    "adverse" immigration decision under section 82(2), against  which  the
    person  concerned  appealed,  it  cannot  be  contended   that   "mere"
    withdrawal of the decision appealed automatically deprives the Tribunal
    of jurisdiction under the 2002 Act.

30.   Neither party in the present  proceedings  sought  to  rely  upon  the
    Upper Tribunal's determination in EG and NG (rule 17: withdrawal;  rule
    24:  scope)  [2013]  UKUT  143  (IAC).  There  is   nothing   in   that
    determination which holds that the withdrawal of the  decision  against
    which a section 82 appeal was brought has the effect of  depriving  the
    Upper Tribunal of jurisdiction. The Tribunal in EG and NG was concerned
    with the effect of the Secretary of State's withdrawal  of  her  appeal
    against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, which had allowed
    the appellants' section 82 appeals on human rights grounds. The  effect
    of permitting the Secretary of State's withdrawal of  her  case  before
    the Upper Tribunal (that is to say, her appeal to it) was to cause  the
    appellants' section  82  appeals  to  be  finally  determined  for  the
    purposes of  section  104(1)(b)  because  the  restriction  in  section
    104(2)(b) was thereby lifted.

31.  What, then, of rule 17(2) of the 2005  Rules?  As  can  be  seen,  this
    provides in terms that the withdrawal of the  appealed  decision  means
    that the appeal against that decision "shall be treated as  withdrawn".
    In her written submissions, Ms Isherwood commented that,  although  the
    First-tier Tribunal, were it re-making the decision, would be bound  by
    rule 17(2) to regard the appeal as withdrawn, "the UT is  arguably  not
    so bound".  Ms Isherwood was, we find, right to refrain from submitting
    that rule 17(2) of the 2005 Rules precludes  the  Upper  Tribunal  from
    proceeding to re-make an appellate decision in the  circumstances  with
    which we are concerned.  The case is, after all, being re-made  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, not  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  such,  the  Upper
    Tribunal is entitled (indeed, obliged) to apply  its  own  2008  Rules.
    There is no justification for construing section 12(4)(a) of  the  2007
    Act so narrowly as confine the Upper Tribunal to doing  only  what  the
    First-tier Tribunal could do under its own procedure rules.

32.  That conclusion is sufficient for our purposes. But there is  also  the
    following point. Section 12(3)(b) of the 2007 Act  empowers  the  Upper
    Tribunal, when remitting a case to the First-tier  Tribunal,  to  "give
    procedural directions in connection with  the  reconsideration  of  the
    case  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal".  That  general  power,   directly
    conferred by primary legislation, would on its face  appear  to  enable
    the  Upper  Tribunal  to  direct  the  First-tier  Tribunal   to   deal
    substantively with an appeal, which might otherwise fall to be  treated
    as withdrawn pursuant to rule 17(2) of the 2005 Rules. Accordingly,  if
    on the remittal of such a case the First-tier  Tribunal  could  proceed
    irrespective of the respondent's withdrawal, then section  12(4)(a)  of
    the 2007 Act contains no impediment to the Upper Tribunal's  doing  the
    same.

33.   Rule 17(2) of the 2005 Rules applies "if the respondent  notifies  the
    Tribunal that the decision ... to which the  appeal  relates  has  been
    withdrawn". Quite apart from  the  point  mentioned  in  the  preceding
    paragraph, it must be doubtful whether this "trigger" event  can  apply
    in the circumstances with which we are concerned. This is  because  the
    respondent will, of course, already have notified the Upper Tribunal of
    the withdrawal of the appealed decision. There would thus  be  no  need
    for her to inform the  First-tier  Tribunal.  If  the  respondent  were
    nevertheless to seek  to  do  so,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  be
    entitled to treat the purported notification  as  ineffective  for  the
    purpose of invoking rule 17(2). We therefore do not  consider  that  Ms
    Isherwood is right in her submission that, so  far  as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is concerned, the  appeal  would  be  bound  to  be  withdrawn
    pursuant to rule 17(2), at least if the case were being dealt  with  on
    remittal from the Upper Tribunal.

34.  In any event, leaving aside the remittal scenario, it is  by  no  means
    apparent that rule 17(2) of the 2005 Rules has the result of compelling
    the First-tier Tribunal, in all circumstances and without exception, to
    treat the appeal as withdrawn.  We refer again to section  104(4A)  and
    (4B) of the 2002 Act. It is unusual in  this  jurisdiction  for  a  new
    decision of the respondent to be made immediately upon  the  withdrawal
    of the decision against which the appeal is brought. In a case where an
    appellant has brought his or her appeal "on the ground relating to  the
    Refugee Convention specified in section 84(1)(g)" or  "on  the  grounds
    specified in section 84(1)(b)", the consequence of treating the  appeal
    as withdrawn - thereby ending  it,  pursuant  to  section  104(1)(b)  -
    before it is known whether the appellant is  to  be  granted  leave  to
    enter or remain, would effectively  negate  Parliament's  intention  in
    enacting section 104(4A) to (4C).  In short, a strict adherence to rule
    17(2) of the 2005 Rules may be legally problematic.

35.   In saying so, we are conscious of the endorsement which rule 17(2)  of
    the 2005 Rules received from the Court of Appeal  in  Chichvarkin.  The
    challenge in Chichvarkin to the vires of rule 17(2) was, however,  made
    on a quite different basis (as it had  been  in  the  Divisional  Court
    proceedings that were the subject of the appeal) and the point made  in
    the preceding paragraph does not appear  to  have  been  raised  before
    either Court.

36.  It is worthwhile observing that the Tribunal  Procedure  Committee  has
    recently undertaken a  public  consultation  regarding  proposed  Rules
    intended to replace  the  2005  AIT  Rules,  in  the  course  of  which
    responses were invited as to whether rule 17(2) should be  changed,  so
    as to empower (rather than compel) the First-tier Tribunal to treat  an
    appeal as withdrawn where the decision appealed  is  withdrawn  by  the
    respondent.  The fact that this consultation was  undertaken  forms  no
    part of our reasoning; but it perhaps serves to  indicate  the  unusual
    nature of present rule 17(2), which as far as we  are  aware  finds  no
    counterpart in the procedure rules of other Chambers of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


    (2) Is an appeal "bound to be academic" where the decision appealed  is
    withdrawn?

37.  We now reach the core of the respondent's submissions  on  this  second
    main question.  The respondent contends that even if, in jurisdictional
    terms,  an  appeal  under  section  82  of  the  2002  Act  against  an
    immigration decision can survive the withdrawal of that  decision,  any
    subsequent determination of that appeal by a Tribunal must be academic,
    in the sense that the outcome of that  appeal  cannot  be  to  put  the
    appellant in any different  position  than  he  or  she  is  in,  as  a
    consequence of the withdrawal by  the  respondent  of  the  immigration
    decision.

38.  Ms Isherwood's written submissions put the matter as follows:-

         "14. The Respondent's position is ...that on a correct  reading  of
             the statute the withdrawal  of  a  decision  appealed  against
             means that the appeal  becomes  academic  and  should  not  be
             pursued absent a good reason.


         15.  Where an appeal has to be determined the deciding Tribunal  is
             required by section 86(2)(a) of the 2002  Act  to  decide  any
             matter raised as a ground and  any  matter  which  section  85
             required it to consider.  If the decision appealed against  is
             withdrawn then no grounds raised against it  require  disposal
             as they have nothing upon which to bear."

39.  In its directions  which  followed  the  hearing  on  7  November,  the
    Tribunal required the parties to comment on the significance,  if  any,
    on the interpretation of Upper Tribunal rule 17 of section 104  of  the
    2002 Act.  Ms Isherwood's written submissions responded as follows:-

         "25. It was observed earlier that the definition in section  104(1)
             and (2) of when an appeal  is  'pending'/'finally  determined'
             bears upon the conduct of immigration cases in  various  ways,
             including the period for which section 3C operates  to  extend
             leave and the timing of certain further actions.   Clarity  is
             therefore operationally desirable in the effect and  scope  of
             UT Rule 17.


         26.  The Tribunal may also have in mind that sections 104(4), (4A),
             (4B), (4C) and (5) have direct statutory effect on  a  pending
             appeal without any need for Tribunal  consent.   Dealing  with
             these provisions in turn:


                . Section 104(4) provides for a section 82(1) appeal  to  be
                  abandoned by an appellant's departure from the UK.


                . Section 104(4A) (qualified by subsections (4A),  (4B)  and
                  (4C)) operates to abandon an 82(1) appeal on the appellant
                  being granted leave to enter.

                . Section 104(4B) provides for an appellant to  continue  an
                  appeal on asylum grounds only if he is granted  leave  for
                  more   than   a   year   and   completes   the   necessary
                  administrative formalities.

                . Section 104(4)(C) provides for an appellant who  has  been
                  granted leave to enter or remain to continue an appeal  on
                  race discrimination grounds.

                . Section 104(5) operates such that  pending  appeals  under
                  section  82(1)  against  certain  classes  of  immigration
                  decision are to be treated  as  finally  determined  if  a
                  deportation order is made against the appellant.


         27.  Each of these provisions invokes a requirement in UT Procedure
             Rule 17A (introduced for asylum cases and immigration cases as
             defined) for the parties to notify the Tribunal if the trigger
             events in  question  occur.   Rule  17A(2)  then  directs  the
             Tribunal as to what to do if an appeal is abandoned or  is  to
             be treated as finally determined by  a  provision  of  section
             104.


         28.  The relevance of  this  is  that  it  is  not  just  voluntary
             attempts to withdraw part or all of a party's case under  Rule
             17 which can bring an immigration appeal to a close.  It seems
             illogical that section 104 continues  to  operate  upon  Upper
             Tribunal's   appeals   (at    whatever    stage)    yet    the
             administratively sensible protocol for appeals to be  rendered
             academic by withdrawal of the decision appealed against should
             not."

40.  We find the respondent's  submissions  on  her  core  case  founder  on
    section 104(4A) to (4C) of the 2002  Act.   Those  provisions  make  it
    plain that, in the circumstances  specified  in  subsection  (4A),  the
    scheme in section 82 is modified by the statutory hypothesis, that  the
    appeal is to be treated as abandoned.  As we have seen, that hypothesis
    does not, however,  have  effect  in  the  circumstances  specified  in
    subsections (4B) and (4C).  In particular, those  subsections  make  it
    clear that statutory  abandonment  "shall  not  apply"  to  an  appeal,
    insofar as that appeal is  brought  on  "the  ground  relating  to  the
    Refugee Convention specified in section 84(1)(g)" or  "on  the  grounds
    specified in section 84(1)(b)", as the case may be.  Crucially, section
    104 does not proceed on the assumption that the scheme of  sections  82
    to 87 of the 2002 Act is such that the grant of leave  (and  consequent
    supersession of the earlier, negative decision against which the appeal
    was brought) has the automatic and independent effect of precluding the
    Tribunal from allowing or dismissing an appeal  under  section  86,  by
    reference to the relevant ground described in  section  84.   Nor  does
    section 104 operate on the earlier sections by "glossing" or  modifying
    them, so as to enable a refugee or discrimination appeal  to  continue,
    despite the grant of leave. On the contrary, section 104 assumes  that,
    without an express  legislative  statement  that  the  grant  of  leave
    constitutes deemed abandonment, that grant would not operate so  as  to
    end the appeal at all.

41.  The significance of section  104(4B)  and  (4C)  is  recognised  by  Mr
    McCarthy in his written submissions:-

         "30. It is important to note that  Section  104(4C)  admits  of  no
             discretion.  Where an appellant gives proper notice of his  or
             her intention to continue  an  asylum  case,  Section  104(4C)
             'shall not apply'.  In  these  circumstances  (e.g.  where  an
             appeal  under  Section  82  remains  extant),  Section  86(2),
             requires that '[The Tribunal] must determine - (a) any  matter
             raised as a ground of appeal (whether  or  not  by  virtue  of
             section 85(1))' (emphasis added).


         31.  Thus, the effect of Section 104 is  that  where  a  person  is
             granted leave to enter or remain,  their  appeal  pursuant  to
             Section 82(1) shall be treated as  abandoned.   The  Appellant
             may, however, continue with an asylum appeal,  upon  providing
             proper notice in accordance with Section  104(4B).   Thus,  by
             the plain effect of Section  104(4B),  it  cannot  be  assumed
             that, even were the SSHD to  re-make  a  decision  before  the
             Upper Tribunal does so in a case with  a  withdrawn  decision,
             that this would be academic in the relevant sense of being  of
             no consequence for the rights and obligations of the parties."



     We agree with those submissions.

42.  Two further  points  need  mentioning.  Before  we  do  so,  we  remind
    ourselves that, as  Lord  Carnwath  observed  in  Patel  and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, the drafting
    of the appeal provisions in the 2002 Act "defies conventional analysis.
    It is not only obscure in places and lacking in  detail,  but  contains
    pointers in both directions": [35]. Nevertheless, as in AS  and  Patel,
    there is sometimes no alternative but to engage in detailed scrutiny of
    those provisions. In the present case, whilst noting (as the  Court  of
    Appeal did in AS) that the references  in  section  84  to  grounds  of
    appeal adopt the present tense,  each of the grounds of appeal set  out
    in section 84(1) receive  their  adjudication  by  the  Tribunal  under
    section 86(3), where it is noteworthy that both paragraphs (a) and  (b)
    are framed in the past tense, requiring  the  allowing  of  the  appeal
    where the decision against which the appeal  is  brought  "was  not  in
    accordance with the law" or that "a discretion exercised  in  making  a
    decision... should have  been  exercised  differently".   Secondly  and
    relatedly, an appeal which continues by virtue of  section  104(4B)  or
    (4C) must, because of section 86(3), still have as its  subject  matter
    the  original  "negative"  decision  against  which  the   appeal   was
    originally brought.  Otherwise, section 104(4B) and (4C) would have  no
    meaning.

43.  We therefore conclude that the withdrawal  by  the  respondent  of  the
    immigration decision against which a section 82 appeal was brought does
    not mean that the appeal must thereafter be treated as academic, in the
    sense described above.  This means that we also reject the respondent's
    submissions that any determination of a  section  82  appeal  in  these
    circumstances can be of no more than "advisory" in its effect,  so  far
    as the respondent is concerned, and that, in particular,  the  Tribunal
    in these circumstances may never give a direction under section 87, for
    the purpose of giving effect to its decision to allow  an  appeal.   We
    shall have more to say about this issue in due course.


D.  HOW SHOULD THE UPPER  TRIBUNAL  PROCEED,  FOLLOWING  WITHDRAWAL  BY  THE
    RESPONDENT OF THE DECISION AGAINST WHICH THE APPEAL WAS BROUGHT?

44.  It is time to take stock of the position we have reached.  Rule  17  of
    the Upper Tribunal Rules does not enable the Upper Tribunal to  prevent
    the Secretary of State from withdrawing a decision, against  which  the
    appellant appealed pursuant  to  section  82  of  the  2002  Act.   The
    withdrawal of that decision, however, does not terminate the  appellate
    jurisdiction of the Tribunal, as regards that appeal.   The  scheme  of
    the 2002 Act is such  that,  as  well  as  continuing  to  have  formal
    jurisdiction, the Upper Tribunal may complete its  appellate  functions
    under section 12 of the 2007 Act  by  re-making  the  decision  in  the
    appeal under section 86 of the 2002 Act, and, if appropriate, by giving
    effect to it by means of directions under section 87, so as to put  the
    appellant in a different position, compared with that he or  she  would
    find themselves in, merely  as  a  result  of  the  withdrawal  of  the
    decision.

45.  The fact that the 2002 Act enables the Tribunal to proceed  to  make  a
    decision that can put  the  appellant  in  such  a  different  position
    carries its own challenges. Given the mandatory terms of section  86(2)
    ("the Tribunal must determine any matter raised as  a  ground..."),  as
    well as subsections (3) and (4), whereby the  Tribunal  must  allow  or
    dismiss the appeal, it may be asked how the Tribunal can  do  otherwise
    than engage with the substantive issues, where  the  decision  appealed
    has been withdrawn. It can immediately be seen,  however,  that  whilst
    such  a  substantive  determination  might  be  desirable  in   certain
    circumstances, in many others it may not.


46.  In addressing this issue, we bear in  mind  the  overriding  objective,
    contained in rule 2 of the Upper Tribunal Rules.  For present purposes,
    the salient provisions are these:-

         "2. (1)  The overriding objective of the Rules  is  to  enable  the
               Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.


               (2)     Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes -


                (a)    dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate
                    to the importance of the case,  the  complexity  of  the
                    issues, the anticipated costs and the resources  of  the
                    parties;


                (b)      avoiding   unnecessary   formality   and    seeking
                    flexibility in the proceedings;
                ...


                (e)    avoiding delay, so  far  as  compatible  with  proper
                    consideration of the issues.
           ...


           (4)    Parties must -


                (a)    help the Upper Tribunal  to  further  the  overriding
                    objective;


                (b)    co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally."




Formal or substantive disposal?

47.  We consider that section 86 of the 2002 Act  permits  the  Tribunal  to
    make a "formal" disposal of an appeal, where (1) the decision  appealed
    against has been withdrawn; and (2) applying the criteria we are  about
    to articulate, the  Tribunal  concludes  that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, it is not in the interests  of  justice  for  the
    Tribunal, in the context of  the  present  proceedings,  to  adjudicate
    substantively on the matters potentially in issue between the  parties.
    This is possible because section 86 does not purport to  prescribe  the
    way  in  which  a  matter  described  in  subsection  (2)(a)  must   be
    determined.  Accordingly, where, in all the circumstances, the Tribunal
    concludes that "formal" determination under section 86 is  appropriate,
    following withdrawal of the immigration decision, the  Tribunal  should
    (i) decline to hear argument as to whether the (now withdrawn) decision
    was not in accordance with  the  law;  and  (ii)  proceed  formally  to
    dismiss the appeal, without making any direction under section 87.

48.  The position may be otherwise where pursuant  to  rule  23A(2)  of  the
    2005 Rules the appellant could be awarded costs representing the  whole
    or part of any fee he or she has paid in order  to  bring  the  appeal,
    were the appeal to be allowed.  In  such  a  case,  where  the  reasons
    underlying  the  respondent's  withdrawal  of  the  appealed   decision
    demonstrate that  some  defect  or  other  deficiency  exists  in  that
    decision, the appropriate course may be formally to allow  the  appeal.
    The important point  is  that,  either  way,  the  formal  disposal  of
    proceedings will preserve the appellant's position, pending  the  fresh
    decision that must be forthcoming, in the wake of withdrawal.

49.  We decline  to  categorise  formal  disposal,  as  just  described,  as
    constituting the "default" position, in the  sense  that  an  appellant
    will be required to demonstrate special reasons why that course  should
    not be followed.  We do, however, consider that, for the reasons we are
    about to give, the likely result  in  practice,  where  a  decision  is
    withdrawn and the Upper Tribunal finds itself at  the  re-making  stage
    under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007 Act, will be formal disposal.


Factors to be considered

(i) Secretary of State should normally be primary decision-maker

50.  An important  factor,  pulling  in  favour  of  formal  as  opposed  to
    substantive disposal, is articulated in the judgments of the  Court  of
    Appeal in Chichvarkin; namely that:

        " ordinarily the SSHD is the primary decision-maker in  respect  of
        immigration, asylum and human rights decisions: see,  for  example,
        Article 4(1) of  the  Qualification  Directive  (Council  Directive
        2004/83); Directive 2005/85 ("The Procedures Directive"),  Articles
        4(1), 8(2), 12(6) and 39; sections 3(1)(a), 4(1) and 11(1)  of  the
        Immigration Act 1971": [35].

51.  Everyone working in the immigration jurisdiction knows  only  too  well
    the tension that exists in  the  legislation  and  resultant  case  law
    between, on the one hand, the principle that the respondent  should  be
    primary decision-maker and, on the other, the desirability of  ensuring
    that appellate  proceedings  deal  comprehensively  with  every  reason
    raised by a person for remaining in, or coming to, the United  Kingdom:
    see esp, section 120  (requirement  to  state  additional  grounds  for
    application) of the 2002 Act.  In AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076, the Court of Appeal  held
    that the Tribunal had an obligation to deal with grounds raised  by  an
    appellant in a section 120 notice, even if those grounds had  not  been
    contained in the original application made to the respondent.

52.    Although  Chichvarkin  was  largely  concerned  with  a  public   law
    challenge to the respondent's decision to withdraw the decision against
    which the appellants had appealed  (thus  triggering  withdrawal  under
    rule 17 of the 2005 Rules), it is directly relevant for  our  purposes,
    as a powerful reiteration of  the  desirability  of  primary  decision-
    making in this field, notwithstanding AS (Afghanistan) (which the Court
    distinguished  for  these  purposes).   In  particular,  where,  as  in
    Chickvarkin, the asylum claim has not been considered by the respondent
    (including by means of a full interview with the appellant), this  must
    constitute a strong pointer towards formal as  opposed  to  substantive
    determination by the Upper Tribunal, following withdrawal of the appeal
    decision.  In so saying we are aware  that  withdrawal  followed  by  a
    grant of leave (but not refugee status)  would  result  in  any  extant
    appeal continuing, pursuant to section 104(4B).

53.  By contrast, where asylum has been raised  and  fully  considered  (and
    rejected) by the respondent, prior to the appeal being instituted,  the
    principle of primary decision-making lying with the respondent does not
    arise or, insofar as the case for the appellant is subsequently put  on
    a different  basis,  may  not  arise  to  the  same  extent.   In  such
    circumstances, the termination of the current appellate proceedings  by
    formal disposal may well not  be  appropriate,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective and section 104(4B).  See also the  facts  of  the
    present case at Part A above and our decision on the  case  at  Part  F
    below.


(ii) Wider public interest reasons: the case law on 'academic' appeals

54.  The next factor  concerns  whether  there  are  wider  public  interest
    reasons, potentially involving persons other than the appellant and his
    immediate family etc, why it may be desirable to determine  the  appeal
    substantively, notwithstanding withdrawal of the appealed decision.  In
    this regard, it is helpful to consider case law concerning when it  may
    be appropriate  for  the  High  Court  in  public  law  proceedings  to
    determine issues that have become "academic", in  the  sense  that  the
    person who brought the proceedings has obtained that which they brought
    the proceedings to get.  The case  law  is  helpful,  even  though  the
    context with which we are presently concerned is different, in that  we
    are considering when it would be appropriate for the Upper Tribunal  to
    re-make a decision pursuant to section 86 of the 2002  Act,  in  a  way
    that may give the appellant more than he or  she  has  received,  as  a
    result of the withdrawal of the decision.  Where he or she has actually
    been granted the leave for which they applied, as well as  the  refugee
    or other status they sought, the appeal will, of course, be statutorily
    abandoned by reason of section  104  of  the  2002  Act.   Accordingly,
    unlike the position in the High  Court,  "purely"  academic  cases  are
    unlikely to arise in immigration and asylum appeals.

55.  A useful analysis of the principles to be applied in  deciding  whether
    a court should permit a party to pursue a  public  law  case  that  has
    become academic is contained in the judgment of  Silber  J  in  Zoolife
    International Limited v Secretary of State for  Environment,  Food  and
    Rural Affairs [2007] EWHC 2995, recently approved by Singh  J  in  K  v
    Entry Clearance Officer Tashkent [2012] EWHC 2875.  Silber J said this:
         "32. The starting point for  considering  whether  a  court  should
             permit a party to pursue an academic point  in  a  public  law
             case is the classic statement of Lord Slynn of Hadley in R  v.
             Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ex  parte  Salem
             [1999] I AC 450 in a speech with which other  members  of  the
             Appellant Committee agreed when he explained (with my emphasis
             added) that:
                  '.... I accept, as both counsel agree, that in case  where
                  there is an issue  involving  a  public  authority  as  to
                  questions of public law, your Lordships have a  discretion
                  to hear the appeal, even if by the time the appeal reaches
                  the House, there is no longer a lis to  be  decided  which
                  will directly affect the rights  and  obligations  of  the
                  parties inter se... The discretion to hear disputes,  even
                  in the area of public law, must be exercised with  caution
                  and appeals which are academic between the parties  should
                  not be heard unless there is good  reason  in  the  public
                  interest for doing so as for example (but only by  way  of
                  example) where a discrete point of statutory  construction
                  which does  not  involve  detailed  consideration  of  the
                  facts, and where large number of similar  cases  exist  or
                  are anticipated so that the issue will most likely need to
                  be resolved in the near future'.
         33.  One of the reasons for this approach  was  expressed  by  Lord
             Goff in R v. Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  ex
             parte Wynne [1993] 1 WLR 115 at 120A-B where he said that:
                  'It is well established that this House  does  not  decide
                  hypothetical questions. If the House were to  do  so,  any
                  conclusion, and the accompanying reasons, could  in  their
                  turn  constitute  no  more  than  obiter  dicta  expressed
                  without the assistance of a  concrete  factual  situation,
                  and would not  constitute  a  binding  precedent  for  the
                  future'.
         34.  These statements refer to the approach of the House  of  Lords
             but there is no reason why they should not  apply  with  equal
             force to other courts. This approach to  academic  issues  was
             considered further in the  speeches  by  the  members  of  the
             Appellate Committee in R (on the application  of  Rushbridger)
             v. Attorney General [2004] 1 AC 357 in which:
             (a)  Lord Hutton explained that 'it is not the function of the
                  courts to  decide  hypothetical  questions  which  do  not
                  impact on the parties before them' (page 371 E [35]);
             (b)  Lord Hutton expressly  approved  at  page  371  [35]  the
                  statement of Lord Justice-Clerk (Thompson) in  Macnaughton
                  v Macnaughton's  Trustees  [1953]  SC  387-392  that  'our
                  courts have consistently acted on  the  view  that  it  is
                  their  function  in  the  ordinary  run   of   contentious
                  litigation to decide only live, practical  questions,  and
                  they have  no  concern  with  hypothetical,  premature  or
                  academic questions, nor do they exist to advise  litigants
                  as to the policy which they should adopt in  the  ordering
                  of their affairs'; and
             (c)  Lord Scott of Foscote stated that 'the valuable  time  of
                  the courts should be spent on real issues' (page 374 E[45]
                  ).
         35.  Similar principles have been  applied  in  the  Administrative
             Court, for example, by Munby J in Smeaton v Secretary of State
             [ 2002] 2 FLR 146, 244 [420] ('the facts remain that the court-
             including the Administrative  Court-  exist  to  resolve  real
             problems and not disputes of  merely  academic  significance')
             and by Davis J in BBC v Sugar [2007] 1  WLR  2583,  2606  [70]
             ('to grant remedies by reference to a  decision  made  in  now
             outmoded circumstances seems to me to be an arid and  academic
             exercise. It is not something that, as an Administrative Court
             Judge, I would  have  been  minded  to  do').  Although  these
             statements indicate that if an issue is  academic,  the  court
             cannot determine it, these statements must be subject to  what
             was said in Salem and which has, as far as I can discover, not
             been disapproved of or qualified in any manner  in  any  later
             case.
         36.  In my view, these statements show clearly that academic issues
             cannot and should not be determined by courts unless there are
             exceptional circumstances such as  where  two  conditions  are
             satisfied in the type of application now before the court. The
             first condition is in the words of Lord Slynn in Salem (supra)
             that 'a large number of similar cases exist or anticipated' or
             at least other similar cases exist or are anticipated and  the
             second condition is that the decision  in  the  academic  case
             will not be fact-sensitive. If the courts entertained academic
             disputes in the type of application now before the  court  but
             which did not  satisfy  each  of  these  two  conditions,  the
             consequence would be a regrettable  waste  of  valuable  court
             time and the incurring by one or more parties  of  unnecessary
             costs.
         37.  These points are particularly potent at the present time where
             the  Administrative   Court   is   completely   overrun   with
             immigration, asylum and other cases  and  where  it  would  be
             contrary to the  overriding  objectives  of  the  CPR  for  an
             academic case to be pursued. After all one of those overriding
             objectives is 'dealing with a case justly [which] includes, so
             far as is practicable ...(e) allotting to  it  an  appropriate
             share of the court's resources, while taking into account  the
             need to allot resources to other cases' (CPR Part 1.1)  It  is
             noteworthy that there have been a number of  cases  where  the
             court has considered it appropriate to hear an academic  issue
             but those cases, which often concerned statutory  construction
             or the impact of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  on
             English statutes, satisfied the two tests which I have set out
             in paragraph 36 above (see generally the examples given  in  R
             (on the application of B) v Dr SS, Dr AC and the Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department of Health [2005] EWHC 86 (Admin)
             [47])."
56.     In R (on application of) Osman Omar v Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2012] EWHC 3448 (Admin), Beatson J (as he  then  was)
      was faced with a judicial review by a  person  whose  application  for
      leave had  been  rejected  for  non-payment  of  a  fee  but  who  had
      subsequently been given leave to remain. The  challenge  was,  amongst
      other things, to the validity of the regulations concerning payment of
      application fees and the effect of non payment:
        "3.  There are now only three issues before the court. The first is
        whether the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  acted
        unlawfully on 12 July 2010 in refusing  to  accept  the  claimant's
        application for an extension of discretionary leave without a  fee.
        This involves a challenge to the decision made on 12 July 2010,  to
        the vires of the relevant regulations, which provide for a fee  and
        do not provide for it to be possible for the Secretary of State  to
        waive it in the case of an  applicant  who  seeks  leave  on  human
        rights grounds but cannot afford  the  fee  because  he  is  either
        destitute or in receipt only of NASS support. It is  the  challenge
        to  the  regulations  which  requires  permission.  The  second  is
        whether, in the light of the defendant's  decision  on  9  November
        2011 to grant the claimant three years discretionary  leave,  there
        remains no live issue in these proceedings. The third  is  whether,
        if no live issue remains, the court should nevertheless  deal  with
        the first issue on the ground that it raises wider points of public
        importance because of the number of similar cases that exist or are
        anticipated and because the decision sought is not  fact-sensitive:
        see R v SSHD ex p. Salem [1999] 1  AC  450  at  456  -  457  and  R
        (Zoolife International) v Secretary of State  for  the  Environment
        [2007] EWHC 2998 (Admin) at [36].


        ...


        36. Mr Johnson submitted that there remains no live issue  in  this
        case. The claim is, he maintained, "academic", and particularly  in
        relation to the challenge to the regulations, for which  permission
        has not been given, the court should not  entertain  it.  The  term
        "academic" is one which is widely used  in  relation  to  cases  in
        which one or other of the parties maintain there  is  no  longer  a
        live issue. It may signify that, even  if  the  claimant  gets  the
        relief which he seeks, that will produce no immediate or  practical
        result because he has his discretionary leave.


        37. The term can, however, be misleading. It cannot  be  said  that
        this  claim  is  "academic"  in  the  sense  of  being  of   purely
        theoretical or speculative interest.  The  issue  raised  in  these
        proceedings has been around for a while but not decided.  It  arose
        in R (Francis) v Secretary of State [2010] EWHC 1122 (Admin), which
        was decided in May 2010. The claimant in that case also  challenged
        the requirement to pay a fee to secure leave to remain and  Mitting
        J stated (at paragraph 5) that,  the  heart  of  her  claim  was  a
        challenge to the lawfulness  of  the  secondary  legislation  which
        prescribes that a fee must be paid when an individual  applies  for
        leave to remain, in that case the 2009 Regulations, but that it was
        "academic" because after proceedings were lodged the  Secretary  of
        State made a decision to remove the claimant.


        ...


        44. In R (Ferguson and Wilkie) v Secretary  of  State  [2010]  EWHC
        3756 (Admin) I also referred to the perception by those who  advise
        claimants that what had happened in that  situation  was  that  the
        Secretary of State had at first chosen to resist  the  claims,  but
        then decided not to allow them to be litigated, perhaps because  it
        was thought that the court would  take  a  different  view  to  the
        Secretary of State. I stated (at paragraph 24) that "it  cannot  be
        right for a  defendant  in  a  public  law  case  to  avoid  taking
        decisions by last-minute concessions in a way which puts people  at
        great uncertainty, and which means that those who  are  less  well-
        advised than  [the  claimants  in  those  cases]  are  left  in  an
        unsatisfactory position". The fact that was  not  the  position  in
        that case, was one of the reasons  I  did  not  consider  that  the
        matter in that case could properly be litigated.


        45. The concern I then expressed, however,  remains.  Is  it  right
        that issues raising important points  of  principle  which  are  in
        dispute between the defendant and  those  whose  position  in  this
        country is regulated by the defendant  and  the  UK  Border  Agency
        under the legislation, the Regulations and  the  defendant's  rules
        and policies should not be resolved because they  are  continuously
        kicked into touch by individual decisions  made  after  proceedings
        are instituted. It is said in these proceedings that  the  decision
        dated 9 November 2011 granting the claimant discretionary leave had
        nothing to do with these proceedings and, in  the  absence  of  any
        other indication, I accept that this is so.


        46. If, however, it appears that ad hoc decisions are being made to
        preclude the  determination  of  difficult  questions  where  those
        advising the Secretary of State consider her position is  difficult
        or because of the undoubted  strains  and  stresses  to  which  the
        system administered by the Secretary of State through the UK Border
        Agency is subject, the court may have  to  think  again  about  the
        general policy. It cannot be  an  efficient  use  of  resources  to
        create situations in which individuals are forced, often at  public
        expense, to institute legal proceedings and take up the time  of  a
        grossly overworked Administrative Court, only to  find  at  a  late
        stage in the proceedings that the Secretary of  State  has  made  a
        decision which arguably makes the issue moot. The  consequence  may
        be, not that the proceedings are abandoned, but that there is  then
        satellite litigation on what might be called the  subsidiary  point
        of whether this is one of those  rare  cases  in  which  the  court
        should nevertheless adjudicate."
        ...

57.    Beatson J resolved the issue as follows:
        "59. I have concluded that, in the circumstances of this case,  the
        concessions made by the defendant and the fact that the Regulations
        have been replaced do not preclude the court from  considering  the
        substance of the claim. Permission has been given in this case  and
        it is only in respect of the direct challenge  to  the  regulations
        that it has not. For the reasons I shall give, that  challenge  is,
        in my judgment, clearly arguable. The substantive issue  raised  by
        the claimant is an  issue  which  arises  regularly.  It  arose  in
        Francis. It will arise in the case of Ahmed  (CO/9926/2011)  which,
        as I have stated, is listed for hearing at the end of January 2013.
        The defendant has also invited the claimant to withdraw  the  claim
        on the ground that the claimant's claim has become academic because
        leave has now been granted and will  not  doubt  so  argue  at  the
        hearing.


        60.   Secondly,  I  accept  Mr  MacKenzie's  submission  that   the
        claimant's case is not fact-sensitive. In the  re-amended  grounds,
        he expressly does not  ask  the  court  to  determine  whether  the
        Secretary of State should in fact exercise discretion to waive  the
        fee in the claimant's case. What is sought is  a  determination  of
        whether such discretion is provided for in statute, and whether the
        Secretary of State must consider exercising it.  While  the  actual
        exercise of discretion  in  the  claimant's  case  would  be  fact-
        sensitive, the question of whether such discretion  (to  waive  the
        fee) must exist in law is not.


        61. Thirdly, as to the question posed by Lord Woolf in Quintavelle,
        whether there is any relief which could  be  appropriately  granted
        and which would be of value to those who  have  to  decide  matters
        such as this, the claimant clearly has standing to seek  relief  in
        respect of the absence of any discretion to waive fees  for  people
        in his position because he was affected by  the  provision  in  the
        2010 Regulations, and is at risk of being affected by  the  similar
        provision in the 2012 Regulations."


58.  The Administrative Appeals Chamber of  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered
    the issue of when it is appropriate to hear academic  appeals,  in  its
    decision  in  KF  and  others  v  Birmingham  Solihull  Mental   Health
    Foundation Trust and Another [2010] UKUT  185  (AAC).   Delivering  the
    Tribunal's judgment, Walker J said:-

         "4.  The general principle is that appellate courts (and tribunals)
             will decline to hear 'academic' appeals in private  law  cases
             (Sun Life Assurance v Jervis [1944]  AC  111  and  Ainsbury  v
             Millington [1987] 1 WLR 379, in which Lord Bridge  of  Harwich
             stressed that 'courts  decide  disputes  between  the  parties
             before them; they do not pronounce on  abstract  questions  of
             law when there is no dispute  to  be  resolved'  (at  381B-C),
             whilst acknowledging that different considerations might apply
             in 'friendly actions' or test cases).  That general  principle
             may not apply with quite the same force in public  law  cases,
             where the established view is that academic appeals should not
             be heard 'unless there is a good reason in the public interest
             for doing so' (R v Secretary of State for the Home Department,
             explanation parte Salem [1999] 1 AC 450,  per  Lord  Slynn  at
             457A-B).


         5.   However,  despite  the  general  rule  there  will  always  be
             circumstances in which it is appropriate  in  the  context  of
             either public or private law proceedings for such an appeal to
             be heard (see eg Birmingham City Council v R [2006]  EWCA  Civ
             1748; [2007] Fam 41 and Rolls Royce  plc  v  Unite  the  Union
             [2009] EWCA Civ 387; [2010] 1 WLR 318).   Notwithstanding  the
             considerable measure of agreement between the parties, we  are
             entirely satisfied that the present proceedings are  one  such
             (joined) appeal.  Both parties accept that there are important
             issues of principle to be  determined.   The  appeals  concern
             relatively narrow points of construction on which the  parties
             have  a  legitimate  interest  in  seeking  clarification  and
             guidance.   The  circumstances  which  arose  in  the  present
             appeals were in no way unusual  and  will  arise  again.   The
             parties  and  their  representatives,  along  with  others  in
             similar situations, are entitled to expect a decision  on  the
             points at issue.  We also bear in mind both that  one  of  the
             functions of the Upper Tribunal is  to  provide  authoritative
             guidance to the First-tier Tribunal  and  that  these  appeals
             concern  one  of  the  most  precious  of  human  rights,  the
             individual's right to liberty.


         6.   In doing so, however, we acknowledge that there  are  inherent
             dangers in a court or tribunal (especially an appellate  court
             or tribunal) expressing views on matters which  do  not  arise
             for decision on the narrow facts of the case, as the Court  of
             Appeal observed in Office of Communications v Floe Telecom Ltd
             [2009] EWCA Civ 47).  We also  bear  in  mind  the  cautionary
             words of Carnwath  LJ,  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals,
             commenting on the role of the Upper Tribunal  in  interpreting
             the scope of the new armed forces compensation scheme,  namely
             that 'Although I understand the panel's wish to give  guidance
             as to the operation of the scheme as a whole, there are always
             dangers in  introducing  a  new  legal  argument  without  the
             factual findings  to  support  it'  (Secretary  of  State  for
             Defence v Lance Corporal (Now Corporal) Duncan &  Anor  [2009]
             Civ 1043; [2010] AACR 5,  at  [125]).   However,  the  present
             appeals are not ones in which a successful party is seeking to
             appeal against the  reasoning  in  the  judgment  of  a  lower
             tribunal on points not necessary for its decision (as in  Floe
             Telecom).  In addition, in at least two of the appeals (KF and
             MO) the patients may have good reason for  wishing  to  appeal
             against the actual orders made, even  though  to  some  extent
             events have moved on.  In all three appeals, even if no relief
             is now sought in respect of the actual order, there remains an
             important issue of principle which touches on the  liberty  of
             the subject.  Furthermore, this is not a  case  in  which  The
             Upper Tribunal has introduced new legal arguments, as appeared
             to be the case in Duncan; rather, we are  seeking  to  resolve
             actual issues which have arisen on the facts  of  the  present
             appeals.   In  addition,  these  appeals  raise  a  number  of
             practical problems which may affect a  substantial  number  of
             other cases before the First-tier Tribunal."


59.  What, then, should we derive from these High Court  and  AAC  cases  on
    "academic"  proceedings,  bearing  in  mind  the   somewhat   different
    statutory context in which the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  must
    operate? There are two main points.  The  first  is  the  principle  of
    restraint, most strongly expressed in the requirement that  there  must
    be exceptional features before  a  court  will  proceed  to  adjudicate
    substantively on an issue that, as  between  the  parties,  has  become
    academic.  The  second  is  that,  in  deciding  whether  a   case   is
    exceptional, the court will consider if there is an  issue  to  resolve
    that will have direct relevance in  other  cases,  thereby  potentially
    saving time and expense in litigating future disputes, and which is not
    fact-sensitive.




(ii)  General guidance in the immigration jurisdiction

60.   Just as with the Administrative Appeals Chamber, there is a  need  for
    the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  give
    guidance on matters of general concern, as regards not only  legal  and
    procedural   issues   but   also   (uniquely   to   our   jurisdiction)
    authoritative country guidance (Practice Direction 12, as amended).   A
    useful articulation of the need for legal  guidance  as  a  reason  for
    proceeding is to be found in the case  of  CS  (see  above).   Although
    there the Tribunal was, as we have  noted,  proceeding  pursuant  to  a
    concession from the respondent that consent was  required  to  withdraw
    the immigration decision, what Blake J said  is,  nevertheless,  highly
    relevant for the purposes of deciding whether to proceed substantively,
    following withdrawal of the appeal decision:-

         "(8) We [refuse consent] for three reasons taking into account  the
             overriding objective to the UT Rules:


             (i)  reconsideration had been ordered  in  December  2008  but
                  consent [to] withdraw the decision was only  being  sought
                  on 30 April 2010 after  the  appellant  had  incurred  the
                  costs of representation at this appeal.


             (ii) The IJ's decision had been based  on  a  reading  of  the
                  Guidance that was now accepted by the respondent  to  have
                  been wrong.  It was important in the public interest  that
                  the error be brought to general attention so  the  parties
                  had the benefit of a reasoned decision of the  UT  on  the
                  question.


             (iii)    The IJ's decision in part relied on some observations
                  of the AIT in MM (above) and if that reasoning  is  flawed
                  it is important that the UT says so."



(iii)  Other factors: timing, reasons for withdrawal

61.  As well as dealing with the importance of giving general guidance,  [8]
    of CS is significant for articulating the fact that both the timing of,
    and reasons for, the respondent's withdrawal of  her  decision  may  be
    such as to necessitate the Upper Tribunal to embark  on  a  substantive
    analysis, leading to  a  fully-reasoned,  authoritative  decision.   In
    particular, where the  reasons  for  withdrawal  of  the  decision,  as
    articulated by the respondent, indicate that the only  legally  correct
    result would be a decision in favour of the appellant (for example,  to
    grant leave to  remain  on  the  basis  that  she  meets  the  relevant
    requirements of the Immigration Rules), then, in  the  context  of  the
    overriding objective, it may well be appropriate for the Upper Tribunal
    to  bring  matters  to  an  end,  by  a  substantive  decision  in  the
    appellant's favour.


(iv)  Bad faith

62.  As we have seen, in Chichvarkin, the  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  what
    was, in effect, an attempt to impose legal fetters on the  respondent's
    power to withdraw decisions in the immigration field, which would  have
    been  wider  than  the  well-established  ones,  based  essentially  on
    irrationality.  In K v Entry Clearance Officer Tashkent Singh J,  faced
    with a challenge to decisions which had subsequently been withdrawn and
    replaced by different ones, accepted that:-

         "...  in  an  extreme  case,  circumstances  might   arise   in   a
         hypothetical context in which, where bad  faith  is  alleged  in  a
         decision-making process, the  court  might  well  be  justified  in
         entertaining a claim for judicial review, even where the  resulting
         decision has by then been withdrawn by a public authority and a new
         decision has replaced it but, I stress, no such allegation  of  bad
         faith has in fact been made in this case." [29]

63.  Any "bad faith" or other irrationality challenge  to  the  decision  of
    the respondent to withdraw an appealed decision  must  not  be  lightly
    made and must be supported by cogent evidence.  A direct  challenge  to
    the withdrawal would need to be brought by means  of  judicial  review.
    But, in deciding whether to proceed to  make  a  substantive  decision,
    together  with  a  direction  compelling  the  respondent  to  act   in
    accordance with it, the Upper Tribunal would, in  such  a  hypothetical
    case, clearly have regard to whether bad faith etc. had been made  out.
    To take a hypothetical example, if the respondent had  (i)  refused  an
    application by reference to Rules in force at the date of decision; but
     (ii) acknowledged that, under  those  Rules  as  then  in  force,  the
    application should have been allowed; and (iii) proceeded  to  withdraw
    that decision in order to make one by reference to the new Rules, under
    which the applicant would lose,  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  be  fully
    justified in allowing the applicant's appeal against  the  unlawfulness
    of the decision appealed, and directing a grant of  appropriate  leave.
    We emphasise, however, that we would not expect the  respondent  so  to
    behave in reality.


(v)  Views of the parties

64.  There remains an  important  factor  in  deciding  between  formal  and
    substantive disposal of an appeal, in the situation with which  we  are
    concerned; namely, the views  of  the  parties.  If  the  appellant  is
    content to await the decision of the respondent, which must  eventually
    follow from the withdrawal of the decision against which the appeal  is
    made, the Tribunal will  need  to  have  regard  to  that  stance.  The
    appellant may go so far as to request consent under Upper Tribunal rule
    17 to withdraw his  appeal,  before  the  result  of  the  respondent's
    reconsideration is known. The appellant's attitude may not be decisive;
    since a need to give legal guidance for the benefit  of  other  appeals
    may point towards substantive determination. But, equally, the Tribunal
    will need to have regard to the fact that a case neither  party  wishes
    to argue may not be the best vehicle for giving such guidance.


Relevance of the factors at 'error of law/set aside' stage

65.  So far under this heading, we have examined the  position  on  the  re-
    making of a decision on an appeal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(ii)  of
    the 2007 Act.  Before the Upper Tribunal reaches that  stage,  however,
    it must have found an error of law in the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  and  set  that  determination  aside.   In  her  written
    submissions,  Ms  Isherwood  suggested  that  "the  withdrawal  of  the
    decision appealed against is unlikely to affect whether or not the  FtT
    erred in law" [22].  With respect, we are not  sure  that  is  correct.
    The history of the present case points to the contrary.  The fact  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge may  have  erred  in  law,  not  just  in
    relation to the issue of social  ostracism  but  also  in  relation  to
    Article 8/best interests, is suggested by the respondent's decision  to
    withdraw the immigration decision, on the basis that it was not made by
    reference to section 55 of the 2009 Act.  Conversely, where  an  appeal
    has been allowed by the First-tier Tribunal, the subsequent  withdrawal
    of the immigration decision may indicate that the respondent shares the
    concern that the First-tier Tribunal must have had about the  decision,
    in allowing the appeal.

66.  Accordingly, where the Upper Tribunal is considering an appeal  against
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the  decision  that
    triggered the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is then withdrawn,  the
    Upper Tribunal must proceed pursuant to section 12 of the 2007  Act  to
    decide whether or not the First-tier Tribunal's determination  contains
    an error of law and in doing so, the Upper Tribunal should have  regard
    to the reasons why the respondent has withdrawn her decision.   If  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not err in law, then that is  the  end  of  the
    appeal.  If the Upper Tribunal finds that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    err in law, then whether it proceeds to  the  stage  of  re-making  the
    appeal under section 12(2)(b)(ii) may well depend on the view that  the
    Upper Tribunal takes of whether the re-made appeal  would  need  to  be
    substantively, as opposed to formally,  determined,  according  to  the
    factors we have described above.  In this regard, we  observe  that  at
    the end of its decision in KF and others,  the  Administrative  Appeals
    Chamber found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law but decided
    not to set that Tribunal's decision  aside  "as  that  would  serve  no
    useful purpose on the particular facts of this case" [62].


Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal?

67.   As can be seen, the discussion  so  far  on  whether  to  re-make  the
    appeal formally or substantively, following withdrawal of the  appealed
    decision, has proceeded on the assumption that the Upper Tribunal would
    re-make that decision itself, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(ii),  rather
    than remitting it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  There  are  powerful
    reasons why re-making in the Upper Tribunal is likely to  be  the  most
    appropriate course, pursuant to the overriding objective  and  Practice
    Statement  7.  If  the  matter  is  to  be  disposed  of  by  a  formal
    determination, it would make no sense for the case to be remitted.  If,
    however,  the  Upper  Tribunal  decides  in   favour   of   substantive
    determination, the factors which drove that conclusion are likely to be
    such as to render it more appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to re-make
    the decision in  the  appeal.  In  particular,  the  giving  of  legal,
    procedural and country guidance is a function of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    not the First-tier Tribunal. If a substantive decision is required  and
    the result is apparent to the Upper Tribunal,  then,  again,  the  best
    course will be for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  reach  that  result  in  a
    determination.

68.  Those considerations have force, irrespective  of  the  issue  of  rule
    17(2) of the 2005 Rules. In view of what  we  have  just  said,  it  is
    perhaps unnecessary to hypothesise a scenario in which,  on  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal against a  First-tier  Tribunal  determination,  the
    decision appealed under section 82 is  withdrawn;  the  Upper  Tribunal
    finds an error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination   and
    sets  it  aside,  considers  the  re-making  requires   a   substantive
    determination  but decides that remittal is the appropriate  course  of
    action, in order for the First-tier Tribunal to produce  a  substantive
    determination. But, having set out such a hypothetical example, we find
    that rule 17(2) of the 2005 Rules would  not  preclude  the  First-tier
    Tribunal from producing such a determination. Our reasons are  set  out
    above at paragraphs 32 and 33.


E.  SUMMARY OF FINDINGS

1. Does rule 17 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
enable the Tribunal to withhold consent to the withdrawal by  the  Secretary
of State of the decision against which the appeal was brought?

69.  No. The word "case" in rule 17 does not cover the decision made by  the
    Secretary  of  State  in  the  exercise  of  her  functions  under  the
    Immigration Acts. Clearer wording would be needed before  it  could  be
    held that a general procedure rule in subordinate legislation imposes a
    direct fetter on the discharge of such functions. The interpretation of
    rule 17 contended for by the appellant finds no support in the practice
    of the Administrative Appeals Chamber of the Upper  Tribunal.  Such  an
    interpretation also faces the difficulty that it would have to apply in
    judicial review  cases  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  where  there  is  no
    suggestion that a minister or  public  body  whose  decision  is  under
    challenge by means of judicial  review  requires  the  consent  of  the
    Tribunal to withdraw that decision.


2.  What is the effect on  appellate  proceedings  in  the  Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal of the withdrawal by the  Secretary  of
State  of  the  decision  against  which  a  person   appealed   under   the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to the First-tier Tribunal?

70.   The withdrawal does not affect the jurisdiction of the Upper  Tribunal
    under section 12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    to decide whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal "involved the
    making of an error on a point of law". Furthermore, the withdrawal does
    not extinguish the jurisdiction of the  Upper  Tribunal  under  section
    12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007 Act to re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal
    brought under  the  2002  Act.  Section  104  of  the  2002  Act  is  a
    comprehensive legislative statement of the circumstances  in  which  an
    appeal is to be regarded as pending. The  withdrawal  of  the  decision
    appealed is not mentioned in section 104 as one of the ways in which an
    appeal comes  to  an  end.  Although  rule  17(2)  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  requires  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to treat an appeal as withdrawn when the  respondent  notifies
    that  Tribunal  that  the  decision  appealed  is  withdrawn   (thereby
    "triggering" section 104(1)(b)), rule  17(2)  sits  uncomfortably  with
    section 104(4B) and (4C) and, in any event, does  not  bind  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Its existence does not circumscribe what the  Upper  Tribunal
    may do by way of re-making  the  decision  in  an  appeal  pursuant  to
    section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007 Act, following the  setting  aside  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

71.   The scheme of the 2002 Act  is  such  that  the  Tribunal's  functions
    under section 86 of determining whether to allow or dismiss  an  appeal
    continue, notwithstanding the withdrawal of the decision against  which
    the appeal was brought.  Section 104(4B) and (4C) expressly provide for
    an appeal to continue on certain  grounds,  even  after  the  grant  of
    leave; and this can only be by reference to  the  Tribunal's  functions
    under section 86 of allowing  or  dismissing  an  appeal  according  to
    whether the decision appealed (albeit no longer extant) was or was  not
    "in accordance with the law". Thus, the respondent's withdrawal of  the
    decision which was appealed to the First-tier Tribunal does not prevent
    the Upper Tribunal, if re-making  the  decision  in  the  appeal,  from
    allowing or dismissing the appeal or from giving effect to its decision
    by means  of  a  direction  under  section  87  of  the  2002  Act.  In
    particular, there  is  no  merit  in  the  submission  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in such circumstances can never  be  anything  more
    than "advisory", so far as the respondent is concerned.


3.  How should the Upper  Tribunal  proceed,  following  withdrawal  by  the
respondent of the decision against which the appeal is brought?

72.  Section 86 of the 2002 Act does not purport to  prescribe  the  way  in
    which matters raised as grounds of appeal must be  determined.  In  re-
    making a decision in an appeal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the
    2007 Act, where the respondent's decision has been withdrawn, the Upper
    Tribunal may make a formal disposal  of  the  appeal  if,  in  all  the
    circumstances, having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective  and  the
    matters mentioned below, that appears to be the most appropriate way of
    disposing of the proceedings. In such cases, the Tribunal would decline
    to  hear  argument  and  need  not  reach   a   substantive,   reasoned
    determination. The formal disposal will  normally  be  to  dismiss  the
    appeal, unless the issue of costs, coupled with the reasons  underlying
    the respondent's withdrawal of the  appealed  decision,  point  towards
    allowing the appeal. In either case, the formal disposal of proceedings
    will preserve the appellant's position, pending the fresh  decision  of
    the respondent.

73.   In deciding, by reference to  the  overriding  objective,  whether  to
    proceed to deal substantively with the  appeal,  in  the  wake  of  the
    respondent's withdrawal, the Tribunal will have regard to all  relevant
    matters, including:

      (a)  the principle that the  respondent  should,  ordinarily,  be  the
      primary decision maker in the immigration field;


      (b)  whether the matters potentially in issue in the appeal  are  such
      as to require  the  Tribunal  to  give  general  legal  or  procedural
      guidance, including authoritative country guidance;


      (c)   the  reasons  underlying  the  respondent's  withdrawal  of  the
      appealed decision (in particular, whether  they  demonstrate  a  legal
      defect in that decision, which the Tribunal  should  find,  so  as  to
      allow the appeal substantively, perhaps with a direction under section
      87);


      (d)  the appeal history, including the timing of the withdrawal;


      (e)  the views of the parties.


74.   The withdrawal of the respondent's decision may have a  part  to  play
    in the Upper Tribunal's findings, pursuant to section 12(1) of the 2007
    Act, on whether the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    an error of law. In any event, withdrawal does not discharge the  Upper
    Tribunal's duty  to  reach  a  decision  on  that  issue.  The  factors
    described above as being relevant to whether the Tribunal would re-make
    any decision in the appeal  on  a  formal  or  substantive  basis  may,
    however, influence the exercise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  discretion
    under section 12(2)(a) whether to set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination, if an error of law in that determination is found.

75.  Remittal of a case to be  re-decided  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    unlikely to be compatible with the  overriding  objective  or  Practice
    Statement 7. But where such a case is remitted, rule 17(2) of the  2005
    Rules would not  preclude  the  First-tier  Tribunal  from  reaching  a
    substantive determination.

76.   In paragraph 1 above, we  said  that  the  answers  to  the  two  main
    questions posed did not admit of easy answers. By  now,  the  truth  of
    that statement will be apparent. The conclusions we  have  reached  do,
    however, have two  positive  aspects.  First,  they  maintain  what  we
    consider to be  the  proper  demarcation  line  between  executive  and
    judicial decision-making, by acknowledging that primary  responsibility
    for making decisions under the Immigration Acts lies with the Secretary
    of State, rather than the Tribunal; and that legislative exceptions  to
    this need to be clear and are not lightly  to  be  inferred.  Secondly,
    having  identified  the  means  whereby  the  2002  Act  can  lead   to
    substantive appellate decisions, even after withdrawal of the  decision
    that was appealed, attention can then be focussed on the principles  to
    be applied in  determining  whether  such  a  substantive  decision  is
    necessary or  desirable  in  a  particular  case,  drawing  on  broadly
    analogous principles which apply in the courts.


F.  APPLYING OUR CONCLUSIONS TO THE PRESENT APPEAL

77.  In the present case, the Secretary  of  State  had  no  option  but  to
    withdraw the entirety of the May 2010 decision to remove the  appellant
    by way of directions, in order to re-determine  whether  the  appellant
    should be granted leave, by reference to the best interests of her then-
    existing only child, born in  the  United  Kingdom.   To  that  limited
    extent, the principle of primary decision-making by the respondent  has
    force.  However, there was no suggestion from the respondent  that  her
    view on the appellant's entitlement to refugee status had changed since
    May 2010, whether by reference to  the  proceedings  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal or otherwise.  This case has now been ongoing for some three and
    a half years.  The respondent's decision to  withdraw  the  immigration
    decision was communicated to the Upper Tribunal only in September 2013.
     The fact that the May 2010  decision  was  defective  in  this  regard
    should have been apparent to the respondent far earlier.

78.  As we already noted, following remittal by the  Court  of  Appeal,  the
    Upper Tribunal has proceeded on  the  basis  that  the  appeal  may  be
    suitable for giving country guidance on the issue of the risk  of  harm
    arising from possible ostracism of mothers with illegitimate  children,
    returning  to  Pakistan.    If   the   result   of   the   respondent's
    reconsideration is to grant leave to the  appellant,  by  reference  to
    (now) her two children, that discretionary leave is  highly  likely  to
    exceed one year, according to the respondent's current policies.  As  a
    result, assuming that the respondent decided not to grant the appellant
    refugee status, the latter would be entitled to  continue  her  appeal,
    pursuant to section 104(4B) of the 2002 Act, provided  of  course  that
    the appeal proceedings had not been formally  concluded  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, following the withdrawal of the appeal decision.   Whilst  it
    is acknowledged that, in those circumstances, the appellant would  have
    a right of appeal against the refusal  of  his  or  her  asylum  claim,
    pursuant to section 83 of the 2002 Act, that appeal would  have  to  be
    brought afresh, in the First-tier Tribunal.  This could well, in  turn,
    affect whether the appellant's case could be  used  in  order  to  give
    authoritative country guidance.

79.  In all the circumstances, we decline to adjudicate on the appeal  under
    section 86, on a purely formal basis, following the withdrawal  of  the
    decision  against  which  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

80.  It is, however, the case that neither party is  currently  prepared  to
    proceed to a substantive hearing of the appeal as a  potential  country
    guidance case. We have, therefore, decided  that  the  hearing  of  the
    appellant's appeal should be adjourned for a period  of  three  months.
    If, in the meantime, the appellant is granted leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, the respondent will be obliged by Upper  Tribunal  rule
    17A to inform the Upper Tribunal of that fact.  If the period of  leave
    is such as potentially to cause the appeal to be statutorily  abandoned
    but the appellant wishes to pursue her appeal on  grounds  relating  to
    the Refugee Convention, she will need to comply with  rule  17A(3),  by
    notifying the Tribunal accordingly.

81.  At the end of the period of three months, the case will be  listed  for
    a case management hearing.  If by that time the respondent has not made
    a fresh immigration decision, or if she has done  so  in  circumstances
    where the appeal continues pursuant to section  104(4B),  the  Tribunal
    will,  at  that  hearing,  give  case  management  directions  for  the
    forthcoming substantive hearing.


                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
