
RU (Immigration Judge: treatment of evidence) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00067

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Newport
Date of Hearing: 9 April 2008



                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
                          Immigration Judge Osborne

                                   Between

                                     RU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           No appearance
For the Respondent:          Miss T Powell, Home Office Presenting Officer

An Immigration Judge must decide an appeal solely on the evidence  and  must
not make responses of his own to a party's  concerns  when  those  responses
are contrary to the evidence or  the  common  experience  of  humanity.   In
particular, in deciding an appeal on  the  papers,  an  Immigration  Judge's
determination must show that he has dealt with any  proper  concerns  raised
in the notice of decision.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appealed to the  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the respondent on 16  April  2007  refusing  him  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor.   The  Immigration  Judge
    allowed the appeal.  The respondent sought and obtained  an  order  for
    reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. At the time and place appointed for the hearing there was no appearance
    by or on behalf of the appellant.  He is abroad and  has  appointed  no
    representative.   We  considered  it  appropriate  to  proceed  in  his
    absence.

 3. The reasons for the respondent's refusal of  the  application  were  as
    follows.  First, the residential address named as that of  the  sponsor
    had been, he said, associated with 17 visa applications lodged  at  the
    post in the last 12 months, with different names and telephone numbers.
     Further, the sponsor had been associated with 10 visa applications  in
    the same period.  The respondent was accordingly not satisfied that the
    appellant had given a correct account of the sponsor's circumstances or
    that his own intentions were as stated.  Secondly, the  bank  statement
    provided by the appellant  had  been  submitted  to  the  forgery  team
    working with the respondent.   It  had  been  compared  with  a  "known
    genuine sample".  Errors in the interest calculations  had  been  found
    and in those circumstances the respondent placed little weight upon the
    document as evidence of the appellant's financial  standing.   Thirdly,
    the pay slips provided by the appellant showed exactly the same  amount
    for each month, which  surprised  the  respondent  and  caused  him  to
    believe that  they  also  did  not  reflect  genuine  employment  by  a
    reputable concern.

 4. In his manuscript grounds of appeal, the appellant said he had been  in
    touch with his sister in the United Kingdom, who had told him that  she
    had not invited a single person to the United Kingdom  previously,  and
    that no member of her husband's family had visited the  United  Kingdom
    either.  The building in which she  lived  was  "a  council  flat  that
    contain many occupants in the building".  So far as concerns  the  bank
    statement, the appellant said in his grounds that he had contacted  the
    branch manager "and he said there are no errors in the statement and  a
    letter was issue to back it  up  (copy  attach)."   No  such  copy  was
    attached to  the  grounds.   So  far  as  concerns  the  payslips,  the
    appellant said that  they  were  in  the  usual  form:  there  were  no
    deductions because he had not missed any work.  There was no extra  for
    overtime because his working hours were 8am  to  5pm  every  day.   The
    appellant said that he intended to visit his sister for only  2  weeks,
    in order to see her new baby.

 5. In his determination,  the  Immigration  Judge  concluded  as  follows.
    First, the sponsor was indeed the appellant's  sister.   He  made  this
    finding "from the documentation provided by the appellant and from  the
    sponsor's own evidence".  Secondly, so far as the multiple use  of  the
    address is concerned, the Immigration Judge said:

       "The  appellant  himself  has  explained   that   this   is   council
        accommodation and I find that as an address [it] may be the home to
        many other people who have been  acting  as  sponsors  during  this
        period and therefore the fact that 17 visa applications  have  been
        associated with [the address] with different  names  and  telephone
        numbers, is not pertinent to this Sponsor.  The mere fact that  the
        sponsor has been associated with 10 visa applications lodged at the
        Lagos post in the last 12 months is  likewise  not  significant  to
        this application, in the absence of  any  evidence  that  these  10
        applications were not bona fide.  The respondent  has  produced  no
        such evidence."

 6. The Immigration Judge went  on  to  consider  the  payslips.   He  said
    "whilst these payslips have not been produced to me I  find  that  they
    are in the form that the respondent has  described."   He  went  on  to
    "find, as the appellant explains, that in Nigeria it is common practice
    for payslips to be identical each month".

 7. So far as concerns the bank statement, he said that  he  had  not  been
    shown what the faults in it were,  and  that  the  fact  that  interest
    calculations  contain  errors  would  not  be  proof  of  falsity.   He
    continued:

      "The appellant states that he has produced a  statement  from  Oceanic
        Bank to state that no errors are contained and  I  find  that  this
        document exists even though it has not been produced to me".

 8.  Having  dealt  in  this  way  with  the  respondent's  concerns,   the
    Immigration Judge went on to allow the appeal.

 9. The grounds for reconsideration, on the basis for which the  order  for
    reconsideration was made, relate to the Immigration Judge's conclusions
    on the multiple use of the address.  They assert that  the  Immigration
    Judge's finding that that address was the address of many other  people
    is speculative, and in any event does not explain why so many  of  them
    sponsored visa applications.  In her submissions before us Miss  Powell
    touched on a number of other issues of concern in the determination.

10. There can be no doubt that the Immigration Judge's determination  is  a
    generous one.  It is, on the  basis  of  the  information  before  him,
    perhaps more generous to the appellant than almost any other person  of
    judgment would have given.  But a diverse judiciary  such  as  that  of
    this Tribunal will be diverse in its attitude and approach as  well  as
    in other characteristics. Courts and Tribunals  sitting  on  appeal  or
    reconsideration frequently see  judgments  of  fact  that  are  clearly
    different from those that they themselves would have made.  But such  a
    difference of opinion does not of itself make the decision wrong: still
    less does it show an error of law, with which alone we are concerned on
    reconsideration.   The  question  raised  by  this  reconsideration  is
    whether,  and  to  what  extent,  a  decision  simply  to  accept   the
    appellant's statements at face value and to provide,  from  the  bench,
    explanations for any difficulties fulfils the judicial task of ensuring
    that all parties are treated fairly.  Is there such a thing in  law  as
    undue judicial credulousness?

11. That is  a  question  bristling  with  difficulties.   What  is  clear,
    however, is that a  judge  in  any  jurisdiction  must  deal  with  the
    concerns of  the  parties.   In  the  present  case,  the  respondent's
    concerns were expressed in the notice of refusal.  For the reasons  the
    respondent gave, he did not regard the  appellant's  application  as  a
    credible one.  No doubt it was open to the Immigration  Judge  to  find
    that he was satisfied on the balance of probabilities by  the  evidence
    before him, but, given the concerns that had been raised, he needed  to
    show that he had taken into account all that material.  It ought not to
    be able to be said of him that he  decided  to  accept  everything  the
    appellant  had  said,  and  ignore  everything  that   undermined   the
    appellant's case.  Unfortunately, however, it appears to us  that  that
    may be exactly what he did.  An Immigration Judge may  be  entitled  to
    make a leap of faith, but not if the material before him shows that his
    faith is misplaced.

12. It is somewhat surprising that the respondent has not  sought  to  give
    any further details of the associated applications, particularly in the
    light of comments made in the order for reconsideration.  No point  has
    been taken on that, however: and, in a sense, the  parties  are  on  an
    even footing in that, while the respondent's case  relies  on  specific
    but unelaborated assertions, the appellant's  case  relies  on  hearsay
    transmitted through a statement in the notice of appeal.  We treat  the
    respondent's allegation as an allegation of fact that needs to be dealt
    with, as the Immigration Judge did.  There are two elements to it.  The
    first is that the sponsor's address has been used a  number  of  times;
    the second is that the sponsor's name is associated with  a  number  of
    previous applications.  So far as concerns the address, the Immigration
    Judge  apparently  accepted  the  sponsor's  statement,  made  to   the
    appellant, and transmitted by him in the grounds of  appeal,  that  she
    lives in council accommodation.  On that basis  the  Immigration  Judge
    concluded that  there  might  well  be  other  people  living  at  that
    accommodation, and went on to assume that those people  might  well  be
    the sponsors of other applications.  We think that that conclusion  was
    either not open to him on the evidence or so unlikely that he ought not
    to have reached it in the absence of clear support for his  hypothesis.
    For whereas it may well be the  case  that  one  building  has  several
    households in it, particularly if the building is, for example, a block
    of flats, whether council  accommodation  or  otherwise,  the  evidence
    before the Immigration Judge clearly showed that what was being  spoken
    of by the respondent was not the same  building  but  the  same  postal
    address.  The postal address in question is that  of  the  sponsor,  as
    confirmed both by her letter to the Entry Clearance Officer in  support
    of the application and by her bank  statement.   That  the  address  to
    which a bank statement is sent is  identical  for  a  large  number  of
    households is not, we think, within the common experience of  humanity;
    and even if an Immigration Judge's familiarity  with  the  arrangements
    for  council  accommodation  is  limited,  it  ought   to   extend   to
    appreciating that a  situation  in  which  many  households,  unrelated
    except by having the same landlord, share the same postal  address  for
    such official communications, is very unlikely.  The Immigration  Judge
    had no basis for making the assumption he  did,  and  on  the  material
    before him he ought not to have made it.

13. Looking now at  the  allegation  that  the  sponsor  herself  had  been
    involved  in  previous  applications,  it  is   remarkable   that   the
    Immigration Judge indicates a possible explanation for that, whilst the
    sponsor herself, again  through  the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal,
    denies it.  Again, quite evidently, the Immigration Judge  was  anxious
    to provide explanations that would assist the appellant: but,  in  this
    case, the explanation that he provided runs  counter  to  the  evidence
    before him.  As a result, he fails entirely to deal with  the  conflict
    of information.

14. If he had been minded to consider the respondent's  allegation  on  its
    merits, he might also have noted the terms  of  the  sponsor's  letter.
    Despite her claim to be the appellant's real sister  and  not  to  have
    previously invited a single person to the United  Kingdom,  she  thanks
    the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  "in   anticipation   for   your   usual
    cooperation", which whilst not fatal might  be  regarded  as  requiring
    some explanation.  Further, although she refers to the appellant  twice
    as her brother, she also calls him "my friend".  She makes no reference
    to what the appellant said was the purpose of the trip  -  to  see  his
    sister's new baby.  It would be wrong of us, even in the light  of  the
    respondent's expressed concerns, to speculate that the  letter  is  one
    that is largely in standard form, but, again, the  differences  between
    what has  been  said  and  what  is  written  require  explanation  and
    investigation, with which apparently  the  Immigration  Judge  was  not
    concerned.

15. If there had been no adverse points, the Immigration Judge  might  have
    been entitled simply to  swallow  the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal
    whole.  He was not, however, entitled to ignore the material  that  was
    before him, or to decline to deal with the adverse points in it.

16. The fact that the salary slips show the same payment for each month did
    not concern the Immigration Judge very greatly, and it would  not  have
    concerned  us.   Salaries  are  often   paid   in   identical   monthly
    instalments.  As it happens, however, the appellant's  comment  on  his
    salary provides another difference between the grounds  of  appeal  and
    the documents.  As we have indicated above, the appellant said that his
    working hours were 8am to 5pm.  The  contract  of  employment  that  he
    submitted in support of his application gives his working hours as  8am
    to 6pm.  It is small point, but  it  is  another  indication  that  the
    evidence is perhaps not reliable.

17. It is in that context that the Immigration Judge should have considered
    the bank statement, and in particular, the letter which  the  appellant
    said existed (but did not specifically indicate its contents) and  that
    was being forwarded  to  the  Tribunal,  but  which  was  not  in  fact
    forwarded.  The Immigration Judge concluded (on what basis we know not)
    that  it  existed,  and  apparently  assumed  that  it  supported   the
    appellant, although he had no information as to  its  contents.   Again
    that is perhaps a conclusion which might (just) be reached if there was
    no reason to suppose that statements  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant were anything other than completely reliable.  There  was  no
    basis for that conclusion; and it follows that  the  Immigration  Judge
    had no basis for supposing that a letter that he had  not  seen  either
    existed or wholly supported the appellant.

18. As we have indicated, we would interfere with the findings of  fact  of
    the Immigration Judge only with the greatest hesitation, and  certainly
    not solely on the basis that we would not have made those  findings  on
    the evidence before us.  It seems to us, however, that this was a  case
    in which the Immigration Judge's conclusion that the  contents  of  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal were to  be  believed  was  not  properly
    sustainable on the totality of the evidence in front of him.

19. The Immigration Judge erred in law in his conclusions.  Bearing in mind
    the points we have made in the course of examining his determination we
    find that, on the evidence before us, we are  not  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor's circumstances are as claimed or that the appellant is  to  be
    believed in his claimed intention, his  employment,  or  his  financial
    assets.  In the circumstances we are not satisfied that at the date  of
    the decision he met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  we
    substitute a determination dismissing his appeal.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


