

   GB (Family visitor - "half brother" included) Ethiopia [2007] UKAIT 00063


                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 19 March 2007                              |                             |
|Prepared 19 March 2007                        |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE DRABU
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE McGEACHY

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARNACE OFFICER, ADDIS ABABA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


In the Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2003  the  terms
"brother" and "sister" includes half brothers and half sisters -  those  who
share one parent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Ethiopia.   She  applied  for  entry
    clearance to enable her to come to Britain as a family  visitor  on  22
    June 2006.  Her application was refused and her  appeal  was  heard  by
    Immigration Judge Horvath on 4 December 2006 and dismissed.

2.   An order for reconsideration  was  made  by  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    Southern on 17 January 2007.

3.   The appellant had applied to visit the sponsor, AG.  He and  she  share
    the same mother.  AG having been born to their mother's  first  husband
    while the appellant was the child of their mother's second husband.  As
    they share a parent they are half brother and half  sister.   They  are
    not stepbrother and sister as stepsiblings are the children of a person
    whom of their parents has married but who has had children with another
    husband and wife - they therefore are not blood relatives.

4.   At the beginning of  the  hearing  before  the  Immigration  Judge  the
    Presenting Officer raised  a  preliminary  issue  which  was  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for a right of appeal under  the  Immigration
    Appeals (Family Visitor)  Regulations  2003.   These  are  set  out  at
    paragraph 13 of the  Immigration  Judge's  determination  and  read  as
    follows:-

         "1.  These Regulations...shall come into force on 1st April 2003.

         2.   (1) For the purposes of  section  90(1)  of  the  Nationality,
               Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 a 'member of the applicant's
               family' is any of the following persons -

              (a) the applicant's spouse,  father,  mother,  son,  daughter,
                    grandfather,   grandmother,   grandson,   granddaughter,
                    brother, sister, uncle, aunt,  nephew,  niece  or  first
                    cousin;

              (b) the father, mother, brother or sister of  the  applicant's
                    spouse;

              (c) the spouse of the applicant's son or daughter;

               (d)  the   applicant's   stepfather,   stepmother,   stepson,
                    stepdaughter, stepbrother or stepsister; or

              (e) a person with whom the applicant has lived as a member  of
                    an unmarried couple for at least two of the three  years
                    before the  day  on  which  his  application  for  entry
                    clearance was made.'

              (2) In these Regulations, 'first cousin'  means,  in  relation
               to a person, the son or daughter of his uncle or aunt."

5.   The Presenting Officer argued that as the appellant was  the  sponsor's
    half sister she would not have a  right  of  appeal  as  there  was  no
    reference in the Regulations to half siblings.

6.   The Immigration Judge accepted that that was the case stating  that  as
    the Family Regulations made no mention of half sister or  half  brother
    it was probable that the intention of Parliament was to  exclude  them.
    She therefore found that the appellant  had  no  "qualifying  relative"
    living in Britain.  She therefore concluded that there was no right  of
    appeal open to the appellant.  However, she went  on  to  consider  the
    merits of the appeal.

7.   We find that  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the
    Immigration Judge that the appellant did not have a right of appeal  as
    a family visitor.  We consider that it would be an  absurd  anomaly  if
    stepsiblings would have a right of appeal as family visitors  but  half
    siblings  would  not,  given  that  stepsiblings  have  a  less   close
    relationship - they do not have a blood relationship - with each other.
     In order to make sense of the Regulations we therefore  consider  that
    where the Regulations refer to brother or sister  they  should  include
    half brothers and half sisters. In any event, we note that the  Concise
    Oxford Dictionary defines a brother as: "son of same parents  or  (also
    half-~)same parent as another person".  Therefore  the  fact  that  the
    sponsor and the appellant share a Mother means that the sponsor is  the
    appellant's brother.  We therefore find that the Immigration Judge made
    an error of law in finding that the appellant did not have a  right  of
    appeal.

8.   Secondly we found that there was an error of law  in  the  approach  of
    the Immigration Judge to the facts of this case.  She made clear errors
    of fact, which are such  as  to  amount  to  errors  of  law  when  she
    transposed facts relating to the appellant's mother to the appellant.

9.    Having  found  that  there  were  material  errors  of  law   in   the
    determination, we told  both  the  sponsor  who  was  representing  the
    appellant and Mr Saunders that we wished to proceed  to  determine  the
    appeal.  They both accepted that we should do so.

10.  We asked the sponsor a number of questions about his sister's work  and
    family in Ethiopia and about sums which have been deposited in her bank
    account which he said had been used to buy land there.  He told us that
    he had a brother in Ethiopia but that apart from  him  his  sister  had
    three half brothers outside Ethiopia.  He said that  his  sister  lived
    with his mother in Ethiopia and took care of  their  mother,  that  she
    played a role in the local church and that she had recently set up  her
    own business.  Moreover she had used the money in her bank  account  to
    buy land in Addis Ababa which  had  gone  up  in  value.   He  produced
    photographs of him, his brother in Ethiopia and the appellant during  a
    visit which he had made in 2003 to Ethiopia.  These photographs  showed
    him, his brother and the appellant in a hotel and in  the  surroundings
    of the hotel in a tourist area in Ethiopia  -  the  pictures  showed  a
    family group in prosperous surroundings.

11.  Mr Saunders questioned the sponsor about sums of money  paid  into  the
    bank account, a copy of which we were able to hand to Mr Saunders whose
    file was incomplete.  The sponsor explained the various sums  of  money
    which had been used from the bank account to buy the property which his
    sister now owns and confirmed that sums of money had been given to  her
    by her mother as well as sums  of  money  given  to  her  by  her  half
    brothers who are living abroad.

12.  The sponsor emphasised that he and his family were Christians and  that
    his sister was only coming for a short visit.  He said that his  Mother
    had visited from Ethiopia and in fact  was  widely  travelled  and  had
    always returned. He had sponsored various other members of  his  family
    who had come on visits and returned.

13.  Mr Saunders, in his summing up asked us to find  that  the  Regulations
    did not include half brothers or sisters - had they  wished  to  do  so
    they would have said so. He asked  us to determine the appeal but  that
    should we allow the appeal that we would not make any directions.

14.  We have considered the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  together  with  the
    documentary evidence which was on  the  file.   We  consider  that  the
    sponsor was a truthful witness and we accept therefore that his  sister
    lives in Ethiopia looking after her mother and that she has a job there
    and indeed has recently set up her own business.  We accept  also  that
    she has purchased property there.  We accept, moreover, that members of
    the family have come to Britain as visitors and returned.

15.  We conclude that therefore she would come for the  short  family  visit
    which was originally envisaged  and  that  she  would  then  return  to
    Ethiopia.

16.  We have set out our above reasoning as to why we consider that she  did
    have a right of appeal under the Family Visit Regulations.

17.  We, for the reasons set out above, having found  that  the  Immigration
    Judge made material errors of law in the determination  substitute  for
    her decision dismissing this appeal our own decision that  this  appeal
    is allowed.  We make no direction.


Decision

19   This visit visa appeal is allowed.







Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy


