
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                             MO (reg 17(4) EEA Regs) Iraq [2008] UKAIT 00061



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Birmingham                                    Date of Hearing: 9
May 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Immigration Judge C E S Andrew

                                   Between
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. R. de Mello, instructed by Coventry Law
Centre
For the Respondent:          Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


1. The decision by the Tribunal in FD (Algeria) [2007] UKAIT 00049 that it
has power to review the exercise of discretion exercised within the EEA
Regulations remains correct, despite the reversal of that determination on
other grounds by the Court of Appeal.

2. When exercising discretion under reg 17(4) it will be necessary for the
decision maker to show that all relevant circumstances were taken into
account in relation to that decision.  A reference to the relevant
circumstances in relation only to a decision under Art 8 is unlikely to be
sufficient.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, applied to the respondent  under  reg
    17(4) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    (SI/2006/2003) for a residence card as an extended family member of  an
    EEA national on the basis that he is in  a  durable  relationship  with
    her.  The Secretary of State refused his application.  The only  reason
    given for the refusal is that "you are  considered  to  be  an  illegal
    entrant.  You therefore had no  valid  leave  at  the  time  that  this
    application was made to either enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    In these circumstances it not considered appropriate to issue you  with
    a residence card".  The respondent went  on  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant had a right under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights to remain in the United Kingdom, and decided that  he  had
    not.

 2. The appellant appealed against the decision refusing  him  a  residence
    card.  The Immigration Judge agreed with the respondent's  reasons  for
    refusing to issue one, and  accordingly  decided  that  the  discretion
    implicit in reg 17 should not have been exercised differently.  He also
    dismissed the appeal insofar as it relied on grounds under  Article  8.
    The appellant attained an order for reconsideration and it is thus that
    the matter comes before us.

 3. Mr. de Mello referred us to the statement of reasons  for  the  consent
    order of the court of appeal in FD (Algeria)  C5/2007/1767,  on  appeal
    from a decision of this Tribunal [2007] UKIAT 00049.   We  record  here
    our understanding that the Tribunal's decision in principle in FD  that
    it has power to review the exercise of a  discretion  exercised  within
    the EEA Regulations has not been the subject of judicial doubt.  In FD,
    however, the parties agreed that the decision in the  appellant's  case
    was defective because, in the words of the statement of reasons,

      "Following the grounds for  permission  to  appeal  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal and investigation into the facts of the case it has  emerged
        that in error, and contrary to the practice  of  the  Secretary  of
        State, all of the personal circumstances of the appellant were  not
        considered  and  his  application  was  refused  that  he  was   an
        overstayer when he applied for a residence card".

      Mr. de Mello told us that he understood that the  Secretary  of  State
    is formulating a policy on applications under reg 17(4) which  will  be
    able to be published.

 4. We do not read the  relevant  part  of  the  statement  of  reasons  as
    indicating that immigration history will be  irrelevant  when  deciding
    whether to grant a  residence  card  under  reg  17.   What  is  clear,
    however, is that the Secretary of State's practice is, as it  certainly
    should be, to consider all the circumstances  of  an  applicant  before
    refusing a residence card under that Regulation.  It is  clear  on  the
    face of the refusal letter in the present case that that was not  done.
    There are a number of circumstances taken into account in  relation  to
    Article 8 that were clearly not  taken  into  account  in  relation  to
    whether a residence card should be issued under the  Regulations.   For
    those reasons it is clear to us, and the parties before us agreed, that
    the Secretary of State  has  not  yet  undertaken  the  task  that  the
    Regulations require of her and that the decision refusing the appellant
    a residence card is one which is not in accordance with the law.

 5. The Immigration Judge erred  in  law  in  failing  to  recognise  that,
    although it is clear that he did not have the information we have.   We
    substitute a determination allowing the appeal, with  the  effect  that
    the appellant's application remains outstanding before the Secretary of
    State awaiting a lawful decision.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
