
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
 AD (Qualification Directive - family member) Afghanistan [2007] UKAIT 00065


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |                           |
|On 18 May 2007                                  |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen

                                   Between

                                     AD
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr A Slatter, Counsel, instructed by Times
Immigration Consultants
For the Respondent:     Mr P Tranter, Home Office Presenting Officer


There is no definition of 'family member' in  Part  11  of  the  Immigration
Rules.  It is accordingly appropriate to refer to the definition in  Article
2(h) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Afghanistan.  He  appealed  to  an
    Immigration Judge against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  13
    October 2006 to remove an illegal entrant from the United Kingdom.  The
    Immigration Judge dismissed his  appeal,  finding  his  claim  to  lack
    credibility.

2.   Reconsideration of the Immigration Judge's decision was sought  on  the
    following basis. Firstly, it was  argued  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    should have found that the respondent's decision was not in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules, in particular 339Q(iii) of HC  395,  having
    apparently accepted that the appellant's brother was related to him  as
    claimed, and that the appellant was a minor, having been born on 22 May
    1989.   Accordingly it was argued  that  as  a  family  member  of  his
    brother, who had been granted indefinite leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom as a refugee, he was his family member within  the  meaning  of
    paragraph 339Q, and accordingly entitled to a United Kingdom  residence
    permit.

3.   It was also argued in the grounds that the appellant was, both  at  the
    date of the Secretary of State's decision and at the hearing before the
    Immigration Judge, a minor, and therefore, since the respondent had not
    considered or applied his  own  policy  with  respect  to  minors,  the
    decision in question was not in accordance with the  law.  Further,  it
    was argued with regard to Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    that the Secretary of State when processing the appellant's  claim  had
    not followed his own policy as set out in paragraph  350 of HC  395  or
    extra-statutory policies for  the  processing  of  claims  for  minors.
    Rather than the claim having  been  accorded  priority  and  considered
    expeditiously, it had taken nearly three years  for  the  claim  to  be
    decided, and no finding had been made by the Immigration  Judge  as  to
    whether the time it took for the Secretary  of  State  to  process  the
    claim fell outwith his own  policy  concerning  such  claims.   It  was
    argued that, if what the Immigration Judge said at paragraph  66  meant
    that the Secretary of State had not failed  to  process  the  claim  in
    accordance with the law, this lacked adequate reasoning.  These matters
    had   clear   relevance   to   the   assessment   of   proportionality.
    Reconsideration was ordered.

4.   The hearing before me took place on 18 May 2007.

5.   Mr Slatter argued that with regard to the first matter  raised  in  the
    grounds for reconsideration, it was open to the  Immigration  Judge  to
    find that the relationship of brothers fell within paragraph 339Q.

6.   Mr Tranter expressed concern as to whether a  grant  of  ILR  could  be
    seen as a grant of humanitarian protection and treated in the same way.
     Also, with reference to the grounds, he argued that the  case  was  on
    all fours with the  decision  in  AA  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  12  concerning
    consideration of the policy for minors, so the same  conclusion  should
    be arrived at in this case as in that. Although the Secretary of  State
    had disputed the appellant's age, the Immigration  Judge  had  accepted
    that he was a minor,  so  the  applicable  policy  would  be  to  grant
    discretionary leave, and the possibility arose  of  a  direction  under
    s.87 of the 2002 Act.  That would negate  the  loss  of  an  in-country
    right of appeal in that regard.  He would accept that the Tribunal  was
    bound by AA and since there were matters of policy, it was a matter for
    the Secretary of State to reconsider with regard to Article 8  and  the
    policy.  Mr Slatter did not disagree.

7.   I agreed that it was appropriate for the appeal to be  allowed  to  the
    extent that the application of the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  and
    Article 8 are  outstanding before the Secretary of State,  although  it
    is clear that the asylum conclusions should stand.

8.   With  regard  to  the  first  point,  whether  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, namely that of paragraph 339Q of
    HC 395, it is perhaps helpful to set  this out in full:

         339Q(i) The Secretary of State  will  issue  to  a  person  granted
             asylum in the United Kingdom a United Kingdom Residence Permit
             (UKRP) as soon as possible after the grant of asylum. The UKRP
             will be valid for five years and renewable, unless  compelling
             reasons of national security or public order otherwise require
             or where there are reasonable grounds for considering that the
             applicant is a danger to the security of the UK or having been
             convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime,
             the applicant constitutes a danger to the community of the UK.








             (ii)     The Secretary of State will issue to a person granted
                  humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom a  UKRP  as
                  soon  as  possible  after  the  grant   of   humanitarian
                  protection.  The UKRP will be valid for  five  years  and
                  renewable, unless compelling reasons of national security
                  or public order otherwise  require  or  where  there  are
                  reasonable  grounds  for  considering  that  the   person
                  granted  humanitarian  protection  is  a  danger  to  the
                  security of the UK or having been convicted  by  a  final
                  judgment of a serious crime, this  person  constitutes  a
                  danger to the community of the UK.


             (iii)    The Secretary of State will issue a UKRP to a  family
                  member  of  a  person  granted  asylum  or   humanitarian
                  protection where the family member does not  qualify  for
                  such status. A UKRP will be granted for a period of  five
                  years. The UKRP is renewable on the terms set out in  (i)
                  and (ii) respectively.


             (iv)     The Secretary of State may revoke or refuse to  renew
                  a  person's  UKRP  where  their  grant   of   asylum   or
                  humanitarian protection is revoked under  the  provisions
                  in the Immigration Rules."


9.   It can be seen from the statement of the appellant's  brother  that  he
    came to the United Kingdom on 14 June 2001 and applied  for  asylum  on
    arrival.  His application was considered by the Secretary of State  and
    he was granted four years exceptional leave to remain, and subsequently
    granted indefinite leave to remain on 3 February 2006.  It can be  seen
    from (iii) of paragraph 339Q, set out  above,  that  a  United  Kingdom
    residence permit will be issued by the Secretary of State to  a  family
    member of a person granted asylum or humanitarian protection where  the
    family member does not qualify for such status in his  own  right.  The
    question then arises, however, who is a  family  member.   The  amended
    Immigration Rules are silent on the point.

10.  There is however a definition of 'family members' in  Article  2(h)  of
    Council Directive 2004/83/EC.  This arises in the context of Article 23
    of that Directive which, insofar as relevant, states as follows:


         'Article 23
         Maintaining family unity


         1.       Member States  shall  ensure  that  family  unity  can  be
             maintained


         2.       Member states shall ensure  that  family  members  of  the
             beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary protection status, who do
             not individually qualify for  such  status,  are  entitled  to
             claim the benefits referred to  in  Articles  24  to  34,   in
             accordance  with  national  procedures  and  so  far   as   is
             compatible with  the  personal  legal  status  of  the  family
             member.


             Insofar as the family members of beneficiaries  of  subsidiary
             protection status are concerned, Member States may  define  the
             conditions applicable to such benefits.


             In these cases Member States shall  ensure  that  any  benefits
             provided guarantee an adequate standard of living.


             ...."


11.  The definition of family members under Article 2(h) is as follows:

         "Family members' means, insofar as the family  already  existed  in
         the country of origin, the following members of the family  of  the
         beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary   protection  status  who  are
         present in the same Member State in relation to the application for
         international protection:


         -        the spouse of the beneficiary  of  refugee  or  subsidiary
             protection status or his or her unmarried partner in a  stable
             relationship, where the legislation or practice of the  Member
             State concerned treats unmarried couples in a  way  comparable
             to married couples under its law relating to aliens,


         -        the minor children of the couple referred to in the  first
             indent  or  of  the  beneficiary  of  refugee  or   subsidiary
             protection status, on condition that they  are  unmarried  and
             are dependent and regardless of whether they were born  in  or
             out of wedlock or adopted as defined under the national law;"

12.  It can be seen therefore that on  the  face  of  it  no  assistance  is
    obtained by the appellant from the definition set out in the Directive.
     In the absence of any definition of family member in paragraph 339Q or
    in that part of the Immigration Rules, the definition in Article  2  of
    the Directive's definition of family member  must  be  seen  as  having
    indirect effect in establishing who is and who is not a family  member.
    It is perhaps surprising that no definition of 'family member' is to be
    found in paragraph  339Q of HC 395 or elsewhere in  that  part  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  I conclude that  the  appellant  is  not  a  family
    member of his brother within the meaning of paragraph  339Q.

13.  Otherwise I consider Mr Tranter is right to attach the weight  that  he
    does to what was said in  AA [2007] EWCA Civ 12.  This appeal,  as  was
    said by Keene LJ at paragraph  1, concerns the law and policy  relating
    to unaccompanied minors who arrive  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  seek
    asylum but whose claim under both the Refugee Convention and the  Human
    Rights Convention is rejected.  Reference is made at paragraph 6 to the
    Home Office Operational Guidance Note on Afghanistan of February   2003
    at paragraph  7 which states as follows:

         "Unaccompanied asylum seeking children who have no claim to stay in
         the United Kingdom and who would, had they been adults,  have  been
         refused outright, should continue  to  be  dealt  with  under  UASC
         policy and given ELR to age eighteen or four years for those  under
         fourteen, unless  there  are  adequate  reception  arrangements  in
         place."

14.  Of course, as Mr Tranter pointed out,  the Home Office did  not  accept
    the appellant's claimed age, but  equally  as  he  also  accepted,  the
    Immigration Judge did, and therefore the policy was  clearly  relevant.
    It is the case therefore, as the Court of  Appeal stated  at  paragraph
    16 in  AA, that the  Immigration  Judge  should  have  found  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and
    the  appeal  should  have  been  allowed  under   s.86(3)(a)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.    Accordingly,  I  allow
    this appeal and direct the Secretary of  State  to  reconsider  whether
    discretionary leave to  remain  should  now  be  granted,  taking  into
    account as he will need to do, the apparent breach  of  his  policy  on
    processing claims by minors.



Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Allen
