

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast
                             [2008] UKAIT 00062

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |
|On 24 April 2008                              |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                       Senior Immigration Judge McKee


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Qureshi of Counsel instructed by C K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wells, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. Neither the Citizens Directive (2004/38/EC) nor regulation 17(4)  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 confers on  an  "other
family member" or "extended family member" of  an  EEA  national  exercising
Treaty rights a right to a residence card; consistent  with  the  Directive,
reg 17(4) makes it discretionary.

2. In deciding whether to issue a  residence  card  to  an  extended  family
member of an EEA national under reg 17(4) the decision-maker should adopt  a
three-stage approach so as to:

    (a) first determine  whether  the  person  concerned  qualifies  as  an
    extended family member under reg 8 (in this case, to determine  whether
    the appellant was "in a durable relationship").


    (b) next have regard, as rules of thumb only, to the criteria  set  out
    in comparable provisions of the Immigration Rules. To do so ensures the
    like treatment of extended family members of EEA and British  nationals
    and so ensures compliance with the general principle of  Community  law
    prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of nationality. The foregoing
    means that for reg 17(4)  purposes  the  comparable  immigration  rules
    cannot be used to define who are extended family members, but  only  to
    furnish rules of thumb as to what requirements they should normally  be
    expected to meet. The fact that a person meets or  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the relevant immigration rules  cannot  be  treated  as
    determinative of the question of whether a  residence  card  should  or
    should not  be issued.


    (c) ensure there has been an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
    circumstances of the applicant/appellant. It may be that in many  cases
    such an examination will have been made in the course of assessing  the
    applicant's position vis a vis the immigration rules. But in  principle
    the third stage is distinct, since the duty imposed by the Directive to
    undertake "an extensive examination of the  personal  circumstances..."
    necessitates a balancing of  the  relevant  factors  counting  for  and
    against the issuing of such a card. It would be contrary  to  Community
    law principles to base refusal solely on the fact that a person  is  an
    overstayer who  falls  foul,  for  example  of  para  295D(i):  see  by
    analogy Case C-459/99  MRAX v Belgian State [2002] ECR I-6591).


3. Assessment of a person's individual circumstances done  by  reference  to
Article 8 of the ECHR, can form part (even a large part)  of  the  requisite
"extensive examination", since: what matters is that  there  is  a  balanced
consideration in the round. But it must be related to the  exercise  of  reg
17(4) discretion: see MO (reg 17(4)  EEA  Regs)  Iraq  [2008]  UKAIT  00061.
             .

4. Regulation 17 is subject to the "public policy"  proviso  in  reg  20(1):
see reg 17(8). If (but only if) the respondent invokes reg 20(1)  can   that
constitute  a  proper  basis  for  refusing  to  issue  a  residence   card,
irrespective of the position under reg 17(4).



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, born on 10 May 1986, is a national of Ivory Coast.   She
    claimed to have entered the UK as a minor on 5 September 2000  using  a
    false French passport. An asylum application made on her behalf in 2001
    was refused on 2 February 2002 but on the same date she was granted ELR
    until 8 May 2004.  An application  for  further  leave  to  remain  was
    refused on 22 July  2004  and  her  appeal  against  that  refusal  was
    unsuccessful.

2.   On 29 December 2005, by which time she had become  an  overstayer,  she
    applied for a residence document on the basis that she was, in terms of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2000  ("the  2000
    Regulations") the dependant an EEA national, a Mr D who  was  a  French
    national. They submitted that they had been  in  a  relationship  since
    September 2003.   By the time the respondent  made a  decision  on  her
    application, on 9 October 2007, the 2000 Regulations had been  replaced
    by  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006
    (SI/2006/2003) ("the 2006 Regulations"), which had retrospective effect
    such that her application stood to be considered under reg 8(5) of  the
    2006 Regulations as that by an unmarried partner  seeking  a  residence
    card on the basis that she was "in a durable relationship" with an  EEA
    national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Whilst
    accepting that the couple had  been  in  a  durable  relationship,  the
    respondent noted that the appellant did not have valid leave to  remain
    at the time of her application.  "In the circumstances," it was stated,
    "it is not considered appropriate to issue you with a Residence  Card".
    It was further stated that "[t]his consideration has taken into account
    the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  ECHR  ...  with  specific
    regard to Article 8 ...". There  were  said  to  be  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant's partner  accompanying  her  to  the  Ivory
    Coast and so the refusal of a residence  card  did  not  amount  to  an
    interference with her right to family life.  Even if  her  partner  was
    unable or unwilling to accompany her,  that  would  not  constitute  an
    unlawful interference with her family life. It was also  considered  he
    could "remain in the United Kingdom and  support  any  application  she
    made from abroad to return with a view to settlement as  the  unmarried
    partner of an EEA national exercising a  treaty  right  in  the  United
    Kingdom".

3.   In a determination notified on  19  December  2007,  Immigration  Judge
    Traynor dismissed the appellant's appeal. He considered  the  appellant
    was caught by the provisions of  reg  20(1)  of  the  2006  Regulations
    concerning public policy,  public  security  or  public  health.    The
    appellant was successful in obtaining an order for reconsideration  and
    so the  matter  comes  before  us.   The  grounds  for  reconsideration
    contended first  of  all  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  erred  in
    dismissing the appeal on the basis that the appellant was caught by the
    provisions of reg  20(1).  Reg  20(1)  had  not  been  invoked  by  the
    respondent expressly and the Immigration Judge was wrong, it was  said,
    to reason that the respondent had relied "implicitly" on it.

4.   The Immigration Judge was also said to have applied too restrictive  an
    interpretation of the  "public policy" proviso under reg 20(1), in that
    he failed to have  regard  to   reg  21(5)(a)-(d)  which  provide  that
    decisions taken under the public policy proviso should be based on  the
    personal conduct of the individual concerned  which must  "represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society"  and  should  not  be  made  for  the
    purpose of general prevention or of deterrence of others.

5.   The second ground for reconsideration alleged a failure on the part  of
    the  Immigration  Judge  to   consider   the   appellant's   particular
    circumstances before assessing whether it would be disproportionate  to
    remove the appellant to  Ivory  Coast.   The  third  ground  alleged  a
    failure to follow the European Court of  Justice  (ECJ)  case  of  MRAX
    (Case C-459/99 Mouvement  contre  le  racisme,  l'antisemitisme  et  la
    xenophobie ASBL (MRAX) v Belgian State [2002] ECR 1-6591).

The Applicable Law
6.   The relevant provisions of the 2006 Regulations are as follows:
         "Regulation 6 (Qualified person)

             (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person who
             is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

             a) a jobseeker;

             b) a worker;

             c) a self-employed person;

             d) a self-sufficient person; or

             e) a student.

                    ...

         Regulation 8 (Extended family member)

          1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means  a  person
             who is not a family member of an EEA national under regulation
             7(1)(a), (b) or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the  conditions  in
             paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         ...

         5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
            is the partner of an EEA national (other than the civil partner)
            and can prove to the decision maker that  he  is  in  a  durable
            relationship with the EEA national.

           ...

         Regulation 17 (Issue of residence card)

           ...

            (4)   The Secretary of State may issue a residence  card  to  an
         extended family member not falling within regulation  7(3)  who  is
         not an EEA national on application if-

                      (a)  the relevant EEA national  in  relation  to  the
                           extended family member is a qualified  person  or
                           an  EEA  national  with  a  permanent  right   of
                           residence under regulation 15; and

                      (b)  in all  the  circumstances  it  appears  to  the
                           Secretary  of  State  appropriate  to  issue  the
                           residence card.

               (5)    Where the Secretary of State receives  an  application
         under paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination  of
         the personal circumstances of the applicant and if he  refuses  the
         application shall give reasons justifying the refusal  unless  this
         is contrary to the interests of national security.

                    ...

           8)    But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1).

          ...

         Regulation  20  (Refusal  to  issue  or  renew  and  revocation  of
         residence documentation)

         1) The Secretary of State may refuse to issue, revoke or refuse to
            renew a registration certificate, a residence card, a  document
            certifying permanent residence or a permanent residence card if
            the refusal or revocation is justified  on  grounds  of  public
            policy, public security or public health.

         ...

         Regulation 21 (Decisions taken on public policy,  public  security
         and public health grounds)

         ...

          (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles-

               a)  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

          (6)     Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."

           ...

7.   So far as  provisions  of  the  Citizen's  Directive  (EC/38/2004)  are
    concerned, the following have possible relevance:

         "Article 3 (Beneficiaries)
         1.   This directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move  to
              or reside in a Member State other than that of which they  are
              a national, and other family members as defined in point 2  of
              Article 2 who accompany or join them.

         2.    Without  prejudice  to  any   right  to  free  movement  and
              residence the persons concerned may have in their  own  right,
              the host Member State shall, in accordance with its   national
              legislation facilitate entry and residence  of  the  following
              persons:

              (a)   any  other  family  members,   irrespective   of   their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2
                  of Article 2 who, in the  country  from  which  they  have
                  come, are dependants or members of the  household  of  the
                  Union citizen having the primary right  of  residence,  or
                  where serious health grounds strictly require the personal
                  care of the family member by the Union citizen;

              (b)  the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
                  relationship, duly attested.

              The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination
              of the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial  of
              entry or residence to these people.

     ...

         Chapter VI: Restrictions on the Right of Entry and the Right of
         Residence on Grounds of Public Policy, Public Security or Public
         Health

         Article 27  (General principles)

         1.   Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member  States  may
             restrict the  freedom  of  movement  and  residence  of  Union
             citizens   and   their   family   members,   irrespective   of
             nationality, on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health.  These grounds shall not be  invoked  to  serve
             economic ends.

         2.   Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public  security
             shall comply with the principle of proportionality  and  shall
             be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the individual
             concerned.   Previous  criminal  convictions  shall   not   in
             themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures.

             The  personal  conduct  of  the  individual   concerned   must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of   society.
             Justifications that are isolated from the particulars  of  the
             case or that rely  on  considerations  of  general  prevention
             shall not be accepted.

         3.   In order to ascertain whether the person concerned  represents
             a danger for public policy or public security  when  assessing
             the  registration  certificate  or,  in  the  absence   of   a
             registration system, not later than three months from the date
             of arrival of the person concerned in its  territory  or  from
             the date of reporting his/her presence within  the  territory,
             provided for in Article 5(5), or when  issuing  the  residence
             card, the  host  Member  State  may,  should  it  consider  it
             essential, require the Member State of origin and, if need be,
             other Member States  to  provide  information  concerning  any
             previous police record the person  concerned  may  have.  Such
             enquiries shall not be made as a matter of routine. The Member
             State consulted shall give its reply within two months.

         4.   The Member State which issued the passport  or  identity  card
             shall allow the holder of the document who has  been  expelled
             on grounds of public policy public security or  public  health
             from another Member State to re-enter  its  territory  without
             any formality even if the document is no longer valid  or  the
             nationality of the holder is in dispute.

         Article 28 (Protection against expulsion)

         1.   Before taking an  expulsion  decision  on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security the host  Member  State  shall  take
             account of considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual
             concerned has resided on its territory, his/her age, state  of
             health family and  economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
             integration, into the host Member  State  and  the  extent  of
             his/her links with the country of origin.

         2.   The host Member State  may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
             against Union citizens or their family  members,  irrespective
             of nationality, who have the right of permanent  residence  on
             its territory, except on serious grounds of public  policy  or
             public security.

          3.  An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union citizens,
             except if the decision  is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of
             public security as defined by Member States, if they:

             (a)  have resided in the host Member State for the previous
                  ten years; or

             (b)  are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary for the
                  best interests of the   child, as provided for in the
                  United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20
                  November 1989."

8.   Also relevant are recitals 6 and 22-24: Recital 6 states:

             "(6)     In order to maintain the unity of  the  family  in  a
                  broader sense and without prejudice to the prohibition  of
                  discrimination on grounds of nationality, the situation of
                  those persons who are not included in  the  definition  of
                  family members under this Directive, and who therefore  do
                  not enjoy an automatic right to entry and residence in the
                  host Member State, should be examined by the  host  Member
                  State on the basis of its  own  national  legislation,  in
                  order to decide  whether  entry  and  residence  could  be
                  granted  to  such  persons,  taking  into  account   their
                  relationship  with  the  Union  citizen   or   any   other
                  circumstances,  such  as  their  financial   or   physical
                  dependence on the Union citizen."

9.   Recitals 22-24 state:

             "(22) The Treaty allows restrictions to be placed on the right
                  of free  movement  and  residence  on  grounds  of  public
                  policy, public security and  public  heath.  In  order  to
                  ensure a  tighter  definition  of  the  circumstances  and
                  procedural safeguards subject to which Union citizens  and
                  their family members may be denied leave to enter  or  may
                  be  expelled,  this  Directive  should   replace   Council
                  Directive  62/221/EEC  of  25   February   1964   on   the
                  coordination of special measures concerning  the  movement
                  and residence of foreign nationals, which are justified on
                  grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
                  health.

             (23)     Expulsion of Union citizens and their family  members
                  on grounds of  public  policy  or  public  security  is  a
                  measure that can seriously harm persons who having availed
                  themselves of the rights and freedoms conferred on them by
                  the Treaty, have become genuinely integrated into the host
                  Member State. The scope of such measures should  therefore
                  be  limited  in   accordance   with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality  to  take  account  of   the   degree   of
                  integration of the persons concerned, the length of  their
                  residence in the host Member State, their  age,  state  of
                  health, family and economic situation and the  links  with
                  their country of origin.

             (24)     Accordingly, the greater the degree of integration of
                  Union citizens and their family members in the host Member
                  State,  the  greater  the  degree  of  protection  against
                  expulsion should be. Only  in  exceptional  circumstances,
                  where there are imperative  grounds  of  public  security,
                  should  an  expulsion  measure  be  taken  against   Union
                  citizens who have resided for many years in the  territory
                  of the host Member State, in  particular  when  they  were
                  born  and  have  resided  there  through  their  life.  In
                  addition, such exceptional circumstances should  apply  to
                  an expulsion measure taken against  minors,  in  order  to
                  protect their links with their family, in accordance  with
                  the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the  Child,
                  of 20 November 1989."

Our Assessment

10.  Plainly the appellant is an "extended family  member"  under  the  2006
    Regulations (the term used within  the  Citizens  Directive  is  "other
    family member": see Article 3(2)(a)). We  are  in  no  doubt  that  the
    Immigration Judge materially erred in law  in  treating  reg  20(1)  as
    relevant to his  case.  The  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him  a
    residence card was based exclusively on  reg  17.  The  refusal  letter
    stated on page 2:

         "Even if a person is in a durable relationship for the purposes  of
         Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations, and is  thus  an  extended
         family member, that person is only entitled  to  a  residence  card
         under Regulation 17(4) if, in all the circumstances, it appears  to
         be appropriate to issue the card.


         You are considered to be an overstayer.


         You therefore have no valid leave at the time this application  was
         made to either enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  the
         circumstances it is not considered appropriate to issue you with  a
         residence card."


11.     The  respondent  went  on  to  consider  whether  this  refusal  was
    compatible with Article 8 of the ECHR, but  there  was  no  attempt  to
    invoke (via reg 17(8)) reg 20(1).  Despite noting at para 28  that  the
    respondent relied on reg 17, the  Immigration Judge proceeded to assume
    that the respondent had also relied on  reg 20(1): see paras 36, 37.

12.  Furthermore, insofar as the Immigration Judge sought to ground his  own
    decision on reg 20(1), he failed to recognise that this provision  does
    not make refusal to issue  residence  documentation  mandatory  if  the
    refusal or revocation is justified on the  grounds  of  public  policy,
    public security or public health; it is discretionary  ("the  Secretary
    of State may refuse...") .

13.  It is particularly  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  Community  law
    regards "public policy" grounds as requiring a restrictive approach and
    due regard to procedural safeguards: that is confirmed by recitals  22-
    23 (so far as family members are  concerned)  and  to  some  degree  by
    recital 27 (so far as both family members and  "other  family  members"
    are concerned) of the Citizens Directive. The Secretary  of  State  not
    having sought to justify the refusal on reg 20(1) grounds, it  was  not
    open to the Immigration Judge to attempt to supply  that  justification
    himself.

14.  In fairness to the Immigration  Judge,  reg  20(1)  was  drawn  to  his
    attention by the appellant's representatives who sought to  argue  that
    the schema of the 2006 Regulations only allowed for a refusal to  issue
    a residence card under reg 17(4) on public policy grounds for  refusing
    to issue a residence card  under  reg  20(1):  see  paras  16  and  30.
    However, there is no  proper  basis  for  reading  these  two  regs  as
    mutually exclusive in this way. If it had been  the  intention  of  the
    drafters to provide in respect of extended family members that  refusal
    to issue a residence card could only be based on public policy,  health
    and security grounds, they would have said so.  In another  section  of
    the Regulations (within the same Part 4) there  is,  for  example,  reg
    19(5) which stipulates that a person who has a right to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom by virtue of leave granted under the 1971 Act "must  not
    be removed ... " unless his removal is  justified  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or  public  health  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 21." Further, reg 17(8) states that reg 17  "is  subject  to
    regulation 20(1)". That clearly  conveys  that  even  if  an  applicant
    benefits from an exercise of reg 17(4)  discretion,  he  can  still  be
    refused under reg 20(1).

15.  It was the appellant's position that to construe  regs  17  and  20  as
    conferring two freestanding discretions would be contrary to  case  law
    of the European Court of Justice (ECJ) on free  movement  of  qualified
    persons. However, this overlooks  that  all  the  cases  on  which  the
    appellant relies relate to  persons  who  are  family  members  of  EEA
    nationals/Union  citizens.   They  do  not  relate  to  "other   family
    members"/extended family members as such.  The distinction  is  crucial
    because, as the respondent pointed out in the  refusal  letter,  it  is
    only the former  who  have  an  automatic  right  under  the  Citizen's
    Directive to join or accompany an EEA national who is exercising a free
    movement rights: see Articles 2(2) and 3(1).  The  position  of  "other
    family members"/extended family members, including  unmarried  partners
    of EEA nationals, is governed by Article 3(2).  Article 3(2) imposes  a
    duty on Member States going no further than a duty to  "facilitate" the
    entry and residence of such  persons  "in  accordance  with  their  own
    domestic legislation".  That is reinforced by recital  6  which  states
    that the situation of other family members "should be examined  by  the
    host Member State on the basis of its own  national  legislation  ...":
    see further KG (Sri Lanka) [2008] EWCA Civ  14;  AP  and  FP  (Citizens
    Directive Article 3(2);  discretion;  dependence)  India  [2007]  UKAIT
    00048.

16.  That is not to say that the duty  to  facilitate  is  unconstrained  by
    general  principles  of  Community  law,  including  the  need  to  act
    consistently with the guarantees afforded by the ECHR (we  discuss  the
    latter later).  Recital 6 makes clear that this duty is also subject to
    the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of  nationality  and  that
    national  examination  must  take  into  consideration  such   person's
    "relationship with the Union citizen or any other circumstances such as
    their financial or physical dependence on the Union citizen". A  number
    of ECJ cases dealing with  family  members  contain  valuable  guidance
    (including as we shall see, MRAX) on the application of  these  general
    principles. But the Citizens Directive does not  otherwise  fetter  the
    right of Member States to apply rules of national  law  under  domestic
    immigration legislation. We shall return  to  the  relevance  of  these
    general principles later.

17.  As already noted, the Immigration Judge concluded that the decision  to
    refuse the appellant a residence card was not contrary to her Article 8
    rights. The grounds for reconsideration contended that this  conclusion
    manifested a further legal error on the judge's part.  We  accept  that
    the Immigration Judge's treatment of Article 8 was also legally  flawed
    albeit not quite for the reason stated. The judge's error was  twofold.
    First, he erred in his approach to the issue of  whether  the  decision
    amounted to an interference with the appellant's right to  respect  for
    family life.  Despite citing AG  (Eritrea)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  801,  he
    appears to have ignored its warning against erecting a  high  threshold
    at the stage of assessing  interference.  Second,  when  he  turned  to
    consider, in the alternative, whether even assuming he  had  found  the
    decision amounted to an interference, it was proportionate or  not,  he
    treated the issue as one in  which  he  was  concerned  only  with  the
    legality of the respondent's decision. At paragraph 45 the  Immigration
    Judge stated:

         "Even if the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  are  engaged,  I  am
         nevertheless satisfied that where the respondent  is  charged  with
         the legitimate aim of maintaining effective than [sic]  immigration
         control that her decision to refuse the appellant's application has
         been based upon all relevant  factors  concerning  the  appellant's
         circumstances ..." [emphasis added]

18.  It may be that this was only mere carelessness in drafting on the  part
    of the Immigration  Judge   and  it  might  be  said  that  in  earlier
    paragraphs (paras 39-44) he had clearly conducted a  merits  assessment
    of the relevant factors arising under Article 8 (albeit he  dealt  with
    them solely in relation to the  issue  of  interference).  But  in  our
    judgment, it was incumbent on him, particularly in  the  light  of  the
    guidance given by the House of Lords in Huang  [2007]  UKHL  (which  he
    cited  later in paragraph 45) to show that  he  applied  that  guidance
    rather than the "review" approach suggested by his wording  of  matters
    in the opening sentence of paragraph 45.

19.  There was no Rule 32(2) notice served in this case and since  there  is
    no challenge to any of the Immigration Judge's  findings  of  fact,  we
    proceed to consider  what  decision  to  substitute  for  that  of  the
    Immigration Judge.

20.  Dealing first with legality, in  our  judgement  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse to issue the appellant a  residence  card  was  in
    accordance with the law, including Community  law.  To  understand  our
    reasons some background explanation is in order.

21.  Reg 17(4) only applies if it is first of all established that a  person
    is an extended family member as defined  in  reg  8;  if  that  is  not
    established, the decision-maker goes no further. Assuming that a person
    has established he or she is an extended family member, two features of
    reg 17 are  vital.  First,  reg  17(4)  confers  a  discretion  on  the
    respondent to issue a residence card if "[i]n all the circumstances  it
    appears to the Secretary of State appropriate to  issue  the  Residence
    Card" (reg 17(4)(b)).  As already noted, the present Citizens Directive
    at Article 3(2) permits Member  States  to  facilitate  the  entry  and
    residence  of  "other  family  members"/extended  family  members   "in
    accordance  with  [their]  national  legislation".  Second,  reg  17(5)
    (mirroring Article 3(2)  of  the  Directive)  imposes  a  duty  on  the
    Secretary of State  to  "undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the
    personal  circumstances  of  the  applicant  and  if  he  refuses   the
    application shall give reasons justifying the refusal  unless  this  is
    contrary to the interests of national security".   In  our  view  these
    twin features assist us in understanding the proper approach to how the
    reg 17(4) discretion should be exercised. Assuming a person  has  shown
    he or she is an extended family member, the decision maker  must  first
    examine the person's position under comparable national law provisions;
     (we shall call this the "renvoi to national law" requirement)  and  he
    or she must further ensure that the examination has taken into  account
    all the relevant personal circumstances of the applicant.  Let  us  now
    look at each of these in turn.

Renvoi to national law

22.  The wording of Article 3(2) of the  Directive  clearly  permits  Member
    States to decide the cases of "other  family  members"/extended  family
    members of Union citizens/EEA nationals in accordance with national law
    and there is nothing in Community law which prevents the United Kingdom
    from providing in reg 17(4)(b) that issue of a residence card for  such
    persons is a matter for discretion. Whilst reg 17(4)(b)  does  not  say
    so, we have no difficulty in accepting that the respondent is  entitled
    when exercising this discretion to have regard to comparable provisions
    in the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC395  as  amended
    (hereafter "the immigration rules"). To do so ensures, at least in some
    respects, like treatment of extended family members  of  EEA  nationals
    with that accorded by these rules to extended family members of British
    nationals.  The  prohibition  on  discrimination  on  the  grounds   of
    nationality is a general principle of  Community  law  and  is  also  a
    principle expressly identified in recital 6 of the  Citizens  Directive
    (which deals specifically with other/extended family members).

23.  However, there are important caveats which must attach  to  any  renvoi
    to national law for reg 17(4) purposes. One  is  implicit  in  what  we
    stated earlier: clearly such renvoi  must  focus  on  whether  extended
    family members can meet certain substantive requirements; it  must  not
    seek to define terms which are Community law terms  (such  as  "durable
    relationship"). Second,  whilst  the  principle  of  non-discrimination
    justifies renvoi to the immigration rules, it must  be  borne  in  mind
    that such rules do not provide a precise comparison.  The  rules  which
    are most similar, those dealing with dependent relatives and  unmarried
    partners, refer to persons applying for settlement, whereas a residence
    card is issued  only  for  five  years  or  "the  envisaged  period  of
    residence in the United Kingdom of the qualified  person"  (reg  8(6)).
    Thirdly renvoi must be to national law provisions that  relate  to  in-
    country applications. In this case, for example,  one  should  look  at
    para 295D, not para 295A. The reason for this is because  provision  is
    only made for the issue of  a  residence  card   in-country.  A  fourth
    caveat is implicit in what we have  already  stated  in  the  preceding
    paragraph: renvoi must be done in conformity with general principles of
    Community law. A further and interrelated caveat is this. We cannot see
    that such reference can be assimilated to an examination of whether the
    comparable national law criteria are met. To seek to reduce  it  solely
    to such criteria would run contrary to a general principle of Community
    law, namely that of proportionality. It would also  overlook  that  the
    power given by the Directive to decide such cases "in  accordance  with
    national legislation" is paired with  another  Directive  principle  or
    requirement that there be "an extensive  examination  of  the  personal
    circumstances". Neither  principle  is  necessarily  met  simply  by  a
    mechanical checking of the comparable national law criteria. It may  be
    in many cases that the assessment of an applicant's position under  the
    relevant immigration rules  covers  much  of  the  ground  required  to
    achieve an "extensive examination". But that will  not  necessarily  be
    the case, if for example,  the  decision-maker  has  decided  that  the
    applicant fails under just one of  the  requirements  of  the  relevant
    immigration rules and goes no further. The comparable immigration rules
    can only provide guidance, therefore, on what requirements an applicant
    under reg 17(4) should normally be expected to meet.

25.  We are fortified in our understanding of how the recourse  to  national
    law should be carried out by two further considerations.  One  is  that
    the Immigration Rules include, of course, para 5 (headed "Application")
    which states:

             "Save where expressly indicated, these Rules do not  apply  to
         those persons who are entitled to enter or  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom  by  virtue   of   the   provisions   of   the   2006   EEA
         Regulations]..."


         Yet (save for para 290A whose scope is limited to the "present  and
    settled"  requirement)  there  is  no  express  indication   that   any
    provisions within Part 8  of  the  immigration  rules  apply  to  those
    falling within the 2006 Regulations.  (And within the 2006  Regulations
    themselves, at reg 8(4), the immigration rules are only said  to  apply
    to dependent relatives; there is no express indication  of  such  rules
    applying in relation to persons in a durable relationship).

26.  The other consideration concerns what is said by the respondent in  her
    internal policy instructions relating to EEA nationals and their family
    members.

27.  Para 2.4 of the European Casework Instructions (updated 8 April  2008),
    at Chapter 2 states inter alia, that:

             "When  deciding  whether  it  is  appropriate   in   all   the
        circumstances to issue a residence card,  we  must  assess  whether
        refusing the family  member  would  deter  the  EEA  national  from
        exercising his/her Treaty  rights  or  would  create  an  effective
        obstacle to exercise of Treaty rights. Each case must  be  assessed
        on an individual  basis  but  an  example  of  where  it  might  be
        appropriate to issue a residence card would be if the family member
        was very elderly or incapacitated. In assessing such cases it would
        be important to consider whether there were any relatives  to  care
        for him/her in the home country".


28.  The IDIs (Immigration Directorate Instructions)  chapter  7  Section  3
    EEA nationals and Family at  5.5.2  (July  2006  is  still  the  latest
    version, although we are given  to  understand  another  is  due  soon)
    state:

     "5.5.2 Extended family member


     Regulation 8 further defines extended  family  members.  In  accordance
     with Regulation 7(3) extended family members are only to be treated  as
     family members for the purposes of the EEA  Regulations  if  they  have
     been issued, as a matter of discretion, with an EEA family permit or  a
     registration certificate or residence card. The EEA  Regulations  allow
     for an 'extensive examination  of  the  personal  circumstances'  of  a
     person applying under  these  provisions.  The  following  persons  are
     extended family members:


     .    A relative of an EEA  national  or  of  his/her  spouse  or  civil
         partner who is residing in an EEA state in which the  EEA  national
         also resides and is dependant on the EEA national or is a member of
         his household  AND  is  either  accompanying  or  joining  the  EEA
         national OR has  joined  the  EEA  national  and  continues  to  be
         dependant or a member of the EEA national's household.


     .    A relative of an EEA national or his/her spouse or  civil  partner
         who strictly requires personal care from the EEA national  or  his
         spouse or civil partner on serious health grounds.


    .    A relative of an EEA  national  or  of  his/her  spouse  or  civil
         partner  who  would  meet  the  requirements  in  part  8  of   the
         Immigration Rules (other than those relating  to  entry  clearance)
         for indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as  a
         dependant relative of the EEA national or his spouse or  his  civil
         partner were the EEA national or his spouse or his civil partner  a
         person present and settled in the United Kingdom.


    .    A person who is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil
         partner) who can show that he/she is in  a  'durable  relationship'
         with the EEA national. When assessing  whether  a  relationship  is
         durable officers should satisfy themselves fully  that  the  person
         meets the leave to enter requirements of an  unmarried  partner  as
         set out in part 8  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (other  than  those
         relating to entry clearance)."

29.  From the above it is clear  that  the  policy  instructions  themselves
    recognise (at least in places) that meeting  the  requirements  of  the
    comparable immigration rules is not necessarily determinative:  para  2
    of the European Casework Instructions emphasises that "[e]ach case must
    be assessed on an individual basis but an example of where it might  be
    appropriate to issue a residence card would be if the family member was
    very elderly or  incapacitated...".  In  the  light  of  our  foregoing
    analysis, it is also clear from the above  that  the  IDIs,  at  least,
    appear to go too far in 5.5.2, which stipulates that  officers  "should
    satisfy themselves fully that the  person  meets  the  leave  to  enter
    requirements of an unmarried partner as  set  out  in  part  8  of  the
    Immigration Rules (other than those relating to entry clearance). " For
    one thing, since the subparagraph seeks to cover both pre-entry and in-
    country decisions ("EEA family permit or a registration certificate  or
    residence card"), it is incorrect to specify only the rule dealing with
    "leave to enter". For another, one of the requirements of the unmarried
    partners rule (at 295D (also at 295A)) is for the couple to  have  been
    "living together in a relationship akin to marriage which has subsisted
    for two years or more",  but  there  is  no  definition  given  by  the
    Directive or the Regulations of the term "durable relationship". So the
    policy instructions are helpful in indicating the general approach  but
    should not be taken as necessarily correct in every particular.

Extensive examination of personal circumstances

30.  Turning to the second aspect of the exercise of reg  17(4)  discretion,
    it seems to us that the underlying purpose of reg 17(5)  (which  echoes
    Article 3(2) of the Directive) is to ensure  that  the  decision  maker
    takes account of the applicant's personal circumstances in  the  round,
    looking at factors for and against exercising  the  discretion  in  his
    favour. The need is, to use the language of the ECJ  in  Case  C-540/03
    Parliament v Council and Commission [2004] OJ C47/21 (which concerned a
    challenge  to  the  2003/86/EC  Directive  on  the  right   to   family
    reunification [2003] OJ L  251/12  and  its  compatibility  with  human
    rights standards) is for a weighing-up of the  competing  interests  in
    each factual situation. It follows from this that it would  not  amount
    to an extensive examination if the decision maker were simply to decide
    a person  should  be  refused  a  residence  card  because  he  was  an
    overstayer: that would be to render the requisite balancing of  factors
    for and against  otiose  and  would  thus  violate  the  Community  law
    principle of proportionality (as further illustrated by the   ECJ  case
    of MRAX, to which we shall turn in a moment). It would be wrong to  say
    in this case, for example, that the appellant could  not  be  issued  a
    residence card solely because he failed to  meet  the  requirements  of
    para 295D(i). At the same time, there is no requirement as to precisely
    how the extensive examination is to be done; at most, via recital 6  of
    the Directive (and ECJ case law to similar  effect),  one  can  say  it
    should  take  into  account  the  family  relationship  with  the   EEA
    national/Union citizen and ensure  that  the  circumstances  considered
    include (if applicable) "their financial or physical dependence on  the
    Union citizen". And in our view it would be wrong  to  make  this  more
    exacting a requirement than it is.  Such  an  examination,  then,  must
    accord  with  general  Community  law  principles,  including  that  of
    proportionality. But the essential need is a simple  one  necessitating
    an examination in the round of the individual's personal circumstances.



31.  For this reason, we do not think it matters, for example, whether  much
    of the examination takes the  form  of  the  human  rights  examination
    (essentially concerned with Article 8 of the ECHR) undertaken  for  the
    purposes of the Human  Rights  Act,  although  it  will  of  course  be
    necessary for the decision-maker to show that circumstances taken  into
    account in relation to Article 8 are taken into account in relation  to
    whether a residence card is issued:  that  is  imperative.  However,  a
    human rights examination cannot on its  own  amount  to  an  "extensive
    examination" because  its  focus  is  on  the  consequence  of  removal
    following from the  decision  (in  this  case  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card), not on the refusal itself: see MS (Ivory Coast) [2007]
    EWCA Civ 133, para 75. Sight must not be lost, that is to say,  of  the
    fact that the only essential need is for an examination in  the  round.
    It may also be, as we shall go on to explain, that in one  respect  any
    human rights examination may need to take a different hue than that  it
    has in non-EEA cases, by virtue of the great importance EU law attaches
    to the principle of freedom of movement for persons  exercising  Treaty
    rights.

The respondent's treatment of the appellant's case

32.  In the  light  of  the  above,  let  us  look  at  how  the  respondent
    approached the exercise of discretion in the appellant's case under reg
    17(4) both in terms of  renvoi  to  national  law  and  examination  of
    personal circumstances.

(a) renvoi to national law

33.  Perusal of the refusal letter in this case shows that it was very  much
    undertaken with national law criteria in mind  (as  formulated  in  the
    policy instructions we identified earlier), so that  consideration  was
    given, inter alia, to the context of the immigration rules dealing with
    unmarried partners. The letter pointed out that the United Kingdom  had
    a longstanding policy of enabling an  unmarried  partner  of  a  person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom to enter the  United  Kingdom
    in order to live with the person if  their  relationship  met  specific
    criteria and it specifically identified  the  correct  in-country  rule
    governing that policy as para 295D of HC 395.

34.  The letter also  pointed  out  that  the  criterion  within  para  295D
    relating  to  living  together  in  a  relationship  akin  to  marriage
    subsisting for two years or more was:

         "equally relevant for the purpose of Regulation 8(5)  of  the  2006
         Regulations and the definition 'extended family  member'  (it  was,
         after all,  developed  for  a  similar  immigration  purpose).   In
         addition, using the same criterion will ensure a  parity  of  terms
         between unmarried partners seeking  to  join  British  citizens  or
         persons settled and residing in the UK and those  seeking  to  join
         EEA nationals."


          In two respects this part of the letter goes too far. One is  that
    it appears (seemingly echoing policy instructions) to treat  para  295D
    as affording the correct definition of  the term "durable relationship"
    so as to require two years living together. But neither  the  Directive
    itself nor the 2006 Regulations stipulate any such definition. So as  a
    definition  (as  distinct  from  an  indication  of   likely   relevant
    evidence), that may well be incorrect. But we do consider  the  refusal
    letter exemplifies the legitimate importance of seeking  to  align  the
    treatment of unmarried partners of EEA nationals with that of unmarried
    partners of UK nationals, so as to prevent discrimination on the ground
    of nationality. Having  identified  reg  8(5)  as  bearing  a  "similar
    immigration purpose", it was  consistent  with  general  principles  of
    Community law (that of non-discrimination on the grounds of nationality
    in particular) for the respondent to treat the appellant's  overstaying
    as an important relevant factor  in  deciding  that  it  was  "not   ..
    appropriate to issue you with a Residence Card": under para 295D  there
    is a commensurate requirement that an applicant be someone  who  has  a
    valid leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  second
    respect in which this part of the letter goes too far is that it  views
    the  immigration  rules  as  identifying  mandatory  requirements.  For
    reasons already set out, that cannot be right: they can at most  afford
    rules of thumb only.

(b) examination of personal circumstances

35.  It was contended by Miss Qureshi that even on the assumption  that  the
    respondent  was entitled to treat overstaying as a relevant  factor  in
    exercising her discretion under reg 17(4),  she  was  not  entitled  to
    treat it as the only relevant factor or to rely simply on the mere fact
    of overstay, irrespective of surrounding circumstances.  We would agree
    that a refusal decision justified solely on the basis of overstay would
    be contrary to Community law principles. As already noted, it would  be
    contrary to the general Community  law  principle  of  proportionality.
    Applying this principle, the ECJ in MRAX at para 3 of its ruling stated
    that "a Member State may neither refuse to issue a residence permit nor
    issue an order expelling on the sole basis that his  visa  had  expired
    before he applied for a residence permit"; in our view this reflects  a
    principle that holds good for both family members and  extended  family
    members (indeed recital 6 of the proposed directive on common standards
    and procedures for returning illegally staying third-country  nationals
    (COM  (2005)  0391-C6-0266/2005  -  2005/0167   (COD))   states   that:
    "[a]ccording the general principles of EU law,  decisions  taken  under
    this Directive should be adopted on  a  case-by-case  basis,  based  on
    objective criteria implying that consideration  should  go  beyond  the
    mere fact of illegal residence").

         But we  do  not  think  that  the  respondent  fell  foul  of  this
    principle in the appellant's case. Whilst it is true that the  specific
    statement of reasons accompanying the notice  to  a  person  liable  to
    (s.10) removal stated:

         "You are specifically considered to be a person who has overstayed,
         and  does  not  have  the  right  of  residence  under  [the  2006]
         Regulations".

     this statement went on to say "[p]lease refer to the  attached  reasons
    for refusal for further  details";  and  the  attached  refusal  letter
    plainly does consider the individual's specific circumstances (see para
    2).  Just as the letter credited the appellant with  having  shown  she
    was in a durable relationship, so it counted against her  that  at  the
    date of application (29 December 2005) she did not have valid leave  to
    remain and in this regard it was plainly in the mind of the  respondent
    that by that date the appellant had been an  overstayer  for  over  six
    months (since 13 April 2005), the couple had only been living  together
    since their religious marriage ceremony in December 2004 (para 13):  at
    the  date  of  application,  therefore,  they  had  only  been   in   a
    relationship for some  12  months.   Even  if  the  respondent  wrongly
    considered that the criterion contained in  the  Immigration  Rules  at
    para 295D(vi) of two years' living together afforded  a  definition  of
    the proper meaning of "durable relationship" and wrongly  treated  that
    as a mandatory requirement, the fact that the couple's relationship was
    at this point only 12 months old plainly did not suffice on its own  to
    show it was  durable. Further, on the evidence  before  the  respondent
    the couple clearly had foreknowledge  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    difficulties: by the  time  they  had  lived  together  for  two  years
    (December 2006) the appellant's last grant of limited leave had expired
    over two and half years ago.

36.  It must also be borne in mind that in considering the exercise  of  her
    regulation 17(4) discretion the respondent had  considered  whether  it
    was compatible with her Article  8  obligations.   We  are  aware  that
    decision letters in some 17(4) cases have not  always  sought  to  link
    consideration of Article 8 with the exercise of discretion  under  this
    regulation. However in this case the refusal letter noted  that:  "This
    consideration [of her exercise of reg 17(4) discretion] has taken  into
    account the United Kingdom's obligations under the [ECHR] with specific
    regard to Article 8".  That  consideration  went  on,  in  considerable
    detail, to consider the appellant's individual circumstances.   Whilst,
    of course, the respondent was separately obliged under the Human Rights
    Act 1998 to consider whether  the  decision  was  compatible  with  the
    appellant's human rights, the terms in which the  letter  was  set  out
    indicate that the respondent's decision-making  on  both  the  EEA  and
    human rights aspects of the appellant's case was informed by  the  same
    concern to conduct  a  wide-ranging  balancing  exercise,  taking  into
    account relevant factors counting for and against the  appellant.  That
    the respondent should seek  to exercise her  reg  17(4)  discretion  in
    this way is hardly surprising, and  is  indeed  the  approach  she  was
    obliged to take, since general principles of Community law include  the
    principle of proportionality and ECHR norms (as  an  integral  part  of
    Community law). At the same  time,  the  respondent's  letter  did  not
    confine its  examination  to  ECHR  considerations  (for  reason  given
    earlier, any such confinement would  not  have  achieved  an  extensive
    examination).

37.  We accept that the respondent did not refer expressly  to  all  of  the
    considerations relevant to the exercise of her  reg  17(4)  discretion,
    but we are satisfied, read as  a  whole,  that  save  in  one  possible
    respect she properly identified valid reasons for refusing to  issue  a
    residence card. Our one point of doubt concerns the  reference  in  the
    refusal letter to there  being  "no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's partner accompanying her to the Ivory Coast..." (see para 2
    above). Reliance on  this  factor  is  difficult  to  square  with  the
    instruction given at para 2.4 of  the  European  Casework  Instructions
    that when deciding whether it is appropriate in all  the  circumstances
    to issue a residence card "we must assess whether refusing  the  family
    member would deter the EEA  national  from  exercising  his/her  Treaty
    rights or would create an effective  obstacle  to  exercise  of  Treaty
    rights".  It is also difficult to see how expecting an EEA national  to
    accompany a partner abroad is consistent with the  Community  objective
    of free movement of Union citizens within the Community.  It  might  be
    contended, in response, that to modify the approach here would  violate
    the principle of non-discrimination  between  an  EEA  national  and  a
    British national. If it can (sometimes) be right to  expect  a  British
    citizen to accompany a third-country  national  spouse/partner  abroad,
    then why should it be any different  for  a  comparable  EEA  national?
    Against that it may be doubted that the two are in the  same  position,
    at least in respect of the possibility of movement onwards  to  another
    country for family life purposes. One has come to  another  country  to
    exercise Treaty rights; the other is simply in his or her own  country.
    But since we cannot see that this  consideration  formed  part  of  the
    respondent's essential reasons  for  refusing  to  exercise  reg  17(4)
    discretion in the appellant's favour, we do not need  to  resolve  this
    issue here.

38.   However,  we  are  not  merely  required  to  be  satisfied  that  the
    respondent's decision was in accordance  with  the  law,  but  also  to
    decide for ourselves whether the reg 17(4) discretion should have  been
    exercised differently.  The burden rests on the appellant to show  that
    the discretion should be exercised  differently  by  us:  see  FD  (EEA
    discretion: basis of appeal) [2007] UKAIT 00049 (  Since  hearing  this
    appeal it has come to our notice that on  10 March 2008  the  Court  of
    Appeal ordered that  FD's appeal be treated as withdrawn (C5/2007/1767)
    in the light of the respondent withdrawing its decision in view of  her
    acceptance  that  she  had  not  considered  all   of   FD's   personal
    circumstances. But the Court's order in no way  impugned  the  guidance
    for which FD was reported).

39.  In our judgement the discretion conferred by reg 17(4)  should  not  be
    exercised differently. Whilst we accept that the  appellant  began  her
    relationship with her EEA partner at a time when she was still  in  the
    UK lawfully and that their relationship became a durable one (certainly
    by the time it had lasted two years), we consider that  other  factors,
    considered cumulatively, carry  more  weight:  that  at  the  time  the
    appellant first met Mr D she was a person who only had limited leave to
    remain (until her 18th birthday); that by the  time  she  began  living
    with him (in December 2004) her limited leave (until 8  May  2004)  had
    already expired; that at the date of  application  she  had  only  been
    living together with him for a year; that by that time she had been  an
    overstayer for over six months; and  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    indicate that there were any difficulties (relating for example to age,
    health or children) in the way of the appellant  going abroad  to  make
    an application to an Entry Clearance Officer for an EEA  family  permit
    as the unmarried partner of an EEA national (see  Regulation  12(2)  of
    the 2006 Regulations) or to arrive at a UK border and seek admission as
    the unmarried partner of an  EEA  national  (see  reg  11(2)).  In  our
    judgment, examining whether the discretion afforded by reg 17(4) should
    have been exercised differently,  we  find  that  it  should  not:  the
    particular facts of the appellant's case made it (and continue to  make
    it) inappropriate in all the circumstances to  grant  the  appellant  a
    residence card.

40.  For the above reasons we conclude:

    The Immigration Judge materially erred in law.

    The decision we substitute  for  his  is  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal.





Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge Storey
