

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

     DD (paragraph 159A: connection/employment) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00060


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |
|On 15 July 2008                               |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                       MR JUSTICE HODGE OBE, PRESIDENT
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE



                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, COLOMBO

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr E. Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Hameed & Co.
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G. Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

(1) The requirement in paragraph 159A(ii)  of  the  immigration  rules  that
there be evidence of a connection between the employer and the  employee  is
of particular importance. It will  be  a  question  of  fact  in  each  case
whether the requisite connection is proved.  Although  the  connection  will
usually spring from the fact of  employment  in  the  employer's  household,
something more than a mere employer-employee relationship  and  presence  in
such a household is required.
(2)  Paragraph  159A(ii)  does  not  require  the  employee  to  have   been
continuously employed by the employer, provided that  the  totality  of  the
periods of employment amounts to at least a year. It is, however,  extremely
unlikely that occasional or irregular employment will enable an employee  to
show a sufficient connection with the employer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 8  August  1958,  applied
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a  domestic  worker  in  a
    private household, pursuant to paragraph 159A of the immigration rules.
     On 11 October 2007 the respondent refused the appellant's  application
    and the appellant appealed to the Tribunal against that decision.   Her
    appeal was heard at Newport on 6 March 2008 by  an  immigration  judge,
    who dismissed it.  Reconsideration of the immigration judge's  decision
    was ordered under section 103A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 on 15 April 2008 on the  ground  that  the  immigration
    judge may have erred in  law  in  concluding  that  paragraph  159A(ii)
    imposed a requirement that the appellant had been continuously employed
    by her employer as a domestic worker for one year or  more  immediately
    prior to the application for entry clearance.

2.   Paragraph 159A reads as follows:-

         "159A.   The requirements to be met by a person seeking  leave  to
                  enter the United Kingdom as a domestic worker in a private
                  household are that he:


                  (i)  is aged 18 - 65 inclusive;


                  (ii) has been employed as a domestic worker for  one  year
                      or more immediately prior  to  application  for  entry
                      clearance under the same roof as his employer or in  a
                      household that the employer  uses  for  himself  on  a
                      regular basis and where there is evidence  that  there
                      is a connection between employer and employee;


                  (iii)    that he [sic] intends to  travel  to  the  United
                      Kingdom in the company of his employer, his employer's
                      spouse or civil partner or his employer's minor child;


                  (iv) intends to work full time as a domestic worker  under
                      the same roof as his employer or in a  household  that
                      the employer uses for himself on a regular  basis  and
                      where there is evidence that  there  is  a  connection
                      between employer and employee;


                  (v)  does not intend to take employment except within  the
                      terms of this paragraph; and


                  (vi)  can  maintain  and  accommodate  himself  adequately
                      without recourse to public funds; and


                  (vii)    holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance  for
                      entry in this capacity."


3.   The appellant's employer  is  an  86  year  old  retired  Professor  of
    Biochemistry and Toxicology who is a citizen  of  both  Sri  Lanka  and
    Australia.  For over twenty  years  he  worked  for  the  World  Health
    Organisation in Geneva and, later, Rome.  From  1980  to  1985  he  was
    Professor and Head of the Department of Food Science at the  University
    of Sebha, Libya.  His  last  post  was  as  visiting  Toxicologist  and
    Tutorial  Project  Supervisor  in  the  RMIT   University,   Melbourne,
    Australia.

4.   As might be expected of a person of his age, the employer suffers  from
    a number of ailments, including  diabetes,  hypertension  and  ischemic
    heart disease.  The employer nevertheless has over the past  ten  years
    divided his time between the United Kingdom and  Sri  Lanka,  where  he
    owns a flat.

5.   The immigration judge had before him a considerable amount  of  written
    evidence, including  a  statement  of  the  employer,  and  heard  oral
    evidence from a friend of the employer, who attended in  place  of  the
    employer because the latter was at the time  living  in  Colombo.   The
    immigration judge made certain adverse credibility  findings  regarding
    the evidence.  Although criticism of those findings  was  made  in  the
    grounds accompanying the application for reconsideration, they were not
    found to disclose any properly arguable error of law and Mr  Fripp  did
    not pursue that criticism at the reconsideration hearing.

6.   The facts as found by  the  immigration  judge  can  be  summarised  as
    follows.  For at least ten years up to the date of the application, the
    appellant had been employed by the employer as a live-in carer  at  the
    employer's home in Colombo whenever the employer had been  resident  in
    that city.   At  paragraph  33,  the  immigration  judge  recorded  the
    evidence that the employer had spent some 40 months in Sri  Lanka  over
    the past ten years and that it was his practice to spend four months  a
    year there.  At  paragraph  39,  the  immigration  judge  recorded  the
    Presenting Officer as attempting to contend that, so far  as  the  past
    four years were concerned, the period spent by the  employer  was  more
    akin to  two  months  rather  than  four;  but  the  immigration  judge
    considered that the Presenting Officer had been  unable  to  make  good
    that contention.

7.   The immigration judge found that, when the  employer  was  not  in  Sri
    Lanka, the appellant is not paid by him; nor did the immigration  judge
    accept that the appellant enjoyed free use of the  room  in  which  she
    lived when the employer was present, as a payment in kind  for  looking
    after the flat whilst he was absent.

8.   At paragraph 45, the immigration judge found:-

         ."I am satisfied that the appellant has acted for a carer  for  the
         sponsor [employer] when he has been in Sri Lanka and that there  is
         evidence of a connection between the sponsor and the  appellant  in
         this regard.  The evidence falls short of meeting the [requirements
         of paragraph 159A] because the reality is that  the  evidence  only
         proves, if I accept  it  which  I  am  prepared  to  do,  that  the
         appellant has cared for the sponsor during his visits and has  been
         paid for this time only.  The proposal now is  that  the  appellant
         should become a full-time carer paid every month once  she  arrives
         in the United Kingdom with the sponsor".


9.   It is not disputed by the respondent that the employer has the need  of
    a residential carer in the United Kingdom.  The employer's proposal  is
    that  the  appellant  should  perform  that  function  for  him,  on  a
    continuous basis,  following  his  failure  to  find  another  suitable
    person.

10.  The fact that the immigration judge regarded the lack of continuity  in
    the appellant's employment as determinative of the appeal it is further
    borne out by paragraph 51 of the determination, where  the  immigration
    judge found that the appellant lived in her own home in Bollegalla:-

     "... but goes to the flat to care for the sponsor when he is there and
        is paid during these periods.  This does not equate  to  continuous
        employment even if I were to accept the submission made by  Counsel
        for the appellant, Mr Fripp, that the payments amount to more  than
        what a Sri Lankan carer would earn in a year.  The issue is not how
        much the appellant is paid but whether the employment is continuous
        and  sufficient  in   the   circumstances   to   meet   the   above
        requirements".


11.  For the respondent, Mr Saunders informed us  that  he  did  not  submit
    that paragraph 159A(ii) contains  a  requirement  that  the  employment
    should be continuous; rather, he submitted that, on the  facts  of  the
    present case, the appellant had failed to show that  the  employer  had
    used the Colombo flat on a regular basis.

12.  In that regard, Mr Saunders  relied  upon  NG  ("On  a  regular  basis"
    paragraph 159A(ii)) Bulgaria [2006] UKAIT 00020.   In  that  case,  the
    Tribunal found that the purpose of  the  reference  to  "on  a  regular
    basis" in paragraph 159A(ii) is to  ensure  that  there  is  a  genuine
    connection between the household in which the applicant is employed  as
    a domestic worker and the employer of  that  applicant.   The  Tribunal
    found that:-

         "[this] requirement would scarcely be served if it were  sufficient
         for the employer to use that household only on an infrequent basis.
          By way of example, it might  be  argued  that  attendance  at  the
         household on but a single occasion  each  year  on  25  January  to
         celebrate Burns Night  could  properly  be  describes  as  'regular
         attendance', but only  in  the  sense  of  being  attendance  which
         recurred at a fixed interval, and clearly not in the sense of being
         attendance for habitual  or  customary  use.   In  the  context  of
         paragraph 159A(ii), it is plainly the latter  sense  in  which  the
         term is being used" (paragraph 15).


13.  In BO (Domestic worker - connection with sponsor) Nigeria [2007]  UKAIT
    00053, it was submitted by  the  respondent  that  the  finding  of  an
    immigration judge that there had  been  a  "temporary  hiatus"  in  the
    sponsor's use of her household  in  Nigeria  in  the  year  immediately
    preceding the application, meant that the appellant could  not  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 159A(ii).  For the appellant, however, it
    was submitted that the evidence showed that,  viewed  over  the  longer
    period of the appellant's employment  and  the  sponsor's  use  of  the
    household, it could be said that the latter had regularly used her home
    in Nigeria.  In paragraphs 8 and 9 of the determination,  the  Tribunal
    had this to say:-

    "8.  In considering these submissions,  we  would  first  observe  that
         there is no justification in the  wording  of  the  Rule  to  limit
         consideration of the use by the Sponsor of her home in Nigeria to a
         short period before the application, such as to the hiatus in  June
         2006 due to pregnancy, as Mr Ouseley has sought to do.  The purpose
         of the Rule is to enable an employer who has  employed  a  domestic
         worker for at least a year in a home overseas which he/she uses  on
         a regular basis, to bring that employee  to  the  UK  to  work  for
         him/her here. The Tribunal in NG was  concerned  with  a  potential
         ambiguity in the meaning of  'regular',  as  to  whether  it  could
         embrace the infrequent occupation  of  a  home  but  in  a  regular
         pattern.  It correctly concluded that it  did  not.   That  clearly
         reflects the purpose of the Rule.  It is not about property  rights
         but about the establishment of a connection  between  the  employer
         and the employee, and it says so expressly in  sub-paragraph  (ii).




    9.   To establish the evidence of such a connection, sub-paragraph (ii)
         requires that  the  employee  should  have  been  employed  by  the
         employer for one year or more immediately prior to the  application
         for entry clearance.  To assess whether an adequate connection  has
         been made, an immigration judge should therefore look at  least  at
         the final year of the relationship but may also take into account a
         longer period to ascertain the extent of the connection, and should
         do so if there is some temporary aberration in the final year  from
         the established long-term pattern".


14.  In the case before us, we have already seen how the  immigration  judge
    regarded the lack of continuity of employment as  decisive.   There  is
    nothing in his determination to show  that  he  rejected  the  evidence
    that, over the past ten years,  the  employer  had  spent  around  four
    months of the year in Sri Lanka, in order to escape, so  he  said,  the
    English winter weather. On the basis of NG and BO, such a  use  of  his
    Colombo home was plainly "regular"  within  the  meaning  of  paragraph
    159A(ii).  The immigration judge accepted that there was evidence of  a
    "connection" between the appellant and the employer.  As  can  be  seen
    from BO, that  requirement  of  paragraph  159A(ii)  is  of  particular
    importance.  It will be a question of fact in each  case  to  determine
    whether the requisite connection is proved.   Although  the  connection
    will usually spring from  the  fact  of  employment  in  the  household
    something more than a mere employer-employee relationship and  presence
    in such a household is required.  In the present  case,  it  cannot  be
    doubted that a genuine and significant relationship exists between  the
    appellant and her employer, forged over the years during which she  has
    cared for the employer when he has been living  in  the  Colombo  flat.
    The appellant said in her statement "[the employer] stays there all the
    time.  I take him out for walks, make sure that he takes  his  medicine
    on time, cook his meals, wash his clothes, do  the  shopping  for  him,
    help him with his bath and generally do all the household duties".

15.  Mr Fripp submitted that if continuous employment had been  intended  to
    be a requirement, the drafter of paragraph 159A could  and  would  have
    inserted the word "continuously"  before  "employee"  in  sub-paragraph
    (ii).  As we have already indicated, Mr Saunders did not demur on  this
    issue.  The Tribunal considers that Mr Saunders was right not to do so.
     On the proper interpretation of paragraph 159A(ii),  the  employee  is
    not required to  have  been  continuously  employed  by  the  employer,
    provided that the totality of the periods of employment amounts  to  at
    least a year.  It is, however, extremely unlikely  that  occasional  or
    irregular employment will enable  an  employee  to  show  a  sufficient
    connection with the employer.

16.   But in this case the immigration judge made a material  error  of  law
    in treating the lack of  continuity  of  employment  as  decisive.  The
    employer used the Sri Lankan household on a regular basis.  During  all
    the time he was doing so, the appellant was living under the same roof,
    administering to his needs in a highly personal way.  Looking back from
    the period immediately prior to the application, the appellant had been
    employed by the employer for a period  well  in  excess  of  one  year,
    albeit not continuously.

17.  There is no issue regarding the appellant's ability to show  compliance
    with the other requirements of  paragraph  159A.   Accordingly,  having
    found that the  immigration  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  his
    interpretation of paragraph 159A(ii), the Tribunal  hereby  substitutes
    for his decision a decision of our own, allowing the appellant's appeal
    under the immigration rules.

Decision

(1) The appeal under the immigration rules is allowed.

(2) We direct the issue of entry clearance to the appellant under  paragraph
    159A of the immigration rules.







                               Signed                                  Date




                               Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane

