

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                HB (EEA right to reside - Metock) Algeria [2008] UKAIT 00069

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |                           |
|On  26 October 2007 and 19 May 2008             |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before


                       SENIOR Immigration Judge STOREY
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR



                                   Between


                                     HB
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant: Mr J Rene (26 October 2007) and Mr C Lam  (19  May  2008)
    instructed by Messrs David Tang & Co Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr Y Oguntolu (26 October 2007) and Miss F Saunders  (19
    May 2008), Home Office Presenting Officers

1. The ruling of the European Court of  Justice  in  Metock  (Case  C-127/08
judgment 25 July 2008) establishes that  a  third-country  national  in  the
United Kingdom who is a family member of an  EEA  national  (Union  citizen)
exercising Treaty rights here, is entitled to a right of  residence  on  the
basis of the family relationship alone. That  right  is  not  subject  to  a
requirement of lawful residence.

2. However, this ruling does not mean  that  there  is  any  change  in  the
approach to  deciding  EEA  appeals  involving  such  family  members.  Such
appeals have to be decided  (as  before)  under  the  Immigration  (European
Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006  Regulations").   Where  the
respondent's  decision  is  to  refuse  to  issue  a  residence  card,   the
appellant, to succeed, must show  not only that he has a right of  residence
under reg 14(2) but that the respondent  is obliged  to  issue  a  residence
card under reg 17.

3. Where the family member is the  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  a  United
Kingdom national, he or she must first fulfil the conditions set out in  reg
9. If the conditions set out in reg 9 are fulfilled, the family member  must
meet the requirements set out in the  2006  Regulations  as  they  apply  to
family members of EEA nationals exercising Treaty rights.
4. Whether a person can succeed in establishing a right of  residence  as  a
family member will depend, inter  alia,  on  (i)  that  person  establishing
that the family relationship is genuine and on whether (if  invoked  by  the
respondent) there are valid (ii) public policy   (reg  21)  or  (iii)  fraud
grounds for denying him or her that right.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This case concerns a third-country national who claims a right to  reside
in the United Kingdom as  a  family  member  of  a  British  national  under
European Community Law, notwithstanding that he is an  illegal  entrant  and
was so even before he married. Since it is one of  the  first  cases  to  be
decided in the light of the recent European Court of Justice (ECJ)  case  of
Metock (Case C-127/08  Metock & ors judgment 25 July 2008), it is  important
that we set out our reasoning with some care. It will be apparent from  what
we go on to say that the ECJ ruling in Metock affects a number  of  Tribunal
and Court of Appeal decisions. However, its ruling does not mean that  there
is to be any change to the method of deciding whether an EEA decision is  in
accordance with the law.  As  almost  all  of  the  relevant  Community  law
dealing with the rights of citizens of the Union and  their  family  members
to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States  is  now
in the form of a directive - Directive 2004/38/EC (hereafter  "the  Citizens
Directive") - decision-makers  have  to  apply  the  relevant  national  law
implementing this measure, namely the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003) (hereafter "the 2006 Regulations).  That  is
because, whilst a directive is binding as to the result to be achieved,  the
Treaty leaves to the national authorities the choice of  form  and  methods:
Article 288 TEU. Only  the  failure  on  the  part  of  a  Member  State  to
implement a directive correctly or within the  time-frame  required  by  the
directive will result in an individual being able to rely for direct  effect
on the provisions of  the  Directive:  Case  152/84  Marshall  v  South-West
Hampshire Area Health Authority [1986] ECR 723. Otherwise it  will  only  be
where there is ambiguity in the meaning of a  particular  provision  in  the
national implementing measure, that recourse can be had to EU  or  Community
law: Webb v Emo Air Cargo (UK) Ltd [1993] WLR 49 (the doctrine  of  indirect
effect). That is to say, the 2006 Regulations have to  be  applied,  subject
only to the doctrines of direct effect and indirect effect.

2. The appellant is a national of Algeria.  This  is  a  reconsideration  of
the determination by Immigration Judge Petherbridge notified on 4  May  2007
allowing his appeal against a decision by the respondent dated 9 March  2007
to refuse to issue a residence card as confirmation of a right of  residence
under European Community law as the non-EEA  national  family  member  of  a
British citizen. The immigration judge concluded that the appellant  had  an
enforceable Community right and at para 25 stated that he was  "entitled  to
a Residence Document").

 3. Following a hearing on 26 October 2007, a decision was taken  to  fix  a
new hearing on 19 May 2008 (so as to allow the parties  to  produce  further
evidence about the appellant's passport situation and  to  make  submissions
concerning the implications for this appeal of the latest ECJ case, Case  C-
291/05 Minister voor Vreemdelingenzaken en Integratie v Eind) at  which  the
case would be heard by a panel. The parties were agreeable to  this  course.
Soon after the hearing on 19  May,  when  the  Tribunal  became  aware  that
another judgment by the ECJ,  in  the  case  of  Metock,  was  imminent,  we
afforded both parties an opportunity to make further submissions  once  that
judgment became available. We  have  taken  into  account  both  replies  we
received. Below we refer only to the submissions made by  Mr  Lam  and  Miss
Saunders, since theirs both recapitulated and added to  those  made  at  the
first hearing. So far as the submissions addressing  Metock  are  concerned,
those from Mr Lam essentially stated that the judgment in Metock  vindicated
the approach taken by the immigration judge in  allowing  the  appeal.  That
from Miss Saunders on behalf of the respondent  contended  that  Metock  did
not preclude Member States enacting immigration rules which were to be  seen
as part of what was meant by "public policy" within the meaning  of  Article
35 of the Citizens Directive.  The  respondent,  she  reiterated,  had  been
entitled to deny the appellant a right of residence and to refuse  to  issue
him with a residence card.

4. At the date of the hearing before the  immigration  judge  the  appellant
did not hold a current Algerian passport: the one he  brought  with  him  to
the UK expired on 18 March 1990. (More recently,  on  2  May  2008,  he  has
obtained a new Algerian passport.)  He first  came  to  the  United  Kingdom
illegally in December 1996. Unless he is able to show  he  has  acquired  an
EEA right, the position is that he is  someone  who  has  always  been  here
illegally. On 3 June 2003  he  married  his  wife,  SH,  who  is  a  British
citizen. On 31 March 2005 he and his wife went to the  Republic  of  Ireland
(hereafter "Ireland"). She found work there.  Between  18  May  2005  and  7
November 2005 she worked for two  different  employers  in  Dublin.  Shortly
after 7 November 2005 they returned to the United Kingdom.  On  20  February
2006 the appellant applied under "Surinder Singh" (a reference  to  the  ECJ
decision, C-370/90 Surinder Singh ex parte SSHD  [1992]  ECR 1-4265)  for  a
residence document as the non-EEA family member of  a  British  citizen  who
had been employed in another Member State for  over  six  months,  but  that
application was refused on 10 April 2006, as no  passport  was  produced  to
confirm the appellant's wife's nationality. On 1 September 2006  he  applied
again for a residence permit. He was again refused,  this  time  because  he
had not been lawfully resident in Ireland,  because  no  evidence  had  been
produced to show that he and his wife lived together in Ireland and  because
no evidence had  been  produced  to  show  that  the  appellant's  wife  was
exercising Treaty rights in Ireland prior to coming to the UK.

5. The immigration judge noted that the respondent had refused  to  issue  a
residence permit under regulation 9(2) (a) and (b) of the 2006  Regulations.
He accepted that the appellant and his wife went to the Republic of  Ireland
on 31 March 2005, that she undertook  employment  (in  two  different  jobs)
there between May 2005 -  November  2005  and  that  the  couple  had  lived
together there during this time. He also accepted that theirs was a  genuine
marriage and that they lived together in a loving relationship.

6. In deciding to allow the appeal the immigration judge wrote:

    "20. With regard to the 2006 Regulations, it is not a requirement  that
    the Appellant had to be lawfully resident in an EEA State. That was the
    position under the 2000 Regulations, but not repeated  under  the  2006
    Regulations.


    21. The requirement under Section 9(2)(b) of the  Regulations  is  that
    the parties have to be "living  together"  before  the  United  Kingdom
    national (the Appellant's wife) returned to the United Kingdom.


    22. The evidence is  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  were  living
    together in the Republic of Ireland throughout the time that they  were
    in that country and during which time the Appellant's wife was in full-
    time employment."

7. At para 24 the immigration  judge  considered  that  the  effect  of  the
decisions of the ECJ in C-6-60/00 Carpenter v Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department [2002] ECR I-6279,  C-105 Jia v  Migrationsverket,  C-459/99
Mouvement contre le racisme, l'antisemitisme and la xenophobie  ASBL  (MRAX)
v Belgian State [2002] ECR 1-6591 and C-15703 Commission of  Spain  per  A-G
Stix-Hackl  was that:

    "...Community law did not require a Member  State  to  take  [sic]  the
    grant of a Residence Permit to nationals of a non-Member State, who are
    members of the family of  the  Community  national  who  has  exercised
    his/her rights of free movement, subject to the conditions  that  those
    family members have previously been residing lawfully in another Member
    State - see paragraph 33 of Jia."

8. He concluded as follows:

    "35. I am satisfied that the Appellant has  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof, on a balance  of  probabilities,  on  the  documentary  evidence
    before me that he and his wife have lived in the  Republic  of  Ireland
    for the period of over 6 months. The  Secretary  of  State's  assertion
    that the Appellant had to be lawfully in another EEA Member  State,  is
    not correct as a  matter  of  law  and  on  this  point  I  follow  the
    determination in Jia."


    36. The Appellant is, therefore, entitled to a  Residence  Document  as
    the [husband] of SH.


9. The respondent's grounds for reconsideration contended  that  in  finding
that the appellant did not have to  be  lawfully  resident  in  another  EEA
Member State prior to coming to the  UK  the  immigration  judge  materially
erred in law. Reference was made to  Surinder Singh  and  also  to  Case  C-
109/01 Akrich v SSHD [2003] ECR I-9607. The grounds further  contended  that
the immigration judge erred in considering that his decision  to  allow  the
appeal was in line with the case of Jia. Contrary to  what  the  immigration
judge thought, the grounds stated, "Jia does not address the issue  of  non-
EU family members of EU nationals who do not have leave or  who  have  never
had leave to enter/reside in the EU and therefore  the  principle  of  prior
lawful residence within the EU is  still  relevant."  In  Jia,  the  grounds
added, the appellant was lawfully resident at the time  of  the  application
and  therefore  consideration  of  that  application  was  appropriate.   By
contrast, the appellant in this case was never lawfully resident in  the  UK
or Ireland.

The 2006 Regulations

10. As already intimated, the decision under  appeal  was  an  EEA  decision
which had been made under  United  Kingdom  law  implementing  the  Citizens
Directive: the 2006 Regulations. If the appellant could  show  that  he  met
the relevant requirements of  the  2006  Regulations,  he  was  entitled  to
succeed in his appeal.  If he could not show he met those  requirements,  it
would still be necessary to assess whether he was  entitled  to  succeed  on
the basis of the Citizens Directive  or  Community  law  directly.  We  turn
first, therefore, to examine his position under the 2006 Regulations.

 11. It is not in dispute that the appellant is  the  spouse  of  a  British
citizen and that theirs is a genuine marriage. Nor  is  it  now  in  dispute
that the couple spent a period of over six months in  another  Member  State
(Ireland) in 2005/2006 during which the appellant's spouse was  residing  in
an EEA State (Ireland) as a "worker" (within the meaning of  Community  law)
before returning to the United Kingdom; and that when  the  couple  returned
to the UK the appellant's spouse found employment and so  was  a  "qualified
person" within the meaning of regulation 6 of  the  2006  Regulations.   Reg
6(1) states that:

   " ..."qualified person" means a person who is an EEA national and in  the
   United Kingdom as-
      ...
     a) a worker;
      ..."

12. The parties accept that against this background  the  immigration  judge
was correct to look at the appellant's position  under  reg  9,  since  that
provision is headed "Family members of United Kingdom  nationals".  But  for
the inclusion of reg 9 the appellant's spouse, being a UK  national,   could
not be treated as an EEA national because  reg 2  defines  EEA  national  to
mean a national  of  an  EEA  State  "...other  than  the  United  Kingdom".
However, in order to  reflect  the  principle  established  by  the  ECJ  in
Surinder Singh,(and no doubt to ensure the definition of  family  member  in
what is now reg 7 was not at odds with this judgment),  the  United  Kingdom
Government in its EEA Regulations has sought to ensure  that  persons  in  a
similar situation could benefit from EEA  rights.  The  predecessor  to  the
2006 Regulations, the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2000
(hereafter "the 2000 Regulations"), contained a similar  but  not  identical
provision at para 11). Reg 9 of the 2006 Regulations states:

    " (1) If the conditions in para (2) are  satisfied,  these  Regulations
    apply to a person  who  is  the  family  member  of  a  United  Kingdom
    national, as if the United Kingdom national were an EEA national.


     (2) The conditions are that:
            (a) The United Kingdom national is residing in an EEA State  as
    a worker or self-employed person or was so residing before returning to
    the United Kingdom; and
            (b) if the family member of the United Kingdom national is  his
    spouse or civil partner, the parties are living  together  in  the  EEA
    State or had entered into a marriage  or  civil  partnership  and  were
    living together in  that  State  before  the  United  Kingdom  national
    returned to the United Kingdom.


    (3) Where these Regulations apply to the  family  member  of  a  United
    Kingdom national, the United  Kingdom  national  shall  be  treated  as
    holding a valid passport issued by the EEA State for  the  purposes  of
    the application of Regulation 13 to that family member."

13. By dint of reg 9 a United Kingdom national spouse  can  be  treated  for
the purposes of establishing his or her spouse's EEA rights "as if  he  were
an EEA national". It can be seen that two of the main conditions set out  in
reg 9 are that the UK national spouse (or civil partner)  must  be  or  must
have been residing in an EEA State  as  a  worker  or  self-employed  person
prior to returning to the UK and that the parties to the marriage (or  civil
partnership) must be living together or must have  lived  together  in  that
EEA State before returning to the UK.

14. What then of the immigration judge's consideration  of  the  appellant's
position under reg 9? Although his determination said little about this,  it
is sufficiently clear that he was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
conditions specified in this regulation in full,  since he  found  that  the
appellant's wife: (i) was a United Kingdom national; (ii) had been  residing
before returning to the United Kingdom  in an  EEA  State  (Ireland);  (iii)
had been a worker there within the meaning of reg  4(1)(a);  and  (iv)  that
she and the appellant had been  living  together  in  that  State  (Ireland)
before they returned to the United Kingdom.

15. In the course of concluding that the appellant met  all  the  conditions
specified  in  reg  9  the  immigration  judge  specifically  rejected   the
contention of the respondent in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  in
order to comply with reg 9 the appellant had to show he  had  been  lawfully
resident in Ireland, which he could not. He pointed out,  correctly  in  our
view, that although prior lawful residence was a  requirement  of  the  2000
Regulations, the 2006 Regulations had omitted such a requirement. Reg 11  of
the 2000 Regulations had stated:

   "11. Family members of United Kingdom nationals
      1) If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these Regulations
         apply to a person who is the family  member  of  a  United  Kingdom
         national returning to the United Kingdom as if that person were the
         family member of an EEA national.
      2) The conditions are that -
         (a)  after leaving the United Kingdom, the United Kingdom  national
         resided in an EEA State and -
                (i) was employed there (other than on a transient or  casual
         basis):
                 or
                (ii) established himself there as a self-employed person;
         (b) the family member of the United Kingdom  national  is  lawfully
         resident in an EEA State [NB. This was substituted from 7  February
         2005, by SI 2005/47];
         (c) on his  return  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the  United  Kingdom
         national would, if he were an EEA national, be a qualified  person;
         and
          (d) if the family member of the United  Kingdom  national  is  his
         spouse, the marriage took place, and the parties lived together  in
         an EEA State, before the United Kingdom national  returned  to  the
         United Kingdom." (Emphasis added)


16. It is unnecessary to analyse all the differences between  the  provision
for family members of UK nationals under  these  Regulations  and  the  2006
Regulations. It suffices for our  purposes  to  observe  that  reg  11(2)(b)
clearly stipulated a requirement of lawful residence in  an  EEA  State.  In
this respect it bears some similarity with the Irish Regulations which  were
the subject of contention in Metock: see below para 26ff).

17.  Plainly  the  appellant  would  not  have  been  able  to  satisfy  the
requirements of reg 11 of the 2000 Regulations (which required prior  lawful
residence in an EEA State). And,  of  course,  at  the  time  the  appellant
returned with his wife from Ireland and applied  for  a  residence  document
and at the time when the  respondent  refused  that  application  (10  April
2006) , the law that then applied  was  still  that  set  out  in  the  2000
Regulations (the 2006 Regulations did not come into  force  until  30  April
2006). But both the application (1  September  2006)  and  the  decision  (9
March 2007) which are the subject of this appeal were made  after  the  2006
Regulations came into force.  And (unlike the Irish  Regulations  which  the
ECJ in Metock found incompatible with Community law: see below  para  26ff))
the 2006 Regulations do not contain a condition of prior lawful residence.

18. Hence the immigration judge was correct to find that the  appellant  met
the conditions of reg 9 in full.

19. However, contrary to what the immigration judge assumed and what Mr  Lam
submitted to us, the ability of the appellant to fulfil or  not  fulfil  the
conditions specified in reg 9 is not the "only" question or issue.   It  may
be that both were  encouraged  to  think  it  was  the  only  issue  by  the
respondent's reference in the refusal decision to deciding it under  (or  by
reference to) regulation 9. But in law the appellant could  not  and  cannot
succeed in establishing a right of residence purely on the basis of  reg  9.
All that reg 9 does is establish that someone who meets its requirements  is
entitled to be treated on the same basis as the  family  member  of  an  EEA
national. Put another way, reg 9 of the 2006 Regulations affords  a  gateway
only for family members of UK nationals in order to  seek  to  benefit  from
other provisions of the Directive. If they  can  meet  reg  9's  conditions,
then they are entitled to have their applications/appeals considered on  the
same basis as family members of nationals of other  Member  States;  but  no
more than that. So although the appellant in this case was clearly  able  to
pass through the gateway of reg 9, the question remains,  was   he  entitled
(as the immigration judge found), as the family member of an  EEA  national,
to be granted a residence card after he had returned  to  the  UK  with  his
spouse?

20. The immigration judge did not seek to show how he thought the  appellant
could establish entitlement under provisions of the 2006  Regulations  other
than reg 9. Nor for that matter did either party seek to address this:  both
relied for the rest on ECJ case law. We will come to that shortly, but  (for
reasons explained in para 1 above) it is first necessary  to  determine  the
appellant's  position  under  other  relevant   provisions   of   the   2006
Regulations.

 21. Part 2 of these Regulations, (headed  "EEA  RIGHTS"),  deals  with  the
right of admission (reg 11), issue of EEA family permit  (reg  12),  initial
right of residence (reg 13),  extended  right  of  residence  (reg  14)  and
permanent right of residence (reg 15). It is apparent that this grouping  of
rights falls into two main categories. Regulations 11 and  12  consider  the
position of a person seeking either pre-entry  permission  to  accompany  or
join an EEA national (regulation 12) or  admission  to  the  UK  (regulation
11). Regulations 13-15 deal with the  position  of  persons  who  have  been
admitted, i.e. with the in-country position.  Also of relevance  is  reg  17
whose relevant parts state:

    "(1) The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to a person who
    is not an EEA national and is the family member of a  qualified  person
    or of an EEA  national  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
    regulation 15 on application and production of -
       a) a valid passport; and
       b) proof that the applicant is such a family member
       ...
       (2) On receipt of an application under paragraph (1) and (2) and the
       documents  that  are  required  to  accompany  the  application  the
       Secretary of  State  shall  immediately  issue  the  applicant  with
       certificate of application for the residence card and the  residence
       card shall be issued no later than six  months  after  the  date  on
       which the application and documents are received.
       (3)...
       (8) But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1)".

22. The decision under appeal  was  a  refusal  to  issue  the  appellant  a
residence card. Deciding whether that decision was correct  or  not  divides
into two parts. First, there is the issue of whether  the  appellant  has  a
right of residence and  second  the  matter  of  whether  he  can  meet  the
documentary requirements set out in reg 17.

The first issue: whether the appellant has a right of residence

23. The most obvious regulation having application to the appellant  is  reg
14(2).   Reg 14 states in full:

    " 1) A qualified person is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for
    so long as he remains a qualified person.
       2) A family member of a qualified  person  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom under paragraph (1) or of an  EEA  national  with  a  permanent
    right of residence under regulation 15 is entitled  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom for so long as he  remains  the  family  member  of  the
    qualified person or EEA national.
       3) A family member who  has  retained  the  right  of  residence  is
    entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for so long as  he  remains  a
    family member who has retained the right of residence.
       4) A right to reside under this regulation is  in  addition  to  any
    right a  person  may  have  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    regulation 13 or 15.
     5) But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b)."

24. This regulation is clearly intended to implement Art 10 of the  Citizens
Directive and reg 14(2) is closely modelled on Article 10(2) which  provides
that "[t]he right of residence provided for in paragraph 1 shall  extend  to
family members who are not nationals of  a  Member  State,  accompanying  or
joining the Union citizen in the  host  Member  State,  provided  that  such
Union citizen satisfies the conditions referred to in  paragraph  1(a),  (b)
or (c)."

25. As Mr Lam emphasised, neither reg 14(2) nor Article 10(2)  stipulates  a
need for an applicant/appellant to be someone who has  lawful  residence  in
the UK or prior lawful residence in another Member State. In Mr Lam's  view,
to read into reg 14 such a requirement would be contrary to  the  schema  of
the 2006 Regulations since the right conferred by it was  made  subject  (by
regulation 14(5))  to reg 19(3)(b). The latter stipulates that a person  who
has been admitted to, or acquired a right to reside in, the  United  Kingdom
under these Regulations may be removed from the  United  Kingdom  if  -  "he
would otherwise be entitled to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  under  these
Regulations but the Secretary of State  has  decided  that  his  removal  is
justified on the grounds of public policy, public security or public  health
in accordance with regulation 21". If the decision-maker wished to  penalise
a person for illegal or unlawful residence, that was possible  but  only  if
there were public policy etc grounds.

26. In seeking to construe reg 14, we remind  ourselves  that  although  the
2006 Regulations are part of national law they  were  enacted  in  order  to
implement a Directive and as such we must adopt a Community law approach  to
their construction, i.e. that we must construe them as far as  possible,  in
the light of the wording, context and purpose  of  the  Citizens  Directive,
paying particular regard to that Directive's purpose, in  order  to  achieve
the result pursued (Case C-106/89 Marleasing [1990]  ECR  I-4135,  para  8).
Since  the  Citizens  Directive  has  now  been  the  subject  of  a   close
examination and a clear ruling by the ECJ in Metock, a ruling which  impacts
directly on our task of interpreting reg 14, it is to the  Court's  approach
in this case that we must now turn.  It concerned a reference  made  by  the
Irish High Court who had to consider four applications for  judicial  review
each seeking inter alia an order of certiorari quashing the decision of  the
Irish Minister for Justice, Equality and Law  Reform  refusing  to  grant  a
residence card to a national of a non-member  country  married  to  a  Union
citizen residing in Ireland under the European  Communities  (Free  Movement
of Persons) (No 2) Regulations 2006. Mr  Metock,  a  national  of  Cameroon,
arrived in Ireland on 23 June 2006 and applied for asylum.  His  application
was definitively refused on 28  February  2007,  but  he  married  a  United
Kingdom national in Ireland on 12 October 2006. Mr Ikogho, a national  of  a
non-Member State, arrived in  Ireland  in  November  2004  and  applied  for
asylum. That application  was  unsuccessful  and  a  subsequent  deportation
order was upheld by the High Court on 19  June  2007.  Before  then  he  had
married a United Kingdom national in Ireland on 7 June 2006. Mr  Chinedu,  a
Nigerian national, arrived in Ireland  in  December  2005  and  applied  for
asylum. His application was  definitively  refused  on  8  August  2006.  He
married a German national resident in Ireland on 3 July 2006. Mr  Igboanusi,
a Nigerian national, arrived in Ireland on 2  April  2004  and  applied  for
asylum. Following refusal of that application a deportation order  was  made
against him on 15 September  2005.  He  married  a  Polish  national  on  24
November  2006.  The  Irish  Regulations  imposed  on   family   members   a
requirement, inter alia, of lawful residence in another  Member  State.  The
High Court referred three questions to the Court for a  preliminary  ruling.
In the event only two were found to require a ruling. These questions were:
      "(1) Does Directive 2004/38/EC permit a Member State to have a general
      requirement that a non-EU national spouse of a Union citizen must have
      been lawfully resident in another Member State prior to coming to the
      host Member State in order that he or she be entitled to benefit from
      the provisions of Directive 2004/38/EC?
      (2) Does Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC include within its scope
      of application a non-EU national who is:
      - a spouse of a Union citizen who resides in the host Member State and
      satisfies a condition in Article 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and
      - is then residing in the host Member State with the Union citizen as
      his/her spouse
      Irrespective of when or where their marriage took place or when or how
      the non-EU national entered the host Member State?"
27. At para 101 the Court's ruling on the first question was as follows:
      "1. Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
      of 29 April 2004 on the right of  citizens  of  the  Union  and  their
      family members to move and reside freely within the territory  of  the
      Member States amending  Regulation  (EEC)  No  1612/68  and  repealing
      Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC,  75/34/EEC,
      75/35/EEC, 90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC precludes  legislation
      of a Member State which requires a national of  a  non-member  country
      who is the spouse of a Union citizen residing in that Member State but
      not possessing  its  nationality  to  have  previously  been  lawfully
      resident in another Member State before arriving in  the  host  Member
      State, in order to benefit from the provisions of that directive."
28. So far as the Court's answer to the first question is concerned,  it  is
clear that its ruling that national legislation cannot impose a  requirement
of prior lawful residence does not impact  on  the  UK's  2006  Regulations:
unlike the corresponding Irish Regulations they do not  impose  a  condition
of prior lawful residence; but it is perhaps worth  noting  that  the  final
words of the ruling make it clear that it is given in  the  context  of  the
other requirements of the directive itself.

29. It is a separate matter whether the Court's ruling, taken together  with
its earlier jurisprudence, in particular Case C-267/83 Diatta v Land  Berlin
[1985] ECR 567,  impacts on the requirement at reg 9(2)(b) that the  parties
are/were "living together in the EEA State"  before  returning  to  the  UK.
However, we do not need to decide this matter since on  the  facts  of  this
case it is agreed that the couple did live together in another Member  State
(Ireland) before returning to the UK. All we would observe is  that  (except
arguably in relation to the "living together" requirement:  see  below  para
30) it is  not  immediately  obvious  that  the  Court's  ruling  in  Metock
precludes  national  legislation  in  the  form  of  reg  9  of   the   2006
Regulations. Article 2(3) of the  Citizens  Directive  gives  the  following
definition of "host Member State":

    "'host Member State' means the Member State to which  a  Union  citizen
    moves  in  order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free  movement  and
    residence".


30. On its face such a definition would  appear  to  exclude  from  being  a
"host Member" State the Union citizen's own state. Further, as we have  just
seen, Metock was concerned with four cases in which  subsequent  to  arrival
in Ireland (and lodging an asylum application) the non-EU  national  married
a national of another Member State who was living and  working  in  Ireland,
i.e. married someone who was not a host Member State national. On  its  face
reg 9 complies with  (and  was  indeed  intended  to  give  effect  to)  the
judgment of the ECJ in an earlier case, Surinder Singh. In the  latter  case
the Court confirmed the general principle that nationals of a  Member  State
cannot invoke  Community  rights  of  free  movement  or  residence  without
themselves having sought to exercise them in another Member State (see  also
Cases C-64/96 and C-65/96, Uecker and  Jacquet  v  Land  Nordrhein-Westfalen
[1997] ECR 1-3 171). Surinder Singh was able to succeed because his wife  (a
British citizen) exercised rights  of  movement  and  residence  in  another
Member State (Germany) before returning with him to her  host  Member  State
(the United Kingdom). If the basic principles enunciated in  Surinder  Singh
(and relied on by the Tribunal in  GC  (Citizens  Directive:  UK  national's
spouse) China [2007] UKAIT 00056 and the  Court  of  Appeal  in  GC  (China)
[2008] EWCA Civ 623 (see below paras 58,64)) remain correct, then  there  is
nothing contrary to Community law or the Directive (which does  not  address
the Surinder Singh situation)  in continuing to require  family  members  of
UK nationals to show that the UK national has worked or  been  self-employed
in another Member State and that they have at least resided there  together.


31. The Court's answer to the second question, however, has a direct  impact
on the appellant's case. Its ruling was:
      "Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted as meaning that
      a national of a non-member country  who  is  the  spouse  of  a  Union
      citizen residing in a Member  State  whose  nationality  he  does  not
      possess and who accompanies or joins that Union citizen benefits  from
      the provisions of that directive, irrespective of when and where their
      marriage took place and of how the national of  a  non-member  country
      entered the host Member State."
32. Earlier the Court had drawn  attention  to  various  provisions  of  the
Citizens Directive, recitals 1, 4, 5 and 11 in  the  preamble  and  Articles
3(1), 6 and 7 and had then concluded:

 "  87.  First, none of those provisions requires that  the  Union  citizen
      must already have founded a family at the time           when he moves
      to the host Member State in order  for  his  family  members  who  are
      nationals of non-member countries to  be  able  to  enjoy  the  rights
      established by that directive.
   88. By providing that the family members of the Union  citizen  can  join
      him in the host  Member  State,  the  Community  legislature,  on  the
      contrary, accepted the possibility of the Union citizen not founding a
      family until after exercising his right of freedom of movement.
   89.  That interpretation is consistent  with  the  purpose  of  Directive
      2004/38, which aims to facilitate  the  exercise  of  the  fundamental
      right of residence of Union citizens in a Member State other than that
      of which they are a national. Where a Union citizen  founds  a  family
      after becoming established in the host Member State,  the  refusal  of
      that Member State to authorise his family members who are nationals of
      non-member countries to join him there would be such as to  discourage
      him from continuing to reside there and  encourage  him  to  leave  in
      order to be able to lead a family life in another Member State or in a
      non-member country.
   90.  It must therefore be held that nationals of non-member countries who
      are family members of a Union citizen derive  from  Directive  2004/38
      the right to join that Union citizen in the host Member State, whether
      he has become established there before or after founding a family.
   91.  Second, it must be determined whether, where the national of a  non-
      member country has entered a Member State  before  becoming  a  family
      member of a Union  citizen  who  resides  in  that  Member  State,  he
      accompanies or joins that Union citizen within the meaning of  Article
      3(1) of Directive 2004/38.
   92.  It makes no difference whether nationals of non-member countries who
      are family members of a Union citizen have  entered  the  host  Member
      State before or after becoming family members of that  Union  citizen,
      since the refusal of the host Member State to grant them  a  right  of
      residence is equally liable to  discourage  that  Union  citizen  from
      continuing to reside in that Member State.
   93.  Therefore, in the light of the necessity  of  not  interpreting  the
      provisions of Directive 2004/38 restrictively and not  depriving  them
      of their effectiveness, the words 'family members [of Union  citizens]
      who accompany ... them' in Article 3(1)  of  that  directive  must  be
      interpreted as referring both to the family members of a Union citizen
      who entered the host Member State with him and  to  those  who  reside
      with him in that Member State, without  it  being  necessary,  in  the
      latter case, to distinguish according to whether the nationals of non-
      member countries entered that Member State before or after  the  Union
      citizen or before or after becoming his family members.
   94.  Application of Directive 2004/38 solely to the family members  of  a
      Union citizen who 'accompany' or 'join'  him  is  thus  equivalent  to
      limiting the rights of entry and residence  of  family  members  of  a
      Union citizen to the Member State in which that citizen resides.
   95.  From the time when the national of a non-member  country  who  is  a
      family member of a Union citizen derives rights of entry and residence
      in the host Member  State  from  Directive  2004/38,  that  State  may
      restrict that right only in compliance with Articles 27 and 35 of that
      directive.
   96.  Compliance with Article 27  is  required  in  particular  where  the
      Member State wishes to penalise the national of a  non-member  country
      for entering into and/or residing in its territory in  breach  of  the
      national rules on immigration before becoming a  family  member  of  a
      Union citizen.
   97.  However, even if the personal conduct of the person  concerned  does
      not justify the adoption  of  measures  of  public  policy  or  public
      security within the meaning of Article 27 of  Directive  2004/38,  the
      Member State remains entitled to impose other penalties on  him  which
      do not interfere with freedom of movement and  residence,  such  as  a
      fine, provided that they are proportionate (see, to that effect, MRAX,
      paragraph 77 and the case-law cited).
   98.  Third, neither Article 3(1) nor any  other  provision  of  Directive
      2004/38 contains requirements as to the place where  the  marriage  of
      the Union  citizen  and  the  national  of  a  non-member  country  is
      solemnised."
33. In the light of the Court's ruling on the second question, it  is  plain
that reg 14 cannot be read as imposing any requirement of lawful  residence.
It requires neither that a third country national family member be  able  to
show prior lawful residence in another Member State nor lawful residence  in
the host Member State.

34. It is true that unlike this case, which concerns the family member of  a
United Kingdom national, Metock was  concerned  with  four  cases  in  which
subsequent to arrival in Ireland (and lodging  an  asylum  application)  the
non-EU national married a national of another Member State  who  was  living
and working in Ireland, i.e. married someone  who  was  not  a  host  Member
State national. But in the light of our  analysis  of  reg  9  of  the  2006
Regulations as being a "gateway", it follows that persons who  pass  through
that gateway are entitled to have their applications/appeals  considered  on
the same basis as  family  members  of  nationals  of  other  Member  States
exercising Treaty rights. The appellant  in  this  case  was  able  to  pass
through the reg 9 gateway.

The documentation issue
35. It might be thought straightforward, therefore, that  the  appellant  is
entitled to succeed under  the  2006  Regulations,  reg  14  in  particular.
However, in the appellant's case there is  a  further  difficulty.  When  he
came to the UK he came illegally. On the evidence before us his  entry  into
Ireland and his re-entry to the UK were effected without the  production  of
either a valid passport or an EEA family permit or a residence card. He  was
not someone therefore who could show he had been  entitled  on  return  from
Ireland to the right of admission since he was required  by  the  applicable
EEA Regulations (then reg 12(2) of  the  2000  Regulations)  to  produce  on
arrival either a valid passport or a residence  permit.  The  same  obstacle
would have confronted him had he  sought  admission  after  30  April  2006,
since reg 11(2) of the 2006 Regulations similarly provides:

   "a person who is not an EEA national must be admitted to the United
   Kingdom if he is a family member of an EEA national...and produces on
   arrival-
     a) a valid passport;
     b) an EEA family permit, a residence card or a permanent residence
        card."

36. Nor, even after 30 April 2006,  was the appellant in a position to  have
qualified under the new EEA right introduced by reg 13, to an initial  right
of residence, firstly because that right depends on his having had  a  right
of admission and secondly because he did not hold a  "valid  passport".  Not
having a right of admission to the UK and not holding a valid  passport  the
appellant was not in a position to qualify, further, for  an  initial  right
of residence since reg 13(2) provides that:

    "A family member of an EEA national  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under paragraph (1) who is not himself an EEA national is  entitled  to
    reside in the United Kingdom provided that he holds a valid passport ."
    (Emphasis added)

37. How does that affect the appellant's eligibility for an "extended  right
of residence" under reg 14(2)?

38. We have considered the following argument which might be raised  against
the appellant, based on the fact that at the date of  decision  he  did  not
have a valid passport. Although reg 14(2) does not impose a  requirement  of
lawful residence, it is entitled  "Extended  right  of  residence",  and  so
might be considered to be  a right  dependent on there  being  something  to
extend, namely an initial right of residence within the meaning of  reg  13.
In support of such a construction there is the fact that  reg  14(2)  refers
to the need for a person to show he "remains" (not "is") the  family  member
of a qualified person. If at  the  date  by  which   the  immigration  judge
promulgated his decision the position  was  that  the  appellant  had  never
produced to any  UK  authority  a  valid  passport  (and  accordingly  never
qualified for a right of admission or an initial  right  of  residence)  how
can it be said that he ever had a right of residence to extend?
39. In support of such an argument, it could be added that  the  requirement
for the national of a non Member State who asserts a right of  residence  as
a family member to produce a valid passport  is  imposed  by  the  Directive
itself. Article 10, which concerns the issue of residence cards,  states  at
para 2 that:
   "For the residence  card  to  be  issued,  Member  States  shall  require
   presentation of the following documents:
     a) a valid passport;
     b) a document attesting to the existence of a family  relationship  or
        of a registered partnership;
     c) the registration certificate or ...in the absence of a registration
        system, any other proof of residence in the host  Member  State  of
        the Union citizen whom they are accompanying or joining;
      ..."
40. Despite its  logicality  we  have  decided  that  this  argument  cannot
succeed. There are two main reasons. First, Metock clearly envisages that  a
family member can acquire a right of residence purely on the  basis  of  the
family relationship and irrespective of how the national  of  a  non  Member
State entered the host Member State and  so  the  requirement  on  a  family
member to produce a valid passport cannot operate  to  nullify  that  right.
Further, Article 10 is concerned with  the  means  by  which  the  right  of
residence may be "evidenced" (see Article 10(1))  and  Article  25(1)  makes
clear that inability to evidence the right in a  specified  form  cannot  be
determinative. It states:
   "Possession of a registration certificate as referred to in Article 8, of
   a document certifying permanent residence,  of  a  certificate  attesting
   submission of an application for a family member  residence  card,  of  a
   residence  card  or  of  a  permanent  residence  card,  may   under   no
   circumstances be made a precondition for the exercise of a right  or  the
   completion of an administrative formality, as entitlement to  rights  may
   be attested by any other means of proof." (Emphasis added).
41. Accordingly we cannot see that the  appellant's  failure  to  produce  a
valid passport either on re-entry from Ireland, in the  first  three  months
or subsequently, disqualifies him from entitlement to a right  of  residence
under reg 14(2).  It follows that in concluding that  the  appellant  had  a
right of residence the immigration judge did not err in law.
The second issue: whether the appellant was entitled to a residence card.
42.  Given that we have found the appellant has a right  of  residence  and,
further, that a failure to comply with  administrative  formalities,  cannot
negate such  a  right  or  its  exercise,  it  may  be  thought  a  foregone
conclusion that the respondent was wrong to  refuse  to  issue  a  residence
card and the immigration judge was right to allow the  appeal  against  that
refusal. However, there is nothing in the Citizens  Directive  or  the  2006
Regulations or  Community law which suggests that possession of a  right  of
residence must automatically entitle a person to   possession  of  documents
evidencing those rights. Plainly the appellant in this case  was  unable  to
meet the evidentiary  requirement  of  reg  17.  That  provision  makes  the
obligation on  the  respondent  to  issue  a  residence  card  dependent  on
production of (a) a valid passport (and (b)  proof  that  the  applicant  is
such a family member). That in turn is wholly in  line  with  the  Directive
which (as we have seen) at Article 10(2) states  that:  "For  the  residence
card  to  be  issued,  Member  States  shall  require  presentation  of  the
following  documents:  (a)  a  valid  passport...  [(b)  and   (c)   require
documentation attesting that the applicant  is  such  a  family  member  and
documentation relating to the Union citizen]".
43. We now know that quite recently the appellant had  been  issued  with  a
valid passport (valid from 2 May 2008). But  it  remains  that  he  did  not
produce it until some time  after  the  immigration  judge  promulgated  his
determination. Not having produced a valid passport, he was not entitled  to
a residence card. Accordingly, albeit correct to  find  that  the  appellant
had a right of residence,  the immigration judge materially erred in law  in
concluding that the appellant was entitled to  a  residence  card  (see  his
para 25).
Our decision
44. Having found a material error of law we turn to consider whether we  are
in a position to decide the appeal for ourselves. Given that in response  to
the Tribunal's directions made  after  the  first  hearing  the  appellant's
representatives  produced  further  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
passport documentation, we consider we are  in  a  position  to  decide  the
appeal for ourselves without further ado.
45. In reaching our own decision we can be very brief. Only two things  need
to be said.  First, pursuant to s.84(10(d) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002,  it  is  clear  from  our  earlier  analysis  that  the
decision  appealed  against  breaches  the  appellant's  rights  under   the
Community Treaties in respect of his residence in the  United  Kingdom.  Our
determination of his appeal must include, therefore, a declaration  that  he
has a right of residence under reg 14(2). Second, the only  basis  on  which
we decided that the immigration judge materially erred in law  consisted  in
the fact that the appellant did not  have  a  valid  passport.  However,  as
noted earlier, the appellant has now remedied that: he has  now  obtained  a
new Algerian passport valid from 2 May 2008 and not due to  expire  until  1
May 2009.  There  is  no  dispute  that  the  appellant  has  satisfied  the
respondent that he is the family member of  the  British  national  who,  by
virtue of the provisions of reg 9, can be treated as if he were  the  family
member of an EEA national. Hence he now  fulfils  the  requirements  of  reg
17(2) and is thus entitled to have a residence card issued to him.
Implications of Metock for cases of family members in the  UK  illegally  or
unlawfully
46. The Court noted in Metock that:
 " 95. From the time when the national of a non-member  country  who  is  a
      family member of a Union citizen derives rights of entry and residence
      in the host Member  State  from  Directive  2004/38,  that  State  may
      restrict that right only in compliance with Articles 27 and 35 of that
      directive.
   96. Compliance with Article 27 is required in particular where the Member
      State wishes to penalise the national  of  a  non-member  country  for
      entering into and/or residing  in  its  territory  in  breach  of  the
      national rules on immigration before becoming a  family  member  of  a
      Union citizen.
   97. However, even if the personal conduct of the  person  concerned  does
      not justify the adoption  of  measures  of  public  policy  or  public
      security within the meaning of Article 27 of  Directive  2004/38,  the
      Member State remains entitled to impose other penalties on  him  which
      do not interfere with freedom of movement and  residence,  such  as  a
      fine, provided that they are proportionate (see, to that effect, MRAX,
      paragraph 77 and the case-law cited).
  98. Third, neither Article 3(1)  nor  any  other  provision  of  Directive
      2004/38 contains requirements as to the place where  the  marriage  of
      the Union  citizen  and  the  national  of  a  non-member  country  is
      solemnised."
47. Under the 2006 Regulations the equivalent provision to  Articles  27  is
reg 21. Article 35 reflects a general principle of  Community  law  and  its
proscription of marriages of convenience  is  reflected  in  the  definition
given of "spouse" in reg 2(1) ("'spouse' does  not  include  a  party  to  a
marriage of convenience").
48. Although we have found that the appellant in this case has  a  right  of
residence under reg 14, it is important to emphasise that in  his  case  the
respondent has been prepared to  accept  that  the  family  relationship  is
genuine and she has not sought at any stage to invoke either  public  policy
or fraud reasons. (Nor has the respondent sought, at least  up  to  now,  to
impose any penalty or fine.) In the course of the hearing of this  case  she
also accepted that his spouse had worked in Ireland and that the couple  had
lived together there prior to returning to  the  United  Kingdom.  In  other
cases one or more of these matters may be disputed by the respondent.
Existing case law
49. Since the parties  expressed  conflicting  views  about  the  impact  of
Metock on existing authorities,  both at ECJ and national level,  and  since
potentially a significant number of cases stand to be  affected  by  Metock,
it may assist if  we  seek,  tentatively,  to  outline  how  we  think  this
judgment impacts on existing case law.
50. So far  as  ECJ  cases  are  concerned,  we  can  confine  ourselves  to
commenting on the implications of Metock for the case of Akrich.  Akrich  on
its face was authority for taking a  restrictive  view  of  the  appellant's
situation, since its facts were very  similar.  It  too  concerned  a  third
country national spouse of a British national who,  like  the  appellant  in
this case, had resided unlawfully in the UK before and  after  his  marriage
to a British citizen. He had no lawful basis for stay in the UK  or  in  any
other EEA State. He had been deported to Ireland and the  decision  appealed
against was a refusal to revoke a deportation order made against  him.   The
referring tribunal in Akrich sought to ascertain the scope of the  judgement
in Surinder Singh. The Court's main conclusions, it will be  recalled,  were
that:

    "49... Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68  covers  only  freedom  of  movement
    within the Community. It is silent as to the rights of a national of  a
    non-Member State, who is the spouse of  a  citizen  of  the  Union,  in
    regard to access to the territory of the Community.


    50. In order to benefit in a situation such as that  at  issue  in  the
    main proceedings  from  the  rights  provided  for  in  Article  10  of
    Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68, the national of a non-Member State, who is
    the spouse of a citizen of the Union, must be lawfully  resident  in  a
    Member State when he moves to another Member State to which the citizen
    of the Union is migrating or has migrated".


51. The only proviso the Court saw fit  to  make  was  to  require  that  in
relation to the situation described in para 54:

    "58...regard must be had to respect for family life under Art 8 of  the
    Human Rights Convention. That right is  among  the  fundamental  rights
    which, according to the  court's  settled  case-law,  restated  by  the
    preamble to the Single European Act 1986 and by Art 6(2) are  protected
    in the Community legal order"

52. However, the Court in  Akrich  was  concerned  to  interpret  Regulation
(EEC) No 1612/68, which the Citizens Directive has  now  amended.   Further,
in Metock the Court expressly stated that:
   "58. It is true that the Court held in paragraphs 50  and  51  of  Akrich
      that, in order to benefit from the rights provided for in  Article  10
      of Regulation No 1612/68, the national of a non-member country who  is
      the spouse of a Union citizen must be lawfully resident  in  a  Member
      State when he moves to another Member State to which  the  citizen  of
      the Union is migrating or has migrated. However, that conclusion  must
      be reconsidered. The benefit of such rights cannot depend on the prior
      lawful residence of such a spouse in another  Member  State  (see,  to
      that effect, MRAX, paragraph 59, and Case C-157/03 Commission v Spain,
      paragraph 28).
   59. The same interpretation must be adopted a fortiori  with  respect  to
      Directive 2004/38, which amended Regulation No  1612/68  and  repealed
      the earlier directives on freedom  of  movement  for  persons.  As  is
      apparent from recital 3 in the preamble to Directive 2004/38, it  aims
      in particular to 'strengthen the right of free movement and  residence
      of all Union citizens', so that  Union  citizens  cannot  derive  less
      rights from that directive than  from  the  instruments  of  secondary
      legislation which it amends or repeals."
53. What the Court states as para 58  does not necessarily mean that  Akrich
 must be considered as always having been  wrong;  the  approach  the  Court
takes  to  Community  legislation  is  one  of   teleological   or   dynamic
interpretation, which sees itself as  evolving standards over time.  But  it
does mean that Akrich is no longer to be followed. The Court's reference  in
Metock to the same interpretation having to be adopted with respect  to  the
Citizens Directive "a fortiori",  taken  in  conjunction  with  its  earlier
identification  of   specific   provisions   of   the   Citizens   Directive
demonstrating that no condition of prior lawful residence can be  placed  on
the right of residence of family members, appears also to  suggest  that  it
views the Citizens Directive as having  expanded  the  scope  of  rights  of
residence afforded by Community law.

54. Metock also referred to the case of Eind. This case concerned the  third
country national daughter of a Dutch national. When he went to work  in  the
UK she joined him from Surinam. In the United Kingdom he  and  his  daughter
were granted a right to reside. On 17 October 2001 Mr Eind returned  to  the
Netherlands with his daughter. She  applied  for  a  residence  permit.  The
decision of the Dutch authorities gave rise to  the  proceedings  which  led
the Dutch Council of State to refer several questions to  the  Court  for  a
preliminary ruling. Mr Lam submitted that this judgment  was  favourable  to
the appellant's case by analogy. He referred to paras 35-45 and para  37  in
particular, which states:

    "Barriers to family reunification are therefore liable to undermine the
    right to free movement which the nationals of  the  member  state  have
    under Community law, as the right of a Community worker  to  return  to
    the member state of which he is a national cannot be considered to be a
    purely internal matter".

55. In our view, Eind taken on its own provides only limited support for  Mr
Lam's argument.   The only ruling of possible relevance is 2, which states:

    "The fact that a third-country national who is a member of a  Community
    worker's family did not, before residing in the Member State where  the
    worker was employed, have a right under national law to reside  in  the
    Member State of which the worker is a national has no  bearing  on  the
    determination of that national's right to reside in the latter State".

56. This ruling essentially establishes a negative:  that  in  order  for  a
third country family member to have a right to reside in  the  Member  State
of which  the Union citizen is a national it is not  necessary  that  he  or
she had a right to  reside  there  previously.  Further,  the  case  is  not
concerned with a third-country national whose  presence  in  both  the  host
Member State and the Member State to which the Union citizen went  in  order
to work is unlawful. Miss Eind was granted a right to reside in the UK  and,
prior to entering the Netherlands with her Dutch father, had no  history  of
unlawful presence in the Netherlands or  anywhere  else  in  the  Community.
But in the light of what the Court ruled in Metock , Mr Lam  does  not  need
to rely on Eind.

57. From the above it can be seen that whatever may have been  the  position
under ECJ jurisprudence prior to Metock, it is now the case  that  a  third-
country national spouse may be able to acquire a right  of  residence  in  a
host Member State where his spouse or civil partner resides,  on  the  basis
of the family relationship alone.

General principles of Community law and Article 8
58. Given our conclusions relating to Metock it is  unnecessary  for  us  to
address Mr Lam's subsidiary argument that, even if ECJ  case  law  does  not
demonstrate that a family member whose presence in  the  host  Member  State
has always been illegal is entitled to a right of residence as such,  he  or
she should be  granted  one  if  failure  to  do  so  would  breach  general
principles of Community  law,  that  of  proportionality  and  human  rights
protection in particular (he cited  in  support   cases  such  as  MRAX  and
Carpenter).

UK case law
59. The Tribunal has not hitherto decided in any reported case the issue  of
a person  seeking  to  rely  on  "Surinder  Singh  rights"  under  the  2006
Regulations as the third country national spouse of a British citizen  where
that person is not lawfully resident in the United Kingdom.  The closest  it
has come is in GC. In GC, however, the  United  Kingdom  national,  although
she had moved  to  another  EEA  State  (Ireland)  for  a  few  months,  the
appellant himself had not moved with her. Accordingly reg 9  did  not  apply
to him: see GC, para 50. As  noted  earlier,  we  have  not  had  to  decide
whether Metock assists the family member of a United  Kingdom  national  (in
relation to the requirements  that  the  UK  national  must  have  exercised
Treaty rights in another Member State and  resided  there  with  the  family
member),  although  (as  indicated  earlier),  on  general   Community   law
principles we cannot see that it does except in relation to the  requirement
(now negated by Metock) that the family  member's  presence  there  must  be
lawful.

60. We recognise, however, that Metock does mean that the  general  approach
the Tribunal has taken to cases involving persons who seek to invoke  rights
as EEA family members of EEA nationals notwithstanding that  their  presence
in the UK is illegal or unlawful can no longer be followed.

61. Turning to decisions of the higher courts, KG and AK (Sri Lanka)  [2008]
EWCA Civ 13 (which was raised in submissions)  is  primarily  a  case  about
"other family members"/extended family members, whereas Metock is  concerned
with  Article  3  family  members.  That  aside,  some  of  what   is   said
(secondarily) in this decision by Buxton  LJ  about  "free  movement  rules"
more generally can  be  described  as  prescient  since  there  are  several
passages which suggest that free movement rights can be  accorded  to  third
country nationals of EEA  nationals  or  Union  citizens  exercising  Treaty
rights on the basis of the family relationship alone: see paras 8,  27,  62.
However, in the light of  Metock  certain  other  parts  of  his  judgment's
analysis of free movement rules can, with respect no longer be followed.  At
para 46 Buxton LJ noted, by reference to Akrich:

    "If the Union citizen is established in state A with a spouse  who  has
    not right to be there, the Union citizen cannot  be  seen  as  deterred
    from moving to state B by the fact that the spouse will not be able  to
    accompany her, because she had had no right to have him in her  company
    in state A..."

62. In the same passage Buxton LJ continued:

    "Take the case of a Union citizen contemplating return from state B, in
    which she has been established as a worker, to her native state  A.  If
    her spouse had a right to be with her in state B he will  be  permitted
    under the free movement rules to enter state A with her. That  was  the
    position with Miss Eind...But if the spouse did not have a right to  be
    in state B, the free movement rules will not apply, and he will only be
    permitted to enter state A if he complies with its domestic immigration
    law. The free movement rules do not apply because, as the Union citizen
    had no right to have her spouse with her in state B,  she  cannot  have
    been deterred from moving to stage A by the fact that  the  same  legal
    position will obtain in that state".


63. In the light of the Court's rejection in  Metock  of  the  prior  lawful
residence requirement, this analysis cannot stand. Buxton LJ's  comments  at
paras 20, 25, 28 30, 58, 60 and 61 that  the  Citizens  Directive  does  not
generate initial rights of entry into the territory of the Community  for  a
family member spouse and that the free movement guaranteed by  the  Citizens
Directive is a freedom of the internal market, "thus assuming movement  from
one member state to another", are no longer wholly  apposite.  His  analysis
at paras 65 of the  "accompanying"  and  "joining"  requirements,  at  least
insofar as they relate to family  members,   must  also  be  rejected.  (The
further Court of Appeal judgement in KG (Sri Lanka)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  664,
has no relevance to the issues of concern here, nor does TC  (Kenya)  [2008]
EWCA Civ 543, which concerns Article 35 of the Citizens Directive).

64. Since our hearings of this case, we have become aware  of  the  judgment
of the Court of Appeal on 11 June 2008, Shirley McCarthy  and  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 641.  This  case  concerned  a
dual UK and Irish national who had sought to argue that she had  resided  in
the UK in accordance with the  2006  Regulations  by  virtue  of  her  Irish
citizenship. Upholding the decision of the Tribunal, Pill LJ concluded  that
a UK national  resident  in  the  UK  cannot,  by  virtue  of  having  Irish
nationality,  claim  a  permit  which  may  be  granted  by  virtue  of  the
Directive. We do not see that Metock  impinges  on  this  decision  at  all.
Further, Pill LJ's obiter comment at para 33,  in  which  he  said  that  he
disagreed with the Tribunal in considering  that  the  Directive  invariably
imposes a requirement that there is movement from one  country  to  another,
could be said to very much anticipate Metock.

65. Bringing matters up to the present, we come then to the recent Court  of
Appeal judgement dealing with the Tribunal case  of  GC:  GC  (China)  [2008
EWCA Civ 623. As already noted, this judgment  (which  echoes,  although  it
does not cite, an earlier Court of Appeal judgment, R(on the application  of
H)(by his mother and next friend  OH)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  245)  upholds  the
approach of the Tribunal in GC which was to find  that  the  appellant,  the
spouse of a national of the United Kingdom, could not succeed  either  under
reg 9 of the 2006 Regulations or Community law because she  had  not  moved.
Whilst it may be that statements made by Sedley LJ at para 8 concerning  the
need for "inter-state movement" and at para 13 concerning the  inconsistency
between the "accompanying or joining"  requirements  of  Article  7  of  the
Citizens Directive and "staying put" cannot survive  Metock,  the  ratio  of
the judgment is that a person who is re-entering  the  country  of  her  own
nationality is not exercising any EU right of free  movement:  that  is  not
impugned by Metock.

66. For the above reasons we conclude that:

the immigration judge materially erred in law;
the appellant has an EEA right of residence;
the decision we substitute for his is to allow the appellant's appeal.

Signed:


Dr H H Storey






