
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                   MG ('Degree level' study) South Africa [2007] UKAIT 00067


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Date of hearing:18th June 2007    |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      senior IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER


                                   Between

                                     MG
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr C Mannan, counsel, instructed by Simply Visas
Limited
For the respondent:    Mr D Hutchison, Home Office presenting officer


The requirement of  'a  course  of  study  at  degree  level  or  above'  in
paragraph 60(i)(c) of HC 395 which has to be interpreted in accordance  with
paragraph 6 of the Rules means that the constituent parts of the  course  of
study in question have to be at degree level.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of South Africa, born on 20th October  1984.
    Her appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent,  refusing  her
    application to vary her leave to remain as a student under paragraph 62
    of HC 395 with reference to paragraph 60(i)(b) was dismissed,  after  a
    hearing, by Immigration Judge Eban on the grounds that she did not meet
    the requirements of paragraph 60(i) of the rules and therefore  had  no
    right of appeal, in a determination promulgated on 13th March 2007.

 2. On 2nd April 2007 Senior Immigration Judge Lane ordered reconsideration
    on the application of the appellant for the following reasons:

        "1.  The grounds accompanying the application  raise  an  issue  of
             interpretation as to what is meant by "degree level study",  as
             defined by  paragraph  6  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
             arguable that the interpretation should be one that encompasses
             the type of course on which the appellant embarked.

        2.   Reconsideration is ordered on the appellant's grounds."

 3. The grounds asserted  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in
    paragraph 15 of the determination.  In that paragraph  the  immigration
    judge said that she was not satisfied that the  appellant's  course  at
    EThames was a course which led to a degree since her counsel  had  said
    that registration with the University of London was  dependent  on  the
    appellant passing her first year  exams.   The  grounds  asserted  that
    counsel for the  appellant  explained  that  registration  with  London
    University would be administered by EThames on behalf of the  appellant
    if she successfully completed the course.  Counsel did not say that the
    same system or  procedure  would  apply  if  the  appellant  was  at  a
    recognised university or at London University as asserted in  paragraph
    15 of the determination.  He said the position would be the same if the
    appellant were at the University of London at the outset of her  course
    and did not complete her first year.   The  second  ground  for  review
    submitted that the definition of 'leads' should be given  its  ordinary
    meaning in law and the appellant's course did in fact lead to a degree.
     In paragraph 15 of her determination the immigration judge did not say
    why the appellant's course did not lead to a  university  degree.   She
    had enrolled on a course at EThames which clearly stated it was to lead
    to a BSc degree.  That was markedly different to a student  being  told
    that he/she was to be  enrolled  on  an  'A'  level  course  which  was
    referred to in paragraph 15 of the determination.  The third ground for
    review asserted that the immigration judge had made an error of law  in
    paragraph 16 of her determination in which she found that the HNC which
    the appellant said she would achieve at the end of her first  year  was
    not  a  qualification  at  level  6  of  the  National   Qualifications
    Framework.  The grounds suggested that 'A' levels were at level  3  and
    HNC/degrees were at the old level 4 and the  new  revised  level  6  as
    shown on the Dfes QCA/government HDAQ/Openquals database.

 4. The history of the matter is that the appellant  was  admitted  to  the
    United Kingdom as a working holiday maker.   She  applied  for  further
    leave as a student having enrolled on what was  described  as  a  three
    year BSc Management course from 24 July 2006 to 31 July 2009 at EThames
    Graduate School.

 5. In paragraph 13 of her determination the Immigration Judge stated  that
    the IDIs made it clear for the purposes of the  definition  of  'degree
    level study' in paragraph 6 of the  rules  that  "a  recognised  United
    Kingdom degree" was a degree that had been awarded by an institution in
    England, Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland  which  had  been  granted
    degree awarding  powers  by  either  a  Royal  Charter  or  an  Act  of
    Parliament.  These were known as recognised bodies.  She went on to say
    that all United Kingdom universities and some higher education colleges
    were recognised bodies.  She was satisfied that London University was a
    recognised body.  In paragraph 14 of her determination  she  said  that
    other institutions that did not have  the  power  to  award  their  own
    degrees might provide courses which led to a  degree  of  a  recognised
    body.  These were known as  listed  bodies.   She  was  satisfied  that
    EThames was a listed body.  That means  that  she  was  satisfied  that
    EThames was an authorised provider of the  course  that  the  appellant
    proposed to follow and satisfied the requirements of paragraph 57(i) of
    HC 395.  She was also satisfied that  the  degree  that  the  appellant
    might obtain was  from  an  institution  capable  of  awarding  degrees
    recognised by the Act, namely London University.  In  paragraph  15  of
    her determination however she said this:

        "While I am satisfied that the appellant is on a course of study at
        EThames, I am not satisfied that it is a course which  leads  to  a
        degree: as Mr Mannan told me registration with  the  University  of
        London is dependent on the appellant passing her first year  exams.
        He told me that this would be the case for any first  year  student
        enrolled at a recognised body and attending a degree  course  at  a
        recognised body.  This was an assertion made by Mr  Mannan  without
        any evidence to support it.   Accordingly  based  on  the  evidence
        before me I am not satisfied that the course on which the appellant
        is currently enrolled is a course which leads to a degree, any more
        than 'A' levels are a course which lead to a degree - they may be a
        pre-requisite but they are separate and  different  from  a  course
        which leads to a degree."

 6. The matter came  before  me  for  reconsideration  of  the  appellant's
    appeal.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant

 7. Mr Mannan submitted that EThames Graduate School was  included  on  the
    Department for Education and Skills Register of Education and  Training
    Providers.  The appellant was a South African and therefore a  non-visa
    national.  In these circumstances  she  would  be  entitled  to  switch
    without having had entry clearance as a student.   He  referred  me  to
    paragraph 6 of the immigration rules which defined 'degree level study'
    as a course  which  led  to  a  recognised  United  Kingdom  degree  at
    bachelor's level or above, or an equivalent qualification at level 6 or
    above of the revised National Qualifications Framework, or level  9  or
    above  of  the  Scottish  Credit  and  Qualifications  Framework.    He
    submitted  the  appellant  had  been  enrolled  on  a  three  year  BSc
    Management degree course.  At the end of her first year if she achieved
    an HNC then she would move onto an external degree course leading to  a
    degree from the University of London.  He submitted that such a  course
    qualified as degree level study.  She was to study for  a  degree  that
    would be awarded by a recognised university, namely the  University  of
    London, and it was not relevant  that  she  was  not  enrolled  at  the
    University of London.  Mr Mannan said that he did not have any evidence
    that HNCs were at the new revised level 6 but both he and Mr  Hutchison
    agreed that I might research the position myself and treat the  results
    as evidence adduced in the course of the hearing.

The submissions on behalf of the respondent

 8. Mr Hutchison submitted that much depended on the definition of 'leads'.
     The appellant was enrolled on a one year course at EThames.  It  could
    be argued that her course led to an HNC after which if  successful  she
    would be entitled to enrol upon a degree level  course  of  study.   He
    submitted that the immigration judge  had  made  an  analogy  with  'A'
    levels.  He  submitted  that  that  was  a  correct  analogy.   If  the
    appellant was not enrolled at the University of London her  course  led
    to an HNC and not to a degree.



My conclusions


9.   The relevant part of paragraph 60 of the immigration rules provides as
    follows:

         "The requirements for an extension of stay as a student are that
     the applicant:
         (i) was last admitted to the UK in possession of a valid entry
         clearance in accordance with paragraphs 57-75M or 82-87F of these
         Rules, unless the applicant:
           .......................
           (c) is a non-visa national who has been accepted for a course of
           study at degree level or above, and who entered the UK with
           leave in accordance with the provisions of any category of these
           Rules, other than paragraphs 40-56J, 82-87, 104-121, and 135I-
           135N; or..........."

10.  Paragraph 6 of the immigration rules defines "degree level study" as:

         " a course which leads to a recognised United Kingdom degree at
         bachelor's level or above, or an equivalent qualification at level
         6 or above of the revised National Qualifications Framework, or
         level 9 or above of the Scottish Credit and Qualifications
         Framework"


11.  Neither representative was able to provide me with any authority
    during the course of the hearing.  In suggesting that the appellant's
    proposed course led to a degree it may well be that at the back of Mr
    Mannan's mind was the determination of the tribunal in TY (Student;
    "satisfactory progress"; course of study) Burma [2007] UKAIT 00007.  In
    that case in paragraph 11 of their determination the Tribunal said:

        "The phrase 'course of study' is capable of encompassing more  than
        one course, though it need not.  A 'course of  study'  is  the  sum
        total of the parts (courses) which coherently add together and lead
        to the educational outcome sought, such as a certificate  or  other
        qualification.  Thus, a 'course of study' may comprise a foundation
        course followed by other more advanced courses which  together,  if
        successfully completed, lead to the  qualification.   The  contrast
        therefore is with the parts (the 'courses' which themselves may  be
        comprised  of  modules)  and  the  whole  or  overall   educational
        endeavour (the 'course of study').  That  is  not  to  say  that  a
        'course of study' must always comprise more than a 'single' course.
         Whether it does will depend upon the structure of the  'course  of
        study' itself."

     It is important to appreciate, however, that the Tribunal  was  dealing
    with the  obligation  on  the  part  of  an  applicant  to  demonstrate
    satisfactory evidence of regular attendance on the course for which  he
    was last granted leave to enter or remain and was  not  concerned  with
    the definition of a course of study at degree level or above.

12.  In YS and SJ ('Degree level' study) Mauritius [2006]  UKAIT  00094  the
    Tribunal held that the requirement of 'a  course  of  study  at  degree
    level or above' in paragraph 60(i)(b) of HC 395 had to  be  interpreted
    in accordance with paragraph 6 of the rules and also  sections  214-216
    of the Education Reform Act 1988.  The condition could be met  only  if
    the claimant had been accepted for a course leading to a degree awarded
    by an institution capable of awarding a degree recognised by  the  Act.
    Dublin Metropolitan University was not such a body. The  Tribunal  also
    indicated the correct approach to the situation in the present case  in
    dealing with the suggestion that the appellants had by the date of  the
    hearing enrolled upon courses  leading  to  a  recognised  degree.   In
    paragraph 25 of their determination the Tribunal said:

         "Under cover of a letter to the Tribunal dated 18  September  2006,
         the appellants have provided evidence that each of them is enrolled
         at the London Institution for  Further  and  Higher  Education,  19
         Elmwood Road,  Croydon,  for  a  full-time  course  leading  to  an
         advanced diploma of the Association of  Business  Executives.   The
         first appellant's diploma is to be in business information  systems
         and his start date is given as 26 June 2006; the second appellant's
         diploma is to be in business administration and her start  date  is
         given as 16 October 2006.  As is demonstrated by a letter from  IND
         to the registrar of that institution, an ABE  advanced  diploma  is
         regarded as a qualification at "degree level" for the  purposes  of
         the definition in paragraph 6 of HC 395.  That is not because it is
         itself a degree, but because it is at  level  6  or  above  of  the
         revised National Qualifications Framework.  We  take  it  that  the
         letters were intended to demonstrate  that,  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing, the appellants met the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.  It is possible that s85(4)  of  the  2002  Act  was  to  be
         invoked.  The position is, however, as Mr  Tam  pointed  out,  that
         registration for an ABE advanced diploma could not of  itself  show
         that the appellants met all the other requirements of paragraph 60.
          There is no evidence that they do meet the other  requirements  of
         paragraph 60, and the matter has never been  investigated,  because
         the refusal was solely on the basis of their failure  to  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 60(i)(b).  There is  a  further  problem.
         Each of the appellants' enrolment for the diploma  is  specifically
         conditional on meeting the "necessary entry requirement  to  pursue
         the course".  According to the  only  evidence  before  us  on  the
         matter, which is paragraph 3.7.3.4 of the Respondent's  Immigration
         Directorates' Instructions, in order  to  qualify  for  entry  onto
         either of the advanced diplomas, an entrance must have attained  an
         ABE diploma in the relevant  discipline,  a  degree  awarded  by  a
         recognised  United  Kingdom  or  overseas  university,  or  another
         recognised qualification  on  an  approved  overseas  institute  of
         higher education.  There appears to be no evidence before  us  that
         either of the appellants  was  qualified  to  embark  on  a  course
         leading to an ABE advanced diploma...."

13. There is in the reconsideration bundle  a  letter  from  the  E  Thames
    Graduate School dated 21st December 2006 addressed  to  the  respondent
    which states that the principal could confirm that  the  appellant  was
    currently studying for a BSc Management from the University  of  London
    external programme. Although it might have appeared that the  appellant
    had enrolled upon a course to be provided by E Thames which would  lead
    to a degree in management, what caused difficulty for the appellant  in
    this case was that the Secretary of State received a  letter  from  the
    University of London dated 12th January 2007 stating that the appellant
    was not registered as an external student of the University  of  London
    and had  not  submitted  an  application  for  admission  for  the  BSc
    Management Degree (or any other programme).  The letter went on to  say
    that she would not  be  admitted  unless  she  satisfied  the  entrance
    requirements for admission to the programme for  which  she  wished  to
    apply.  In paragraph 16 of  her  determination  the  immigration  judge
    referred to the evidence of the appellant  that  she  would  achieve  a
    Higher National Certificate at the end of her first year.

14. I am satisfied that therefore the position was that the  appellant  had
    embarked upon an HNC course for a year to be followed  by  an  external
    degree course provided that she satisfied the registration requirements
    of the University of London  as  an  external  student.   Although  the
    teaching for the courses was to be provided by EThames, nonetheless  it
    is clear that the appellants had not yet  enrolled  upon  the  external
    degree course and her enrolment was conditional upon her success in the
    HNC examinations.  In these circumstances  her  situation  was  on  all
    fours with that of the appellants in YS and SJ ('Degree  level'  study)
    Mauritius.  If the question were asked whether the subjects  which  the
    appellant was studying for her HNC course formed part of  her  proposed
    degree course the answer in my view would clearly be in  the  negative.
    It seems fairly obvious that studying subjects which if successful will
    result in an HNC cannot be degree level study.  Mr Mannan's  submission
    that the situation of the appellant was similar to that of a first year
    degree course student whose further progression depended  upon  success
    in examinations at the end of the first year is not correct  since  no-
    one would doubt that such a student had been accepted on a degree level
    course and his first year's studies formed  part  of  that  course.  No
    doubt it suits the commercial interests  of  EThames  Graduate  School,
    whose name suggests the  provision  of  courses  at  degree  level,  to
    advertise the two courses together as a BSc Management course but in my
    view the HNC element of the course does not amount to a course of study
    at degree level or above.

15. There is support for this view to be found in the determination of  the
    Tribunal in TF (student - conditional offer  not  acceptance)  Pakistan
    [2007] UKAIT 00029.  In that case the appellant had been accepted on by
    New College Nottingham, on an English language course  from  July  4th,
    2005 - August 26th 2005 and had a conditional offer for progression  on
    to the GSCE programme starting on 5 September 2005 for  one  year.   To
    progress the student had to achieve the required IELTS  level  5.5  and
    obtain a satisfactory progress and attendance report.

16. In paragraph 15  of  the  determination  the  Tribunal  said  that  the
    structure of section 91(1)(a) and (b) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002  was such that, in order to have a right of appeal,
    a person must have  been accepted for  a  course  of  study  and   that
    course must be one that will last more than six  months.  If  the  only
    course for which a person had been accepted was  one  that  lasted  six
    months or less, she could not  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, whether or not she had an aspiration to  follow  some  other
    longer course for which she had not been accepted.

17. In paragraph 19 of the determination the Tribunal said:


         "In this Tribunal's view, the analogy  sought  to  be  made  by  Ms
         Taylor between the present case and that of a student  progressing,
         subject to satisfactory performance, from one year to the next of a
         degree course is a false one.  On  the  facts  of  this  case,  the
         better analogy is that of a person being given a conditional  offer
         by a university, dependent upon that  person  obtaining  particular
         grades at 'A' level.    On any reading of the  letter  of  24  June
         2005 from New College Nottingham, the appellant's acceptance on the
         GCSE  programme  was  conditional;  indeed,  the  third   paragraph
         expressly  refers  to  her  having  'a  conditional  offer'.    The
         Immigration Judge should have looked at the two courses  for  which
         the appellant had sought entry to  the  United  Kingdom  and  asked
         himself whether she had been 'accepted' on them for the purposes of
         the Rules.  As a matter  of  statutory  interpretation,  'accepted'
         should, the Tribunal finds,  be  given  its  ordinary  meaning.  It
         cannot be equated  with  holding  'a  conditional  offer'.  If  the
         drafters of the Rules and the 2002 Act had intended to cover such a
         case, they could easily have done so.  Accordingly,  the  appellant
         had not been 'accepted' for the GCSE course".

18. So far as the suggestion that the appellant's HNC course was at level 6
    of the National Qualifications Framework is concerned  the  immigration
    judge noted in paragraph 16 of her  determination  that  she  had  been
    provided with no documentary evidence that it was.  In the third ground
    for review it was asserted that "HNC/Degrees" were at the  new  revised
    level 6.  If that were the case then  it  should  have  been  a  simple
    matter for Mr Mannan, who also represented the appellant at the hearing
    before the immigration judge, to have provided a  print  out  from  the
    relevant web page but none was forthcoming.   As  previously  indicated
    both representatives agreed that I might research the point myself  and
    regard the result as if evidence of it  had  been  adduced  during  the
    hearing.  I was not able to find  the  web  page  referred  to  in  the
    grounds for review but  the  result  from  www.edexcel.org.uk/nqf-grid/
    clearly shows that HNCs are at the revised  level  5  of  the  National
    Qualification Framework.

19. In these circumstances I am not satisfied that  the  immigration  judge
    made a material error of law in her determination and her determination
    dismissing the appeal therefore stands.






Signed                              Dated


Senior Immigration Judge Spencer

