
SD (expert evidence) Lebanon [2008] UKAIT 00078 | |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|asylum and immigration Tribunal                                             |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|         |                          |                    |                  |
|Heard at:|Field House               |Date of hearing:    |17 July 2008      |
|         |                          |Determination       |                  |
|         |                          |notified:           |                  |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Senior Immigration Judge Gill                                               |
|Designated Immigration Judge French                                         |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |SD                                                 |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |
|                                                                          |

Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr.  E.  Wilford,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  the
                       Refugee Legal Centre (RLC).
For the Respondent:    Ms.  J.  Isherwood,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.


     Where an expert refers the Tribunal to cases in which his expertise has
     been accepted or acknowledged or in which he has  received  praise,  he
     must, at the same time, refer the Tribunal to any  cases  which  he  is
     aware of and which may detract from what is said about him in the cases
     he has referred to. Failure to place before the Tribunal such  material
     in an even-handed way may reflect on the weight  to  be  given  to  the
     evidence which is the subject matter of the expert's report(s).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is  the  reconsideration  of  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  a
     national of Lebanon born on 17 October 1964. She arrived in the  United
     Kingdom on 9 May 2004 and was granted entry on a six-month  visit  visa
     until 20 October 2004. She claimed asylum on 1 September 2004 with  her
     child as her dependant.  On  16  March  2005,  the  Respondent  made  a
     decision to refuse to vary the Appellant's leave to  enter  the  United
     Kingdom and to refuse to grant asylum. The Appellant  appealed  against
     this decision. Her appeal was heard on 20 June 2005 before  Immigration
     Judge Cohen, who dismissed her appeal in a determination promulgated on
     5 July 2005. On the application of the Appellant, the Tribunal  ordered
     reconsideration on 19 July 2005. The first-stage of the reconsideration
     took place on 22 December 2005. The Tribunal decided that there  was  a
     material error of law in the determination of Immigration Judge  Cohen,
     but stated that it was unable to complete  the  reconsideration  on  22
     December 2005, because further oral evidence would be necessary.

2.    The second stage of the reconsideration  of  the  Appellant's  hearing
     took place on 11  July  2006  before  Immigration  Judge  Bartlett  and
     Immigration Judge Markham David.  In a determination promulgated on  27
     July 2006, the Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

3.    On 5 December 2006 and  by  a  Order  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  the
     Appellant's appeal was allowed and remitted to the  Tribunal,  for  the
     reasons given in the Statement of Reasons, which reads:

      "1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Lebanon, a Christian and a  single
           parent of a child born out of wedlock.

      2.    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on a visitor's Visa  in
           May 2004 and claimed asylum on 1 September 2004 before expiry of
           her leave  to  enter.  She  appealed  against  the  Respondent's
           decision of 16 March 2005 to refuse to vary leave to enter which
           was accompanied by a reasons for refusal letter  of  the  asylum
           claim of the same date.

      3.    At the subsequent appeal, the AIT found at paragraph 32 that:

            "The objective material overall is indicative  of  a  reasonable
                 degree of likelihood that the Appellant would be at risk of
                 substantial harm or of being the victim of  honour  killing
                 if she returned to live with her family and brothers in the
                 small village at which she resided ...."

      4.    The AIT, however, dismissed the appeal stating that:

                 "On the basis of the evidence as we assessed it,  it  would
                 not  be  unsafe,  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  the
                 Appellant to enter and relocate to a part of Lebanon  other
                 than the village where her family resides....."

      5.    The AIT therefore  found  that  the  Claimant  could  internally
           relocate within Lebanon so that she would not be  found  by  her
           family.

      6.    In dismissing the claim, it is accepted that the  AIT  erred  in
           law for the following reasons:

            i.   The AIT did not take into account  the  events  surrounding
                 the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in the  period  between  12
                 and 19 July, during which time the  determination  remained
                 pending.  These  events  were  relevant  to  the  issue  of
                 internal relocation for the Appellant and  her  child  with
                 regards to whether internal relocation was a reasonable and
                 safe expectation in light of the ongoing conflict  and  the
                 consequences for the  welfare  of  the  Appellant  and  her
                 child.

            ii.  The AIT did not fully engage with the expert report of  Dr.
                 Alan George dated 18 May 2005 which  stated  that  internal
                 relocation would not guarantee the safety and the anonymity
                 of the Appellant as a single parent.

       7.     Therefore,  for  the  reasons  stated  above,  the  Respondent
           concedes that this amounts to an error of law ................."

4.    The appeal was then listed for hearing before the  Tribunal  on  dates
     including 26 April 2007 and 1 October 2007. On 1 October 2007,  it  was
     listed before Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis who  adjourned  the  case
     and directed that it be re-listed for hearing. Senior Immigration Judge
     Jarvis made the following observations and directions:


     "UPON hearing  Ms  E  Storey  of  the  Refugee  Legal  Centre  for  the
     Appellant, who requested an adjournment by reason of the fact  that  Mr
     Bandegani, Legal Representative who has conduct of the matter  for  the
     Appellant, has been taken ill and is unable to leave his home, and that
     he has with him the Appellant's file, (a letter to that effect arriving
     with us after we  had  concluded  the  hearing),  and  there  being  no
     objection from Ms J Isherwood  Presenting  Officer,  we  adjourned  the
     hearing to a date to be  fixed  with  the  following  observations  and
     directions.


     ISSUES FOR RECONSIDERATION:


     1. On 5 December 2006, an order was made, by consent, in the Court  of
        Appeal,  allowing  the  Appellant's   appeal   and   quashing   the
        determination of the Tribunal dated 11 July 2006 and issued  on  27
        July  2006.  The  matter  was  remitted   to   the   Tribunal   for
        reconsideration.


     2. At the hearing on 26 April 2007 before the Tribunal it  was  agreed
        that the order of the Court of Appeal  was  to  be  interpreted  as
        holding that there had been a material error of law on the part  of
        the previous of the Tribunal so that the Tribunal would  next  move
        to the second stage of the further reconsideration. It was  further
        agreed that  the  primary  findings  of  fact  and  credibility  in
        relation to the Appellant's account, as found by the panel  of  the
        Tribunal that decided the appeal in the determination issued on  27
        July 2006 are to stand. On 26 April 2007, the  Tribunal  noted  the
        agreed material facts to be:


      . The Appellant is not married
      . The Appellant is a national of Lebanon
      . The Appellant has a son who was born out of wedlock in 2004
      . The Appellant is of the Christian faith
      . The Appellant is in contact with her former partner who is said  to
        be in the Lebanon
      . The Appellant is at real risk in her home area where she is in fear
        of being a victim of an honour killing at the hands of  her  family
        members by reason of her having given  birth  to  a  child  outside
        wedlock, such a fear being well-founded.


     3. In addition to the above and to the fear of being a  victim  of  an
        honour killing, it is accepted  by  the  parties  that  it  is  the
        Appellant's case that she also holds a genuine subjective fear that
        her former partner will take her child away from her  and  that  he
        will be permitted to do so by the law in the Lebanon.


     4. The further substantive hearing is by way of  full  further  second
        stage reconsideration in order that all the relevant material facts
        may be found in relation to all matters and issues, both subjective
        and objective, going to internal relocation within the Lebanon  and
        more particularly to  Beirut,  and  to  include  receiving  written
        expert evidence and perhaps  also  oral  expert  evidence  from  Dr
        George and from Mr Abed Awad, the latter  to  provide  evidence  on
        relevant aspects of Lebanese family law. It is  likely  that  there
        will also need to  be  up  to  date  oral  evidence  given  by  the
        Appellant.


     5. In the light of the findings as to relevant fact, the Tribunal will
        then consider and decide the issue of  risk  on  return,  including
        whether the Appellant would be  at  real  risk  on  return  to  the
        Lebanon if required to relocate to Beirut from her home  area,  for
        all or any of the feared reasons or any other relevant reasons.


     6. On 28 June 2007 Directions were given for the filing and service of
        expert evidence by the  Appellant  which  have  not  been  complied
        with."

5.    On 9 May  2008,  this  case  was  listed  for  hearing  before  Senior
     Immigration Judge Gill.  Unfortunately,  inadequate  arrangements  were
     made for the hearing, in consequence of which the  hearing  had  to  be
     adjourned. At this hearing, the Appellant was  represented  by  Ms.  G.
     Loughran, of the  RLC,  and  the  Respondent  was  represented  by  Ms.
     Isherwood, who sought to withdraw the Respondent's acceptance   of  the
     finding that the Appellant is at real risk of being a victim of  honour
     killing at the hands of members of her family in her home area.  Senior
     Immigration Judge Gill ruled against Ms. Isherwood. Senior  Immigration
     Judge Gill observed that the Tribunal (in the determination promulgated
     on 27 July 2006) had found that the Appellant was at real risk of being
     a victim of honour killing if she returned to live with her family  and
     brothers in the small village at which she had resided an hour's  drive
     from Beirut (see paragraph 32 of the determination), that the  Tribunal
     had dismissed the appeal only because it found that the Appellant would
     be able to relocate in Lebanon, that the case was remitted by the Court
     of Appeal on the basis of the Statement of  Reasons  and  that  it  was
     clear from the Statement of Reasons that the Respondent  did  not  take
     issue with the finding that the Appellant was at real risk in her  home
     area. In these circumstances, Senior Immigration Judge  Gill  concluded
     that it was too  late  for  the  Respondent  to  take  issue  with  the
     Tribunal's finding that the Appellant was  at  real  risk  of  being  a
     victim of honour killing in her home area. It would be unfair to  allow
     the Respondent to do so.

6.    It is plain from what we have said above that  the  findings  made  in
     the determination of the Tribunal promulgated on 27  July  2006  stand,
     except for the findings with regard to internal flight. Accordingly, we
     adopt paragraphs 1 to 32 of that determination, and this  determination
     should  be  read  as  if  paragraphs  1  to  32  of  the  determination
     promulgated on 27 July 2006 had been set out herein.

7.    At the hearing on 9 May 2008, the Tribunal was informed  that  it  was
     the Appellant's intention  to give oral evidence on her own behalf  and
     also to call two expert witnesses, namely,  Dr.  Alan  George  and  Dr.
     Sabah Al-Mukhtar, who had both provided written reports.

8.    The appeal was then listed before us for  hearing  on  17  July  2008.
     Unfortunately, an interpreter had not been  requested.  We  immediately
     instructed the administrative staff to arrange for  an  interpreter  to
     attend. At about 11.30 a.m., Mr. Ahmed Blaha,  an  interpreter  in  the
     Arabic language, arrived.

9.    Mr. Wilford made a request for an adjournment. This  was  because  Dr.
     Al-Mukhtar was not present. Mr. Wilford informed us  that  he  and  Ms.
     Isherwood  were  agreed  that  the  presence  of  Dr.  Al-Mukhtar   was
     necessary. Mr. Wilford informed us that Dr. Al-Mukhtar was contacted on
     9 June, when he confirmed that he would be able to attend  the  hearing
     on 17 July. However, Dr. Al-Mukhtar subsequently said that he  was  not
     aware that he should attend on 17 July, which Mr. Wilford accepted  was
     contradictory. Mr. Wilford could not explain what had gone wrong.

10.   We were concerned about the possibility of  similar  problems  arising
     in the future. We were also mindful of the fact that the case had had a
     long history. In our view, the Appellant had had sufficient opportunity
     to secure the attendance of any expert witnesses.  We  also  took  into
     account the fact that we had a  written  report  from  Dr.  Al-Mukhtar.
     Although there were matters arising from his report which we would have
     liked to put to Dr. Al-Mukhtar if he had attended the hearing, we  were
     not given any assurance that, if the matter  was  adjourned,  he  would
     attend on a future occasion. In all of the circumstances, and  for  all
     of these reasons, we were not satisfied that rule 21(2) of  the  Asylum
     and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  as  amended,  was
     satisfied. Accordingly, we refused the adjournment request.

11.   Mr. Wilford then contacted the RLC and  asked  them  to  make  contact
     with Dr. Al-Mukhtar with a view to arranging (or attempting to arrange)
     his attendance before us on the same day. At the conclusion of the oral
     evidence of the Appellant and Dr. George, when we were  ready  to  hear
     oral evidence from Dr. Al-Mukhtar, Mr. Wilford  informed  us  that  his
     instructing  solicitors  had  informed  him  that  Dr.  Al-Mukhtar  had
     travelled to the hearing centre but that he did not wait to  be  called
     to give oral evidence. It seems he arrived whilst we were hearing  oral
     evidence from Dr. George and that he then  left  to  attend  a  meeting
     elsewhere. Mr. Wilford reiterated his view that it  was  important  for
     the Appellant to call oral  evidence  from  Dr.  Al-Mukhtar.  We  again
     refused the request. Our reasons are the same as stated above.

12.   The parties agreed that it was for the Tribunal to decide whether  the
     Appellant had a genuine fear of losing her child to his father. In this
     regard, we made the observation that  the  previous  Tribunal  did  not
     accept the Appellant's evidence that she is estranged from  the  father
     of her child  or that her relationship with him has ended.

13.    We  also  raised  the  question  as  to  whether  the  Appellant  was
     attempting in her recent witness statement dated February  2008  (pages
     B1 to B4 of the Appellant's bundle B) to re-argue factual issues  which
     have been settled by the previous Tribunal. In this regard, Mr. Wilford
     acknowledged that the guidance in   DK  (Serbia)  and  others  v.  SSHD
     [2006] EWCA Civ  1747  was  against  the  Appellant.  In  addition,  he
     acknowledged that  the adverse credibility assessment of  the  previous
     panel in the determination promulgated on 27 July  2006  had  not  been
     challenged by the Appellant. However,  he  submitted  that  the  recent
     witness statement of the Appellant was evidence before the Tribunal.

14.   We asked the parties whether we have to reach a finding as to  whether
     the Appellant is at real risk of being persecuted  by  members  of  her
     family if she were to relocate, or whether the finding of the  Tribunal
     in the determination promulgated on 27 July 2006 that the Appellant  is
     not at such real risk stands.  Mr. Wilford referred us to  paragraph  5
     of  the  document  issued  by  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Jarvis.  Ms.
     Isherwood initially said that she relied on her skeleton argument  but,
     when pressed to clarify  her  position,  asked  us  to  reach  our  own
     finding. As we indicated at the hearing, we take into account the  fact
     that the parties have, to date, assumed that we would  have  to   reach
     our own finding on this factual issue and that paragraph 5 of the  note
     of Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis conveys the impression that  it  was
     understood that the Tribunal would have to reach  a  fresh  finding  on
     this issue.

15.   Accordingly, we have decided that the finding of  the  previous  panel
     that the Appellant is not at real risk of persecution from  members  of
     her family if she were to relocate will not stand,  and  that  we  will
     reach our own finding on that matter on the whole of the  evidence.  Of
     course, this includes the evidence that was before the  previous  panel
     and as has been assessed by it  to  the  extent  not  affected  by  the
     Consent Order and the Statement  of  Reasons.  Ms.  Isherwood  accepted
     that, in the event that we were to find that the Appellant is  at  real
     risk of being persecuted if she were to relocate  and  that  she  would
     have insufficient  protection,  then  there  is  an  applicable  Geneva
     Convention reason.

16.   We raised several matters in connection with  the  psychiatric  report
     of Dr. James Barrett. On page B11, he states  that,  at  the  time  the
     Appellant gave her previous accounts (which, we noted, were  given  two
     years or so previously), she was suffering from the same  psychological
     problems she was suffering from at the time of his examination of  her.
     We questioned what this opinion was based on, since we  could  not  see
     that Dr Barrett had had the benefit of the Appellant's medical records.
      On page B12, Dr. Barrett made recommendations for the treatment of the
     Appellant, i.e. that her GP should institute treatment for a depressive
     disorder.  We  questioned  whether  these  recommendations   had   been
     progressed by the Appellant or her GP.  We asked  Mr.  Wilford  whether
     the Appellant was currently on any  treatment  and  if,  so,  what.  He
     informed us that he was unable to assist, because the interpreter  from
     the RLC had not arrived.

17.   The parties agreed that, in addition to internal  flight  with  regard
     to the asylum claim, we also had to decide whether the Appellant is  at
     real risk  of  serious  harm,  pursuant  to  the  President's  Practice
     Direction of 9  October  2006,  to  treat  the  grounds  of  appeal  as
     including,  and  having  always  included,  a  humanitarian  protection
     ground.

18.   With regard to the human rights claim, Mr. Wilford  informed  us  that
     he relied on Articles 3 and 8.  He  informed  us  that  there  are  two
     strands to the Article 3 claim - one which is based on the same factual
     matrix as the asylum claim, and the second which is based on  the  risk
     of suicide. Similarly, Mr. Wilford  informed  us  that  there  are  two
     strands to  the  Article  8  claim,   the  first  being  based  on  the
     deterioration in the Appellant's health together  with  the  associated
     risk of suicide, and the second being based on the Appellant's right to
     family life with her child which (it is contended  on  the  Appellant's
     behalf)  would be lost if the Appellant were to lose her child  to  the
     child's father.

      Oral evidence from the Appellant:

19.   We heard oral evidence from the Appellant, through an  interpreter  in
     the Arabic language. In examination-in-chief, she  confirmed  that  her
     recent statement dated 18 February 2008 had been read back to  her  and
     that its contents were true and correct.

20.   There were no questions in cross-examination.

21.   We then explained to the Appellant that we  had  noted  that  she  had
     given explanations for the difficulties the previous  panel  had  found
     with her evidence. We asked her why we should believe her evidence that
     she fears that the father of her child would take her child  away  from
     her, if she were to return to Lebanon. In response, the Appellant  said
     that she has been in the United Kingdom for four years and has not  had
     any contact with the father of her child. During the four years, he has
     not made any attempt to contact her, although  he  knows  that  she  is
     living with her sister Leila and he knows  her  sister's  address.  She
     does not know why he has not made any contact with her during the  past
     four years.

22.   The Appellant said that the reason why she believes  that  the  father
     of her son will take her son away from her, is because her  brother-in-
     law met her son's father whilst he was in  Lebanon.  Her  son's  father
     told her brother-in-law that he does not want her (the Appellant),  but
     he wants the child.  Her  brother-in-law  has  explained  this  in  his
     witness statement which was submitted to the previous panel.

23.   The Appellant told us that, when she was in Lebanon,  she  went  to  a
     boarding school in Al-Ashrfieh in Beirut for ten years,  and  that  she
     left school at the age of 17 years. After leaving school, she worked in
     shops in different areas, in the centre  of  Beirut  and  also  in  the
     surrounding areas of Beirut. She lived  with  her  mother  in  an  area
     called Baabda, which was about half an hours' drive from Beirut.

24.   The Appellant said that she  is  currently  living  with  her  sister,
     Leila, in the United Kingdom. She does not receive any news from  Leila
     about her family in Beirut. She has had an argument  with  her  sister.
     They are not on good terms. Her sister has allowed her to live  in  her
     house for the sake of her son.

25.   Neither Mr. Wilford nor Ms. Isherwood had any questions  arising  from
our questions.

      Oral evidence of Dr. George

26.   Dr. George confirmed that he stood by what he has said  in  his  first
     report dated 18 May 2005 and his three supplementary reports  (dated  8
     March 2006, 3 December 2007  and  27  February  2008),  having  made  a
     correction of "a small editing  error"  in  one  of  the  supplementary
     reports. The last version of his curriculum vitae is  set  out  in  the
     third report dated December 2007. Since then, Dr. George has  completed
     a trip to Iraqi Kurdistan in late  April  this  year,  after  which  he
     briefed the Foreign Office research department, "Research Analysts", on
     the situation in Iraqi Kurdistan. In May, he gave a lecture in Istanbul
     at a university conference on Turkish / Syrian relations. In late June,
     he was invited by the Foreign Office,  Research  Analysts,  to  give  a
     seminar on how to conduct research on the middle  east.  Also  in  late
     June, he gave a lecture, at the International Institute  for  Strategic
     Studies in London on the future of Lebanese-Syrian relations. This  was
     a conference involving Israeli and European academics. The most  recent
     broadcast he did was about a month ago for the BBC  World  Service,  on
     the Lebanese political crisis.

27.   Since the fourth and last report was written, the political crisis  in
     Lebanon has not only persisted, it has evolved into armed confrontation
     in various parts of the Lebanon, most notably in late spring and  early
     summer this year, when  there  were  a  series  of  armed  events.  For
     example, Hizbollah, a Shia militant group,  occupied  west  Beirut  for
     several days. Normally, it is  not  present  in  west  Beirut.  In  the
     northern city of  Tripoli,  there  have  been  successive  gun  battles
     between pro- and anti-Hizbollah groups who fought  in  the  streets  in
     Tripoli. In the Shouf  mountains,  south  east  of  Beirut,  there  was
     fighting between the Druse and Hizbollah. In May, there was a political
     solution of sorts, mediated by Qatar, the Gulf state, as  a  result  of
     which Hizbollah withdrew from west Beirut. However,  sporadic  fighting
     has  persisted,  particularly  in  Tripoli.  The  political  crisis  in
     Lebanon, and the accompanying violence,  arises  essentially  from  the
     very  nature  of  Lebanon,  its  society  and  the  rivalries   between
     significant components of the Lebanese population. These various groups
     have outside sponsors, in  particular,  Syria  and  Iran,  who  support
     Hizbollah, and on the other side, United States and France, who support
     the groups who oppose Hizbollah. The situation now, while mainly  calm,
     remains tense. None of the underlying issues have been resolved.

28.    Paragraph  45  of  Dr.  George's  third  report  (page  B34  of   the
     Appellant's bundle  B)  states  that  "...it  is  neither  the  general
     practice nor is it easy for individuals to relocate to parts of Lebanon
     remote from members of  their  community."  Dr.  George  told  us  that
     outbreaks  of  communal  violence  reinforce  an   awareness   of   the
     significance of the communal structure and the fact that  security  can
     be found in one's own community,  although  this  does  not  mean  that
     people from one community never move to some  other  part  of  Lebanon.
     Paragraph 45 of the same report also states that families and  extended
     families form the basis of society in Lebanon and that they provide the
     social, economic and political support. Dr. George told us that,  if  a
     person is literally totally destitute and has no contacts,  they  would
     have to survive by begging or  obtaining  charity  if  they  could  not
     obtain a job, which would depend on their skills. It is  not  the  case
     that, in every single instance, the only way one can survive is through
     the support of one's family or clan. Dr. George said that he would  not
     exclude the possibility of a Lebanese, without  a  particularly  strong
     family clan or backing, succeeding spectacularly in terms  of  business
     etc. However, the  general  position  is  that  people  rely  on  their
     families for support and as a  social  network.  This  is  what  people
     depend on when they do not have a job or when they are in trouble.  The
     Lebanese state does not provide a generous welfare state.

29.   Paragraph 46 of the same report states  that  "the  extended  families
     and clans, as well as functioning as vital economic and  other  support
     mechanisms for individuals constitute highly effective channels for the
     flow of information. Through family and  clan  networks,  a  fugitive's
     antagonists would have relatively little difficulty establishing  their
     quarry's whereabouts. This is especially so as Lebanon is such a  small
     country." Asked to explain how a person would go about finding  someone
     through that person's extended families, Dr. George said that one would
     work one's way from one end of one clan system into the next.  If  each
     clan or extended family is seen  as  being  akin  to  a  village  where
     everyone knows the presence of each individual, it is  relatively  easy
     to track members of a clan. At the  points  where  clans  and  extended
     families overlap, as they do "at the edges", then one can gain  insight
     into who is in the adjacent clan or family.

30.   Dr. George said that  he  has  had  personal  experience  of  this  in
     Lebanon in the context of his commercial consulting work. In  1996,  he
     was asked to go to Lebanon to establish the background or bona fides of
     a gentleman who wanted to be  the  local  representative  of  a  multi-
     national company. His task was to establish whether  the  gentleman  in
     question, who was a Maronite Christian, had a clean background in terms
     of gun running or drugs.  Within four or  five  days,  Dr.  George  had
     learnt a surprising  amount  about  the  gentleman,  simply  by  moving
     through the family system until he got near enough to  the  gentleman's
     extended family so that he  was  talking  to  the  gentleman's  distant
     family who knew all about him.

31.   In cross-examination, Dr. George informed  us  that  he  was  last  in
     Lebanon in April 2007.  Paragraph  15  of  the  third  report  dated  3
     December 2007 mentions a trip in March / April  2007  to  Lebanon.  Dr.
     George told us that he obtains his information about what is  happening
     in these countries  in  many  ways.  One  reads  the  media,  including
     internet websites.  One  stays  abreast  of  the  latest  publications,
     academic  books  and  reports  of  numerous  bodies,  such  as  Amnesty
     International Report. One attends  conferences.  Dr.  George  maintains
     contact  with  foreign  office  officials  who  are  dealing  with  the
     countries in question. In the case of Lebanon, Dr. George also receives
     by e-mail each morning the main Lebanese  newspaper,  the  Daily  Star,
     which is a respected English language Lebanese daily newspaper.

32.   The publication entitled: "Honour:   Crimes,  Paradigms  and  Violence
     against Women",  edited  by  Lynn  Welchman  and  Sara  Hossain,  dated
     November 2005, which is attached to Dr. George's second report dated  8
     March 2006, states, at page A37 of the Appellant's bundle A,  that,  in
     its constitution, Lebanon has committed  itself  to  the  principle  of
     justice and equality for all Lebanese before the law  and that "Lebanon
     has voluntarily become a party to a number of international conventions
     and charters that involve the principle of  equality  and  require  the
     abolition of all forms of discrimination between one person and another
     on grounds beyond their choice and will". In response, Dr. George  said
     that he had not written this chapter himself and that there may be some
     confusion over the use of the word "committed" in the publication.  Dr.
     George took it to mean that, by signing the  conventions,  Lebanon  had
     committed itself. However, this was different, in  Dr.  George's  view,
     from saying that the Lebanese government is "committed"  in  the  sense
     that it is pressing forward on all fronts  in  all  parts  of  society,
     including Hizbollah, to eliminate discrimination against women.

33.   The reason why Dr. George did not refer to the "third periodic  report
     of the State's  parties"  to  the  United  Nations'  Committee  on  the
     Elimination of Discrimination against Women, in his reports, until this
     was mentioned by the Respondent in the skeleton argument,  is  because,
     as stated at paragraph 35 of his fourth report dated 27 February  2008,
     he did not consider that it added anything substantive to the  existing
     information on matters relevant to the instant appeal.

34.   There were no questions by way of re-examination.

35.   We then asked Dr. George some questions. Referring to paragraph 14  of
     his report on page A58 of the Appellant's bundle A,  where  Dr.  George
     had said, in  commenting  on  customs,  particularly  in  Jordan,  that
     "nothing in Islam provides for such brutality", Dr. George informed  us
     that he does not have any formal in-depth knowledge about Islam  or  in
     Islamic law or jurisprudence and the  Islamic  legal  system.   He  has
     general knowledge about Islamic law.

36.   We then referred Dr. George to paragraph 23 of  his  first  report  at
     page A60 of the Appellants bundle A, where he  had  made  reference  to
     various communities within Lebanon. Asked to describe in greater detail
     what communities exist and where they are found in Lebanon, Dr.  George
     said that the biggest Christian community is  the  Maronite  community,
     thought to be a majority in the 1930s/1940s. Maronite Christians are to
     be found in the "swathe" or  area  stretching  continuously  from  east
     Beirut running northwards along the coast to  a  point  roughly  midway
     between the coastal towns of Jounieh and Tripoli. At  that  point,  the
     area shifts  from  being  Maronite  Christian  to  Sunni  Muslim.  This
     Maronite "swathe" extends inland to embrace the first of Lebanon's  two
     parallel mountain angles. It  functioned  as  a  mini  Christian  state
     during the civil war. Other Christian groups and also some  Muslims  do
     live in this Maronite Christian "swathe", which can also  be  described
     as a territory which runs from the eastern half  of  Beirut,  which  is
     Christian, northwards along the  coastal  plane  and  to  the  adjacent
     mountain range. There are geographically  recognisable  towns  in  this
     region. East Beirut is one. Joune is another. Those are  the  two  main
     urban centres. There are numerous villages and smaller  towns  in  this
     area. Asked to describe the size of  Joune  and  the  other  towns  and
     villages, Dr. George said that  statistics  in  Lebanon  are  extremely
     unreliable, because of the sensitivity of the issue as to the  relative
     sizes of the various communities and the  sizes  of  the  control  they
     should have over the state.

37.   Apart from this "swathe", Maronite Christians will  not  be  found  in
     any significant numbers in other parts of Lebanon, although  there  are
     other Maronite Christians in other major towns such as Sidon and  Tyre,
     both of which are majority  Sunni  with  "very  very  small"  Christian
     communities. In addition, in the south of  Lebanon   along  the  border
     with Israel, there is a Maronite presence, which is not dominant, in  a
     mainly Shia area. The other remaining major  part  of  the  country  is
     almost exclusively Shia  and  Sunni.  At  the  edges  of  the  Maronite
     heartland, the situation can be quite variable over short distances, as
     the religious structure merges into the adjacent area.

38.   Dr. George told us that Tripoli, which  is  Lebanon's  second  biggest
     city, is a Sunni majority city.  There  are  Christian  communities  in
     Tripoli. There is a small Armenian Greek  Orthodox  or  Greek  Catholic
     community in Tripoli. There may also  be  some  Syrian  Catholics;  Dr.
     George  was  not  sure  without  conducting  further  research.   These
     Christians are also found in Beirut.

39.   With reference to paragraph 46 of his third report on page B34 of  the
     Appellant's bundle B, which states, inter alia,  that  newcomers  to  a
     locality attract attention, Dr. George said that he could cite numerous
     examples of newcomers going to a new locality. These were examples from
     his work as an  expert  witness,  involving  Lebanese  cases  when  the
     applicants were deemed incredible by the courts. These individuals have
     given detailed accounts of how difficult or impossible it was  to  live
     anonymously. Dr. George  stressed  that  this  is  not  a  particularly
     Lebanese phenomenon but a middle eastern phenomenon.

40.   In the event that we  were  to  find  that,  although  unmarried,  the
     Appellant is not estranged from the father of  her  son  and  that  her
     relationship with him had not in fact  ended,  then,  in  Dr.  George's
     opinion, the issue as  to  whether  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
     relocate in Lebanon would depend very much  on  the  attitudes  of  his
     family and her family. Dr. George said: "If they were at one end of the
     spectrum of social or  religious  opinion,  at  the  extreme  end,  the
     fundamentalist end, it would be very serious if they continued to  have
     a relationship out of wedlock. If, on the other hand, they were at  the
     other end of the spectrum, there would not be a problem. In relation to
     Maronite society, wealthy educated Maronites are often very liberal  in
     such matters. At the other end of the Maronite spectrum, in a  mountain
     village for example,  attitudes can be just about as  hard-line  as  in
     the case of fundamentalist Muslims. Somewhere  in  the  middle  of  the
     Maronite spectrum, one might put the poorer  working  or  middle  class
     residents  of  East  Beirut  who,  while   tending   to   be   somewhat
     conservative, would not necessarily  take  violent  action  to  express
     their opposition to the relationship. It really is  very  difficult  to
     generalise." Dr. George accepted that, in his reports,  the  assumption
     made that the Appellant's family would wish to track her down and carry
     out an honour crime, was based on an acceptance  of  her  evidence.  He
     said  he  was  aware  of  the  difference  between   plausibility   and
     credibility and where his function ceases.

41.   At paragraph 9 of his second report on page  A18  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle A, Dr. George had explained that the reason why he did not refer
     to the report of the Canadian  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  (CIRB)
     dated 25 February 2004 at paragraph 17 of his first report, is  because
     his first report largely overlapped with the CIRB report.  However,  we
     had noted that, in fact the statistics in the CIRB report which he went
     on to describe at paragraph 9  of  the  second  report  contradict  the
     statistics previously given at paragraph 17 of his first  report.  When
     this was put to Dr. George, he said that he was not surprised that  the
     statistics cited by the Daily  Star  and  the  CIRB  conflict,  due  to
     definitional problems as  to  what  constitutes  an  honour  crime  and
     because of the underreporting of honour crimes.

42.   At paragraphs 16 to 18  of  his  third  report  on  page  B28  of  the
     Appellant's bundle B, Dr. George had provided  some  information  about
     the assessment by the judiciary of his expert reports in  other  cases.
     At paragraph 18 of the report, Dr. George had said that the courts  had
     invariably found him qualified to act as an expert witness, that he was
     very rarely criticised and that  any  criticism  was  either  minor  or
     proved to lack substance by subsequent judicial scrutiny. Asked whether
     this was his own opinion, or whether it was held by  the  courts   upon
     further judicial scrutiny of any judgments which were critical  of  his
     reports, that the criticisms  were  minor  or  without  substance,  Dr.
     George said that the short answer, which he  would  like  to  elaborate
     upon slightly, is  that,  in  some  cases,  the  criticisms  have  been
     overturned by the Court  of  Appeal  and  that,  in  other  cases,  the
     criticisms have not been examined by higher judicial authority.

43.   We asked whether there was  any  particular  reason  why  he  had  not
     quoted the criticisms in the same way as he had quoted  from  judgments
     which made positive remarks about him, so as to enable the Tribunal  to
     decide the matter for itself. Dr. George said that there were a  number
     of reasons. It would simply be unwieldy  to  have  done  so;  the  most
     standard critique of those criticisms would run to several pages.  When
     the question was repeated, Dr. George said that he had tried to include
     matters which are of substance and of relevance to assisting the court.
     He did not consider that "criticisms which are minor or which evaporate
     on examination to be any way helpful".  However, he said that  he  "was
     ready to go through  that  process  without  going  into  any  sort  of
     detail".  He asked if it would help to give us one example of  what  he
     meant, or if it would help  if  he  were  to  submit  his  critique  of
     criticisms that had been made of his reports.  We  were  worried  about
     embarking about an examination of  satellite  issues  and  we  did  not
     consider that any further delays in our consideration of this case were
     justified. We observed that it would perhaps have been more helpful  if
     Dr. George had simply set  out  the  critical  cases  as  well  as  the
     complimentary ones, so that we can decide the matter for ourselves.

44.   At paragraph 20 of his first report on page  A60  of  the  Appellant's
     Bundle A, Dr. George had attributed the following  quote  to  the  U.S.
     State Department Report on Lebanon for 2003:

            "Women who report  instances  of  violence  against  them  often
            receive dismissive or insufficient protection from the  police,
            as it is seen that family matters should be handled within  the
            family, even with reference to such severe  matters  as  "honor
            killings".

45.   At paragraph 42 of his third  report  (page  B34  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle B), Dr. George said that this quotation  should  not  have  been
     included in his first report because it does not  appear  in  the  said
     USSD Report, referring to it as "an editing error".  Asked  to  explain
     how the "editing error" had occurred, Dr.  George  that  he  could  not
     really do so at this point. He said: "It would have been some  item  in
     my computer which would probably have been in the memory that one  uses
     when drafting an article which I inserted intending to take  out  again
     but failed to do so". He agreed that, if something is  quoted  wrongly,
     this may give rise to misgivings with regard to the  report  generally.
     Dr. George said that the quote in question "has the ring of an  earlier
     report, possibly an earlier USSD report. It is not something  I  wrote"
     and that the curious thing was that the quote in the last  sentence  of
     paragraph 20 of the first report is an accurate  quote  from  the  same
     USSD report.

46.   We have narrated almost the whole of Dr. George's oral evidence.

47.   We then heard submission from the parties, which we have considered.

48.   We reserved our decision.

      Assessment

49.   It is for the Appellant to establish that  she  is  at  real  risk  of
     treatment amounting to persecution for a Geneva  Convention  reason  or
     serious harm or (in relation to the Article 3  claim)  that  there  are
     substantial grounds for  believing  that  she  would  be  subjected  to
     treatment amounting to torture or inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
     punishment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

50.   We stress that we have considered all the  documents  before  us  very
     carefully (whether or not they have been specifically referred  in  our
     determination) before reaching our conclusions on this  appeal.  It  is
     impossible, without producing a determination of inordinate length,  to
     refer to each and every document or mention each  and  every  point  or
     argument mentioned in each document.

51.   As stated above, the factual findings of  the  previous  Tribunal,  as
     set out at paragraph 2 of the document quoted at our paragraph 4 above,
     stand. It is also clear, from this document, that it is  necessary  for
     us to reach a finding as to whether the Appellant has  a  genuine  fear
     that her son's father will take her son away  from  her.  The  previous
     Tribunal  made  an  adverse  assessment  of  the  credibility  of   the
     Appellant's evidence, including her evidence as to her alleged  contact
     (or absence of contact) with her son's father in the United Kingdom. As
     we observed at the hearing, it is plain,  from  the  reasoning  of  the
     previous Tribunal, that the  previous  Tribunal  did  not  believe  the
     Appellant's evidence that she was estranged from her son's  father,  or
     that her relationship with him has ended. This case was remitted by the
     Court of Appeal to the Tribunal only for  the  Tribunal  to  reconsider
     internal flight. The only error of law agreed between  the  parties  in
     the  Statement   of   Reasons   concerned   the   previous   Tribunal's
     consideration of the availability of internal flight on account of  the
     risk of being a victim of an honour crime at the hands of  her  family.
     At the hearing before us, Mr. Wilford acknowledged that the guidance of
     the  Court of Appeal in DK (Serbia)  was  against  the  Appellant.   We
     agree. The findings of  the  previous  Tribunal,  in  relation  to  the
     Appellant's evidence about the alleged lack of contact with  her  son's
     father, are not affected by the error of law, and they should stand.

52.   In any event,  we  did  not  find  the  Appellant's  further  evidence
     credible. In her statement of February 2008, the Appellant acknowledged
     that she had been untruthful previously. She sad that she had lied when
     she said she had met a friend of her son's father on a  bus.  She  said
     she lied, because she thought that she would not be believed if she had
     said that she had not had a relationship with her son's father for some
     time and that she was afraid that she would be removed  to  Lebanon  if
     she was not believed. We did not find her explanation at all  credible,
     not least  because, on this evidence, she is still saying that she  was
     not in contact with her son's father at the relevant  time,  which  the
     previous Tribunal found contradicted the evidence  of  her  brother-in-
     law, that she and her son's father lived with him and his  wife  for  a
     substantial period, only leaving at the end of August 2004 to  go  into
     NASS  accommodation  together  (see  paragraph  27  of   the   previous
     determination). Accordingly, having taken an opportunity to correct the
     previous adverse credibility assessment  by  making  her  statement  of
     February 2008, the Appellant has still  given  evidence  which  is  not
     credible and which is still contradicted by the evidence of her brother-
     in-law.

53.   In all of the circumstances, and for these reasons, we  did  not  find
     that there were any good reasons for departing from the findings of the
     previous Tribunal in connection with the Appellant's evidence about her
     contact (or lack of contact) with her son's father.

54.   The Appellant said that  the  only  reason  why  her  sister  and  her
     brother-in-law allow her to live in their home, is for the sake of  the
     child  and that  she  and  her  sister  do  not  talk.  In  her  recent
     statement, she described her circumstances in her sister's home. In his
     report, Dr. Barrett describes  the  Appellant's  circumstances  in  her
     sister's home, stating that she and her son are confined to their  room
     as much as possible (see page B8 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  B).   He
     describes the atmosphere as being "exceedingly tense" (page B8  of  the
     Appellant's bundle B)  and  her  circumstances  as  being  "desperately
     miserable domestic circumstances" (page B11 of the  Appellant's  bundle
     B). Of course, in making these observations, Dr. Barrett relies on  the
     Appellant's account to him of her domestic circumstances.  The  overall
     impression given, of a difficult and unsupportive environment,  is  not
     supported by the fact that the Appellant's brother-in-law attended  the
     previous hearing and gave evidence in support of her appeal. Bearing in
     mind the previous Tribunal's assessment of the Appellant's  credibility
     and the fact that the previous Tribunal also had difficulty  with  some
     aspects of the evidence of the Appellant's  brother-in-law  and  having
     regard, further, to the fact that  we  too  have  difficulty  with  the
     Appellant's evidence, we did not find the Appellant's evidence that she
     and her sister do not talk and do not get along credible. We only  have
     the Appellant's evidence in her recent statement that her  brother  has
     told her sister and brother-in-law that,  if  she  were  to  return  to
     Lebanon, he (the Appellant's brother) would kill her. This  Appellant's
     credibility is so low that we do not  accept  that  anything  she  says
     which is not supported by other evidence is  reasonably  likely  to  be
     true.

55.   The previous Tribunal made a finding that the  Appellant  is  at  real
     risk of substantial harm or of being the victim of an  honour  killing,
     if she returned to live with her  family  and  brothers  in  the  small
     village at which she would have  lived  an  hour's  drive  from  Beirut
     (paragraph 32 of the determination of the previous Tribunal).   In  our
     view, it is clear that the Tribunal based this finding on the objective
     evidence as to the availability, or otherwise, of state  protection  to
     potential female victims of honour killing. Having noted earlier in the
     same paragraph the Respondent's submissions, the information  contained
     in the CIRB report of 25 April 2006 and a letter from a lawyer  stating
     that Lebanese Christians have an open mentality that permits common law
     relationship and that the age and financial status of the  women  would
     be relevant in deciding whether an individual  is  at  real  risk,  the
     Tribunal did not assess the Appellant's circumstances or her  evidence,
     in order to reach its finding that the Appellant would be at real  risk
     of an honour killing at the hands of her family.

56.   We  therefore  have  difficulty  with  the  finding  of  the  previous
     Tribunal, that  the  Appellant  is  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
     substantial harm from her family in her home area because, as  we  have
     said, that finding appears  to  be  based  entirely  on  the  objective
     evidence as to sufficiency of protection. This may be  the  reason  why
     Ms. Isherwood sought to re-open the issue as to whether  the  Appellant
     is at real risk of persecution in her home area. Our decision  in  this
     regard was that it was too late for the Respondent to seek  to  re-open
     this factual issue and that it would be unfair to allow her to  do  so.
     It  is  right  that   we   stand   by   that   decision.   Accordingly,
     notwithstanding the fact  that  we  did  not  believe  the  Appellant's
     evidence, we determine this appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  previous
     Tribunal's finding that the Appellant is at real risk of persecution or
     substantial harm at the hands of her family in her home  area,  stands.
     That finding is determinative  of  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  (for
     reasons given below). This is the reason  why  we  have  described  our
     difficulty with the previous Tribunal's finding that the  Appellant  is
     at real risk in her home area, and the reasons for our  difficulty.  If
     we had not explained our reasons, we would have  left  unexplained  the
     potential conflict between the adverse assessment  of  the  Appellant's
     credibility (including her evidence that her brother has threatened  to
     kill her) and our decision to allow this appeal.

57.   We had several difficulties with the evidence of Dr. George.

58.   The first difficulty we have relates to the  error  which  Dr.  George
     described as an "editing error" in relation  to  paragraph  20  of  his
     first report (on page A60 of the Appellant's bundle A), which  contains
     the quote we have set out at our paragraph 44 above. At paragraph 42 of
     his third report (page B34 of the Appellant's  bundle  B),  Dr.  George
     states that this quotation should not have  been  included  because  it
     does not appear in the said USSD  report.  He  referred  to  it  as  an
     "editing error". We have set out above Dr. George's explanation in oral
     evidence as to how this editing error occurred. The fact that an expert
     has included a quote attributing it to a report which does not in  fact
     include that quote, raises questions about the accuracy of the expert's
     reports in other respects. However, experts, like all human beings, can
     make mistakes. On the other hand, we cannot dismiss this error  out  of
     hand as a trifling matter either, given that the Tribunal  is  entitled
     to expect that material quoted in  an  expert's  report  is  accurately
     taken from the document indicated to be the source  of  the  quote  and
     that sources for any  quotations  are  accurately  indicated.  If  this
     "editing error" was the only issue we had with Dr.  George's  evidence,
     it may be that we might have concluded that it was not  worthy  of  any
     special mention. However, given that we have other  concerns,  we  feel
     bound to mention it.

59.   The second difficulty relates to paragraph 17 of  Dr.  George's  first
     report (page A59 of the Appellant's bundle A) and paragraph 9  of   his
     second report (page A18 of the Appellant's bundle A). At  paragraph  17
     of his first report Dr. George quoted the following passage from a CIRB
     report dated 25 February 2004:

            "Most deaths linked to honour crimes are  not  reported  to  the
            police and  are  covered  up  by  the  family  as  suicides  or
            accidents ..... Of the 36 [reported]  honour  crimes  committed
            between 1995 and 1998, 22 were  committed  by  brothers,  7  by
            husbands, 6 by fathers, and 1 by a son".

60.   At paragraph 9 of his  second  report,  Dr.  George  referred  to  the
     publication of a report on 9 September 2004 of the  Beirut-based  Daily
     Star entitled: "Laws in Arab World Remain Lenient on Honour Crimes". He
     explained that he had not referred to this article at paragraph  17  of
     his first report, because it largely overlapped with  the  CIRB  report
     and that he was mentioning it in his second  report  for  completeness.
     Dr. George then went on to quote the following from the report  in  the
     Dairy Star:

            "In Lebanon, the most recent study on honor crimes goes back  to
            1998 and shows sentences issued between 1994  and  1998  in  16
            cases of murder included one acquittal,  four  one-year  prison
            sentences, four sentences of less than five  years  in  prison,
            three jail sentences  of less  than  10  years  and  four  life
            sentences............ According  to  Internal  Security  Forces
            Statistics, there were 22 cases  of  so-called  "honor  crimes"
            committed between 1995 and 1997. More recent  figures  are  not
            available".

61.   Dr. George then said in his second report:

            "I note that the statistics on honour crimes cited by the  Daily
            Star and by the  CIRB  conflict.  This  does  not  surprise  me
            bearing in mind definitional problems....."

62.    It  seemed  to  us  odd  that,  notwithstanding   the   contradictory
     statistics (a fact acknowledged by  Dr.  George),  he  should  seek  to
     explain away the absence of any mention in  his  first  report  of  the
     statistics which were reported in the Daily Star report, on  the  basis
     that the Daily Star report largely overlapped  with  the  CIRB  report.
     When we put this to Dr. George at the  hearing,  he  said  he  was  not
     surprised that the statistics cited by the  Daily  Star  and  the  CIRB
     conflict "due to definitional problems as to what constitutes an honour
     crime and because of the underreporting of honour crimes".  We did  not
     consider that this explanation addressed the point that was put to him,
     that is, how it could be  said  that  the  report  in  the  Daily  Star
     overlapped  with  the  CIRB  report,  when  he  acknowledged  that  the
     statistics as to the number of reported honour crimes committed in  the
     two reports conflict. The figure of 36 reported honour crimes committed
     according to the CIRB report and which he quoted in his  first  report,
     was a figure that was 63 % higher than the figure of 22  honour  crimes
     committed according to the Daily Star report, which he omitted to quote
     (leaving aside the fact that the periods for which the  figures  relate
     do not correspond exactly, a fact which Dr. George did not rely  on  to
     explain the difference in the statistics). The issues we take here are:
     (a) if Dr. George was aware of the report in the Daily Star at the time
     of his first report,  then  he  should  have  mentioned  both  sets  of
     statistics, with  his  explanation  as  to  possible  reasons  for  the
     conflicting statistics; (b) the failure to mention in the first  report
     the lower numbers in the Dally Star cannot be  explained  away  on  the
     basis that they "largely overlap" with the CIRB report; and (c)  if  he
     was not aware of the report in the Daily Star at the time of his  first
     report, this itself raises questions as to how well-informed he is.

63.   The third, and more important, difficulty concerns  paragraphs  16  to
     18 of Dr. George's third report (pages B28 to B29  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle B), where he quoted from or referred  to  various  decisions  or
     judgments of the courts in which comments were made about his expertise
     or his opinions, as follows:

     "16.   In the past nine years I have prepared numerous  Expert  Reports
           on Middle Eastern cases for submission to the IAT, IAA and  AIT.
           I cannot be precise about how many but my best estimate would be
           about 700.  Adjudicators and Judges have repeatedly acknowledged
           by credentials and accepted my expertise.  By way of example,  I
           would cite the case of  Jasim  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  342.   In  the
           Judgment in that case Lord Justice Sedley stated: 'No doubt  was
           cast before or by the adjudicator upon Dr George's expertise  or
           credentials, and there was no evidence in direct  opposition  to
           his.  He is  an  experienced  writer  and  consultant  upon  and
           analyst of Middle Eastern  political  and  economic  affairs,  a
           Senior Associate Member of St Anthony's College,  Oxford  (whose
           Middle East Centre is an acknowledged centre of excellence), and
           since 1989 a specialist commentator upon  Iraq'.   Lord  Justice
           Pill stated: 'That Dr Alan George was qualified to  provide  the
           report on Iraq he did is not in  doubt  and  the  report  was  a
           helpful contribution to the in-country information available  to
           the immigration judge'.  I would note that in his Determination,
           promulgated on 4 August 2006), of the case of a Palestinian from
           Iraq Appeal Number AA/07439/2006, Immigration Judge Hart stated:
           'Dr George's credentials as an expert are impeccable ... I  have
           been much assisted by Dr George's report'.  I also refer to  the
           judgment in the case of H v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 803,  in  which
           it was  noted  that  I  had  given  ''  a  detailed  history  of
           involvement with and knowledge of affairs in  the  Middle  East,
           and more particularly  in  Syria'  and  that  it  had  not  been
           suggested in that case that I was 'not a person with  specialist
           knowledge of Syria and able to report on it.'  The Determination
           of the Country Guidance case of AR (Kurd: not risk per se) Syria
           CG [2006] UKAIT 0048, promulgated on 7 June 2006,  for  which  I
           gave written and oral evidence, states: 'Dr George is clearly  a
           knowledgeable witness.  He has a lengthy history of commentating
           on Middle Eastern matters'.


     17.    In a letter dated 16 March 2007 relating to an entirely separate
           case (also involving  a  Palestinian  from  Lebanon),  the  Home
           Office,  while  expressing  an  intention  to  question  certain
           aspects of my testimony in that case, wrote: 'That Dr George has
           enormous experience and knowledge of Middle  Easter  affairs  is
           not disputed'.


     18.    While the Courts have invariably found me qualified to act as an
           Expert Witness and have repeatedly  explicitly  acknowledged  my
           credentials and accepted my expertise,  very  rarely  they  have
           criticised aspects of  my  testimony  (including  in  a  Country
           Guidance case  involving  Palestinians  in  Lebanon).   I  would
           respectfully observe, however, that these  criticism  have  been
           either minor or, on examination, have proved to lack  substance.
           On request, I would be pleased to provide a detailed critique of
           these criticisms."

64.   Paragraph 18  of  the  third  report  makes  reference  to  a  country
     guidance case involving Palestinians in Lebanon, but fails to make  any
     reference to another country guidance case  involving  Palestinians  in
     the West Bank, that is, MA (Palestinian Arabs - Occupied Territories  -
     Risk) Palestinian Territories CG [2007] UKAIT 00017. In that case,  the
     Tribunal had before it reports from  Dr.  George.  The  Tribunal  noted
     that, whilst Dr. George had quoted from the judgments of Sedley LJ  and
     Pill LJ in Jasim (incidentally, the passages of  the  judgments  relied
     upon before the Tribunal in MA (Palestinian Territories) were the  same
     as the passages quoted at paragraph 16 of the  third  report  which  is
     before us), he had omitted to mention that Gibson J. and Pill  LJ,  who
     gave the majority judgments in Jasim, held that the  Immigration  Judge
     in Jasim was entitled not to accept the opinion of Dr. George as to the
     risk on relocation.

65.   The Tribunal in MA (Palestinian  Territories)  went  on  to  list  the
     previous Tribunal determinations in which Dr. George's reports had been
     dealt with and consider what had been said about Dr.  George's  reports
     in the previous determinations, as follows (paragraphs 68 to 70 of  the
     determination in MA (Palestinian Territories)):

      "68.  Dr. George's reports have been considered  by  the  Tribunal  in
            the following reported cases:

            KK IH HE (Palestinians - Lebanon - camps)  Palestine  CG  [2004]
                 UKIAT 00293;
                 AR (Kurd: not risk per se) Syria  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00048;
      and
            LM (Educated women - Chaldo- Assyrians - risk)  Iraq  CG  [2006]
                 UKAIT 00060.

            (a)  In the LM case, Dr. George is referred to at paragraphs  9,
                 53 and 54 of the Determination. We cannot see any  in-depth
                 analysis in that case  of  the  general  expertise  of  Dr.
                 George.

            (b)  In the KK IH HE case,  the  Tribunal  heard  oral  evidence
                 from  Dr.  George,  whose  written  and  oral  evidence  is
                 summarised at paragraphs 18 to 43 of the  Determination  in
                 that case. The Tribunal assessed the evidence of Dr.  Joffe
                 (from whom  it  also  heard  evidence  and  Dr.  George  at
                 paragraph  85  onwards.  At  paragraph  86,  the   Tribunal
                 expressed concern about the fact that Dr. George  had  only
                 visited Lebanon once in 1996. The Tribunal found surprising
                 Dr. George's statement  that  he  can  better  monitor  the
                 Middle East from London than on the ground as people  speak
                 more freely in  London.  The  Tribunal  considered  that  a
                 person would be far  more  likely  to  be  able  to  get  a
                 realistic feel for the conditions in the camps if  (in  the
                 case of Dr. George) he had visited the camps more  recently
                 than in 1996. The Tribunal found itself in  agreement  with
                 the Respondent's representative concerning  the  occasional
                 sweeping generalisation to be found in the evidence of  Dr.
                 George. The Tribunal did not consider that it can  properly
                 be said, as contended by Dr. George, that conditions in the
                 camps are life threatening  generally.  Otherwise  and,  in
                 general, the Tribunal found the evidence of Dr. George  was
                 essentially consonant with the various country  reports  of
                 specialist bodies.

            (c)  We note that the AR case concerned Syrian Kurds. In the  AR
                 case, the  Tribunal  also  heard  oral  evidence  from  Dr.
                 George, whose written and oral evidence  is  summarised  at
                 paragraphs 27 to 59 of the Determination in that  case.  At
                 paragraph  77  onwards,  the  Tribunal  commented  on   Dr.
                 George's  evidence  referring  to   him   as   "clearly   a
                 knowledgeable witness.....  [with]  a  lengthy  history  of
                 commentating on Middle  Eastern  matters"  (paragraph  77).
                 However, at paragraph 78, the  Tribunal  expressed  concern
                 with the efforts Dr. George made as to the truth or lack of
                 it concerning the suggestions that significant  numbers  of
                 Syrian Kurds were to be granted citizenship.  The  Tribunal
                 considered that Dr. George seemed to have gone to a  source
                 from which the answer given could be expected and that  the
                 Tribunal would have expected Dr. George to have carried out
                 more extensive research than he did. At paragraph  79,  the
                 Tribunal  stated  that,  with  that  caveat  in  mind,  the
                 Tribunal  considered  that  Dr.  George's  evidence  is  in
                 general  consistent  with  the   background  evidence   and
                 deserving of weight being attached to it as a consequence.

      69.   Dr. George's report, which is dated 15 May 2006,  pre-dates  the
           date of promulgation of the AR case and the date on which it was
           added to the publicly-available country guidance list on 8  June
           2006. We can therefore understand why he made no mention of  the
           AR case. However, it is unfortunate that, whilst he referred  to
           the Jasim case as an example, he overlooked mentioning the KK IH
           HE case in which he gave oral evidence to the  Tribunal  and  in
           which the Tribunal commented  in  more  specific  terms  on  his
           evidence than the generalised comments in the Jasim case. Whilst
           we note that Dr. George makes clear that he was referring to the
           Jasim case only by way of example, we do not  consider  that  he
           was entitled to state that his "expertise has been  accepted  by
           the Courts" without also drawing the attention of the reader  to
           the reservations expressed on his evidence in the KK IH HE case.



      70.   The KK IH HE case  is  included  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  B
           (pages 160 to 177 of bundle B). We consider  that  we  are  also
           entitled to have regard to the AR case; it is  a  reported  case
           and deals with Dr. George's evidence on part of the Middle East.
           We consider that we are entitled to have regard not only to  the
           general observations about Dr. George in the Jasim case but also
           to the Tribunal's more specific observations in the KK IH HE and
           AR cases. We are not aware that the observations of the Tribunal
           in those cases to which we have referred have  been  disapproved
           of by the Court of Appeal. It may be argued that,  for  example,
           the fact that the Tribunal in the KK IH HE case considered  that
           Dr. George made occasional sweeping comments does not mean  that
           Dr. George has done so in the  report  before  us.  That  is  of
           course entirely correct. Similarly, it would be entirely correct
           to say that the KK IH HE and  the  AR  cases  concern  different
           countries and that accordingly  they  have  no  bearing  on  the
           question as to whether Dr. George's opinion in the report  which
           is before us should be accepted  or  rejected.  An  individual's
           expertise concerning the situation in  different  countries  may
           not be the same and  it  may  be  argued  that  he  has  greater
           expertise to opine on the  situation  for  Palestinians  in  the
           Occupied Territories than in Syria or the camps in  Lebanon.  We
           bear that in mind. However, just as it would be  appropriate  to
           bear in mind the complimentary observations about Dr. George  in
           the Jasim case, so too is  it  relevant  to  bear  in  mind  the
           reservations of the Tribunal in the KK IH HE and  in  AR  cases.
           However, we should make clear that, even  if  we  had  not  been
           aware of the Tribunal's reservations, we would nevertheless have
           reached the conclusions we have reached in  the  instant  appeal
           (see below)."

66.   In summary, therefore, the Tribunal took issue  with  the  fact  that,
     whilst Dr. George had quoted from decisions or judgments in which he or
     his expertise had  been  praised,  he  failed  to  mention  other  less
     complimentary observations or remarks which appeared  elsewhere  -  for
     example, in the KK, IH, HE case, where the Tribunal found his  evidence
     to contain "the occasional sweeping generalisation";  and,  in  the  AR
     case, the Tribunal had expressed concern that Dr. George seemed to have
     gone to a source from which the answer given could be expected, in  his
     efforts  to  ascertain  the  truth  or  lack  of  it,  concerning   the
     suggestions that significant numbers of Syrian Kurds were to be granted
     citizenship.

67    We are now confronted with the same difficulty in  the  instant  case.
     Whilst Dr. George has (again) quoted from the complimentary passages in
     the judgments of Sedley LJ and Pill LJ at paragraph  16  of  his  third
     report, he has omitted to mention the fact that Gibson J and  Pill  LJ,
     who gave the majority judgements in Jasim, held  that  the  Immigration
     Judge was entitled not to accept the opinion of Dr. George  as  to  the
     risk on relocation. Whilst he quoted from a  complimentary  passage  in
     the Tribunal's determination in the AR case, he omitted to mention that
     the same Tribunal expressed concern that he went to a source from which
     the answer could be expected in attempting to  establish  a  matter  in
     issue. Whilst he has referred to "a  Country  Guidance  case  involving
     Palestinians in Lebanon" (presumably, this is a reference  to  the  KK,
     IH, HE case) as  an  example  of  a  rare  occasion  on  which  he  was
     criticised, he omitted to  mention  the  more  recent  MA  (Palestinian
     Territories), which is also a country guidance case.

68.   Importantly, MA (Palestinian Territories) was appealed  to  the  Court
     of Appeal. Whilst the Court of Appeal granted permission to  appeal  on
     other issues,  permission  was  refused  to  challenge  the  Tribunal's
     decision that "there were ...... features of Dr. George's report  which
     led [the Tribunal] to attach less weight  to  it  than  [the  Tribunal]
     would otherwise have..." (paragraphs 35 to 39 of the  judgment).  These
     features included  the  fact  that  the  Tribunal  in  MA  (Palestinian
     Territories)  considered  that   Dr.   George's   use   of   the   term
     "colonisation" was tendentious. At the hearing,  the  Court  of  Appeal
     refused a renewed application to challenge the Tribunal's  decision  to
     attach less weight to the reports of Dr. George. Whilst  the  Court  of
     Appeal did not express a view as to whether the Tribunal was  justified
     in drawing the inference it drew from Dr.  George's  use  of  the  term
     "colonisation", the Court  held  that  the  Tribunal  had  expressed  a
     preference for other evidence and had given other  proper  reasons  for
     doing so. In other words, the Tribunal did not err in law in making its
     other observations.  It is inconceivable that Dr. George is  not  aware
     of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in MA (Palestinian Territories),
     especially given that the RLC were representing the appellant  in  that
     case, as they are in the instant case.

69.   With this background in mind, Dr. George's  evidence  that  criticisms
     of his testimony "have been  either  minor  or,  on  examination,  have
     proved to lack substance" (paragraph 18 of the third report on page B29
     of the Appellant's bundle  B) does not stand up to examination. It  can
     hardly be said that the criticisms in the Tribunal's  determination  in
     MA (Palestinian Territories) were minor or that  they  proved  to  lack
     substance on examination.

70.   At the hearing, we initially asked Dr. George whether it was  his  own
     opinion that criticisms were minor  or  proved  to  lack  substance  on
     examination, or whether it was held by the courts upon further judicial
     scrutiny of any judgments which were critical of his reports  that  the
     criticisms were minor or without substance. Dr. George  said  that  the
     short answer, which he would like to elaborate upon slightly, is  that,
     in some cases, the criticisms have been  overturned  by  the  Court  of
     Appeal and that, in other cases, the criticisms have not been  examined
     by higher judicial authority. He did not mention  the  fact  that  some
     criticisms had been upheld, including a criticism that he had failed to
     mention decisions in  which  some  criticisms  had  been  made  of  his
     reports. There is no question of the Court of  Appeal  overturning  the
     criticisms of the Tribunal in MA (Palestinian Territories)  or  of  the
     Court of Appeal not examining the criticisms. We therefore express  our
     concern about the fact that Dr. George omitted making  any  mention  of
     the fact that there was at  least  one  occasion  when  the  Tribunal's
     criticisms of his report were examined and were not overturned.

71.   We then asked Dr. George whether there was any particular  reason  why
     he had not quoted criticisms of his reports, in the same way as he  had
     quoted from judgments which made positive remarks about him, so  as  to
     enable the Tribunal to decide the matter for itself. He said that there
     were a number of reasons, as follows: "that it  would  be  unwieldy  to
     have done so; the most standard critique of those criticisms would  run
     to several pages".  When the question was  repeated,  Dr.  George  said
     that he had "tried to include matters which are  of  substance  and  of
     relevance to assisting the court" and that he "did  not  consider  that
     criticisms which are minor or which evaporate on examination to be  any
     way helpful".  However, he said that he "was ready to go  through  that
     process without going into any sort of detail".  He asked if  it  would
     help to give us one example of what he meant, or if it would help if he
     were to submit his critique of criticisms that had  been  made  of  his
     reports.  We  have  already  explained  above   that   the   Tribunal's
     observations in MA (Palestinian Territories)  cannot  be  described  as
     minor; still less  do  we  consider  that  they  can  be  described  as
     criticisms which "evaporated on examination".

72.   As we said at  the  hearing,  we  did  not  receive  evidence  of  Dr.
     George's critique of any criticisms, because we  were  concerned  about
     embarking about an examination of satellite issues. The  point  is  not
     whether any criticisms were valid or not, but whether  there  were  any
     good reasons for Dr.  George's  decisions:  (a)  to  place  before  the
     Tribunal  only  quotations  from  decisions  or  judgments  which  were
     complimentary (and omitting to quote from decisions or judgments  which
     were not complimentary); and (b) to describe criticisms of his  reports
     as "minor" or which "on examination, proved  to  lack  substance".   It
     seems to us that Dr.  George  was  simply  not  prepared  to  have  the
     Tribunal assess for  itself  any  criticisms  of  his  reports  without
     placing before the Tribunal his own critique thereof.  He withheld from
     the Tribunal any mention of any criticisms which, on  further  judicial
     scrutiny, did not evaporate. When this is considered together with  the
     concern expressed in KK, IH, HE and what we have said in paragraphs  60
     to 62 above, we have concerns as to whether Dr. George is objective and
     unbiased in giving his opinions about matters extending to the  subject
     matter of his reports. We acknowledge  that  he  is  knowledgeable  but
     depth of knowledge  is  not  all  that  is  expected.  An  ability  and
     willingness to present information is an objective way where  there  is
     conflicting evidence which goes both ways, is also expected. In all  of
     the circumstances, and for the reasons we have  given,  we  decided  to
     treat Dr. George's evidence with caution in this case.

73.   In general terms, we would  say  that,  where  an  expert  refers  the
     Tribunal  to  cases  in  which  his  expertise  has  been  accepted  or
     acknowledged or in which he has received praise, he must, at  the  same
     time, refer to the Tribunal to any cases which he is aware of and which
     may detract from what is said about him in the cases  he  has  referred
     to. In other words, failure to place before the Tribunal such  material
     in an even-handed way may reflect on the weight  to  be  given  to  the
     evidence which the subject matter of the expert's report(s).

74.   In the instant case, there is no evidence  before  us  which  counters
     Dr. George's evidence as to the likelihood of  the  Appellant  being  a
     victim of an honour killing or an honour crime  at  the  hands  of  her
     family. Accordingly, for that reason, we accept his  evidence  in  that
     regard. We have set out Dr. George's oral evidence in full at paragraph
     40 above. The combination of this  evidence  and  the  finding  of  the
     previous Tribunal that the Appellant is at real risk of being subjected
     to substantial harm or persecution in her home area at the hands of her
     family, means that we must determine this appeal on the basis that  her
     brothers are to be likened  to  the  extreme  end  of  the  social  and
     religious spectrum. On the basis of  this  and  Dr.  George's  evidence
     (which we accept because it was not countered by any other evidence) as
     to the ease with which individuals can be traced in  Lebanon  (see  our
     summary of his evidence in this regard at paragraphs 29 and 30  above),
     we are driven to conclude that, if the Appellant  were  to  attempt  to
     relocate to another community in Lebanon, whether Maronite Christian or
     otherwise, there is a reasonable likelihood that  she  would  be  found
     quickly by her family.

75.   In addition, we are driven to conclude that, once she is found by  her
     family, the Appellant would  receive  inadequate  protection  from  the
     state against the actions of her family, who we have to regard as being
     at the extreme end of the social or religious spectrum, for the reasons
     we have given. We have considered  the  evidence  relied  upon  on  the
     Respondent's behalf as to the incidence of honour killings in  Lebanon.
     For  example  in  Taha  v.  Canada   (Minister   of   Citizenship   and
     Immigration), 2004 FC 1675, the Federal Court of Canada considered that
     the evidence shows that honour  killings  are  rare  in  Lebanon,  that
     Lebanon is the most Western country in the middle east and that  honour
     killings are confined to a small segment of the  rural  population.  We
     have considered the article in the International Herald  Tribune  issue
     of 2 August 2007 on which Ms. Isherwood  relied.  Notwithstanding  this
     evidence, the finding that the Appellant  is  at  real  risk  from  her
     family in her home area and the fact that we must liken the Appellant's
     family to the extreme end of the social and religious spectrum, we  are
     driven to conclude that, in the unique circumstances and on  the  basis
     of the accepted findings in this particular case, it is not  reasonably
     likely that the Appellant would receive sufficient protection from  the
     Lebanese authorities against the actions of her extremist family.

76.   Ms.  Isherwood  accepted  that,  if  we  were  to  conclude  that  the
     Appellant would be at real risk on relocation from her family of  being
     a victim of an honour killing and  that  there  would  be  insufficient
     protection, there is an applicable Geneva Convention reason.

77.   Accordingly, and for  the  reasons  given  above,  the  Appellant  has
     established her asylum claim and her related Article 3 claim. Since her
     asylum claim has  succeeded,  her  claim  for  humanitarian  protection
     cannot succeed (see paragraph 339C(ii) of the Immigration Rules).

78.   Accordingly, our finding (and the finding of  the  previous  Tribunal)
     that the Appellant's evidence about the lack of contact with the father
     of her son is not  credible,  is  not  material  to  the  outcome.  The
     previous Tribunal concluded that the Appellant had not established that
     she and the father of her son are not in continuing  contact.  We  find
     that the Appellant has not shown that the relationship she enjoyed with
     the father of her son has ended, notwithstanding the fact that  he  may
     have returned to Lebanon. For the same reasons, we do  not  accept  her
     evidence that, if returned to Lebanon, she would be living as a  single
     female. We did not accept that she has any genuine fear of  losing  her
     child to the father of her son. Accordingly, it is not necessary for us
     to deal with Ms. Isherwood's submissions relating to  EM  (Lebanon)  v.
     SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1531. But for the finding of the previous Tribunal
     that the Appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in  her  home
     area at the hands of her family, the Appellant would not have succeeded
     in her asylum claim or her related Article 3 claim.

79.   It is therefore not necessary for us to deal with the  report  of  Dr.
     Al-Mukhtar. Suffice it so say that we had several difficulties with his
     report, including the fact that his report was not sourced;  he  states
     that he is an Iraqi lawyer but he failed to explain how he obtained his
     knowledge of Lebanese law and whether he has ever lived in Lebanon;  he
     did  not  explain  whether  there  are  any  instances   of   Christian
     illegitimate children living  in  Lebanon;  and,  he  did  not  explain
     whether the fact that the Appellant's son's birth certificate gives the
     name of his father makes a material difference to his  opinion  of  the
     potential difficulties the Appellant and her son would face.

80.   For the same reasons, it is not  necessary  for  us  to  consider  the
     Appellant's Article 3 claim to the extent  that  it  is  based  on  her
     medical condition and the risk of suicide,  or  her  Article  8  claim.
     Accordingly, we do not need to deal with the report of Dr.  Barrett  in
     any greater detail than we have.

81.   Decision:


      The original Tribunal made a material  error  of  law.  The  following
     decision is substituted:

     The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.
     The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.
     The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).






Ms. D. K. GILL
Senior Immigration Judge                     Date:  21 August 2008




