
[pic]

VB and Another (draft evaders and prison conditions) Ukraine CG [2017] UKUT
00079 (IAC)

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2016                            |                              |
|& 1 November 2016                             |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                   VB (1)
                                   IS (2)
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes and Ms S Panagiotopoulou instructed by
                 Yemets Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




    1. At the current time it is not reasonably likely that a  draft-evader
       avoiding conscription or mobilisation in Ukraine would face criminal
       or administrative proceedings for that act,  although  if  a  draft-
       evader did face prosecution proceedings the Criminal Code of Ukraine
       does provide, in Articles 335, 336 and 409, for  a  prison  sentence
       for such an offence. It would  be  a  matter  for  any  Tribunal  to
       consider, in the light of developing evidence,  whether  there  were
       aggravating matters which might lead to imposition of  an  immediate
       custodial sentence, rather than a suspended sentence or  the  matter
       proceeding as an administrative offence and a fine being sought by a
       prosecutor.

    2. There is a real risk of  anyone  being  returned  to  Ukraine  as  a
       convicted criminal sentenced to  a  term  of  imprisonment  in  that
       country being detained on  arrival,  although  anyone  convicted  in
       absentia would probably be  entitled  thereafter  to  a  retrial  in
       accordance with Article  412  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code  of
       Ukraine.

    3.  There  is  a  real  risk  that  the  conditions  of  detention  and
       imprisonment in Ukraine  would  subject  a  person  returned  to  be
       detained or imprisoned to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction


    1. The agreed facts in relation to  the  first  appellant,  VB,  are  as
       follows. He is a citizen of  Ukraine  born  on  29th  July  1981.  He
       completed his military service during the period 1999 -2001  when  he
       was  a  communications  operator  and  driver.  He  suffered  serious
       bullying and injury in the army. He entered the UK  clandestinely  on
       5th January 2013, to join his wife who was already in the UK, and his
       daughter was born on 1st October 2013.  Whilst  in  the  UK  call  up
       papers  were  issued  requiring  his  attendance  with  the  military
       commissar in April 2014 and again in May 2014.

    2. VB claimed asylum on 19th May 2014; his claim  was  refused  on  27th
       November 2014 and his appeal dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  on
       9th November 2015. However, on 27th  June  2016  the  Upper  Tribunal
       found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  and  set  aside
       their decision. The reasons for that decision are set  out  in  Annex
       [B]

    3. The agreed facts in relation to the  second  appellant,  IS,  are  as
       follows. He is a Ukrainian citizen born on 25th  March  1986.  He  is
       married to a Ukrainian citizen who is presently in the UK, and has  a
       daughter born in the UK on 9th  February  2013.  He  entered  the  UK
       unlawfully in the back of a lorry with his wife in January  2013.  He
       claimed asylum on 13th August 2015 on the basis of his having  evaded
       military service, having been prosecuted and having been sentenced to
       two years' imprisonment on the 7th July 2015  by  the  Ternopil  City
       Court in accordance with Article 335 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine.



    4. IS's asylum claim was refused and his appeal  against  that  decision
       was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal, but an  error  of  law  was
       found in that decision by the Upper Tribunal and it was set aside  on
       29th April 2016. The reasons for that decision are set out  in  Annex
       [C]

    5. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal were both set aside with  no
       findings preserved, and adjourned for remaking in the Upper Tribunal.
       We now remake these two appeals.

    6. It was agreed with the parties that this decision would also seek  to
       provide Country Guidance on the following issues:

         i) What are the likely punishments for draft evasion in Ukraine

        ii)  Are prison conditions for draft evaders in Ukraine contrary to
            Article 3 of ECHR, or has there been a significant and  durable
            change in Ukraine such that the country guidance decision of PS
            (prison conditions; military service)  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00016
            should no longer be followed?

       iii) Are draft evaders who have been imprisoned under Article 336 of
            the Ukrainian criminal code required  thereafter  to  undertake
            military service during periods of mobilisation? If so what are
            the conditions to  which  they  will  be  exposed  during  such
            military service?

    7. At the hearing however it was agreed by both parties  and  the  Panel
       that it is only possible to address the first two issues with a  view
       to providing country guidance and that there was simply  insufficient
       country of origin material available to make  any  informed  guidance
       decision on the third issues  as  to  whether  those  conscripted  or
       mobilised into the Ukrainian army were at real risk of being required
       to commit acts contrary to international humanitarian law or  whether
       they would be at real risk of persons such as  the  appellants  being
       subject to "dedovshchina", which means violent bullying or initiation
       within the army, which might in turn put those recruited or mobilised
       at risk of serious harm.

    8. The only substantial material on the issue of  "dedovshchina"  is  in
       the Strasbourg judgement of Mosendz v Ukraine  52013/08  in  which  a
       violation of Article 2 ECHR was  found  for  failure  to  uphold  the
       positive obligation to protect the life and investigate the death  of
       a young soldier doing his military service, where  that  soldier  had
       committed suicide due to violent bullying. This case cites  evidence,
       including a report from the Ukrainian Parliamentary Commissioner  for
       Human Rights and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human  Rights  of
       the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of  Europe  regarding  this
       issue, but all evidence is prior to 2007. There is also evidence of a
       small number of convictions for  such  offences  by  members  of  the
       military in the 2013 US State Department Report on Ukraine. Professor
       Bowring accepted  that  he  had  only  anecdotal  evidence  that  the
       practice, which he believed was mostly an issue for younger recruits,
       remained widespread in the Ukrainian army today.



Current Political & Economic Situation in Ukraine

    9. We must acknowledge the current political and economic  situation  in
       Ukraine, which is not a matter in dispute between the parties.

   10.  Political  unrest  started  with  mass  demonstrations   in   Kiev's
       Independence  Square  in  November  2013  in  reaction  against   the
       government's suspension of the preparations to  sign  an  association
       agreement with the European Union.  This  movement  became  known  as
       "Euromaidan"  or  "Maidan".   Violent   protests   followed   against
       repressive measures by the then government, with a change in power in
       February 2014. Shortly thereafter Russia  annexed  Crimea  and  armed
       conflict broke out in  the  east  of  Ukraine.  Russian-backed  armed
       separatists continue to hold substantial territory in  the  areas  of
       Donetsk and Luhansk.

   11. The US State Department Report on Ukraine published in  2016  reports
       that more than 9000 have died and 18000 people have been  wounded  in
       this conflict since 2014. More than two and  a  half  million  people
       have fled this region. More than one and a half  million  people  are
       registered  as  internally  displaced  persons  and  over  a  million
       Ukrainians are refugees in other countries, mostly Russia.

   12. In this context the US State Department Report 2016  notes  that  the
       country  suffers  severely  from   corruption,   including   in   the
       prosecutor's  office   and   judiciary,   and   deficiency   in   the
       administration of justice. In September 2016 441 judges  were  sacked
       for having made illegal decisions regarding  Maidan  participants  or
       being pro-Russian with 104 new ones appointed by Presidential decree,
       and a new prosecutor general was appointed who has no legal education
       and is  associated  with  current  President  Poroshenko's  political
       party; see the supplementary evidence from Professor Bowring  relying
       upon internet news reports.

   13. The UN  Human  Rights  Commissioner's  Report  on  the  human  rights
       situation in Ukraine 16 May to 15 August 2016 states that the  entire
       population of Ukraine  is  affected  by  the  deteriorating  economic
       situation as a result of the conflict and instability  in  the  east,
       with a 4.9% rise in prices over the first six months of 2016, and the
       price of utilities for heating and  hot  water  double  that  of  the
       beginning of the year by 1st July 2016. There has been no increase in
       the average salary, and the impact  is  felt  acutely  by  vulnerable
       groups such as internally displaced people and pensioners.

Basic Outline of the Detention/ Imprisonment System in Ukraine

   14. The system of penitentiary provision in Ukraine is not  a  matter  of
       dispute between the parties.

   15. The main source of information on the detention system is the reports
       produced by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture  and
       Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment ("the  CPT").   The  CPT
       was set up under the Council of Europe's European Convention  on  the
       Prevention  of  Torture  and  Inhuman  or  Degrading   Treatment   or
       Punishment 1989. It  is  a  non-judicial  preventative  mechanism  to
       prevent those deprived of their liberty from being exposed to torture
       or other ill-treatment.  To  achieve  this  aim  the  CPT  carry  out
       periodic inspections about every four years with  additional  ad  hoc
       inspections where necessary. CPT delegations have unlimited access to
       places of detention, and the right to move inside such places without
       restriction. They interview persons  deprived  of  their  liberty  in
       private,  and  communicate  freely  with  anyone  who   can   provide
       information. Co-operation with the national  authorities  is  at  the
       heart of the CPT's work, since the aim is to protect persons deprived
       of their liberty rather than to condemn States for  abuses.  However,
       if a state fails to co-operate or refuses to improve the situation in
       the light of the CPT's recommendations, the Committee may  decide  to
       make a public statement

   16. The other sources, principally  the  Home  Office's  report  "Country
       Information and Guidance  (CIG)  Ukraine:  Prison  conditions  report
       January 2016" are reliant on the CPT's reports as a source  which  is
       cited extensively.  Further information about the system is  provided
       in the CIG report and by Dr William Bowring.

   17. The Ukrainian penitentiary system is one inherited  from  the  Soviet
       era.  Subject to some exceptions,  detention  prior  to  sentence  is
       mainly in one set of establishments known as SIZOs.  Those  sentenced
       to  custodial  punishments  are  held  in  a   range   of   different
       institutions including correctional colonies, where prisoners live in
       barrack type accommodation, and closed prisons.

   18. There were  148  facilities  controlled  by  the  State  Penitentiary
       Service of Ukraine in 2015, 29 SIZOs and  113  correctional  colonies
       for adults and 6 for juveniles. In addition, there are also  internal
       detention isolators (ITTs) for short  periods  of  initial  detention
       (generally up to 10 days although this can be longer when needed as a
       protective measure) run by the  various  regional  divisions  of  the
       Ukrainian Home Office. There are also said  to  be  secret  detention
       facilities used in security cases but these are not the focus of this
       decision.

   19. Historically there was a high rate of incarceration in  Ukraine  with
       147,142 (324 prisoners per 100,000 of population) persons  imprisoned
       in 2013 where as in July 2016 the number had been reduced  to  61,816
       (or 170 prisoners per  100,000  of  population).  The  high  rate  of
       detention had resulted in a very severe problem of overcrowding.  The
       numbers in detention were reduced  by  a  combination  of  government
       actions starting in  2012.  The  most  significant  measure  was  the
       introduction of the new Criminal Procedural Code, the CCP, which came
       into force on 19th November 2012 which provided  for  automatic  bail
       rather than pre-trial detention in the majority of cases. The Council
       of Europe, European Committee  for  the  Prevention  of  Torture  and
       Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishments (CPT) Report on Ukraine
       dated April 2014 comments that this provision led to a 57%  reduction
       in remand prisoners in the period November 2012, when  the  new  Code
       came into force, to October 2013. At the same time other  legislative
       steps were also taken to  decriminalise  some  petty  crimes  and  to
       introduce probation for  some  offences  which  also  reduced  prison
       numbers.

   20. There is no separate military prison system for  those  convicted  of
       offences relating to failure to be drafted into military service,  so
       they are held  in  the  civil  detention  and  prison  facilities  as
       outlined above.

Basic Outline of the Military Service System in Ukraine

   21. As with the basic prison system the overall operation of the military
       service system was not a matter of dispute between the parties in the
       appeal. This summary draws on the materials provided to the  Tribunal
       in the joint bundle including the Country  Information  and  Guidance
       (CIG) Ukraine: Military Service September 2016, the evidence  of  the
       expert Dr William Bowring and UNHCR  in  their  January  2015  report
       International Protection Considerations related  to  developments  in
       Ukraine Update II, as well as reports from Amnesty International  and
       the Quaker Council for European Affairs cited below. We use the  term
       "conscription" to refer to the compulsory military service system  by
       which young men are taken into the army for  the  first  time  for  a
       period of service and the term  "mobilisation"  for  the  forced  re-
       recruitment of those who have done service at a later stage in  their
       lives. However, we are aware that reports,  particularly  those  from
       the press, do not necessarily use these terms with any precision.

   22.  The  Constitution  of  Ukraine  provided  at  its  inception  as  an
       independent state in 1991 for compulsory  military  service  for  all
       male citizens aged 18 to 25 years for a period of 12  months  in  the
       army or air force, or 18  months  in  the  navy,  with  a  number  of
       exemptions, for instance for those medically unfit or those  who  had
       served a prison sentence. Under Article  335  of  the  Criminal  Code
       avoidance of conscription was punishable by imprisonment for  a  term
       of up to 3 years, although there  were  provisions  for  a  range  of
       exemptions, as indicated above, and for conscientious objection based
       on religious grounds with an alternative service for such persons.

   23. Ukraine's army consisted  largely,  at  this  stage,  of  conscripted
       recruits: there were in the region of 300,000 men,  250,000  of  whom
       were conscripts. In 2005 plans were made for phasing out conscription
       and a transition to a professional army  by  2010,  although  due  to
       insufficient funding the transition period was extended to 2015.

   24. The army of modern Ukraine has always had a very substantial  problem
       with draft evasion. In 2004 the Ukrainian Ministry  of  Defence  said
       that between 1996 and 2004 there were 48,624 cases of draft  evasion.
       Amnesty International and the Quaker  Council  for  European  Affairs
       estimated that around only between  10%  to  30%  of  those  eligible
       actually performed their military service; see material  set  out  in
       the Australian Refugee Tribunal Country Advice on Ukraine dated  11th
       December 2009. Information from this period on the numbers prosecuted
       for draft evasion is not available to the Panel.

   25. In October 2013 President Viktor  Yanukovych  abolished  conscription
       hoping to create a professional army instead. In  spring  2014,  when
       fighting broke out in eastern Ukraine, he did not immediately  resort
       to conscription but instead relied upon mobilising former soldiers to
       replenish his forces.

   26. In May 2014 acting President  Oleksandr  Turchynov  signed  a  decree
       reinstating general conscription. At this point the  army  wished  to
       conscript some 40,000 20 to 27 year olds for 18  months  of  military
       service.

   27. In July 2014 the Ukrainian parliament raised the age to which  former
       soldiers could be recalled to 60 from  50  years.  There  were  three
       waves of mobilisation of former soldiers in 2014. In 2015 there  were
       a further three waves of such mobilisation, with the purpose to bring
       qualified personnel into the army. Persons  targeted  included  those
       with  past  experience  as  paratroopers,   grenade   launchers,   in
       artillery,  logistical  support   and   other   personnel   including
       physicians, electricians, mechanics  and  drivers.  However,  it  has
       proved difficult to source military personnel in this  way,  and  the
       last wave of the recruitment drive raised only  half  of  the  25,000
       soldiers the military wanted.

   28. In 2014 and 2015 it is  reported  in  the  press  that  approximately
       125,000 of those summons to military service did not report.  In 2015
       it was reported in the press that 1500  criminal  investigations  had
       been commenced against persons for  avoiding  military  service;  and
       that in 2016 the defence  ministry  reported  that  26,800  men  were
       subject to  prosecution  for  avoiding  military  service,  and  that
       military prosecutors had sent to the  courts  2500  prosecutions  for
       evasion of  military  draft.  There  were  said  to  be  8000  arrest
       warrants, 3750 search warrants but  only  337  persons  detained  for
       these reasons at the beginning of 2016.

   29. The Ukrainian army is reported in the press as  being  in  very  poor
       shape  suffering  from  a  shortage  of  basic  supplies,  disastrous
       discipline, low competence  of  soldiers  and  officers,  a  lack  of
       leadership, large numbers of non-combat  casualties,  and  corruption
       and theft of supplies. It is reported that many evade military  draft
       by bribery or by leaving the country.

Relevant Sections of the Penal Code and Administrative Code

   30. Chapter XIV.
       CRIMINAL OFFENSES RELATED TO THE PROTECTION OF STATE SECRETS,
       INVIOLABILITY OF STATE BORDERS, CONSCRIPTION AND MOBILIZATION
       Article 335. Avoidance of conscription for active military service
       Avoidance of conscription for active military  service,  -  shall  be
       punishable by restraint of liberty for a term up to three years.
       Article 336. Avoidance of mobilization
       Avoidance of mobilization, - shall be punishable by imprisonment  for
       a term two to five years.
       Article 337. Avoidance of military registration or special assemblies
       1. Avoidance of military registration by a person bound  to  military
       service after notification by an appropriate military commissariat, -
       shall be punishable by a fine up to 50 tax-free minimum  incomes,  or
       correctional labor for a term up to two years, or arrest for  a  term
       up to six months.
       2. Avoidance of military training or special assemblies by  a  person
       bound to military service, - shall be punishable by a fine up  to  70
       tax-free minimum incomes, or arrest for a term up to six months.
       Chapter XIX.
       CRIMINAL OFFENSES  AGAINST  THE  ESTABLISHED  PROCEDURE  OF  MILITARY
       SERVICE (MILITARY OFFENSES)
       Article 409. Evasion of military service by way  of  self-maiming  or
       otherwise
       1. Evasion of military service by a military  serviceman  by  way  of
       self-maiming or malingering, or forgery of documents,  or  any  other
       deceit, - shall be punishable by custody in a penal battalion  for  a
       term up to two years, or imprisonment for the same term.
       2. Refusal to comply with the duties of military service, - shall  be
       punishable by imprisonment for a term of two to five years.
       3. Any such acts as provided for by paragraph 1 or 2, if committed in
       state of martial law or  in  a  battle,  -  shall  be  punishable  by
       imprisonment for a term of five to ten years.
       The Code of Administrative Offences of Ukraine

        Article 210. The violations of the law by military service staff  or
       subjects on general Military Duty and Military Service.

        - For failing to appear in the military recruitment  office  without
       good reason or late submission of information on change of residence,
       education, employment, position, and also violations of the order  of
       educational meetings (sessions) are punishable by a  fine  of  85-119
       UAH.


   31. We adopt the abbreviation  "UAH"  for  the  Ukrainian  currency,  the
       Hryvnia.  As at the date of hearing, the exchange rate was 31.25  UAH
       to the Pound Sterling making the maximum fine approximately �3.90.  A
       further offence within one year can lead to a fine starting from  170
       UAH to 255 UAH. However, in May  2014  the  Administrative  Code  was
       supplemented  by  an  article  on   violation   of   legislation   on
       mobilization, where fines are much higher:



       Article 210-1.  Violation  of  legislation  on  defence  mobilization
       preparation and mobilization:

       - Violation of legislation on defence  mobilization  preparation  and
       mobilization entails a fine of up 170-510 UAH, and  for  officials  -
       510-1700 UAH. If the violation is repeated within  a  year  then  the
       penalty increases to 510-1700 UAH for citizens and for  officials  to
       1700-5100 UAH.


   32. Also the Administrative Code has a  fine  of  UAH  17-51  for  wilful
       damage or loss of military documents and 17 UAH for failure to appear
       for recruitment to be registered at the military recruiting station.

Strasbourg Case Law

   33. There is a large body of case law from the European  Court  of  Human
       Rights assessing whether  conditions  of  imprisonment  or  detention
       breach Article 3 of the Convention.

   34. As set out in the very recent case of Mursic v Croatia (7334/13 Grand
       Chamber judgment of 20th October 2016), torture, inhuman or degrading
       treatment  or  punishment   is   prohibited   irrespective   of   the
       circumstances and the victim's behaviour. Ill-treatment must attain a
       minimum level of severity to fall within the scope of Article  3.  To
       conclude there has been a breach  of  Article  3  there  must  be  an
       assessment which takes into account all the circumstances of the case
       which include the duration of the treatment, its physical and  mental
       effects and in some cases the sex, age and health of the  victim.  It
       usually  includes  bodily  injury  or  intense  physical  or   mental
       suffering, but even if these are absent  a  violation  can  be  found
       where there is a diminishing of human dignity so as to raise fear and
       or anguish capable of breaking an  individual's  moral  and  physical
       resistance. An absence of an intention to  humiliate  a  detainee  by
       placing him in poor conditions  does  not  conclusively  rule  out  a
       finding of  a  violation  of  Article  3.  It  is  incumbent  on  the
       government to organise its penitentiary system in such a  way  as  to
       ensure respect for the dignity of detainees regardless  of  financial
       and logistical difficulties.

   35. In relation to the issue of prison  overcrowding  the  Grand  Chamber
       concluded in Mursic that a minimum standard of 3  square  metres  per
       detainee in multi-occupancy accommodation should be maintained as the
       relevant minimum standard of assessment under  Article  3,  and  that
       failure to meet that standard  creates  a  strong  presumption  of  a
       violation of Article 3. Rebutting this  presumption  of  a  violation
       could be done by showing that there was only a short,  occasional  or
       minor  reduction  in  the  required  personal  space  where  this  is
       accompanied by sufficient freedom of movement outside the cell, where
       there are adequate out of cell activities  and  where  the  detention
       facility is otherwise appropriate. Reference is made  to  Council  of
       Europe, European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and  Inhuman
       or Degrading Treatment or Punishments (CPT) standards  requiring  all
       prisoners to be allowed at least one hour's exercise in the open  air
       every day, with a reasonable part of  the  day  outside  cells  doing
       purposeful activities such as work, recreation or education.

   36. There are a series of cases against Ukraine brought by  prisoners  or
       detainees in which violations of Article 3 ECHR are found.  Truten  v
       Ukraine [2016] ECHR 561 found a violation due to lack  of  space  and
       exercise conditions in a SIZO; Yarovenko v Ukraine  [2016]  ECHR  835
       found a violation regarding detention in three SIZOs and a  temporary
       detention facility as a result of the  poor  physical  conditions  of
       detention, but not in the prison where the applicant  was  eventually
       held, and found also treatment for  tuberculosis  inadequate  and  in
       violation of Article 3; Andrey Yakovenko v Ukraine  [2014] ECHR found
       a breach of Article 3 in  SIZOs  because  of  overcrowding,  lack  of
       lighting and ventilation and  lack  of  proper  sanitary  facilities;
       Yakovenko v Ukraine [2007] EHCR 877 found a breach of Article 3 in  a
       SIZO and  pre-trial  detention  centre  due  to  overcrowding,  sleep
       deprivation, lack of natural light and air, and  failure  to  provide
       adequate medical assistance; Poltoratskiy v Ukraine  [2003] ECHR  216
       found a breach of Article 3 in a prison for overcrowding,  inadequate
       lighting and heating, and lack of outside walks,  correspondence  and
       visits. However, it is to be noted that all of the  cases  relate  to
       detention and imprisonment in Ukraine prior to 2007.

   Extradition Cases

   37. In the case of Igor Lutsyuk v Government of Ukraine [2013]  EWHC  189
       (Admin)  the  Administrative  Court  reviewed  the  decision  in   PS
       (Conditions; Military Service) Ukraine v SSHD CG [2006] UKAIT  00016,
       with additional  evidence  provided  by  Professor  William  Bowring,
       Professor of Law at Birkbeck University, in the context of having  to
       decide whether the appellant should be extradited to Ukraine where he
       had been convicted of robbery and sentenced to two years imprisonment
       given his contention that this would breach his Article 3 ECHR rights
       as a result of detention and prison conditions in that  country.  The
       appellant contended that he was likely to be held in a SIZO on return
       to Ukraine. Lord Justice Laws takes PS as an  authoritative  starting
       point, and concludes that the evidence presented by Professor Bowring
       from the Council of Europe, European Committee for the Prevention  of
       Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishments  (CPT)  and
       US State Department reports on Ukraine "paints a  picture  which,  if
       anything, displays a deteriorating state of affairs."  Laws  LJ  also
       concludes that the succession  of  visits  and  reports  by  the  CPT
       "speaks loud as to the gap between aspiration and achievement" on the
       part  of  the   Ukrainian   government.   The   conclusion   of   the
       Administrative Court was that  there  were  substantial  grounds  for
       believing that the appellant would be  subject  to  ill-treatment  on
       return to Ukraine due to the detention conditions he  would  face  on
       return.

Original Sources of Country  of  Origin  Information  on  the  Situation  in
Ukrainian Prisons and Pre-trial Detention

   38. The Panel finds that the key original sources of information  on  the
       situation in Ukrainian detention centres and prisons are the  reports
       of the Council of Europe, European Committee for  the  Prevention  of
       Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishments (CPT);  the
       reports of the United Nations Subcommittee on Prevention  of  Torture
       (SPT) and the reports of the Ukrainian Parliamentary Commissioner for
       Human Rights (the Ombudsman). These three sources are all  viewed  as
       reliable, as  any  reports  are  written  by  impartial  bodies  with
       relevant  expertise  which  have  the  right  to  carry   out   often
       unannounced prison inspections  and  gain  access  to  all  detention
       areas,  thus  basing  their  reports   on   first-hand   un-sanitised
       information. We therefore  provide  summaries  of  the  key  relevant
       material provided from these sources.

Council of Europe, European Committee for  the  Prevention  of  Torture  and
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment  or  Punishments  (CPT)  Reports  dated  29th
April 2014 and 29th April 2015

2014 CPT Report on Ukraine Relating to a Visit in October 2013

   39. The 2014 CPT report results from a visit in  October  2013  to  eight
       ITTs in Kiev, Crimea, Dnipropetrovsk, Odessa and  Vinnytsia  regions,
       four SIZOs (Kiev, Dnipropetrovsk, Odessa and  Simferopol),  a  closed
       prison and a correctional colony. This was a periodic  report  rather
       than ad hoc visit, although it is notable that  the  last  visit  had
       been less than a year previously in December 2012. This was the tenth
       visit to Ukraine by the CPT. It was not suggested by any  party  that
       this report did not provide a representative view of SIZOs  and  pre-
       trial detention facilities, and clearly it included Kiev  SIZO  which
       is the largest such facility in Ukraine.

   40. It is noted at paragraph 9 of the report that intimidatory action  or
       retaliatory action against prisoners prior to, during and  after  CPT
       visits has been a recurrent issue since  the  CPT's  first  visit  in
       1998, and that there were on-going concerns in two of the  SIZOs  and
       in the prisons. This is deplored by the CPT, at paragraph 11  as  "an
       assault on the principle of co-operation which lies at the  heart  of
       the Convention."

   41. CPT noted a major decrease in the number of inmates  due  largely  to
       the adoption of the new Criminal Procedure Code  (CCP)  in  2012  but
       commented that "localised overcrowding" had  been  seen  in  all  the
       SIZOs visited.  At  paragraph  18  the  CPT  notes  that  key  issues
       previously identified had not been progressed  at  all:  "By  way  of
       illustration, the Committee noted that no decisive  action  had  been
       taken to upgrade material conditions in most  SIZOs  visited  and  to
       introduce programmes  of  out-of-cell  activities  for  adult  remand
       prisoners. Further the situation for male prisoners  facing/sentenced
       to  life  imprisonment  remained  basically  unchanged.  Measures  to
       improve the medical examination of inmates and to ensure  the  proper
       documentation of any injuries observed on  examination  were  clearly
       ineffective."

   42. It is clear from paragraph 23 of the report  that  there  were  still
       concerns  about  the  effective  investigation  into  allegations  of
       torture and ill-treatment from public officials, with  the  phenomena
       of torture being said to have been "an issue of grave concern for the
       CPT since the Committee's first visit to Ukraine 15  years  ago".  In
       relation to those held in Kiev by internal affairs officials  in  ITT
       facilities the Committee found that since the entry into force of the
       new CCP the instances of severe physical abuse had  reduced  although
       there were still many detained persons who complained of physical ill
       treatment such as punches, kicks and being hit with hard objects, and
       threats of beatings. The improvement in relation to such matters  was
       not as good in  other  regions  outside  Kiev  and  there  were  also
       allegations of treatment which was severe enough to amount to torture
       such as being suspended, the use of  electric  shocks,  burning  with
       cigarettes and asphyxiation. CPT conclude that the phenomenon of ill-
       treatment is a long way from being overcome and  has  become  closely
       connected with corrupt practices. There were  great  improvements  in
       relation to  this  issue  at  Kiev  and  Simferopol  SIZOs  where  no
       complaints of ill-treatment by staff were made, but this was not  the
       case at Odessa and Dnipropetrovsk SIZOs. In the correctional colonies
       and in  the  closed  prisons  improvements  relating  to  staff  ill-
       treatment were found, but in both cases a group of inmates was  being
       used to ill-treat others at the behest of the prison authorities.

   43. At paragraph 99-102 of the report it is reiterated that  the  overall
       level of overcrowding in the Ukrainian prison system  had  diminished
       significantly, and explained that the Ukrainian Ministry  of  Justice
       now believed that their system was compliant with their own  national
       legal standard of providing 2.5 square meters  of  living  space  per
       inmate. However, the view of the CPT was that the Ukrainian  standard
       was not acceptable  and  that  the  SIZO  system  remained  seriously
       overcrowded in the institutions they visited. They also noted serious
       problems of disrepair in the majority  of  the  prison  estate,  with
       little in the way of  purposeful  out  of  cell  activities  for  the
       inmates and with most remand prisoners being locked up in their cells
       all day. Although in contrast a new block  for  women  in  Kiev  SIZO
       provided reasonable space, and conditions were materially better.

   44. At paragraph 144 the CPT summarises their conclusions on health  care
       as being that there were insufficient health-care staffing resources.



2015 CPT Report on Ukraine relating to a visit in September 2014

   45. The 2015 CPT report results from an ad hoc visit by the Committee  in
       February 2014 to two correctional colonies (No. 25 and  No.  100)  in
       the Kharkiv area and an investigation  into  the  position  of  those
       detained in SIZOs in Kiev and Kharkiv and in a State Security Service
       detention facility in Kiev as a result of anti-terrorism  operations.
       The Committee found evidence that state security staff had used  ill-
       treatment on detainees in anti-terrorism operations,  although  there
       were no substantial allegations of ill-treatment by  custodial  staff
       in the SIZOs or in the State Security detention facility.

   46. It was noted that at the two penal colonies that there were  frequent
       and serious allegations of ill-treatment by staff and  a  climate  of
       fear and intimidation of prisoners observed by the delegation.  There
       was also an unacceptable system of "duty prisoners" who had delegated
       authority from staff; and  frequent  allegations  of  corruption  and
       exploitation  of  prisoners  for  economic  reasons.  The   Committee
       concluded  that  there  were  major  management  problems   in   both
       establishments.  At paragraphs 42  and  43  of  the  report  detailed
       remedial actions are  set  out  giving  the  measures  taken  by  the
       Ukrainian government as a result of the information provided  by  the
       Committee, which included the dismissing of  both  directors  of  the
       colonies and instigation of criminal investigations against staff  as
       a result of complaints of ill-treatment by  two  prisoners.  The  CPT
       concluded that "a page is being turned and  decisive  action  is  now
       being taken by the relevant authorities to combat  the  phenomena  of
       ill-treatment and intimidation of prisoners in colonies", although it
       was noted that the Committee would continue to monitor the  situation
       of prisoners in these colonies and others and would reinvestigate  if
       improvements were not sustained or if actions not vigorously pursued.
       Concerns  were  also  expressed  about  life  prisoners   and   their
       conditions,  which  had  not   improved   in   line   with   previous
       recommendations.

United Nationals Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture (SPT)

   47. The SPT was established pursuant to the provisions of a  treaty,  the
       Optional Protocol to the  Convention  against  Torture (OPCAT).  The
       OPCAT was adopted in December 2002 by the  General  Assembly  of  the
       United Nations and entered into force in June 2006. The SPT  has  two
       primary operational functions. First,  it  may  undertake  visits  to
       States Parties, during the course of which it  may  visit  any  place
       where persons may be deprived of their liberty. Under the OPCAT,  the
       SPT has unrestricted access  to  all  places  where  persons  may  be
       deprived of their liberty, their installations and facilities and  to
       all relevant information. Second, it has an advisory  function  which
       involves providing assistance and advice to  States  Parties  on  the
       establishment of National Preventive  Mechanisms  (NPM)  which  OPCAT
       requires  that  they  establish,  and  also  providing   advice   and
       assistance to both the NPM and the State Party regarding the  working
       of the NPM. In addition, the SPT cooperates, for  the  prevention  of
       torture  in  general,  with  relevant  United  Nations   organs   and
       mechanisms as well as  with  international,  regional,  and  national
       institutions or organizations.

   48. Whilst we do not have a report from  the  SPT  on  Ukraine  Professor
       Bowring has brought to our attention a report  of  the  Human  Rights
       House  Network  (HRHN),  an  umbrella  organisation   for   90   non-
       governmental human rights groups, website which explains that in  May
       2016  the  United  Nations  Subcommittee  on  Prevention  of  Torture
       suspended its visit to Ukraine where it  was  trying  to  investigate
       allegations of torture in places  where  it  suspected  persons  were
       being held by the Ukrainian security services. "This denial of access
       is in breach of  Ukraine's  obligations  as  a  State  party  to  the
       Optional Protocol  to  the  Convention  against  Torture,"  said  Sir
       Malcolm Evans, head of the four-member delegation. "It has meant that
       we have not been able to  visit  some  places  where  we  have  heard
       numerous and serious allegations that people have been  detained  and
       where torture or ill-treatment may have occurred." "This cancellation
       suggests that Ukraine  is  unwilling  to  fully  cooperate  with  the
       international community on human rights," responded Florian Irminger,
       Head of Advocacy  at  HRHN.  "After  Euromaidan,  the  annexation  of
       Crimea, and the conflict in the East, one would expect the government
       in Kiev to fully cooperate with such mechanisms - in order to build a
       Ukraine committed to human rights and universal values. Ukraine  must
       really choose the side of full  cooperation  with  international  and
       regional human rights mechanisms."

The Ukrainian Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights (the Ombudsman)

   49. Ms Valeriya Lutkovska was appointed to this position in  April  2012.
       She is a qualified lawyer who has amongst other  things  been  deputy
       minister of justice in Ukraine and  a  government  agent  before  the
       European Court of Human Rights.  She  is  the  National  Preventative
       Mechanism (NPM) since Ukraine ratified the Optional Protocol  to  the
       UN Convention Against Torture. States must allow  the  NPM  to  visit
       all, and any suspected, places of deprivation of liberty, and the NPM
       must be able to carry out visits in the manner and with the frequency
       that the NPM itself decides. This includes  the  ability  to  conduct
       private interviews with those deprived of liberty and  the  right  to
       carry  out  unannounced  visits  at  all  times  to  all  places   of
       deprivation of liberty, in accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the
       Optional Protocol. Concerns have been raised about  the  insufficient
       financial support provided to her to fulfil the service of the NPM in
       the Ukrainian Human Rights Union report on the implementation of  the
       Council of Europe, European Committee for the Prevention  of  Torture
       and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishments (CPT)  report.  Her
       work is of course far  wider  than  dealing  with  prison  conditions
       (although it is said she has conducted more than 300  inspections  of
       prisons in Ukraine in the letter from the FCO  dated  20th  September
       2016), and it is perhaps  notable  that  her  office  has  issued  no
       reports at all since 2013.

   50. In September 2016 Ms Lutkovska put information regarding human rights
       violations at Kiev  SIZO  No  1  into  the  public  domain  which  is
       accompanied  by  photographs  which  show  cells  with  no   windows,
       insufficient space, walls covered in fungus and dangerous  electrical
       fittings.  Ms  Lutkovska   notes   that   cells   have   insufficient
       ventilation, do not have a lavatory, that inmates do  not  have  free
       access to drinking water and that there is no night lighting  so  the
       lights are on all of the time. She notes, as examples regarding over-
       crowding, that the national standard of 2.5 square meters per  inmate
       was not met with one cell measuring 8.3 square  meters  containing  4
       people and another measuring 7.5 square meters containing  6  people.
       This  information  will,  it  is  anticipated  by   her   office   in
       conversation  with  Professor  Bowring,  be  part  of  a  forthcoming
       official report.

Evidence of Professor William Bowring

   51. Like Laws LJ in Igor Lutsyuk v Government of Ukraine we are satisfied
       that Professor Bowring is an appropriate expert and we give weight to
       his opinions and evidence. He is  a  qualified  barrister  who  still
       practises at the European Court of Human Rights and is a professor of
       law at Birkbeck University. He is fluent in Russian and has  provided
       expert evidence in extradition  cases  since  2003,  including  seven
       relating to Ukraine. He has an extensive experience of working on the
       penitentiary systems of post-Soviet countries.

   52. We find he has collated in his report  the  evidence  on  the  issues
       before the Tribunal from the key sources, the sources outlined  above
       as well as notably information from the press, from the  Home  Office
       Country Information and Guidance Reports (CIGs) on Ukraine and the US
       State Department Reports on Ukraine. In oral evidence he was able  to
       give fully reasoned answers  to  all  questions  put  to  him,  being
       careful both in his report and in  oral  evidence  to  say  when  his
       evidence was speculative. He has provided additional  responses  both
       as a result of questions from the Tribunal and the respondent.

   53. Professor Bowring's opinion is that the  document  relating  to  VB's
       conviction appears to be genuine given its appearance  and  language.
       Although the offence VB is convicted of is one under Article  409  of
       the Criminal Code this is not necessarily incorrect  given  his  past
       military service, and his being  a  case  of  mobilisation,  although
       Article  336  would  also  apply  and  might  be  seen  to  be   more
       appropriate. Professor Bowring also accepted that call up papers must
       be hand delivered according to material  from  the  Canadian  Refugee
       Board.

   54. Starting therefore from the premise that  both  appellants  had  been
       convicted of offences of failing to do military service  in  absentia
       Professor Bowring believes that it is highly likely that  they  would
       be arrested on return to  Ukraine  and  held  in  a  SIZO  pending  a
       retrial. They would  be  highly  likely  then,  in  his  opinion,  be
       entitled to be retried as Ukrainian law provides for this  in  almost
       all circumstances where an  accused  person  has  been  convicted  in
       absentia. This is in accordance with Article  412  of  the  Ukrainian
       Criminal Procedure Code. Further this would be  the  compatible  with
       European Court of Human Rights law, (see Jones v  UK  Application  No
       30900/02 9th September 2003), and would reflect  the  fact  that  the
       Ukrainian authorities do generally  attempt  to  cooperate  with  the
       Council of Europe.

   55. The appellants would, in Professor Bowring's opinion, be very  likely
       to be detected as having been previously  convicted  of  offences  on
       entry to Ukraine as there are computerised systems  at  the  airport.
       They would then be likely to be taken to a SIZO, with  a  significant
       possibility that this would be Kiev's  SIZO  No  1  as  this  is  the
       largest one in Ukraine. This  is  the  SIZO  which  featured  in  the
       Ombudsman's most recent critical report. A prosecutor would then have
       to decide what would happen next with the appellants,  considering  a
       possible retrial or  other  options  to  deal  with  them.  Professor
       Bowring believes that  there  is  therefore  a  real  risk  that  the
       appellants would  be  subject  to  degrading  treatment  contrary  to
       Article 3 ECHR if returned to Ukraine as they would be very likely to
       be in detention in a SIZO for a period of weeks or months whilst  the
       prosecutor determined what should happen with the appellants.

   56. Professor Bowring is unable to quantify the likelihood of the various
       options available to the prosecutor  to  dispose  of  the  appellants
       thereafter due to the lack of relevant evidence in the public domain.
       It is possible that there might not be a retrial  if  the  appellants
       were to agree to be called-up (although on  the  evidence  before  us
       this is not something either would be likely to do), or they might be
       dealt with as administrative offenders - and thus in accordance  with
       the Administrative Code only be liable to a fine.  Professor  Bowring
       noted that although the fines were low for administrative offences (a
       maximum of just over the minimum wage for a month) that Ukraine is  a
       poor country so these fines are not insignificant punishments to many
       citizens.

   57. The evidence in the public domain is  that  very  few  draft  evaders
       have, to date, been subject to any  criminal  proceedings  let  alone
       convicted of any criminal offence or  sent  to  prison.  However,  no
       precise official figures are  available  on  criminal  penalties  and
       there is nothing at all available about those convicted  in  absentia
       who are being retried. It is possible that sentencing might  be  more
       severe for these appellants due to their  efforts  to  do  everything
       possible to avoid call-up. If criminal proceedings were brought there
       is not a power under Article 69 of the Ukrainian criminal code for  a
       judge to give a lesser sentence than the  prison  terms  set  out  in
       Articles 335, 336 and 409 but it would be possible  for  that  prison
       sentence to be suspended, and if a term is suspended there is a power
       to give probation/supervision. Professor Bowring is of the view  that
       the very recent change of staff for the prosecutor and judiciary  may
       possibly herald a harder line against draft  evasion.  He  felt  that
       despite the new bail provisions it was very likely indeed that  these
       appellants would not automatically  be  granted  bail  due  to  their
       having absconded previously.

   58. In relation to the issue of whether there had been a  durable  change
       in prison conditions in  Ukraine  warranting  a  departure  from  PS,
       Professor Bowring does not agree this is the case. He is  clear  that
       there have been real improvements regarding overcrowding and  serious
       engagement with the EU and Council of  Europe.  For  instance,  there
       were six mini projects undertaken by the Ukrainian State Penitentiary
       Service with the Council of Europe and the EU, in the period 2015  to
       early 2016, to support prison reform by improving the  rehabilitation
       of prisoners, examples being training prison staff in  conflict  free
       communication, improving preparation for release,  training  convicts
       to adopt  a  healthy  lifestyle  and  improved  systems  for  suicide
       prevention. So whilst there was an aspiration for positive change  by
       the authorities the evidence of conditions in the  2014  CPT  report,
       and the very recent evidence  2016  from  the  Ombudsman  shows  that
       significant overcrowding is  still  found  in  Kiev  SIZO;  and  more
       broadly within the prison system  (SIZOs  and  penal  colonies)  that
       abusive conditions (violence by staff who are often  ex-military  who
       treat prisoners as the enemy and poor physical conditions in prisons)
       continue to exist. He felt that Ukraine was not in a good position to
       make sustained durable improvements at the current time, despite some
       desire to do so, given it is a country at war and was  starting  from
       what is essentially an aging Soviet gulag system.







   Country Information  and  Guidance  (CIG)  from  Home  Office  -  Ukraine
   Military Service and Prison Conditions

   59. Key relevant  information  in  these  reports  not  already  set  out
       elsewhere is summarised as follows.

   60. The CIG opinion is that conditions within  military  service  do  not
       amount to a real risk of serious harm, and that penalties for failing
       to do it are not disproportionate.

   61. The FCO information, set out in a letter  dated  September  2016,  is
       that only one person has been  given  a  prison  sentence  for  draft
       evasion, and even this has been postponed, and that this  is  despite
       hundreds of cases being opened for this offence. 77  guilty  verdicts
       were said to have been issued by courts as of February 2016  but  the
       majority were given probation and released.  UNHCR  information  from
       January 2015 indicated that in  December  2014  32  people  had  been
       sentenced for evasion of conscription or mobilisation and  that  when
       16 of those cases  were  looked  at  all  got  administrative  fines,
       community  service  or  suspended  sentences.  A  UNHCR  report  from
       September 2015 found statistics from Ukrainian  courts  showing  that
       from July 2014 to July 2015 661 criminal cases were recorded  against
       draft  and  mobilisation  evaders.  Further  in  November  2015   the
       organisation Global Research  reported  7000  criminal  cases  opened
       against  evaders  of  mobilisation.   A   blogger   who   had   urged
       conscientious objectors not to fight was sentenced to a  three-and-a-
       half year prison term in July 2016. The publication "Global Security"
       stated in June 2015 that there have been 10,000  cases  of  desertion
       registered in the Ukrainian army since the outbreak of war  in  April
       2014.

   62. Information provided by the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board in
       June 2015,  and  taken  from  a  US  private  non-profit  foundation,
       indicates that military service call-up is via a written  instruction
       to citizens to go to a commissariat for further  instructions  and  a
       medical check-up. This notice has to be hand-delivered  and  requires
       the signature of the recipient.  News reports  are  cited  that  show
       that attempts to mobilise reservists have led to between 70% and  95%
       ignoring the notices.  Some  had  moved  to  another  address,  other
       refused to open their doors and some ignored the notice or ran  away.
       Corruption enables richer persons to bribe their way out  of  service
       whilst  poorer  rural  residents  were  a  large  portion  of   those
       mobilised.

   63. With respect to prison conditions it is accepted in the FCO letter of
       September 2016, annexed to the CIG, that many  prison  and  pre-trial
       detention centres are in old buildings which sometimes  do  not  have
       adequate sanitary facilities or ventilation, and that overcrowding is
       a problem in Ukrainian prisons. The letter goes on to say that  there
       are common complaints about medical care, being held in a  cell  with
       someone who has TB, lack of open air activities, lack  of  access  to
       drinking water, lack of timely response to emergencies in cells, lack
       of furniture in cells, lack of  light,  showers  and  adequate  food.
       Prisons in Ukraine, it is accepted, do not meet  European  standards,
       and conditions in some prisons violate human rights  although  it  is
       said that they do not pose a direct threat to life. There  have  been
       improvements since  2014:  for  instance,  social  and  psychological
       services established in prisons; religious  services  and  visits  by
       priests; and fewer cases of  torture  and  mistreatment  recorded  by
       human right organisations since 2012. There have also been  measures,
       such as house arrest and probation, to  reduce  the  numbers  serving
       prison sentences.

   64. In the CIG itself reliance is placed on the CPT report of April  2015
       that "decisive action" is now being taken to combat the phenomena  of
       ill-treatment and on positive comments in the April 2014  CPT  report
       with regards to marginal systemic improvements in  the  treatment  of
       prisoners, and on the Ukraine Council of Europe/ EU project of reform
       for 2015 to 2017.  It  is  accepted  that  the  US  State  Department
       covering events in 2014, and other reports,  found  that  prison  and
       detention centre conditions remained poor, did not meet international
       standards, and at times posed a serious threat to life and health  of
       prisoners. Poor sanitation, abuse, and lack of adequate light,  food,
       and medical care were persistent problems. However, the conclusion is
       that although prison conditions are poor in  Ukraine  and  there  are
       reports  of  torture  and  mistreatment   in   some   establishments,
       conditions are not so systemically inhumane and life  threatening  as
       to meet the high threshold of Article 3 ECHR.

   Discussion - Country Guidance

   65. The first issue identified for  country  guidance  is  what  are  the
       likely punishments for avoiding military service.

   66. There is a stark contrast between the penalties provided in the  law,
       which appear to be straight-forwardly long periods of imprisonment of
       between 2 and 5 years under the relevant parts of the  Criminal  Code
       at Articles 335, 336 and 409, or  fines  of  varying  severity  under
       Article 210 of the Code of Administrative Offences; and the  evidence
       of what is happening in practice in Ukraine, which is far less clear,
       but collectively does not lead us to conclude  that  statistically  a
       prison sentence or even a fine is currently likely  for  the  reasons
       set out below.

   67. We lack a straight forward set of official statistics  on  the  issue
       but information obtained by the FCO, UNHCR and  newspapers  indicates
       only a couple of persons would appear to have actually been  sent  to
       prison for conscription or mobilisation  evasion,  with  evidence  of
       suspended sentences, probation or fines in only tens of other cases.

   68. This appears firstly to be the case because the Ukrainian authorities
       have faced draft evasion, both from young conscripted men  and  those
       summonsed for mobilisation, on a colossal scale and have not yet  got
       anywhere  near  the  stage  of  the  process  where  they  would   be
       "sentencing" the majority of evaders. The  overwhelming  majority  of
       the over 100,000 draft evaders would  appear,  from  the  information
       before us, to have faced to date no consequences for their actions at
       all. In some cases it would seem likely that this  is  because  these
       people have left Ukraine as war refugees or otherwise, in  others  it
       seems likely that they are internally displaced, given that there are
       over a million internally displaced people  in  Ukraine;  others  may
       have avoided receiving their call up papers or simply ignored  papers
       served.

   69. It appears from the information before us that failure to answer call-
       up papers has historically been a major problem,  and  that  problems
       with provision of kit, training and leadership in the army are likely
       to be the major issues with currently persuading citizens to serve in
       the army, rather than  a  lack  of  patriotism  or  support  for  the
       Ukrainian government in defending the state  against  Russian  backed
       separatist aggression.  It  would  also  appear  that  the  Ukrainian
       government has to date  preferred  to  try  to  persuade  parents  to
       encourage  their  sons  to  cooperate  with  their  conscription   by
       reassuring them in political statements that they would not  be  sent
       to the front; and by agreeing generally to slightly  better  pay  for
       those volunteering to join the army; and made  attempts  to  regulate
       the  borders  and  thus  prevent  people  escaping,  rather  than  by
       attempting to come down heavily on large numbers of  evaders  through
       criminal proceedings. It  may  well  be  that  such  a  clampdown  is
       something  that  they  are  not  in  a  position   to   do,   perhaps
       administratively or financially, and also in the sense of  their  not
       having the prison  places  to  deal  with  such  a  large  number  of
       potential convicts. It would also perhaps not be  in  line  with  the
       Ukrainian government's  intended  future  for  the  army  as  one  of
       professional soldiers rather than coerced conscripts.

   70. Of the less than 30,000 draft-evaders against whom some investigation
       or initial proceedings may have been  instigated,  according  to  the
       data before us, these steps would appear  mostly  to  be  at  a  very
       preliminary stage.  The information about the tens of cases known  to
       have an outcome indicates that these are mostly dealt with  by  fines
       or suspended sentences.

   71. It is possible that a new harder line judiciary and prosecutor  might
       decide to make some examples of those evading service,  as  was  done
       with  the  blogger,  Ruslan  Kotsaba,  who  posted  a  YouTube  video
       demanding an end to fighting in Donbass and called on  Ukrainian  men
       to resist conscription, who faced a treason trial and  was  sentenced
       to three and a half years in prison for hindering the  activities  of
       the Ukrainian armed forces in July 2016. At this  stage  it  is  very
       hard to understand if there would be  a  profile  for  an  "ordinary"
       draft-evader who would be more likely to receive a  prison  sentence:
       the one case which has featured  in  the  news  press  (and  the  FCO
       letter) from Zaporizhzhya district was of a plumber  in  Kryvyi  Rih,
       who was married with a child, who ignored four  notices  calling  him
       up, and then said in court he was not joining the army. He received a
       two-year  prison  sentence  with  one-year  probation,  although  FCO
       information is that he is yet to  serve  his  sentence  due  to  ill-
       health. It is possible, as Professor Bowring has argued,  that  doing
       more to avoid the call-up might lead  to  harsher  sentencing  as  an
       aggravating circumstance, and that leaving Ukraine might be  seen  as
       such an aggravating circumstance, but it is still unclear  when  that
       would be in the context of criminal proceedings or when this would be
       in the context of administrative proceedings, and it would seem to us
       that there is a major factor of unlucky chance  involved  before  any
       particular draft-evader finds himself identified for any  proceedings
       at all.

   72. We conclude at present  there  is  no  real  risk  of  an  individual
       receiving a prison sentence for draft-evasion  in  Ukraine.  However,
       the law provides for such proceedings and penalties and in  at  least
       one apparently unremarkable case, discussed in the  paragraph  above,
       there was a prosecution which led to a two-year prison sentence.

   73. The second issue identified for country guidance  is  whether  prison
       conditions for draft-evaders in Ukraine are  contrary  to  Article  3
       ECHR, or whether they are not as there has  been  a  significant  and
       durable change in Ukraine such  as  to  mean  that  previous  country
       guidance in PS should no longer be followed.

   74. It is firstly important to note that that there is no  difference  in
       prison conditions for draft-evaders than for  other  prisoners.  They
       are held in the same conditions, and are not subject to any  military
       prison regime.

   75. We are guided by the decision in the Grand Chamber  of  the  European
       Court of Human Rights in Mursic in considering the  circumstances  in
       which imprisonment will amount to a breach of Article 3 ECHR  due  to
       the conditions of that imprisonment. We note of course that  torture,
       inhuman  or  degrading  treatment   or   punishment   is   prohibited
       irrespective of the circumstances and the victim's behaviour but that
       ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity to fall  within
       the scope of Article 3. It is important to note, given the  situation
       of armed conflict and economic crisis  in  Ukraine,  that  the  Grand
       Chamber said: "It is incumbent on  the  government  to  organise  its
       penitentiary system in such a way as ensure respect for  the  dignity
       of detainees regardless of financial and logistical difficulties." We
       note that without a minimum standard of 3  square  metres  space  per
       detainee in multi-occupancy accommodation there is a presumption that
       prison/detention conditions are in breach of Article  3  ECHR  unless
       there is only a short, occasional or minor reduction in the  required
       personal space where this is accompanied  by  sufficient  freedom  of
       movement outside the cell, where  there  are  adequate  out  of  cell
       activities and where the detention facility is otherwise appropriate.

   76. We find that the  cases  drawn  to  our  attention  against  Ukraine,
       finding breaches of Article 3 ECHR based on prison conditions  before
       the European Court of Human Rights, support PS  having  been  rightly
       decided but that as they are all about violations of Article  3  ECHR
       based on prison conditions prior to 2007 they do  not  assist  us  in
       assessing whether there is a current real risk of a breach of Article
       3.

   77. We find that  there  have  been  some  positive  changes  in  Ukraine
       regarding  the  prison  system  since  PS  was  decided.   The   most
       significant positive development has been  changes  to  the  criminal
       code  and  criminal  procedural  code  which  have  led  to  a   very
       significant reduction in the  prison  population,  with  there  being
       around 61,000 persons incarcerated in 2016  compared  to  147,000  in
       2013. This must have reduced overcrowding, particularly in  pre-trial
       detention  facilities  given  the  presumption  in  favour  of   bail
       introduced for those awaiting  trial  and  the  removal  of  criminal
       penalties for minor matters.

   78. Also significant has  been  the  fact  that  the  various  inspection
       reports of the CPT and Ombudsman available to us do, if  generalised,
       indicate a reduction in the reporting of mistreatment  severe  enough
       to qualify as torture in pre-trial detention and a pattern of  lesser
       allegations of acts of ill-treatment, not so severe as to qualify  as
       torture, by staff in pre-trial detention.

   79. However, with  respect  to  torture  and  ill-treatment  contrary  to
       Article 3 the evidence before us is  that  whilst  in  the  2014  CPT
       report improvements in staff treatment  of  inmates  in  correctional
       colonies and other provision for convicted prisoners were noted, this
       was sadly countered by the fact that systems were  in  place  whereby
       control was retained by the authorities using groups of inmates being
       empowered to ill-treat others. In the  2015  CPT  report  inmates  in
       correctional colonies no 25 and 100 were found to be subject to  ill-
       treatment by both staff and "duty prisoners"  delegated  to  maintain
       order resulting  in  a  "climate  of  fear  and  intimidation",  with
       frequent allegations  of  corruption  and  economic  exploitation  of
       prisoners. It is appreciated however that the  material  we  have  on
       correctional colonies and other provision for convicted prisoners  is
       not as wide in scope as that  for  pre-conviction  detainees  and  so
       whilst this evidence is of a very serious nature  it  may  not  be  a
       reflective of the  situation  across  all  facilities  for  convicted
       prisoners.

   80. There is significant evidence of improvements for  Ukrainian  inmates
       in the ability by the Ukrainian authorities to take, in the words  of
       the CPT in their  2015  report,  "decisive  action"  to  "combat  the
       phenomena of ill treatment and intimidation of prisoners in colonies"
       when presented with evidence of breaches of Article 3 ECHR  in  their
       prison estate in Colonies No 25 and 100. There is  also  evidence  of
       Ukraine working with the EU and Council of Europe on smaller projects
       to improve their penal system in an  on-going  programme  started  in
       2015 and the establishment of the Ombudsman with a mandate to inspect
       prisons and report on their condition since 2012, which has also  led
       to decisive action in dismissing staff when  ill-treatment  has  been
       found.

   81. However, this evidence of cooperation with international and national
       human rights bodies to improve the  prison  estate  and  bring  about
       conformity to human rights norms has to be placed in the balance with
       evidence that Ukraine has  very  recently,  in  May  2016,  prevented
       access to detained facilities by the United Nations  Subcommittee  on
       Prevention of Torture (SPT), thus breaching their  obligations  as  a
       state party to  the  Optional  Protocol  to  the  Convention  against
       Torture. Further evidence of a  less  positive  attitude  to  Ukraine
       upholding prisoners' human rights standards is also found in a report
       on prisoners' rights by the Ukrainian  Helsinki  Human  Rights  Union
       dated 25th April 2016 that says that the heads  of  Colonies  25  and
       100, sacked as part  of  the  government  "decisive  action"  against
       breaches of Article 3 found in  these  institution,  have  apparently
       both been reinstated in Colony 43,  where  human  rights  abuses  are
       contended to continue. We note that issues with  intimidatory  action
       and retaliatory action against prisoners prior to, during  and  after
       CPT visits also arose in the context of both the CPT reports of  2014
       and 2015, and were said to have been persistent  problems  since  the
       CPT's first visit in 1998.  When the  totality  of  the  evidence  is
       considered we are not satisfied that as yet the Ukrainian authorities
       have acted so as to mean that there  is  not  a  real  risk  of  ill-
       treatment in detention and prison facilities.

   82. What is very clear from all of the reports on  prison  conditions  in
       Ukraine is that in  the  pre-trial  facilities,  particularly  SIZOs,
       there is evidence that the required Article 3 compliant  standard  of
       basic  space  (3  square  metres  per  detainee  in   multi-occupancy
       accommodation) is regularly not being met. This results in, we remind
       ourselves, a presumption of a breach of Article 3 ECHR. The  required
       national standard in Ukraine is only 2.5 square metres which  is  not
       in conformity with Article 3 ECHR. The  evidence  of  the  Ombudsman,
       from her September 2016 inspection, regarding insufficient  space  at
       Kiev SIZO No 1, the largest such facility in Ukraine,  is  that  even
       the national standard is not being met. It is also  clear  from  this
       report that other aspects of the provision of accommodation support a
       breach of Article 3  rather  than  rebut  the  presumption  based  on
       inadequate space: the SIZO accommodation inspected had in part had no
       windows,  was  damp,   had   dangerous   electrical   fittings,   had
       insufficient ventilation, lacked sanitation and  access  to  drinking
       water and had no night-lighting so lighting was kept on continually.

   83. This very recent report of the Ombudsman on SIZOs is, of  course,  to
       be placed in the context of the conditions found by the  CPT  in  the
       2014 and 2015 report.  In the 2014 report localised overcrowding  was
       found in SIZOs visited, and it was noted that no decisive action  had
       been taken to upgrade material conditions in the  majority  of  SIZOs
       visited; there were inadequate numbers of health  care  professionals
       available to inmates; and a failure by the authorities  to  introduce
       programmes of meaningful  out-of-cell  activities  for  adult  remand
       prisoners.

   84. We also find it consistent with this picture of poor detention/prison
       conditions contravening human rights norms that the Ukrainian  prison
       population has a high death rate amongst inmates: there were 35 self-
       inflicted deaths and 321 disease deaths in 2015 which gives a rate of
       0.586% compared to 0.315% across all 47 Council of  Europe  countries
       (data taken from the Council of Europe Annual Penal Statistics Report
       for 2015).

   85. We conclude that there has been no significant or durable  change  in
       prison conditions in Ukraine so as to mean that it  would  not  be  a
       breach of Article 3 ECHR to  return  someone  to  detention  in  that
       country. The combined  evidence  of  lack  of  space,  poor  material
       conditions, and lack of meaningful out of cell  activity  means  that
       pre-trial detention in Ukraine poses a real risk of being inhuman and
       degrading treatment on return. The evidence of a real risk of serious
       ill-treatment in certain penal colonies, combined with  the  lack  of
       sustained evidence  of  corrective  action  to  allegations  of  such
       treatment, is such that we find return  to  these  institutions  also
       poses a real risk of such treatment too.

   86. We believe that this conclusion is consistent with the FCO letter  of
       20th September 2016 which states that "Conditions in certain  prisons
       can be considered to violate human rights" despite some improvements,
       including fewer reported  cases  of  torture  and  ill-treatment  and
       aspirations for future reforms to "bring conditions more in line with
       European standards". Our conclusion is also in line with that made by
       the Administrative Court in relation to the extradition request  made
       in 2013 in Igor Lutsyuk v Government of Ukraine; and  the  conclusion
       of the 2016 US State Department Country Report for Ukraine  on  Human
       Rights Practices for 2015 which summarises the situation as:  "Prison
       and  detention  centre  conditions  remained  poor,  did   not   meet
       international standards, and at times posed a serious threat  to  the
       life and health of prisoners. Physical abuse, lack of proper  medical
       care and nutrition, poor sanitation, and the lack of  adequate  light
       were persistent problems."

Conclusions - Country Guidance

   87. At the current time it is not reasonably likely that  a  draft-evader
       avoiding conscription or mobilisation in Ukraine would face  criminal
       or administrative proceedings for that  act,  although  if  a  draft-
       evader did face prosecution proceedings the Criminal Code of  Ukraine
       does provide, in Articles 335, 336 and 409, for a prison sentence for
       such an offence. It would be a matter for any Tribunal  to  consider,
       in the light of developing evidence, whether there  were  aggravating
       matters which might lead to  imposition  of  an  immediate  custodial
       sentence, rather than a suspended sentence or the  matter  proceeding
       as an administrative offence and a fine being sought by a prosecutor.

   88. There is a real risk  of  anyone  being  returned  to  Ukraine  as  a
       convicted criminal sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  in  that
       country being detained  on  arrival,  although  anyone  convicted  in
       absentia would probably  be  entitled  thereafter  to  a  retrial  in
       accordance with  Article  412  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code  of
       Ukraine.

   89.  There  is  a  real  risk  that  the  conditions  of  detention   and
       imprisonment in  Ukraine  would  subject  a  person  returned  to  be
       detained or imprisoned to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.







Conclusions - Appellants

Evidence VB

   90. The agreed facts in relation to the first appellant, VB, are that  he
       is a citizen of Ukraine born on 29th  July  1981.  He  completed  his
       military  service  during  the  period  1999-2001  when  he   was   a
       communications operator and driver. He suffered serious bullying  and
       injury in the army. He entered the UK clandestinely  on  5th  January
       2013, to join his wife who was already in the UK,  and  his  daughter
       was born on 1st October 2013. Whilst in the UK call  up  papers  were
       issued requiring his attendance with the military commissar in  April
       2014 and again in May 2014.

   91. It is accepted by the respondent that these summonses are  consistent
       with the recall of reservists during mobilisation in Ukraine  in  the
       refusal letter, and their validity is also attested to  by  Professor
       Galeotti (see below) who confirms not merely that  they  are  in  the
       correct format but also that they are signed by the  person  who  was
       the correct military commissar and have the appropriate seal for  the
       particular military commissariat.

   92. The respondent does  not  accept  that  VB  has  been  convicted  and
       sentenced to five years imprisonment on 9th July 2014 for failure  to
       answer to this draft in accordance with Article 409 of  the  Criminal
       Code of Ukraine by the  Bogorodchanskyy  Court  as  set  out  in  the
       document produced by him.  The respondent says  that  enquiries  with
       the Ukraine criminal database did not reveal any positive returns for
       the  claimed  criminal  sentence,  and  she   produced   a   document
       verification report stating she had been told that that VB's document
       did not exist in the Register database; that it  had a  number  which
       did not relate to decisions in July (which were in the range  388-389
       - and this document was number 344); and that the secretary said  the
       judge, prosecutor and lawyer in the document had not been employed as
       court staff.

   93. VB's solicitor (as set out in her witness statement provided  to  the
       Tribunal) found that the telephone number given on  the  respondent's
       verification report did not work but located another  which  did  and
       called the Court,  and  was  told  that  information  verifying  VB's
       document could not be given out and that given  the  current  country
       situation it was likely individuals employed by the Court would  have
       moved on after a year. An expert,  Professor  Galeotti  Professor  of
       Global Affairs at New York University with a background  of  research
       in Russian and Eurasian crime who has had professional  and  personal
       links with Ukrainian police and judiciary  since  1991,  provided  an
       expert  report  which  expresses  the  opinion  that  the  sentencing
       document is genuine due to the language, lay-out and sentence imposed
       being consistent with his experience of such documents.

   94. VB claimed asylum on 19th May 2014, and his claim was refused by  the
       respondent on 27th November 2014 as his criminal conviction  was  not
       believed for the reasons set out above, and therefore the  respondent
       said he did not face imprisonment for draft evasion, and also it  was
       not accepted that he faced a  real  risk  of  dedovshchina  or  other
       treatment contrary to  Article  3  ECHR  whilst  doing  his  military
       service.

   95. Before moving on to decide VB's appeal we must first  decide  whether
       or not we accept  to  the  lower  standard  of  civil  proof  he  was
       convicted of the offence of draft-evasion.

   96. We heard oral evidence from VB, given as a result of  examination  in
       chief, cross-examination and questions from the  Panel,  through  the
       Tribunal  interpreter  whom  he  confirmed  he  understood.  VB  also
       confirmed his two statements were true and correct and that he wished
       these also to stand as his evidence to the Tribunal.

   97. The pertinent evidence of VB can he summarised  as  follows.  VB  was
       challenged by Mr Wilding as to whether his summonses (notwithstanding
       the agreed facts) and his court sentencing document are  genuine.  He
       maintained that all documents are genuine and were  received  by  his
       mother, the summonses being served upon her at the  family  home  and
       the sentencing document having been collected by her from the village
       council after she had been notified by an official it was waiting for
       him to collect there. He did not know why the summonses came from two
       different military commands. VB  did  not  believe  that  his  mother
       signed anything when she took the summons although she  did  ask  why
       she was being served with papers when VB was not in the country,  and
       was told that the authorities had a list of people to whom  they  had
       to serve summonses. He gave evidence that prior to knowing about  the
       April 2014 summons he had fully intended to return  to  Ukraine  with
       his wife, and had been in the process of obtaining  a  passport  from
       the Ukrainian embassy and inoculations for his  daughter  to  achieve
       this. VB said that his parents had gone to see a Ukrainian  solicitor
       after receiving the court sentencing document but were told no appeal
       could be made without VB being present in Ukraine.  He had taken  one
       month to claim asylum after receiving  information  about  the  first
       summons in April 2014 from his mother via Skype, although he did  not
       intend to return to Ukraine from this time. This was because  he  had
       first consulted a solicitor in the UK to obtain advice  about  making
       an asylum claim.

   98. The Panel are satisfied to the lower civil standard of proof that the
       military service call up papers for VB were sent to him in the way he
       describes for the following reasons. We find him  to  be  a  credible
       witness who gave his evidence in considerable detail;  in  a  serious
       and heart-felt manner; and answering all questions put to him to  the
       best of his ability, thus doing his best to assist the  Tribunal.  We
       note that two experts believe the call-up papers to be  genuine,  and
       that the respondent also accepts that they appear to be so.  Although
       the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  information  dated  June
       2015 says that such call-up papers "are hand  delivered  and  require
       the signature of the recipient",  it  is  unclear  whether  recipient
       means simply the  person  who  takes  the  summons  rather  than  the
       addressee of the summons.  It  is  noted  that  the  source  of  this
       information is a senior program officer for Europe and Eurasia at the
       National Endowment for Democracy (NED), a US-based private non-profit
       foundation. No doubt the information was given  in  good  faith,  and
       might generally be correct but it  is  not  sufficient,  particularly
       given the ambiguity as to acceptable signatories, to mean that we  do
       not find the call up paper to have  been  genuinely  served  on  VB's
       mother in the way  he  describes.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the
       signature part of the official procedure was overlooked or that  VB's
       mother simply did not tell him she had signed for it. The  fact  that
       VB received two different notices with different "Command Nos" is not
       obviously   significant   either   when   considering   whether   the
       documentation is genuine: it could simply  mean  that  two  different
       units under "VOS No 92" had inadvertently dealt with him and sent out
       duplicate notices.

   99. The Panel are also satisfied to the lower standard of proof that  the
       sentencing document is genuine and was received by VB in the  way  he
       describes. As set out above we find him to be  a  generally  credible
       witness. Again we have the opinion of two  experts  that  it  appears
       genuine due to its format. It is the opinion of Professor Bowring  in
       oral evidence that the Article of the Criminal Code  chosen  (Article
       409) was one potentially available for the evasion  of  mobilisation,
       and  interestingly  the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
       information dated June  2015  sources  cites  this  as  the  relevant
       provision for evasion of military service. Even if Article 336 of the
       Criminal Code might seem ultimately to all before our Tribunal to  be
       the more appropriate provision given the apparent lack of ability  of
       the Ukrainian government to address the draft evasion problem in  all
       ways and the decentralised way in which  military  service  is  dealt
       with it is not implausible that this potentially relevant and perhaps
       overlapping charge was brought, and given the lack of any defence for
       VB that it was maintained, and used to convict and sentence VB.

   Evidence IS

  100. The agreed facts in relation to the second appellant, IS, are that he
       is a Ukrainian citizen born on 25th March 1986. He is  married  to  a
       Ukrainian citizen who is presently in the UK, and has a daughter born
       in the UK on 9th February 2013. He entered the UK unlawfully  in  the
       back of a lorry with his wife in January 2013. He claimed  asylum  on
       13th August 2015 on the basis of his having evaded military  service,
       having been prosecuted  and  having  been  sentenced  to  two  years'
       imprisonment on the 7th July 2015  by  the  Ternopil  City  Court  in
       accordance with Article 335 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine.

  101. IS's claim for asylum was refused on 9th October 2015, and his asylum
       appeal  was  dismissed  on  25th  February  2016  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, whilst accepting the facts as set out above, on  the  basis
       that the poor prison conditions which the appellant would  experience
       would not "equal a breach of Article 3  ECHR".  On  29th  April  2016
       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman set the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal aside as it was conceded by  the  respondent  that  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  had  unlawful  failed  to  follow  the  country
       guidance in PS. The matter was to be reheard  on  the  basis  of  the
       factual findings  accepted  by  the  respondent  and  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, and it was to be assessed whether  there  were  significant
       and durable changes in Ukraine which meant  that  PS  should  not  be
       followed.

  102. As a result of the above findings both VB and IS are  found  to  face
       return to Ukraine as convicted military service evaders, VB  avoiding
       mobilisation  and  IS  conscription,  and  both   facing   terms   of
       imprisonment  following  their  convictions.  There  is  no  material
       difference therefore in the facts before us when considering  whether
       their return to Ukraine will result in a breach of  Article  3  ECHR,
       the only basis of appeal relied upon by both appellants.

   Conclusions - Both Appellants

  103. Whilst there have been submissions about the pressure under which the
       Ukrainian government currently finds itself  from  war  and  economic
       problems it remains a member of the Council of Europe, and it has not
       been contended by anyone that Ukraine is a failing state  without  an
       operating criminal justice system. In these circumstances we find the
       evidence of Professor Bowring that the appellants  would  be  checked
       against computer systems and found to be convicted offenders  without
       any appeal against sentence and with prison sentences outstanding  on
       re-entry to Ukraine compelling. We also accept Mr  Symes'  submission
       that the appellants cannot be required to lie in response to standard
       questioning on re-entry which might reasonably be expected to include
       issues regarding criminal convictions or military  service.  We  note
       the view of the Australian Refugee Review Tribunal in  their  Country
       Advice Ukraine decision dated 11th December 2009 at  page  3  of  the
       document where it is said: "If a person has broken the law by evading
       the draft, their return to Ukraine is likely to attract the attention
       of the authorities -  particularly  if  they  enter  Ukraine  through
       official  channels."  This  is  also  consistent  with  the  Guardian
       newspaper report of 10th February 2015 which refers to  draft-dodgers
       being arrested at border checkpoints in the context of  a  government
       decree regulated foreign travel for those subject to mobilisation. It
       is also consistent with the observation by UNHCR in  their  September
       2015 report at paragraph 34 which records fears of being mobilised at
       official border crossings. We therefore  accept  Professor  Bowring's
       evidence that as a result it is highly  likely  that  the  appellants
       would be taken into detention on  arrival  in  Ukraine.  We  find  it
       highly unlikely that there could be any other  response  given  their
       return as convicted criminals with outstanding prison sentences.

  104. It is accepted by all as probable that on return to Ukraine  the  two
       appellants would be entitled to a retrial in the light  of  Professor
       Bowring's evidence. Given that they would  both  undoubtedly  request
       this as a preliminary to challenging their prison sentences  we  find
       it probable that they would be held during the process  of  decision-
       making by the authorities on this  issue  in  a  pre-trial  detention
       facility, or SIZO. We accept the evidence of Professor  Bowring  that
       this would likely take a matter of weeks or perhaps months: it is not
       an entirely clear-cut legal issue and not one which arises  routinely
       and the context is one of a recent large turn-over of judges and  the
       chief prosecutor being new and inexperienced in this field. We do not
       see that the appellants could possibly apply for bail until the issue
       of entitlement to a re-trial had been determined as they would  until
       this  point  simply  be  convicted  offenders   with   sentences   of
       imprisonment.

  105. Whilst  it  seems  highly  likely  the  issue  of  retrial  would  be
       eventually determined in their favour even at this point whether  the
       appellants would be granted bail  cannot  be  a  forgone  conclusion.
       There is a presumption in favour of bail under the  current  criminal
       procedural  code,  however  the  appellants  have  shown   themselves
       persistent avoiders of military service  and  the  Ukrainian  justice
       system, and it might be that the  authorities  have  chosen  to  make
       examples of them in the context of their previous harsh sentences. We
       find a real risk that the period of detention in the SIZO  would,  in
       this context, extend beyond the initial period  of  weeks  or  months
       taken to determine the issue of the retrial in their favour.

  106. We do not find that there  is  evidence  to  support  the  idea  that
       ultimately, on a retrial, the appellants would be sentenced to  serve
       a period of imprisonment. At the current time this is clearly a  very
       rare occurrence. We find it is more likely that they would receive an
       administrative penalty in the form of a fine or if a criminal penalty
       were pursued  that  this  would  ultimately  result  in  a  suspended
       sentence of imprisonment or  be  converted  to  probation.  From  the
       material before the Tribunal at the current time this is clearly  the
       way proceedings for failure to  do  military  service  are  generally
       dealt with in the few cases which have reached this stage.

  107. The question then arises as to whether the probable period of several
       months in a SIZO  on  return  to  Ukraine,  that  we  find  that  the
       appellants are likely to experience  prior  to  this  retrial,  would
       amount to a real risk of a breach of their Article 3 ECHR rights.  We
       find that this would be the case following the country  guidance  set
       out above, most particularly due to the  high  likelihood  that  they
       would be held in a SIZO in overcrowded and materially poor  detention
       conditions.



Decision:

    1. The making of the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the
       making of errors on points of law.

    2.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunals are set aside

    3. The decisions are remade allowing both  appeals  on  Article  3  ECHR
       grounds.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellants. This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of  serious  harm  arising  to  the  appellants  or  their
    families from the contents of their protection claims.



Signed:                                 Date:  1 March 2017

Fiona Lindsley

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



                                 APPENDIX A




               DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL




                        Expert Report and Enclosures



|Date           |                                              Description |
|Not dated      |Expert's Report of Professor William Bowring              |



                     Documents before the Upper Tribunal



|Date           |Source                    |Description                    |
|                                                                          |
|Undated                                                                   |
|Undated        |Valeriya Lutkovska        |Resume of Valeriya Lutkovska   |
|               |Ukrainian Parliament      |Ukrainian Parliament           |
|               |Commissioner for Human    |Commissioner for Human Rights  |
|               |Rights                    |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://www1.ombudsman.gov.|                               |
|               |ua/en/index.php?option=com|                               |
|               |_content&view=article&id=1|                               |
|               |116&Itemid=29             |                               |
|Undated        |Council of Europe         |Council of Europe Recent       |
|               |Parliamentary Assembly    |developments in Ukraine:       |
|               |http://www.assembly.coe.in|threats to the                 |
|               |t/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTM|functioning of democratic      |
|               |L-en.asp?fileid=20712&lang|institutions                   |
|               |=en                       |                               |
|Undated        |Institute for criminal    |World Prison Brief - statistics|
|               |policy research  - World  |Ukraine                        |
|               |Prison brief              |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://www.prisonstudies.o|                               |
|               |rg/country/ukraine-       |                               |
|Undated        |Ukrainian Helsinki Human  |Alternative interim report by  |
|               |Rights Union              |Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights|
|               |                          |Union on implementation of     |
|               |http://tbinternet.ohchr.or|recommendations, provided by   |
|               |g/Treaties/CAT/Shared%20Do|the Committee against Torture  |
|               |cuments/UKR/INT_CAT_CSS_UK|based on the consideration of  |
|               |R_24508_E.pdf             |the sixth periodic report of   |
|               |                          |Ukraine (CAT/C/UKR/6)          |
|Undated        |Criminal Procedure code of|Criminal Procedure Code of     |
|               |Ukraine                   |Ukraine                        |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |https://rm.coe.int/CoERMPu|                               |
|               |blicCommonSearchServices/D|                               |
|               |isplayDCTMContent?document|                               |
|               |Id=09000016802f6016       |                               |
|Undated        |Criminal  Procedure code  |Criminal Procedure Code of     |
|               |of Ukraine                |Ukraine                        |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://zakon3.rada.gov.ua/|                               |
|               |laws/show/4651-17         |                               |
|Undated        |Moscow Times              |Poroshenko Signs Law Allowing  |
|               |                          |ousted Yanukovych to be Tried  |
|               |https://themoscowtimes.com|in Absentia                    |
|               |/articles/poroshenko-signs|                               |
|               |-law-allowing-ousted-yanuk|                               |
|               |ovych-to-be-tried-in-absen|                               |
|               |tia-40642 -               |                               |
|Undated        |The Ukrainian Ombudsman   |New facts of Human Rights      |
|               |for Human Rights          |violations  were fixed in the  |
|               |                          |Kiev Sizo                      |
|               |http://censor.net.ua/photo|                               |
|               |_news/404244/novye_fakty_n|                               |
|               |arusheniyi_prav_cheloveka_|                               |
|               |zafiksirovany_v_kievskom_s|                               |
|               |izo_ofis_ombudsmena_fotore|                               |
|               |portaj                    |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2016                                                                      |
|13 October 2016|Inquest: Working for      |Deaths in Prison               |
|               |truth, justice and        |                               |
|               |accountability            |                               |
|               |www.inquest.org.uk/statist|                               |
|               |ics/deaths-in-prison      |                               |
|15 September   |Office of the UN High     |UHCHR report on the human      |
|2016           |Commissioner for Human    |rights situation in Ukraine  16|
|               |Rights                    |May - 15 Aug 2016              |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://www.ohchr.org/Docum|                               |
|               |ents/Countries/UA/Ukraine1|                               |
|               |5thReport.pdf             |                               |
|4 September    |ICPS Report               |Prison reform in Ukraine: some |
|2016           |                          |analytical notes and           |
|               |http://www.yagunov.in.ua/?|recommendations                |
|               |p=444                     |                               |
|September 2016 |UK Visas and Immigration  |Country Information and        |
|               |                          |Guidance -Ukraine - Military   |
|               |https://www.gov.uk/governm|service                        |
|               |ent/uploads/system/uploads|                               |
|               |/attachment_data/file/5564|                               |
|               |33/CIG_-Ukraine_-_Military|                               |
|               |_Service_v2_0__September_2|                               |
|               |016_.pdf                  |                               |
|29 August 2016 |Amnesty International     |Ukraine: authorities must      |
|               |                          |commit to a thorough           |
|               |https://www.amnesty.org/en|investigation after 13 people  |
|               |/latest/news/2016/08/ukrai|released from secret detention |
|               |ne-authorities-must-commit|                               |
|               |-to-a-thorough-investigati|                               |
|               |on-after-13-people-release|                               |
|               |d-from-secret-detention/  |                               |
|28 August 2016 |Human Rights Watch        |Ukraine: new research          |
|               |                          |corroborates secret detentions |
|               |https://www.hrw.org/news/2|                               |
|               |016/08/28/ukraine-new-rese|                               |
|               |arch-corroborates-secret-d|                               |
|               |etentions                 |                               |
|1 August 2016  |                          |Letter of instruction to       |
|               |                          |Professor Bowring dated 1st    |
|               |                          |August 2016                    |
|18 July 2016   |Human Rights in Ukraine:  |Ukraine's legislators refuse to|
|               |Information website of the|part with repressive soviet era|
|               |Kharkiv Human Rights      |norm                           |
|               |Protection Group          |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://www.khpg.org.ua/en/|                               |
|               |index.php?id=1468417337   |                               |
|July 2016      |Amnesty International     |Ukraine: "You don't exist":    |
|               |                          |Arbitrary detentions, enforced |
|               |https://www.amnesty.org/en|disappearances and torture in  |
|               |/documents/eur50/4455/2016|eastern Ukraine                |
|               |/en/                      |                               |
|25 June 2016   |Correspondent.net         |Poroshenko explained how he    |
|               |                          |stopped the mobilization       |
|               |http://korrespondent.net/u|                               |
|               |kraine/3703204-poroshenko-|                               |
|               |rasskazal-kak-ostanovyl-mo|                               |
|               |bylyzatsyui               |                               |
|20 May 2016    |Human Rights in Ukraine:  |Soviet-era norm allows revenge |
|               |Information website of the|prosecution of prisoners who   |
|               |Kharkiv Human Rights      |assert their rights            |
|               |Protection Group          |                               |
|               |http://www.khpg.org/en/pda|                               |
|               |/index.php?id=1463690153  |                               |
|5 May 2016     |Correspondent.net         |The spring call up started in  |
|               |                          |Ukraine                        |
|               |http://korrespondent.net/u|                               |
|               |kraine/3678669-v-ukrayne-s|                               |
|               |tartoval-vesennyi-pryzyv  |                               |
|25 April 2016  |Ukrainian Helsinki Human  |Prisoner's Rights              |
|               |Rights Union              |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://helsinki.org.ua/en/|                               |
|               |prisoner-s-rights/        |                               |
|               |Correspondent.net         |15 thousand cases opened on    |
|6 April 2016   |http://korrespondent.net/u|draft dodgers                  |
|               |kraine/3663540-na-uklonyst|                               |
|               |ov-ot-sluzhby-otkryly-15-t|                               |
|               |ysiach-del                |                               |
|April 2016     |US Department of State    |US Department of State Report -|
|               |                          |Human Rights Practices for 2015|
|               |http://www.state.gov/j/drl|                               |
|               |/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsrepo|                               |
|               |rt/index.htm?year=2015&dli|                               |
|               |d=252911wrapper           |                               |
|28 January 2016|En Reporter               |That Interpol was looking for  |
|               |                          |Yanukovych and his associates, |
|               |http://en.reporter-ua.ru/t|Poroshenko proposed to change  |
|               |hat-interpol-was-looking-f|the law on in absentia Justice |
|               |or-yanukovych-and-his-asso|                               |
|               |ciates-poroshenko-proposed|                               |
|               |-to-change-the-law-on-in-a|                               |
|               |bsentia-justice.html      |                               |
|January 2016   |UK Visas and Immigration  |Home Office: Country           |
|               |                          |Information and Guidance -     |
|               |https://www.gov.uk/governm|Ukraine prison conditions      |
|               |ent/uploads/system/uploads|                               |
|               |/attachment_data/file/4914|                               |
|               |11/CIG_-_Ukraine_-_Prison_|                               |
|               |Conditions_v_1_0__2_.pdf  |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2015                                                                      |
|23 December    |Council of Europe         |Council of Europe (CoE) Annual |
|2015           |                          |Penal Statistics Survey 2014   |
|               |http://wp.unil.ch/space/fi|                               |
|               |les/2016/05/SPACE-I-2014-R|                               |
|               |eport_final.1.pdf         |                               |
|15 December    |Council of Europe         |European Committee for the     |
|2015           |                          |Prevention of Torture and      |
|               |http://www.cpt.coe.int/en/|Inhuman or Degrading Treatment |
|               |working-documents/cpt-inf-|or Punishment CPT              |
|               |2015-44-eng.pdf           |                               |
|November 2015  |Refworld                  |Country Information and        |
|               |                          |Guidance -Ukraine - Military   |
|               |https://www.refworld.org/d|service                        |
|               |ocid/56eade5a4.html       |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |Ukraine articles          |Are there any penalties for    |
|11 October 2015|https://ukr.media/ukrain/2|Draft Evaders in Ukraine       |
|               |44992/                    |Article (11 October 2015)      |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |and                       |                               |
|               |http://tyachivnews.in.ua/n|Are there any penalties for    |
|               |ovini/tyachyvschina/suspls|Draft Evaders in Ukraine       |
|               |tvo/3070-yak-v-ukrayin-kar|Article (11 October 2015)      |
|               |ayut-uhilyantv-vd-moblzacy|                               |
|               |i.htm 334 - 337           |                               |
|September 2015 |Refworld                  |UNHCR International protection |
|               |http://www.refworld.org/do|considerations related to      |
|               |cid/56017e034.html        |developments in Ukraine -      |
|               |                          |Update III                     |
|27 August 2015 |Kyiv Post                 |Draft Dodgers                  |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |https://www.kyivpost.com/a|                               |
|               |rticle/content/ukraine-pol|                               |
|               |itics/draft-dodgers-396690|                               |
|               |.html                     |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|August 2015    |US Department of  Justice |Mortality in Local Jails and   |
|               |                          |State Prisons, 2000-2013 -     |
|               |www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pd|Statistical Tables             |
|               |f/mljsp0013st.pdf         |                               |
|22 May 2015    |Amnesty International     |Breaking bodies: Torture and   |
|               |                          |summary killings in Eastern    |
|               |https://www.amnesty.org/en|Ukraine                        |
|               |/documents/eur50/1683/2015|                               |
|               |/en/                      |                               |
|22 May 2015    |Amnesty International     |Ukraine: Overwhelming new      |
|               |                          |evidence of prisoners being    |
|               |https://www.amnesty.org/en|tortured and killed amid       |
|               |/latest/news/2015/05/ukrai|conflict                       |
|               |ne-new-evidence-prisoners-|                               |
|               |tortured-and-killed-amid-c|                               |
|               |onflict/                  |                               |
|29 April 2015  |Refworld                  |Council of Europe Committee for|
|               |                          |the prevention of torture      |
|               |http://www.refworld.org/cg|(CPT): report to the Ukrainian |
|               |i-bin/texis/vtx/rwmain?doc|government on the visit to     |
|               |id=5542096b4              |Ukraine carried out by the     |
|               |                          |European Committee for the     |
|               |                          |prevention of Torture and      |
|               |                          |inhuman or degrading treatment |
|               |                          |or punishment from 9 to 16     |
|               |                          |September 2014.                |
|April 2015     |US Department of State    |US Department of State Report -|
|               |                          |Human Rights Practices for 2014|
|               |http://www.state.gov/j/drl|                               |
|               |/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsrepo|                               |
|               |rt/index.htm?year=2015&dli|                               |
|               |d=252911                  |                               |
|18 February    |Foreign Policy            |The Draft Dodgers of Ukraine   |
|2015           |                          |                               |
|               |http://foreignpolicy.com/2|                               |
|               |015/02/18/the-draft-dodger|                               |
|               |s-of-ukraine-russia-putin/|                               |
|               |295                       |                               |
|1 December 2014|Office of the UN High     |UN Report on the human rights  |
|-15 February   |Commissioner for Human    |situation in Ukraine           |
|2015           |Rights                    |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://www.un.org.ua/en/pu|                               |
|               |blications-and-reports/un-|                               |
|               |in-ukraine-publications/35|                               |
|               |92-un-reports-on-human-rig|                               |
|               |hts-situation-in-ukraine  |                               |
|12 February    |Internet Article          |Ukrainians will be punished to |
|2015           |                          |5 years imprisonment for       |
|               |http://tsn.ua/politika/ukr|avoiding mobilization. Polityka|
|               |ayinciv-budut-karati-5-rok|                               |
|               |ami-v-yaznici-za-uhilennya|                               |
|               |-vid-mobilizaciyi-408862.h|                               |
|               |tm                        |                               |
|3 February 2015|Reuters                   |Bravado, resentment and fear as|
|               |                          |Ukraine called men to war      |
|               |http://www.reuters.com/art|                               |
|               |icle/us-ukraine-crisis-arm|                               |
|               |y-idUSKBN0L71PW20150203   |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|February 2015  |The Guardian              |Ukraine: Draft Dodgers face    |
|               |                          |jail as Kiev struggles to find |
|               |https://www.theguardian.co|new fighters                   |
|               |m/world/2015/feb/10/ukrain|                               |
|               |e-draft-dodgers-jail-kiev-|                               |
|               |struggle-new-fighters     |                               |
|22 January 2015|Internet Article          |How Ukrainians will be punished|
|               |                          |for evasion of mobilization:   |
|               |http://tsn.ua/ukrayina/yak|fines and prison Ukrayina      |
|               |-ukrayinciv-pokarayut-za-u|                               |
|               |hilennya-vid-mobilizaciyi-|                               |
|               |shtrafi-ta-tyurma-404376.h|                               |
|               |tml                       |                               |
|21 January 2015|Vinnysya News Article     |Those who do not care less     |
|               |                          |about Mobilisation             |
|               |http://vn.20minut.ua/kriza|                               |
|               |-v-ukrayini/ne-sluzhat-i-n|                               |
|               |e-nadto-sidyat-ti-hto-zabi|                               |
|               |v-na-mobilizatsiyu-1043270|                               |
|               |8.htm                     |                               |
|January 2015   |Refworld                  |UNHCR International Protection |
|               |                          |Considerations related to      |
|               |http://www.refworld.org/pd|developments in Ukraine -      |
|               |fid/54c639474.pdf         |Update II                      |
|2015           |Council of Europe         |United States State Department |
|               |                          |Human Rights Report  Ukraine   |
|               |http://www.assembly.coe.in|                               |
|               |t/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTM|                               |
|               |L-en.asp?fileid=20873&lang|                               |
|               |=en                       |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2014                                                                      |
|21 October 2014|Tass Russian News Agency  |Poroshenko Signs Trial in      |
|               |                          |Absentia law for those charge  |
|               |http://tass.com/world/7556|with corruption                |
|               |35                        |                               |
|20 October 2014|Human Rights Watch        |Ukraine: widespread use of     |
|               |                          |Cluster Munitions              |
|               |https://www.hrw.org/news/2|                               |
|               |014/10/20/ukraine-widespre|                               |
|               |ad-use-cluster-munitions  |                               |
|30 September   |US Department of Justice  |Prisoners in 2013              |
|2014 (Revised) |                          |                               |
|               |https://www.bjs.gov/conten|                               |
|               |t/pub/pdf/p13.pdf         |                               |
|9 to 16        |Council of Europe         |Council of Europe Report to the|
|September 2014 |                          |Ukrainian Government on the    |
|               |http://www.cpt.coe.int/doc|visit to Ukraine carried out by|
|               |uments/ukr/2015-21-inf-eng|the European Committee for the |
|               |.pdf                      |Prevention of Torture and      |
|               |                          |Inhuman or Degrading Treatment |
|               |                          |or Punishment (CPT)            |
|29 April 2014  |Council of Europe         |Report to the Ukrainian        |
|               |http://www.cpt.coe.int/doc|Government on the visit to     |
|               |uments/ukr/2014-15-inf-eng|Ukraine                        |
|               |.pdf                      |carried out by the European    |
|               |                          |Committee for the Prevention of|
|               |                          |Torture and Inhuman or         |
|               |                          |Degrading Treatment or         |
|               |                          |Punishment (CPT)               |
|               |                          |from 9 to 21 October 2013      |
|9 April 2014   |US Department of State    |Recent developments in Ukraine:|
|               |Country Reports on Human  |Threats to the functioning of  |
|               |Rights Practices for 2015 |democratic institutions report |
|               |                          |from the Parliamentary Assembly|
|               |http://www.state.gov/j/drl|                               |
|               |/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsrepo|                               |
|               |rt/index.htm?year=2015&dli|                               |
|               |d=252911                  |                               |
|2014           |Statistics Canada         |Adult correctional statistics  |
|               |                          |in Canada, 2013/2014           |
|               |http://www.statcan.gc.ca/p|                               |
|               |ub/85-002-x/2015001/articl|                               |
|               |e/14163-eng.htm           |                               |
|2014           |Correctional Service      |Annual Report on Deaths in     |
|               |Canada                    |Custody 2013/2014 (Canada)     |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://www.csc-scc.gc.ca/p|                               |
|               |ublications/005007-9002-en|                               |
|               |g.shtml                   |                               |
|2014           |Australian Government -   |Australian crime: Facts &      |
|               |Australian Institute of   |figures 2014                   |
|               |Criminology               |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://aic.gov.au/media_li|                               |
|               |brary/publications/facts/2|                               |
|               |014/facts_and_figures_2014|                               |
|               |.pdf                      |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2013                                                                      |
|2013           |Australian Government -   |Deaths in Custody, 2011-12 and |
|               |Australian Institute of   |2012 - 13                      |
|               |Criminology               |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://aic.gov.au/publicat|                               |
|               |ions/current%20series/mr/2|                               |
|               |1-40/mr26/05_prison.html  |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2012                                                                      |
|6 April 2012   |Global Voices             |Ukraine: Lukyanivska prison -  |
|               |                          |where people are kept like     |
|               |https://globalvoices.org/2|animals                        |
|               |012/04/05/ukraine-lukyaniv|                               |
|               |ska-prison-where-people-ar|                               |
|               |e-kept-as-animals/        |                               |
|               |                          |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2011                                                                      |
|15 July 2011   |Unian Information Agency  |Trial Adjourned until 18th July|
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://www.unian.info/poli|                               |
|               |tics/519147-trial-adjourne|                               |
|               |d-until-july-18.html -    |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2009                                                                      |
|11 December    |Amnesty International     |Annual Report: Ukraine         |
|2009           |                          |2015/2016                      |
|               |https://www.amnesty.org/en|                               |
|               |/countries/europe-and-cent|                               |
|               |ral-asia/ukraine/report-uk|                               |
|               |raine/                    |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2005                                                                      |
|15 May 2005    |War Resisters'            |Country Report and updates:    |
|               |International             |Ukraine                        |
|               |                          |                               |
|               |http://www.wri-irg.org/pro|                               |
|               |grammes/world_survey/count|                               |
|               |ry_report/en/Ukraine      |                               |
|                                                                          |
|2001                                                                      |
|2001           |Legislation Line          |The Criminal Code of Ukraine of|
|               |                          |2001 as amended                |
|               |http://www.legislationline|                               |
|               |.org/documents/action/popu|                               |
|               |p/id/16257/preview        |                               |




Annex B: Error of Law Decision VB

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born in 1981. He arrived in  the
      UK on 5th January 2013, and claimed asylum on 19th May 2014. His claim
      for asylum is  based  on  fear  of  being  imprisoned,  and  suffering
      treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR as a result of such imprisonment,
      for failing to respond to papers requiring him to  attend  to  be  re-
      conscripted into the Ukrainian army. He  also  says  he  would  suffer
      treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR including  hazing,  bullying  and
      physical abuse if he were forced to do such service as he had suffered
      treatment during his first period of military service between 1999 and
      2001.  His application for asylum was refused on 17th  November  2014.
      His appeal against the decision to  refuse  him  leave  to  remain  on
      asylum and human rights grounds was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Roopnarine-Davies in a  determination  promulgated  on  the  9th
      November 2015.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Southern  on
      19th January 2016 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-
      tier judge had erred in law for the reasons set out in the grounds  of
      appeal.

   3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal
      had erred in law.

      Submissions

   4. Ms Panagiotopoulou relied upon the grounds of  appeal  and  argued  in
      oral submissions that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in  law
      in the following ways.

   5. Firstly the Tribunal failed to properly assess risk on return.

   6. The Tribunal accepted that the appellant had been bullied in the  army
      during his first period of military  service  and  that  he  had  been
      called up for a second time in 2014. It was also accepted by all  that
      he had failed to comply with this call up and was  therefore  a  draft
      evader, and could be imprisoned for that offence under Ukrainian law.

   7. In accordance with PS (prison conditions: military service) Ukraine CG
      [2006] UKAIT 00016  the  appellant  was  at  real  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 ECHR in prison. Ukraine is currently at war  and
      in a state of military  mobilisation.  As  such  Article  336  of  the
      criminal code prescribes a prison sentence of  between  two  and  five
      years for such draft evasion. There is no evidence that the law is not
      being applied in practice (although the respondent has suggested  this
      is the case).

   8. The Tribunal appears however to have found at paragraphs 25 and 26  of
      the decision that there was a risk of  a  6  month  sentence  for  the
      appellant. In the light of this finding it ought to  have  been  found
      that the appellant was at risk of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3
      ECHR. However the finding that the sentence would only be for 6 months
      is in fact contrary to the country of origin evidence which is that it
      would be for a minimum of 2 years (as  set  out  above).  It  is  also
      possible from what  is  said  that  the  Tribunal  believed  that  the
      appellant was not actually at risk of imprisonment at all, even for  a
      6 month period, as they believed he had a defence  to  any  charge  of
      draft evasion because he was not in Ukraine when the summons recalling
      him to the army was issued, see paragraph 26 of the decision.  However
      the existence of this defence is  not  supported  by  any  country  of
      origin evidence, and so is a further material error by  the  Tribunal.
      Also even if such a defence existed  it  is  very  unlikely  that  the
      appellant would benefit from it as he had  been  called  up  over  two
      years ago,  and  had  clearly  remained  in  the  UK  claiming  asylum
      precisely to avoid doing his military service. Any suggestion that  he
      could avoid prison by complying  with  the  draft  is  also  untenable
      because as a matter of historical fact he failed to comply with it and
      there is no country of origin evidence that those who evade the  draft
      are simply made to complete their military service, and  this  is  not
      logically likely as it would not assist the  authorities  in  ensuring
      the draft was complied with.

   9. Secondly the Tribunal errs in law as at paragraph 27 of  the  decision
      the Tribunal finds that the appellant has been  subjected  to  "hazing
      and bulling" in the Ukrainian army but this is not sufficient to  meet
      the Article 3 ECHR  standard  of  ill-treatment.  This  conclusion  is
      contrary to PS (prison conditions: military service) Ukraine CG  which
      finds that it may  be  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  if  it  is
      sufficiently persistent. As the appellant has suffered this  treatment
      in the past it is more likely to reoccur with him and to have  a  more
      pronounced affect upon him, and thus ought to be properly to  be  seen
      as treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

  10. Mr Tarlow argued that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      entirely lawful and was in line with the country of  origin  materials
      and what was said in PS (prison conditions: military service)  Ukraine
      CG.

  11. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that I found that the
      First-tier Tribunal had erred in law but would set out my full reasons
      in writing. I asked if they would  support  the  remaking  becoming  a
      country guidance or country point case. Both were happy  for  this  to
      happen. Ms  Panagiotopoulou  said  that  another  of  her  instructing
      solicitor's client's, a Mr I S, had an appeal  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal which  had  also  been  identified  as  a  potential  country
      guidance case on a  similar  point  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Chapman, and a CMR hearing in that case was  awaited.  Her  solicitors
      were therefore already collating relevant country of origin materials.









      Conclusions

  12. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law in the assessment
      of the risk the appellant faces on return to Ukraine.

  13. The findings are not clear  as  to  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      accepted that the appellant would face  a  real  risk  of  six  months
      imprisonment on return to Ukraine but could produce a defence relating
      to being in the UK, which would appear to be the position at paragraph
      25, or that he would face no risk of prison at all  because  he  could
      opt simply to do  his  military  service,  which  appears  to  be  the
      position at paragraph 26. In either scenario the  First-tier  Tribunal
      errs for want of adequate reasoning on this key issue as there  is  no
      evidence identified in the decision  that  supports  either  that  the
      appellant could defend proceedings and thus not end up  in  prison  by
      saying he was in the UK claiming asylum or that he could simply opt to
      perform  his  military  service  rather  than  face  prosecution   and
      imprisonment.

  14. The Tribunal's finding at paragraph  25  of  the  decision,  that  the
      appellant faced a  potential  prison  term  of  six  months,  is  also
      contrary to the evidence before them that the relevant statute  states
      that this term of imprisonment would be for a period of  two  to  five
      years. This at least had to be considered by  the  Tribunal,  together
      with the other evidence of practice with sentencing of  draft  evaders
      as set out at paragraph 22 of the decision,  in  coming  to  a  lawful
      conclusion as to the real risk the appellant faced of imprisonment.

  15. At paragraph 26 the First-tier Tribunal found the appellant would  not
      be at real risk of facing prison conditions which breached  Article  3
      ECHR  due  to  his  "personal  circumstances   and   current   country
      conditions" whilst finding that "prison conditions are harsh  and  may
      engage article 3". This statement is not lawful for want of proper and
      clear reasoning. If it is a statement that there is not a real risk of
      Article  3  ECHR  breaches  if  the  appellant  is  at  real  risk  of
      imprisonment it is contrary to the  country  guidance  in  PS  (prison
      conditions: military service) Ukraine CG with  insufficient  reasoning
      to depart from the conclusions in that case.

  16. At paragraph 27 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal found that the
      appellant had suffered bulling  and  hazing  whilst  doing  his  first
      period of military service. The finding that he would not  now  be  at
      risk of such treatment due to being older is also not founded  in  any
      country of origin evidence. It is clear from  PS  (prison  conditions:
      military service) Ukraine CG at paragraph 112 consideration  ought  to
      have been given as to whether this might constitute  a  real  risk  of
      serious harm in  the  context  of  the  appellant's  history  of  such
      treatment and the context  of  the  draft  evasion  which  would  have
      proceeded his undertaking any further  military  service.  Failing  to
      give consideration to these factors is a further material error of law
      in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.





  Decision:




   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal with  no  findings
      preserved.

   3. I adjourn the remaking decision.





Directions





   1. The case will be listed for a CMR hearing on Wednesday 29th June  2016
      inter alia to consider the remaking of  this  decision  as  a  country
      guidance decision. The parties should attend this hearing.





    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of his protection claim.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 27th June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley




Annex C: Error of Law Decision

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal                                 Appeal Number:
PA/01993/2015  (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2016                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before



                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN



                                   Between



                                   MR I S

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                      v



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                         __________________________



                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                         __________________________



Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms S Panagiotopoulou, counsel instructed by
Yemets Solicitors

For the Respondent:   Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



1. The Appellant is a national of Ukraine, born on 25 March  1986.  He  last
entered the United Kingdom in January 2013 with his wife, who was  pregnant.
Their daughter was subsequently born in the United  Kingdom  on  9  February
2013. The Appellant eventually claimed asylum  on  13  August  2015  on  the
basis that he had evaded military service as a result of which he  had  been
prosecuted and sentenced to 2 years imprisonment. Upon return  he  would  be
required to serve that sentence in prison conditions,  which  were  contrary
to Article 3 of ECHR. In a decision dated 9 October  2015,  his  application
was refused by the Respondent.

2. The Appellant appealed to the First tier Tribunal  and  his  appeal  came
before Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Mill  for  hearing  on  16  February
2016. Expert evidence was submitted in the form of two reports by  Professor
Mark Galeotti, confirming the authenticity of the  documents  submitted  viz
Court summonses and a decision by a Ukrainian Court dated 7 July  2015.  The
Appellant also sought to rely upon  the  Country  Guidance  decision  in  PS
(prison conditions; military service)  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00016,  where  the
Upper Tribunal had expressly found that  prison  conditions  are  likely  to
breach Article 3 of ECHR. At [39] First tier Tribunal Judge Mill  noted  the
effect of the decision in PS but  at  [47]  having  considered  more  recent
evidence e.g. the Home Office  Country  Information  &  Guidance  on  prison
conditions in  Ukraine  dated  January  2016,  he  held  that  "poor  prison
conditions, such as those described, do not in my view  equal  a  breach  of
article 3 of ECHR." Consequently, he dismissed the appeal.

3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis  inter
alia that the First tier Tribunal Judge had materially  erred  in  that  the
evidence before him did not justify departure from the existing CG  case  of
PS as no  durable  or  significant  change  in  the  prison  conditions  was
established by the evidence before him.

4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
Pooler on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge erred by failing  to
follow a country guidance case.

Hearing

5. At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke on behalf of the Respondent  accepted
that the Respondent had not challenged the findings that the  Appellant  has
been convicted and sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.  Therefore,  the  only
issue is whether the First tier Tribunal Judge was warranted to depart  from
the country guidance decision and  whether  there  was  an  Article  3  risk
arising from the conditions in prison and that he was unable to  argue  that
the decision has been made in accordance  with  the  Practice  Direction  on
departing from country guidance decisions. He invited me to find that  there
had been a material error of law and that the hearing  should  be  adjourned
for submissions only on the issue. The Respondent's  position  is  that  the
Country  Information  and  Guidance  report  of  January  2016  on   prisons
indicates that there is a marked change. Ms Panagiotopolou on behalf of  the
Appellant agreed.

6. In light of Mr Clarke's  helpful  concession  that  First  tier  Tribunal
Judge Mill erred  materially  in  law  in  failing  to  follow  the  country
guidance case, I find that there is a material error of law. The  appeal  is
adjourned to a resumed hearing on the issue of whether prison conditions  in
Ukraine are contrary to Article 3 of  ECHR  or  whether  there  has  been  a
significant and durable change in Ukraine such  that  the  country  guidance
decision in PS (prison conditions; military service) CG [2006]  UKAIT  00016
should no longer be followed.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                25 April 2016















