
ST and others (Article 3.2: Scope of regulations) India [2007] UKAIT 00078

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham
Date of Hearing: 13 July 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                    Designated Immigration Judge McCarthy
                          Immigration Judge Hanson

                                   Between



                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MUMBAI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellants:          Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Bhavsar Patel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Miss E Mepstead, Home Office Presenting
Officer

Article 3.2 of the Citizens Directive 2004/38/EC does not  limit  the  scope
or the terms of any national legislation that gives  substantive  rights  to
individuals covered by that provision.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. We heard these three appeals together, because Mr Ahmed, on  behalf  of
    the appellants, wished to raise similar submissions in all of them.  In
    each, the appellants are citizens of India who applied for  EEA  family
    permits in order to allow them to join family members (to whom in  each
    case we shall refer as "the sponsor") who are  in  the  United  Kingdom
    exercising Treaty rights here.  In  each  case  the  applications  were
    refused;  there  were  unsuccessful  appeals  to  Immigration   Judges,
    followed  by  orders  for  reconsideration  at  the  instance  of   the
    appellant.  Thus the appeals come before us.

 2. In the first appeal, the first appellant is  the  sponsor's  sister-in-
    law; the second appellant is her child and is therefore  the  sponsor's
    niece.  In the second appeal the appellants  are  the  sponsor's  adult
    sons.  In the third appeal the appellants are again the sponsor's adult
    sons.

 3. Both before us and before the Immigration Judge,  Mr  Ahmed  based  his
    submissions on the basis of the  Citizens  Directive,  2004/38/EC,  and
    argued that certain provisions in the Directive had the effect  of  (i)
    giving the appellants what  they  seek;  or  (ii)  rendering  the  UK's
    implementing legislation,  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003) ineffective; or (iii)  requiring  those
    regulations to be read in a particular way.

 4. In the Directive, Article 2.2 defines "family member".  For the present
    purposes we say only that the definition includes descendents  over  21
    if they are dependent, but excludes descendents over 21 if they are not
    dependent, and excludes sisters-in-law, nephews and nieces.  Article  3
    is as follows:

        "Beneficiaries
        1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to  or
             reside in a Member State other than that of which  they  are  a
             national, and to their family members as defined in point 2  of
             Article 2 who accompany or join them.
        2. Without prejudice to any right to free  movement  and  residence
             the persons concerned may have in their  own  right,  the  host
             Member  State  shall,   in   accordance   with   its   national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for  the  following
             persons:
             (a)   any  other  family   members,   irrespective   of   their
                 nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2 of
                 Article 2 who, in the country from which  they  have  come,
                 are dependants or members of the  household  of  the  Union
                 citizen having the primary right  of  residence,  or  where
                 serious health grounds strictly require the  personal  care
                 of the family member by the Union citizen;
             (b)  the partner with whom the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
                 relationship, duly attested.
             The host Member State shall undertake an extensive  examination
             of the personal circumstances and shall justify any  denial  of
             entry or residence to these people."

 5. Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations defines "family member" in such  a
    manner as, for present purposes, may be regarded as congruent with  the
    definition in the Directive.  Regulation  8  defines  "extended  family
    member".  It is as follows:

        "8. -(1) In these Regulations  "extended  family  member"  means  a
             person who is not a family member  of  an  EEA  national  under
             regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions
             in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
        (2)      A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA  national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and-
             (a)   the person is residing in an EEA State in which  the  EEA
                 national  also  resides  and  is  dependent  upon  the  EEA
                 national or is a member of his household;
             (b)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
                 accompanying the EEA national  to  the  United  Kingdom  or
                 wishes to join him there; or
             (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),  has
                 joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues
                 to be  dependent  upon  him  or  to  be  a  member  of  his
                 household.
        (3)      A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national or his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly requires
             the personal care of the EEA national his spouse or  his  civil
             partner.
        (4)      A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA  national  and  would  meet  the
             requirements  in  the  immigration  rules  (other  than   those
             relating to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to  enter  or
             remain in the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA
             national were the EEA national a person present and settled  in
             the United Kingdom.
        (5)      A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is the partner of an EEA national (other  than  a  civil
             partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he  is  in  a
             durable relationship with the EEA national.
        (6)      In these Regulations "relevant  EEA  national"  means,  in
             relation to an extended family member, the EEA national who  is
             or whose spouse  or  civil  partner  is  the  relative  of  the
             extended family member for the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or
             (4) or the EEA national who is  the  partner  of  the  extended
             family member for the purpose of paragraph (5)."


    Regulation 12 is headed "Issue of EEA family permit":


        "12.-(1) An entry clearance officer must issue an EEA family permit
             to a person who applies for one  if  the  person  is  a  family
             member of an EEA national and-
             (a)  the EEA national-
                 (i)   is residing  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  these
                     Regulations; or


                 (ii)  will be travelling to the United Kingdom  within  six
                     months of the date of the application and will  be  an
                     EEA  national  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom   in
                     accordance with these Regulations on  arrival  in  the
                     United Kingdom; and
             (b)  the family member will be accompanying the EEA national to
                 the United Kingdom or joining him there and-
                 (i)    is lawfully resident in an EEA State; or
                 (ii)  would meet the requirements in the immigration  rules
                     (other than those relating  to  entry  clearance)  for
                     leave to enter the United Kingdom as the family member
                     of  the  EEA  national  or,  in  the  case  of  direct
                     descendants  or  dependent  direct  relatives  in  the
                     ascending line of his spouse or his civil partner,  as
                     the family member of his spouse or his civil  partner,
                     were the EEA national or the spouse or civil partner a
                     person present and settled in the United Kingdom.
        (2)      An entry clearance officer may issue an EEA family  permit
             to an extended family member of an EEA national who applies for
             one if-
             (a)  the relevant  EEA  national  satisfies  the  condition  in
                 paragraph (1)(a);
             (b)   the  extended  family  member  wishes  to  accompany  the
                 relevant EEA national to the United Kingdom or to join  him
                 there; and
             (c)   in  all  the  circumstances,  it  appears  to  the  entry
                 clearance officer  appropriate  to  issue  the  EEA  family
                 permit.
        (3)      Where an entry clearance officer receives  an  application
             under paragraph (2) he shall undertake an extensive examination
             of the personal  circumstances  of  the  applicant  and  if  he
             refuses the  application  shall  give  reasons  justifying  the
             refusal unless this is contrary to the  interests  of  national
             security.
        (4)      An EEA family permit issued under this regulation shall be
             issued free of charge and as soon as possible.
        (5)      But an EEA family permit shall not be  issued  under  this
             regulation if the applicant or the EEA national concerned falls
             to be excluded from the United Kingdom  on  grounds  of  public
             policy, public security or public  health  in  accordance  with
             regulation 21."


 6. It had been argued in a number of appeals, these included, that Article
    3.2 of the Directive gave to those encompassed  by  that  Article  some
    right of admission to or residence in EU countries.  That  right  would
    have had to be somewhat inchoate because, although the  Directive  goes
    on to define the rights of those family members encompassed by  Article
    2.2 with some precision, it says nothing more at all about other family
    members.  The argument was rejected by this Tribunal in AP & FP  [2007]
    UKAIT 00048.  Mr Ahmed told  us  that  he  did  not  seek  directly  to
    challenge the conclusions reached there.  Those conclusions  were  that
    family members other  than  those  falling  within  the  definition  of
    Article 2.2 of the Directive have no substantive right under EU law  to
    admission to or residence in a Member State.   Any  substantive  rights
    they have are regulated by the national law  of  the  Member  State  in
    question.  National law may be more generous than is  required  by  the
    Directive: see Article 37.  The provisions  in  UK  law  for  relatives
    falling within Article 3.2 are found in reg 8 and reg 12(2).  A  person
    who falls outside the definition of family member in Article  2.2  (and
    reg 7) must first show that he falls within one of the  categories  set
    out in reg 8; if he does so, and applies for an EEA family  permit,  an
    Entry Clearance Officer must examine the application, see if  he  meets
    the requirements of reg 12(2), and if he does, may (in his  discretion)
    issue a permit; if he refuses, he must, as required by reg  12(3)  (and
    Article 3.2) give reasons justifying the refusal.  An "extended  family
    member" who obtains and uses an EEA family permit is, under  reg  7(3),
    treated for most purposes as though he were a family member within  the
    definition of Article 2.2.

 7. These appeals, like many other similar appeals, raise  issues  for  the
    purposes of which we may ignore the special provisions in reg 8(3)  and
    8(5).  The appellants will count as "extended family  members"  of  the
    sponsor if and only if they can show present or historic dependence  on
    the EEA national they seek to join within the conditions set out in reg
    8(2), or that (treating them as if they were intending to join a person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom) they meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

 8. Mr Ahmed attacks these requirements of  the  Regulations.   He  submits
    that if it is accepted that Article 3.2 gives no substantive rights  to
    family members other than those encompassed in Article 2.2, Article 3.2
    nevertheless points the way  to  national  legislation.   The  national
    legislation in question is the 2006 Regulations.  The 2006  Regulations
    are clearly intended to implement the Directive.  There is no reference
    in the Directive either to the Immigration Rules,  or  to  the  complex
    provisions in reg  8(2).   Mr  Ahmed's  principal  submission  is  that
    regulations purporting to implement a Directive should not, and  cannot
    lawfully, incorporate provisions that have, as he put it, nothing to do
    with the requirements of the Directive.  Therefore, in his  submission,
    the Regulations should be read as thought they  omitted  the  offending
    requirements: in that case, the appellants might be entitled to succeed
    despite their inability to meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and despite their inability to show dependence or membership  of
    a household in the manner specified by reg 8(2).

 9. We are unable to accept that submission.  As a matter of principle, the
    power to include provisions in  statutory  instruments  is  simply  not
    limited in the way Mr  Ahmed  argues.   Provided  that  the  provisions
    themselves are not contrary to  any  superior  legal  rule,  they  have
    effect.  They are not contrary to any legal rule, because the Directive
    gives the persons in question no right other than that which they might
    have by national law.

10. If that were not sufficient, there are other reasons for  rejecting  Mr
    Ahmed's submission.  We have already referred, in  passing,  to  nearly
    all of them.  The first is that Article 37  of  the  Directive  permits
    national  legislation  to  be  more  generous  than  required  by   the
    Directive.  The Directive does not confer  any  substantive  rights  on
    family members other  than  those  falling  within  Article  2.2.   Any
    provision of national law which does give any rights  to  such  persons
    is, therefore, permitted by Article 37.  So far  from  being  impliedly
    prohibited by the Directive, the provisions in question  are  expressly
    permitted.  Secondly, because in  general  family  members  other  than
    those falling within the definition in Article 2.2 have no  substantive
    rights under the Directive, it cannot be said that national legislation
    dealing with their substantive rights is to any  extent  controlled  by
    the Directive.  It simply and clearly is not.  Thirdly, the  appellants
    in these appeals remain in their country of nationality.  They  do  not
    even fall within the provisions of Article 3.2, because of  the  phrase
    in that Article "the country from which they have come".  There  is  no
    such country in the case of any of these appellants.  That is a further
    reason distancing any provisions made for them from the requirements of
    the Directive.

11. We shall accordingly read the regulations as written and as  containing
    certain conditions which, if they are to succeed in their appeals,  the
    present appellants would have to meet.

12. In the first case, the appellants could not, whatever  their  level  of
    dependence on the sponsor, fall within the definition of family  member
    in Article 2.2.  They are therefore entitled to be considered  for  the
    issue of EEA family permits under reg 12(2) only if they can show  that
    they are "extended family members" within the meaning of reg  8.   They
    cannot do so.  They cannot meet the requirements of  reg  8(2)  because
    they do not reside in an EU state with the sponsor and have never  done
    so.  They cannot meet the requirements of reg 8(4) because in order  to
    do so they would need to meet the substantive requirements of paragraph
    317 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 and it  is
    not suggested that they  could  do  so:  in  particular,  there  is  no
    evidence that they were at the  date  of  the  decision  "living  alone
    outside  the  United  Kingdom  the   most   exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances and mainly dependent financially on relatives settled  in
    the United Kingdom", as required by paragraph 317(i)(f).  There is said
    to be some dependence on the sponsor, but these  appellants  live  with
    the first appellant's mother,  and  there  is  no  suggestion  that  in
    general they could be described as  living  "in  the  most  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances".

13. They are not extended family members and are accordingly  not  entitled
    to consideration for the issue of EEA family permits under  reg  12(2).
    Their appeals against the refusals were rightly dismissed.

14. Before turning to the other appellants we must say something about  the
    notion of dependence.  As we noted above, a child of  the  sponsor  who
    although  over  21  is  dependent  on  the  sponsor  falls  within  the
    definition of family  member  in  Article  2.2.   He  has  a  right  of
    admission to the United Kingdom not dependent on the issue  of  an  EEA
    family permit (see reg 11(4)), and in any event does not need  to  rely
    on reg 8.  The question of what dependence means in the context of  the
    Directive and the regulations is a  matter  of  some  complexity.   The
    Tribunal dealt with it  in  AP  &  FP  at  paragraphs  [26]-[35].   The
    relevant parts are as follows:

        "Dependence and dependants


        26.      There are three possibly relevant  notions  of  dependence
             for the purposes of cases such as this.  First as we have seen,
             there is a reference to  dependants  in  Article  3(2)  of  the
             Directive, as persons who have, subject to  national  law,  the
             procedural advantages given by that Article.  Secondly, the EEA
             Regulations, at reg 8(2) define "extended family member" partly
             in terms of dependence.  Thirdly, reg  8(4)  defines  "extended
             family member"  alternatively  by  reference  to  qualification
             under the Immigration Rules, which  themselves  may  contain  a
             requirement of dependence on the sponsor.


        27.      There are at least two possibly  relevant  definitions  of
             dependence for these purposes.  The Immigration  Rules  require
             that a person seeking admission  as  a  dependent  relative  be
             "wholly or mainly dependent" on the family member he  seeks  to
             join (Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395,  paras
             317(iii)),  and  the  authorities  establish  that,  for  these
             purposes, the dependence must be of necessity,  not  of  choice
             (Zaman v ECO Lahore [1973] Imm AR 71; Musa v ECO Bombay  [1976]
             Imm AR 28).  Where the requirement of dependency is outside the
             Rules but is instead imposed  by  regulations  introduced  with
             reference  to  EU  free  movement  legislation,  the  Tribunal,
             interpreting regs 6(4) and 10(4) of the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2000  (SI  2000/2326),  implementing
             reg (EEC) No 1612/98 of the Council of 15 October 1968,  in  PB
             and others [2005] UKIAT 00082 said at [8]:


                 'In deciding whether an applicant is a  family  member  for
                 these purposes, it may be necessary to make  a  finding  of
                 fact on dependency.  For these purposes, it is  clear  that
                 dependency is a question of fact.  There is no  requirement
                 that dependency be of necessity.'


        28.      What is meant by dependence within the  EU  free  movement
             legislation itself was discussed in  Jia.   In  that  case  the
             Court had to consider whether the claimant had established that
             she was dependent on her son  and  daughter-in-law  within  the
             meaning of Article 1(1)(d) of Directive 73/148/EEC,  which  set
             out equivalent rules for the admission  of  family  members  of
             nationals of Member States who sought to  establish  themselves
             in another Member State.   The Court noted at  [35]  that  "the
             status of 'dependent' family member is the result of a  factual
             situation characterised by the fact that the  material  support
             for that family member is provided by  the  Community  national
             who has exercised his right of free movement".   After  further
             reminding itself that the question is about  the  circumstances
             that exist, not the reason for those circumstances,  the  Court
             continued:


                 '37.  In order to determine whether the  relatives  in  the
                     ascending line of the spouse of a  Community  national
                     are dependent on the latter,  the  host  Member  State
                     must assess whether, having regard to their  financial
                     and social conditions, they are not in a  position  to
                     support themselves. The need for material support must
                     exist in the State of origin of those relatives or the
                     State whence they came at the time when they apply  to
                     join the Community national.


                 38.   That is the conclusion  that  must  be  drawn  having
                     regard to Article 4(3) of Council Directive 68/360/EEC
                     of 15 October 1968 on the abolition of restrictions on
                     movement  and  residence  within  the  Community   for
                     workers of  Member  States  and  their  families  (OJ,
                     English Special Edition, 1968(II), p. 485),  according
                     to which proof of the status of dependent relative  in
                     the ascending line of a worker or  his  spouse  within
                     the meaning of Article 10 of Regulation No 1612/68  is
                     to be provided by a document issued by  the  competent
                     authority of the "State of origin or the State  whence
                     they came", testifying that the relative concerned  is
                     dependent on the worker or  his  spouse.  Despite  the
                     lack of precision as to the means of acceptable  proof
                     by which the individual concerned can  establish  that
                     he falls within one of the classes of persons referred
                     to in Articles 1 and 4 of Directive 73/148,  there  is
                     nothing to justify the status of dependent relative in
                     the  ascending   line   being   assessed   differently
                     according to whether the relative is a member  of  the
                     family of a worker or of a self-employed worker.'


             So much is clear.  Leaving aside for a moment  the  requirement
             for proof by a particular document, dependency for the purposes
             of Directive 73/148/EEC is a matter of  need,  not  of  choice.
             The question is not whether a person does not support  himself,
             but whether he is not in a position to support  himself.   This
             position is emphasised in the Court's formal Ruling at the  end
             of the judgment,  that  "dependent  on  them"  means  that  the
             members of the family of a Community  national  established  in
             another Member State within the meaning of Article 43  EC  need
             the material support of that Community national or his  or  her
             spouse in order to meet their essential needs in the  State  of
             origin of those family members or the  State  from  which  they
             have come at the time when they apply to  join  that  Community
             national.


        29.      A potential difficulty arises, however, from the words  of
             para [36] of the judgment.  This is as follows:


                 '36.  The Court has also held that the status of  dependent
                     family member does not presuppose the existence  of  a
                     right to  maintenance,  otherwise  that  status  would
                     depend on national legislation, which varies from  one
                     State  to  another  (316/85  Lebon  [1987]  ECR  2811,
                     paragraph 21). According to the  Court,  there  is  no
                     need to determine the reasons  for  recourse  to  that
                     support or to raise the question  whether  the  person
                     concerned is able to support himself by taking up paid
                     employment.  That  interpretation   is   dictated   in
                     particular by the principle  according  to  which  the
                     provisions establishing the free movement of  workers,
                     which  constitute  one  of  the  foundations  of   the
                     Community,   must   be   construed   broadly   (Lebon,
                     paragraphs 22 and 23).'

        30.      This appears to be -  in  fact  is  -  a  reference  to  a
             different notion of dependence, in which the question is to  be
             settled without regard  to  need,  so  that  a  person  can  be
             dependent on another even if he is in  a  position  to  support
             himself.  It is certainly rather odd that in the judgment  this
             paragraph is followed immediately, in the  next  paragraph,  by
             the first of the formulations of a rule of dependence based  on
             need and on a requirement of inability to support oneself.  The
             Court has no formal procedure for reviewing or  overruling  its
             previous judgments or revising a view previously expressed  and
             we can only suppose that the reference to  the  rule  in  Lebon
             here, followed by discussion and assertion of a different  test
             and a formal ruling are intended to dictate a new understanding
             of dependence based on need, whatever may  have  been  said  in
             Lebon.  That understanding must, it is clear from the reasoning
             in Jia (in particular that at the conclusion of  para  [38]  to
             which we are about to refer) pervade the notion  of  dependence
             as an adjunct  of  or  qualification  of  the  rights  of  free
             movement of and residence in the free movement legislation as a
             whole; and the same must be true of the  2004  Directive  which
             replaces it.  It follows that the formulation in para [8] of PB
             may also need revision.  In so far as  dependence  in  the  EEA
             Regulations  is  intended  as  an  implementation  of  such   a
             requirement in the Directive, it must mean  dependence  in  the
             Jia sense: that is to say, dependence arising from a  need  for
             the support of the national of a Member State.


        ...


        33.      In summary, the effect of the decision of the Court in Jia
             is to import into European law a requirement for dependence  to
             be of necessity, and to reinforce the requirement of  proof  by
             the document described in the Directive.  In  the  result,  the
             notion of dependence under the  Directive  and  hence  the  EEA
             Regulations is probably little different  from  that  developed
             under the Immigration Rules,  although  the  Regulations  allow
             dependence to be proved for UK purposes without  production  of
             the document normally required by European law."

15. There is no reason to suppose that the notion of dependence in  Article
    2.2 of the Directive is different from that in Article 3.2.  So far  as
    a person needs to prove dependence for the  purposes  of  Article  2.2,
    therefore, the word has the  meaning  given  by  the  decision  of  the
    European Court of Justice in Jia.  So far as concerns reg  8(4),  there
    is no doubt that in order to prove that he meets  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules, an appellant  required  by  the  Rules  to  show
    dependence would need to do so according to the meaning  of  dependence
    in the Rules.  We note that reg 8(2) neither derives from the Directive
    nor incorporates a reference to the Rules, and it follows that  it  may
    be that the PB approach to the meaning of dependence applies there.  We
    do not have to decide that question in these appeals, however,  because
    it is certain that none of these appellants can meet  the  requirements
    of reg 8(2) in any event.

16. The evidence advanced on the appellants' behalf in  the  second  appeal
    was intended to establish that they were dependent  upon  the  sponsor;
    that he regularly sent them substantial amounts of money; and that they
    lived in a house whose rent he paid.  The Immigration Judge  considered
    the oral and  documentary  evidence  before  him  and  rejected  it  as
    incredible.  He pointed out in particular  that  the  two  accounts  of
    whether the house in which the appellants lived was the  sponsor's  own
    house, and whether they paid rent for it, were flatly contradictory; he
    noted  that  there  was  little  documentary,  and  inconsistent  oral,
    evidence as to the sums of money sent.  His findings are criticised  in
    the grounds for review on the basis that he failed to make  clear  that
    he was considering whether dependence had been established in the sense
    required by EU law.  There is perhaps some merit in that criticism:  it
    is not always easy to  understand  from  the  determination  the  legal
    structure  against  which  the  Immigration  Judge  is  assessing   the
    evidence.  What does clearly emerge, however, is that  the  Immigration
    Judge did not find that the appellants were in any sense dependent upon
    the sponsor.  Certainly the evidence falls woefully  short  of  showing
    that the appellants were dependent upon him in the  sense  required  by
    Jia.  Any error of law made by the Immigration Judge  in  his  decision
    about dependence was entirely immaterial.

17. In the third case, the Immigration Judge had before her a determination
    of an earlier appeal by the appellants which itself referred to an even
    earlier  appeal.   In  both  those  previous  appeals  there  had  been
    reference by the appellants to employment in their uncle's wine shop, a
    business which the sponsor denied existed.  In the present appeals  the
    Immigration Judge decided that she had "not  been  told  the  truth  at
    all".  She decided that  the  appellants  were  not  dependent  on  the
    sponsor.  Her findings are criticised  on  the  ground  that,  for  the
    purposes of EU law, dependence is a question of fact only.  It does not
    seem to us that that criticism is well made in this case:  she  clearly
    decided, as a fact, that the  appellants  were  not  dependent  on  the
    sponsor.

18. In these two appeals, then, the appellants, who are in each case  adult
    descendants of the sponsor, have not shown that they are dependent upon
    their sponsor and therefore have not established that they  are  family
    members within the meaning of Article 2.2.  Like the appellants in  the
    first case, therefore, they are entitled to admission only if they  can
    show that they are "extended family members" within the meaning of  reg
    8.  They cannot meet the requirement of reg  8(2),  because  they  have
    never lived in an EEA country.  They cannot meet  the  requirements  of
    reg 8(4), because, whatever might be said about dependence, it has  not
    been shown that any of them, or the applicants  from  any  family,  are
    "living alone outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances".

19. Each of the grounds for reconsideration makes allusion  to  Article  8.
    In the second and third cases the Immigration Judge made strong adverse
    findings on credibility.  There is no factual basis  upon  which  these
    appellants  could  show  that  their  circumstances  were   such   that
    proportionality  demands  their  admission.   In  the  first  case  the
    relationship is more distant.  The Immigration Judge found  it  a  fact
    that the appellants (who live with the first appellant's  mother)  have
    not been members of the sponsor's household before he left  India.   It
    is very difficult to see the basis of an  Article  8  claim  that  they
    should now be permitted to come to the United  Kingdom  and  live  with
    him, rather than with their direct ascendant in India.

20. Mr Ahmed suggested that  their  claim  under  Article  8  was  stronger
    because the regulations in force at the time of their application on 22
    February 2006 would have entitled them to admission.  We do not  accept
    the premise of that submission.  The Immigration Judge found  that  the
    appellants were not dependent upon the sponsor (not  merely  that  they
    were not dependent of necessity upon him) and that they  had  not  been
    members of his household.  It is therefore not easy  to  see  how  they
    could have been entitled to admission under the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2000  (SI  2000/2326)  as  amended.   Those
    regulations permitted (but did not require) an EEA family permit to  be
    issued to a person who was a  relative  of  an  EEA  national  who  was
    dependent on him or was (or had been) living in his household.  Even if
    the facts had been in the appellants' favour, however, and even if they
    had had a realistic possibility  of  challenging  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's discretion, it is very difficult to see that  the  change  in
    the law could have any bearing on their rights under  Article  8.   The
    position is simply that they fail to show that the maintenance  of  the
    status quo interferes with their private or family life.

21. In this case there are also grounds based on Article 14 of the ECHR: Mr
    Ahmed did not elaborate them in oral submission.  They  argue  that  an
    EEA worker with relatives outside the EEA is at a disadvantage compared
    with an EEA worker who has relatives within the EEA.   The  submissions
    entirely fail to engage with the purpose of the Directive and  the  EEA
    Regulations, which is not to secure primary immigration to EU countries
    but to ensure that a Union citizen moving around the EU in the exercise
    of Treaty rights is not dissuaded from  exercising  his  rights  by  an
    inability to have his close family with him as he moves from one Member
    State to another.  There is no merit in the discrimination argument  in
    the terms in which it is put in the grounds.

22. For the foregoing reasons we consider  that  none  of  the  Immigration
    Judges made material errors of law.  We order that their determinations
    dismissing these appeals shall stand.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
