
CO (EEA Regulations: family permit) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00070

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Belfast                                                   Date of
Hearing: 12 June 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Deans

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr O Stockman BL, instructed by Madden &
Finucane
For the Respondent:          Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer

Regulation 12 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
is purely a creation of UK law.  A person who is unable to  obtain  an  "EEA
family permit" under that regulation is not precluded from admission to  the
United Kingdom if he has an EU right to admission.  The  procedure  in  such
cases is that in reg 11(4).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, applied to  the  respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer for an EEA Family Permit to enable him to  enter  the
    United Kingdom and reside with the sponsor, a Polish  national  who  he
    says  is  his  father.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer   refused   the
    application.  The appellant  appealed  to  an  Immigration  Judge,  who
    allowed the appeal and directed that entry clearance be  granted.   The
    respondent sought and obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus  the
    matter comes before us.

 2. We are aware that there has  been  concern  amongst  practitioners  and
    others about the regulations  relating  to  the  issue  of  EEA  Family
    Permits; questions have been raised about  whether  the  terms  of  the
    regulations are consistent with  those  of  the  Directive  which  they
    purport to implement.  This appeal gives us an opportunity to  set  out
    the position as we see it.

 3. Council Directive 2004/38/EC has as its subject "The right of  citizens
    of the Union and their family members to move and reside freely  within
    the territory of the Member States".  It had to be brought  into  force
    in Member States by 30 April 2006.  Its scope is  set  out  in  Article
    3.1:

        "This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to  or
        reside in a Member State other  than  that  of  which  they  are  a
        national, and to their family members as  defined  in  point  2  of
        Article 2 who accompany or join them."

    The definition of "family  member"  for  these  purposes  includes  the
    spouse, the civil partner in Member States where civil partnerships are
    recognised,  the  direct  descendants  under  the  age  of  21  of  the
    principal, the spouse or the civil partner, and the direct  descendents
    and ascendants of the principal, the spouse or the  civil  partner  who
    are  dependants.   The  rights  that  the  Directive  gives  to   those
    encompassed by it include rights  of  entry  and  residence  in  Member
    States.  Those rights are, subject to the  conditions  imposed  by  the
    Directive, available not only to Union  citizens  but  also  to  family
    members of Union citizens who are not themselves Union citizens.  There
    is little doubt that the Directive has, to some extent at least, direct
    effect.

 4. That latter point  ought  to  be  of  no  importance,  because  of  the
    obligation on Member States to implement the Directive.  Implementation
    in the United Kingdom was by the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003), which came into  effect  on  30  April
    2006.  By the transitional provisions in Schedule 4, those  Regulations
    are made to apply to applications and appeals pending on  the  date  of
    commencement.   It  is  to  the  Regulations,  as  the  United  Kingdom
    legislation, that a United Kingdom court needs to look  first:  but  it
    must remain open to an appellant to assert that  the  Regulations  deny
    him a right that the Directive gives him.  If he should establish  that
    that is so, his case should be considered directly under the  terms  of
    the Directive.   Appellants  have  very  often  chosen  to  raise  such
    arguments, with the result that the  Tribunal  has  frequently  had  to
    consider the terms of the Directive.

 5. In the present case, the appellant, who is under 21 and claimed  to  be
    the son of a Union citizen  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom, set about making his arrangements for joining his father here.
     He applied for entry clearance in Lagos and was refused.  The  reasons
    given for refusal were, broadly  speaking,  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied on the basis of the evidence before him  that
    the appellant was related as claimed to the  person  he  said  was  his
    father, nor that that person was a Polish  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.  The Immigration Judge  saw  the  sponsor
    and his passport, and concluded that he is  indeed  a  Polish  national
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  She also concluded  on
    the basis of the evidence before her that the  appellant  is  his  son.
    Those findings are  not  now  disputed.   It  follows  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's reasons for refusal can no longer  be  regarded  as
    having merit.  But the Immigration Judge's decision to allow the appeal
    was met by grounds for reconsideration as follows:

        "The Immigration Judge has allowed this case as [she] has  accepted
        that the appellant is related to the sponsor as claimed and that he
        would qualify under the  EEA  Regulations  as  a  dependent  family
        member. However, family members of EEA nationals  would  only  have
        the right of free movement if they are already lawfully resident in
        a Member State.  This is confirmed in  the  case  of  Secretary  of
        State for the  Home  Department  v  Akrich  (Case  C-109/01).   The
        appellant resides in Nigeria and has not previously  been  residing
        in a Member State.  He cannot qualify under  Regulation  12(b)(ii).
        It  is  therefore  submitted  that  he  would  need  to  meet   the
        requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules."

 6. It is difficult to escape the conclusion  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    failed to consider regulation 12 of the EEA Regulations  at  all.   The
    question that is of more interest is  whether  she  needed  to  do  so.
    Regulation 12 is, so far as relevant, as follows:

      "12. -     (1)   An entry clearance officer must issue an EEA  family
             permit to a person who applies for  one  if  the  person  is  a
             family member of an EEA national and -
            (a)  the EEA national -
                       (i)  is residing in the UK in accordance with  these
             Regulations; or
                       (ii) will be travelling to the United Kingdom within
                     six months of the date of the application and will  be
                     an EEA national residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                     accordance with these Regulations on  arrival  in  the
                     United Kingdom; and
            (b)  the family member will be accompanying the EEA national to
                 the United Kingdom or joining him there and -
                       (i)  is lawfully resident in an EEA State; or
                       (ii) would meet the requirements in the  immigration
                     rules (other than those relating to  entry  clearance)
                     for leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  the  family
                     member of the EEA national or, in the case  of  direct
                     descendants  or  dependent  direct  relatives  in  the
                     ascending line of his spouse or his civil partner,  as
                     the family member of his spouse or his civil  partner,
                     were the EEA national or the spouse or civil partner a
                     person present and settled in the United Kingdom.
      ...
      (5)   But an EEA  family  permit  shall  not  be  issued  under  this
             regulation if the applicant or the EEA national concerned falls
             to be excluded from the United Kingdom  on  grounds  of  public
             policy, public security or public  health  in  accordance  with
             regulation 21."

    Regulation 12 sets out the circumstances under which a person  applying
    from abroad (as is implied by  the  reference  to  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer) is entitled to an EEA  family  permit.   Sub-paragraph  (1)(a)
    sets out the conditions applying to the EEA national and  sub-paragraph
    (1)(b) sets out the conditions applicable to the family member.  As  is
    pointed out in the grounds for reconsideration in the present case,  if
    the family member is not presently lawfully resident in an  EEA  state,
    he must meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in order  to  be
    entitled to an EEA family permit. (In the  present  case  the  relevant
    rules would be those in paragraph 297 of the Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395.  As the appellant's mother is alive he would
    need to establish that his father has had sole responsibility  for  his
    upbringing or that there are serious and  compelling  family  or  other
    reasons making his exclusion undesirable.  There is no suggestion  that
    he can meet the requirements of paragraph 297.)

 7. The effect of an EEA  family  permit  is  that  it  gives  a  right  of
    admission to the United Kingdom.  That is the effect of regulation  11,
    which provides as follows:

      "11. - ...
      (2)   A person who is not an EEA national must  be  admitted  to  the
             United Kingdom if he is a family member of an EEA national  ...
             and produces on arrival -
            (a)  a valid passport; and
            (b)  an EEA family permit, a  residence  card  or  a  permanent
                 residence card."


    Paragraph  5  of  regulation  11  makes  that  regulation  subject   to
    regulation 19(1) and (2), which are as follows:


      "19. -     (1)   A person is not  entitled  to  be  admitted  to  the
             United Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11 if his  exclusion  is
             justified on ground of public policy, public security or public
             health in accordance with regulation 21.
      (2)   A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom
             as the family member of an EEA national under regulation  11(2)
             unless, at the time of his arrival -
            (a)  he is accompanying the EEA national or joining him in  the
                 United Kingdom; and
            (b)  the EEA national has a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
                 Kingdom under these regulations."

 8. Other things being equal, therefore, a holder of an EEA  family  permit
    is entitled to admission to the United Kingdom to accompany or join the
    EEA national whose family member he is.  What the  regulations  do  not
    say, however, is that a person who does not have a family permit is not
    to be admitted.  It would be surprising if there were such a  provision
    in the regulations because of the right of admission  apparently  given
    by the Directive.  As we have seen, certain family members (that is  to
    say those who are not already lawfully resident in an  EEA  state)  can
    have a  family  permit  only  if  they  meet  the  requirements  of  UK
    immigration law.  No  such  restriction  on  the  admission  of  family
    members of Union citizens is recognised in the Directive.

 9. The regulations do not, however, merely fail to prohibit the  admission
    of a family member who does not have an EEA family permit: they clearly
    allude to it as a possibility.  Regulation 11(4) is as follows:

      "11. - ...
      (4)   Before an immigration officer refuses admission to  the  United
             Kingdom to a person under this regulation  because  the  person
             does not produce on arrival a document mentioned  in  paragraph
             (1) or (2), [which we have  set  out  above],  the  immigration
             officer must give the person every  reasonable  opportunity  to
             obtain the  document  or  have  it  brought  to  him  within  a
             reasonable period of time or to prove by other means that he is
             -
            (a)  an EEA national;
            (b)  a family member  of  an  EEA  national  with  a  right  to
                 accompany that national or join him in the United  Kingdom;
                 or
            (c)  a family member who has retained the right of residence or
                 a  person  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence   under
                 regulation 15."

    The emphasis is ours.  It is clear that a person who comes  within  the
    definition of "family member" in Art  2.2  of  the  Directive  and  who
    derives a right of admission from the Directive as such a family member
    is entitled to prove his right to admission to the Immigration  Officer
    regardless of his possession of a family permit.

10. It follows that the procedure for obtaining an EEA family permit  under
    regulation 12 is to an extent optional.  That does not mean that it has
    no purpose.  The obtaining of entry clearance  is  sometimes  optional.
    Some purposes require  entry  clearance,  and  the  nationals  of  some
    countries require visas.  A person who is not a visa national, and  who
    seeks entry for a purpose for which no entry clearance is required,  is
    nevertheless at liberty to obtain entry clearance if he  wishes  to  do
    so.  If, having done so, he arrives in the United Kingdom with  current
    entry clearance, he is entitled to admission unless  his  circumstances
    have changed or there is some other  reason  why  the  entry  clearance
    should not  be  honoured.   For  such  a  person,  obtaining  an  entry
    clearance before travelling gives some assurance of admission.  But  he
    does not need to obtain an entry clearance, and, if he does not do  so,
    is entitled to present himself to the Entry Clearance Officer and  show
    that he satisfies the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  should
    be admitted.

11. The position in relation to EEA family permits  appears  to  us  to  be
    similar.  Although Article 5 of the Directive contains restrictions  on
    the need for visas in  the  case  of  persons  to  whom  the  Directive
    applies, nothing in the Directive requires  Member  States  to  use  an
    entry clearance process by which a person's eligibility to be  admitted
    can be determined other than at the border of the  state  in  question.
    The possibility of obtaining an EEA  family  permit  from  a  UK  Entry
    Clearance Officer abroad is a procedure not governed by  the  Directive
    at all.  A person who is able to and wishes to take advantage of it  is
    at liberty to do so.  A person who is unable to meet  the  requirements
    of regulation 12, or chooses not to obtain an EEA family permit, is  at
    liberty to present himself to the Immigration  Officer  and  prove  his
    eligibility under regulation 11(4).  Regulation 12 contains  provisions
    purely of UK law: it has nothing to do with admission under EU law.

12. The effect may be  thought  to  be  that  the  family  members  of  EEA
    nationals have more extensive rights of admission to the  UK  than  the
    family members of nationals of the UK itself.  But the true position is
    that their rights are simply different.  The rights of  family  members
    of EEA nationals  are  merely  parasitic  on  the  rights  of  the  EEA
    national, and exist in order to enable the EEA national to exercise his
    Treaty rights.  A UK national needs no such assistance to enable him to
    exercise his rights as a  UK  national;  but  his  family  members  are
    entitled to seek admission on their own account.

13. We should mention one further matter, in case the argument is raised in
    other appeals.  The appellant in this case is a visa national: that  is
    to say his country of nationality is one of those named in paragraph  1
    of Appendix 1 to the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 24 provides  that  a
    visa national is to be refused leave to enter the United Kingdom if  he
    has no current entry clearance.  But EEA  nationals  and  their  family
    members do not require entry clearance.  Paragraph 5 of the Immigration
    Rules is as follows:

        "5.      Save where expressly indicated, these Rules do  not  apply
        to those persons who are entitled to enter or remain in the  United
        Kingdom by virtue of the provisions of the  2006  EEA  Regulations.
        But any person who is not entitled to rely  on  the  provisions  of
        those regulations is covered by these Rules."

    A family member of a Union citizen is covered by the  2006  Regulations
    whether or not he has an EEA family permit: he comes within  regulation
    11(4).  In any  event,  given  that  a  family  permit  is  not  "entry
    clearance" within the definition in s33 of the  Immigration  Act  1971,
    and is not otherwise the subject of reference in the Immigration  Rules
    themselves, the entire process under regulation 12 would be ineffective
    if family members who are visa nationals had to be  refused  entry  for
    lack of entry clearance.  The position is that  the  rights  under  the
    Directive transcend the controls imposed by the Immigration Rules:  but
    so far at any rate as concerns the situation with which this appeal  is
    concerned, there is nothing in the Regulations or the Immigration Rules
    that encroaches on a right given by the Directive.

14. The truth of the matter is that, in this as in other  similar  appeals,
    the appellant obtained an unwelcome answer because he asked  the  wrong
    question.  He is not entitled to entry clearance  because  the  purpose
    for which he seeks entry is not a purpose for which entry clearance  is
    available under the Immigration Rules.  He is not entitled to a  family
    permit, because he does not meet the  requirements  of  regulation  12.
    But what he really wants to know is whether he  can  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as the family  member  of  his  father.   The  answer  to  that
    question is in the affirmative  if  his  father  is  exercising  Treaty
    rights here, despite the appellant's ineligibility for entry  clearance
    or a family permit.

15. The Immigration Judge evidently and materially erred in law through her
    failure to consider regulation 12, and  in  her  direction  that  entry
    clearance be granted to a person who is not  eligible  for  it,  for  a
    purpose for which entry clearance  was  not  available.   However,  her
    findings  demonstrate  that,  while  the  appellant's  father  is  here
    exercising Treaty rights, the appellant is entitled to be with  him  if
    he shows that he is  his  son  and  is  under  21.   The  part  of  the
    Immigration Judge's judgment that is not challenged is amply sufficient
    to enable him to do that.

16. For the foregoing reasons, having  found  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    materially  erred  in  law,  with  the  consent  of   the   appellant's
    representatives, we substitute a determination dismissing  the  appeal.
    The appellant was and  is  entitled  neither  to  entry  clearance  nor
    (following the commencement of the 2006 Regulations) to an  EEA  family
    permit.  The outcome of this litigation is, however, that the appellant
    has established that he is the family member of the person he claims he
    is namely his father.  It follows that he is entitled to the  admission
    to the United Kingdom within the provisions of regulation  11(4).   The
    administrative arrangements (if any) needed to enable him  to  exercise
    that right are not a matter for us.  For the reasons we have given, the
    appeal against refusal of UK EEA family permit is dismissed.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
