
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                KG (Review of current situation) Nepal CG [2006] UKAIT 00076

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 14 August 2006                            |31 October 2006               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before


                       SENIOR Immigration Judge STOREY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent






Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr M Mullins, Counsel, instructed by Gillman-Lee
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Leatherland, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. The fact that conditions in a country are  unstable  or  fluid  does  not
necessarily mean the AIT will avoid  producing  country  guidance  decisions
relating to risk categories in that country.
2. Generally speaking and given recent developments, it  would  only  be  in
the exceptional case that an appellant  could  show  a  continuing  risk  of
persecution or serious harm or treatment contrary to Article 3 by virtue  of
being perceived by the authorities in Nepal as a Maoist.
3. Similarly, it will only be in very limited cases that a person  would  be
able to show he or she faces risk in his or her home area at  the  hands  of
the Maoists.

4. However, even those able to show a  risk  (from  Maoists)  on  return  to
their home area (such  as  businessmen,  industrialists  and  entrepeneurs),
will generally have a viable internal relocation alternative  in  Kathmandu.
Only in an exceptional case would this not be so.
5. The following cases should no longer be referred to for country  guidance
on Nepal: KH (Risk - Maoist) Nepal CG [2002] UKIAT 03945, IP (Risk -  Maoist
- Farmer) Nepal CG [2002] UKIAT 04038, DG (Journalist  -  Healthcare)  Nepal
CG [2002] UKIAT 04284, LG (Maoist - Ex  -Military)  Nepal  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
04334, Gurung (Exclusion - Risk - Maoist) Nepal CG* [2002] UKIAT  04870,  GC
(Relocation - Maoists) Nepal CG [2002] UKIAT  05241  and  RS  (Relocation  -
Maoists) Nepal CG [2002] UKIAT 05407.(Gurung remains starred  on  the  point
of law it deals with).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is  a  national  of  Nepal.  On  14  February  2003  the
   respondent refused to grant him leave to enter and refused to  grant  him
   asylum. He appealed. In a determination notified on 4 November  2004  the
   Adjudicator Mr K O Adio allowed his appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
   grounds. Permission to appeal to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  was
   granted on 7 March 2004. By virtue of transitional provisions made  under
   the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of claimants, etc)  Act  2004,  the
   respondent's appeal took effect as a reconsideration. On 4 October 2005 a
   panel of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (the Hon  Mr  Justice  Hodge
   OBE President, Senior Immigration Judge Latter and  Immigration  Judge  G
   Jones) decided that the Adjudicator had materially erred in law. Omitting
   only the description of the proceedings, their  reasons  were  stated  as
   follows:


         "2.  The first question we have to decide is whether there was  any
         error of law on  the  part  of  the  Adjudicator.  The  appellant's
         evidence that he had been attacked by  Maoists  was  accepted.  The
         Adjudicator found that he  had  been  persecuted  and  allowed  the
         appeal.


        3.  We concluded that the Adjudicator erred in law, in  failing  to
        make findings about the sufficiency of protection available to  the
        appellant in the light of the decision of the House  of  Lords  [in
        Horvath [2000] INLR 239] He accepted the  appellant's  evidence  of
        two attacks in June 1999 and August 2002 by Maoists.  He  describes
        the attacks as serious. He gave no reason for concluding that  such
        attacks were in fact persecution by  non  state  agents.  There  is
        objective evidence that the authorities are strongly opposed to the
        Maoists. There are areas of Nepal  where  the  population  are  not
        generally at risk from Maoists.  The  Adjudicator  failed  to  make
        adequate findings about whether the state is  able  or  willing  to
        protect this appellant.


        4.  The objective evidence indicates there may  well  be  areas  of
        Nepal where those who face persecution may  relocate  without  that
        being unduly  harsh.  We  do  not  consider  that  the  Adjudicator
        addressed this issue as fully as he might have done. If indeed  the
        treatment meted out to  the  appellant  is  persecutory,  the  case
        provides an opportunity for the tribunal to consider the  issue  of
        internal relocation within Nepal.


        5.   We accepted the  appellant  may  wish  to  give  further  oral
        evidence in relation to his attempts to report his concerns to  the
        police. We considered both parties should have the  opportunity  to
        present updated material on the generalised country  conditions  in
        Nepal, so the tribunal might consider the issue of  sufficiency  of
        protection and internal relocation. We  accordingly  adjourned  the
        case for a second stage reconsideration hearing."

2.  In  consequential  directions  the   panel   stated   the   issues   for
reconsideration as being:

        "1. Given the adjudicator accepted the evidence the  appellant  had
        been attacked by Maoists on two occasions, are the  authorities  in
        Nepal, able or willing to  protect  a  person  in  the  appellant's
        position from the actions of the Maoists as non  state  agents;  is
        there sufficiency of protection? If not;  2.  Would  it  be  unduly
        harsh for this person to internally relocate within Nepal?"

3. Whilst the panel in this way identified the issues as  twofold,  that  of
protection and internal relocation, it seems  clear  to  us   from  what  is
stated at paragraphs  3  and  4  that  the  protection  issue  was  seen  as
encompassing also the issue of whether the two attacks did indeed amount  to
serious harm. Given that the Court of Appeal in  Bagdanavicius  [2003]  EWCA
Civ 1605, [2004] INLR 163 has emphasised that the  issues  of  serious  harm
and whether a state can protect  against  such  harm  are  interrelated,  we
consider we are obliged in any event to examine the issue  of  serious  harm
as a prerequisite to considering the protection issue proper.

4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he  had  been  a  farm
worker on his parents' farm. In 1988 he joined  the  Nepali  Congress  Party
(NCP). His father was also  a  member.  He  eventually  became  involved  in
attending meetings and  distributing  leaflets  as  a  result  of  which  he
suffered two incidents of attacks by local Maoists in Kaski, a  district  of
Pokhara: one at a meeting in June 1999, the other at  a  meeting  in  August
2002. The 1999 incident led  to  him  being  hospitalised  for  4-5  months.
Afterwards he continued to attend NCP meetings  secretly.  He  said  he  had
become the leader of the party in his area. After the August 2002  incident,
when Maoists brandished guns, he had fled. His evidence as  to  whether  and
when he reported the 1999 incident to  the  police  in  his  home  area  was
equivocal, but in relation to the August 2002 incident he said that  he  had
reported this  to  the  district  police  headquarters  in  Kathmandu.  They
refused to take statements from  him  and  told  him  to  leave  the  police
station.  He decided to leave Nepal and did so on 5 December 2002.  He  came
to the UK via India, Malaysia, Argentina and Italy, destroying his  passport
on the flight from Rome.

5. At the outset of the hearing Mr Mullins said he was aware  the  case  had
been listed for potential country  guidance  but  urged  the  panel  not  to
attempt any guidance, since the current situation in Nepal was highly  fluid
and there was good reason to think that the  ceasefire  in  place  currently
would collapse - like all the previous ceasefires. In  his  view  the  three
main issues raised by this case were: (1) protection from  persecution;  (2)
the significance of the appellant having gone into hiding  before  he  left;
and (3) why the appellant thought he would  still  be  at  risk  on  return,
notwithstanding the ceasefire.

6. In the light of point 5 of the previous panel's reasons for  finding  the
determination of the Adjudicator legally flawed, we granted  permission  for
Mr  Mullins  to  call  the  appellant  to  give  evidence   concerning   the
circumstances in which he had gone into hiding.

7. In oral evidence the appellant said he had gone into hiding  in  Sunnali.
He had not approached the police there to report the  August  2002  incident
as it was a border area. He only stayed there  two  days.  Asked  about  the
current situation, he said he had had no contact with anyone back  in  Nepal
since he left. His father had come to India. Although he had some  relatives
in his home area of Nepal, he had not had contact with them.

8. He was cross-examined by Ms Leatherland about what  he  was  recorded  as
saying about the 1999 incident which took place in Kaski.  Why,  she  asked,
had he first said that he went to  the  police  in  Kaski  before  going  to
hospital yet later said he had only gone  to  them  after  being  discharged
from hospital. The appellant said he had  only  gone  to  the  police  after
being discharged from hospital. Ms Leatherland  asked  him  why  in  October
2004 he had said he had only gone once to see the police  and  that  was  in
Kathmandu after the second incident in August 2002. The  appellant  said  he
had gone to see the police both in Kaski and in Kathmandu. If  he  had  said
differently before, it was because it had slipped  his  mind.   He  had  not
informed any of his party members about the treatment  he  had  received  in
1999; at that time there was no NCP office in his  area  and  party  members
were scattered around. He was not in contact now with any party members.

9. In submissions Ms Leatherland asked us  not  to  accept  the  appellant's
evidence about his past attempts to obtain protection from the  authorities.
His evidence as to whether he had sought  to  obtain  protection  after  the
1999 incident was  inconsistent.  His  evidence  on  this  matter  was  also
implausible because, if these events had happened, one would expect  him  to
have approached other members of the party  for  help  in  obtaining  police
protection.  In relation to the appellant's attempt to obtain protection  in
August 2002 in Kathmandu, he had only spoken of making  one  attempt,  which
should not be considered enough, given the  background  evidence  indicating
that  the  authorities  were  willing  and  able  to  protect  civilians  in
government-controlled areas.   As  regards  the  general  situation,  recent
events amounted to a material change of  circumstances.  There  were  formal
talks, the UN was involved, the parties  were  mostly  observing  the  cease
fire, and there were clear plans for an  interim  government  involving  the
Maoists in some form and for elections to be held  in  2007.  Maoist  rebels
had been released from jail;  the  Maoist  leader  had  met  the  new  Prime
Minister face-to-face in Kathmandu. It was  clear  the  government  security
forces were in control of government areas.  If a person had a well  founded
fear  of  persecution  in  Maoist-controlled  parts  of  Nepal,  they  could
relocate to Kathmandu, where there was a clear sufficiency of protection.

10. Mr Mullins urged us to consider  the  appellant's  past  experiences  as
being consistent with the background  evidence  concerning  the  ability  of
Maoists to operate with impunity even in  government-controlled  areas.  The
Amnesty International report made clear that  in  late  2002,  although  the
Maoists were only in control of 7 districts, there had been  Maoist  attacks
in 74  out  of  Nepal's  75  districts.  There  had  even  been  attacks  in
Kathmandu. There had also been an incident as recently as March 2006  in  an
area south-west  of  Pokhara  -  the  appellant's  home  area.  Attacks  had
continued right up until the ceasefire and beyond  it.  Hence  the  risk  to
this appellant was not dependent on what happened to the cease fire.  If  he
returned to his home area and sought to continue his  political  activities,
he would face a recurrence at some point of similar problems  at  the  hands
of Maoists.  The  appellant's  evidence  regarding  his  attempt  to  obtain
protection was indicative of the ongoing  general  problem  for  members  of
political parties in Nepal. The  government  "umbrella"  of  protection  had
proved ineffective.  The appellant had been targeted because he had  been  a
political activist. In the absence of a permanent  cease  fire  and  a  firm
agreement about power-sharing the political and  military  future  of  Nepal
was fraught with danger and the appellant should be  given  the  benefit  of
the doubt.

11. Mr Mullins submitted that the appellant would not only  continue  to  be
at risk in his home area of Pokhara; he would also remain at  risk  wherever
he went in Nepal, including in Kathmandu. He had been to  Kathmandu  already
and had met with difficulties there. The panel should bear in mind that  the
appellant  was  not  in  the  same  position  as  the  general  run  of  the
population. First of  all,  he  was  a  party  activist.  Secondly,  he  had
suffered previous attacks from the Maoists because he was a party  activist.
Thirdly, he had been unable to obtain protection  when  he  had  sought  it.
Fourthly he had no immediate family and his only relatives were in  Pokhara,
his home area where he faced  ongoing  difficulties  at  the  hands  of  the
Maoists.

12. As regards the general situation, Mr Mullins submitted  that  given  the
history of breakdown in past ceasefires, it could not  be  said  that  Nepal
had achieved stability. There were major issues  that  still  separated  the
Maoists from the government, including the future  of  the  monarchy,  which
were potentially explosive issues.  As regards whether it  would  be  unduly
harsh for him to internally relocate, it was clear that in Nepal there  were
a  significant  number  of  internally  displaced  persons  who  were  in  a
vulnerable situation and the appellant would face similar dim prospects

The background situation

13. We had a considerable body of background material  before  us:  this  is
listed in the  Appendix.  It  presents  the  following  picture  of  Nepal's
history over the past ten years.

14. Since February 1996 the Communist Party of Nepal  (Maoist)  or  CPN  has
been conducting a "people's war". Initially confined to the remote  mid-west
regions of the country, it gradually spread  to  almost  all  areas  of  the
country. In November 2001 the Royal Nepalese Army  (RNA)  was  deployed  and
from November 2002 the Nepal Police and the Armed Police  Force  (APF)  were
placed under  the  "unified  command"  of  the  RNA  for  counter-insurgency
operations. However, even before then, in October  2002,  Maoist  insurgents
were said to control nearly half of the country. Against the  background  of
civil war, the  parliamentary  process  was  beset  by  difficulties:  since
October 2002 four Prime Ministers either resigned or were dismissed  by  the
King, the last been removed on 1 February 2005. Although the Maoists  appear
now to have control of only 10-15%  of  the  75  districts  of  Nepal,  they
remain a dominant force in many rural areas and  their  military  wing,  the
PLA, is 20,000 strong and has not yet agreed to disarm.

15. The 10 year Maoist insurgency has resulted in the deaths of over  13,000
people. The conflict has been marked by what  the  2006  UN  Office  of  the
Commissioner  for  Human  Rights  (OCHR)  report  describes   as   "...gross
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law  committed  by
CPN (Maoist) in the course of its insurgency and by security forces  in  the
State's response." The US State Department March  8,  2006  report  covering
2005 events states that:

   "The government's poor human rights record worsened  and  the  government
   continued to commit many serious abuses, both during and after the  state
   of emergency that suspended all  fundamental  rights  except  for  habeas
   corpus.  Members  of  the  security  forces  and  the  Maoist  insurgents
   committed numerous  grave  human  rights  abuses  during  the  year.  The
   following human rights problems were reported:

   Obstruction of citizens' rights to change the government
   Arbitrary and unlawful lethal force including torture
   Vigilantism
   Disappearances
   Poor prison and detention conditions
   Arbitrary arrest and lengthy pre-trial detention
   Impunity for security forces
   Compromised independence of judiciary
   Suspension of news broadcasts
   Restrictions on the Tibetan community
   Restrictions on internal travel
   Discrimination against persons with disabilities and lower castes
   Violence against women and trafficking in women and girls
   Abuses of child labour
   Restriction on workers rights."

16. There have been various  attempts  to  end  the  conflict:  a  ceasefire
declared by both sides in July 2001 was eventually broken by the Maoists  in
November 2001; a ceasefire  agreed  in  January  2003  stalled  after  three
rounds of negotiations and the Maoists unilaterally ended it  on  27  August
2003; a three month  ceasefire  unilaterally  declared  by  the  Maoists  in
September 2005 was ended by them on 2 January  2006.  Up  until  April  2006
there seemed limited prospects of the conflict ending. Events  centering  on
the monarchy were to change all that. The  authority  of  the  monarchy  had
already suffered a  serious  setback  in  2001,  with  the  murder  of  King
Birendra and other members of the Royal Family on 1 June 2001  by  Birenda's
son, the Crown Prince Dipendra, who subsequently shot  and  killed  himself.
King Gyanendra came to the throne in  these  tragic  circumstances  in  June
2001.

17. The second setback was the decision by King Gyanendra in February  2005,
following the failure of several transitional governments, to announce  that
he was assuming direct (executive) power. He had dissolved  the  government,
saying that a new government would  be  formed  under  his  leadership  that
would restore peace and effective democracy within the next three years.  He
took control of the 78,000  member  army.  Under  the  subsequent  state  of
emergency  there  was  a  crackdown  on  senior  political  leaders,   trade
unionists, human rights activists, student activists,  lawyers,  journalists
and suspected Maoist sympathisers. Thousands of  arrests  took  place.  Many
other civil and political rights, including freedom of movement and  freedom
of  assembly,  were  suspended.  Press  freedom  was  suspended.  There  was
widespread international  condemnation  of  these  measures.  Following  the
declaration of a state of emergency the CPN leadership denounced the  King's
seizure of power and called for an indefinite  bandh  (strike).   The  Human
Rights Watch report December 31 2005 stated that:

   "Extrajudicial  killings,  illegal   detentions,   and   "disappearances"
   continue to be instigated by the Royal  Nepalese  Army  (RNA)  while  the
   Maoists continue to engage in extortion, murder, forced  displacement  of
   civilians, and abductions".

18. The same report noted that in 2005 Nepal continued to have  the  largest
reported number of enforced "disappearances"  in  the  world.  In  September
2005, the report also noted, the UN Special Rapporteur  on  Torture  visited
Nepal and said that torture and ill treatment was  systematically  practised
in Nepal by the police, armed police,  and  the  RNA  in  order  to  extract
confessions and to obtain intelligence. In  the  case  of  the  Maoists  the
Rapporteur found "shocking evidence of torture and mutilation" in  order  to
extort money, punish non-cooperation and intimidate others.

19. However,  the  King's  seizure  of  power  resulted  in  an  uneasy  but
effective alliance developing between the main political parties on the  one
hand and the Maoists on  the  other.  On  22  November  2005  a  seven-party
alliance and the CPN (Maoist) announced their common adoption of a  12-point
"Letter of Understanding"  including  a  call  for  an  "end  to  autocratic
monarchy" and the election of a constituent assembly.

Events leading up to the April 2006 situation

20.The Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Human  Rights  on
the situation of human rights and the activities  of  her  Office  including
technical cooperation, in Nepal dated  16  February  2006  stated  that  its
concerns about the government's actions grew in the second half  of  January
2006,  as  public  protest  intensified  in  opposition  to  the   municipal
elections called for 8 February 2006  against  a  background  of  government
banning of all assemblies, processions and sit-ins in the Kathmandu  Valley.
A further report of the same body entitled "Investigations  into  violations
of international humanitarian law in the  context  of  attacks  and  clashes
between the Communist  Party  of  Nepal  (Maoist)  and  Government  Security
Forces: findings and recommendations January -March  2006"  considered  that
the resumption of hostilities was leading to a worsening situation.

21. The 3 July 2006 version of the Home Office Operational Guidance Note  on
Nepal (OGN v4) summarises the position up to April 2006 as follows:

   "2.1 On 1 February  2005,  the  Nepalese  King  Gyanendra  dismissed  the
   cabinet, declared a state of emergency, and assumed direct control of the
   government under the emergency powers article of the Constitution, citing
   the need to fight a Maoist  insurgency.  Amnesty  International  reported
   that the human rights situation deteriorated sharply after King Gyanendra
   seized direct power. Civil liberties were undermined, with  thousands  of
   politically motivated arrests, strict media censorship and harassment  of
   human rights defenders. The state of emergency was  lifted  on  29  April
   2005.
   2.2 Since February 1996 the Communist Party of Nepal (CPN)  (Maoist)  has
   been conducting an increasingly high  profile  insurgency  (the  People's
   War) against the government. Initially this insurgency was limited to the
   remote Mid-West regions of the country, but it has since spread  to  most
   parts of Nepal. In local elections held in May and July 1997, the Maoists
   disrupted the  election  process  in  some  areas  by  intimidating  non-
   Communist candidates and  party  workers.  In  May  1998  the  government
   launched a major police offensive against the Maoists.  It  is  estimated
   that over 12,000 people, including  Maoists, police and  civilians,  have
   been killed since the troubles began.
   2.3 During 2005 the government's poor human rights  record  worsened  and
   both members of the security forces and the Maoist  insurgents  committed
   numerous grave human rights abuses. The security forces  often  operating
   with impunity unlawfully  arrested  tortured  and  killed  civilians  and
   suspected Maoists, while Maoist forces abducted civilians  and  committed
   unlawful killings and torture. Thousands of people were displaced by  the
   conflict, while  strikes,  insecurity  and  displacement  prevented  many
   people from enjoying their economic and social rights.
   2.4 The law prohibits torture, beating, and mutilation,  however,  during
   2005 the security forces regularly engaged in such activities  to  punish
   suspects or to extract confessions. The Centre  for  Victims  of  Torture
   (CVICT), a local NGO, reported that blindfolding and beating the soles of
   feet were  commonly  used  methods.  The  government  failed  to  conduct
   thorough and independent investigations  of  reports  of  security  force
   brutality and generally did  not  take  significant  disciplinary  action
   against those involved. Citizens were afraid to bring cases  against  the
   police or the army for fear of reprisals."

The Post-April 2006 situation

22. The situation since April 2006 is described in  the  July  2006  OGN  as
follows:

   "2.5 In April 2006 after weeks of strikes and protests against his direct
   rule King Gyanendra recalled parliament and appointed GP Koirala (who had
   been chosen by the leaders of a seven-party alliance to be their  leader)
   as prime minister.8 Following the reinstatement of parliament on  the  27
   April 2006 Nepal's Maoist rebels declared a  three-month  ceasefire.  The
   rebel leader, Prachanda, said the ceasefire was intended 'to express deep
   commitment to people's desire for peace'.
   2.6 In May 2006 parliament voted unanimously  to  curtail  the  monarch's
   political powers including his control of the  military  and  effectively
   rendered him a ceremonial figure. They also declared a ceasefire  in  the
   10-year conflict with Maoist insurgents. Announcing the move, the  Deputy
   Prime Minister Khadga Prasad Oli said all terrorism charges  against  the
   rebels would be dropped. Politicians  have  promised  to  work  with  the
   Maoists as a prelude to bringing them  into  government.  The  government
   also announced that it was annulling  controversial  municipal  elections
   held by the  King  in  February  2006  and  sacking  local  officials  he
   appointed. In addition, it said it was  awarding  compensation  of  about
   $14,000 to families of those killed by security forces during the  recent
   demonstrations, and was appointing a judicial commission to inquire  into
   the deaths."


23. In the bundle were a number of  press  cuttings  covering  events  since
April. Ekantipur.com referred to two incidents of abductions by  Maoists  in
Ramechap and and Siraha.The same source gave a  report  dated  11  May  2006
headed "Parliamentarians  accuse  Maoists  of  intensifying  extortion".  It
recounted an incident in Maheshpur where Maoists were said to have  demanded
a donation from a Congressman. The report also said  that  SPA  leaders  had
accused the rebels of continuing with extortion and  terrorizing  civilians.
One SPA leader was quoted as stating that:

   "Maoists have been extorting money on the excuse of feeding their 20,ooo-
   man army, said CPN-UML General-Secretary Madhav Kumar Nepal.  Asking  the
   Maoists to stop all atrocities against [the] people, Nepal added that  he
   was ready to take responsibility for feeding the Maoists army".

24. The same report also mentioned a breach of the ceasefire  involving  the
abduction of five policemen from the APF in Nawalparasi.

25. A report dated 14 May 2006 refers  to  a  group  of  men  demanding  Rs3
million from the Life Care hospital. A report of  May  16  states  that  the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs urged the Maoists  to
stop extortions, intimidations and recruitment for their militia.  Reference
was made to abduction of a local timber  trader  from  Sarlahi  and  it  was
stated:

   "Our report from Dolakha says that Maoist  rebels  are  still  continuing
   with the collection of forced 'taxes' from various  government  and  non-
   government organisations".

26. A May 15 2006 report quotes the CPN leader Prachanda  as  stating,  when
asked about continued extortion by rebels, "Donation was necessary for  food
and  treatment  for  thousands  of  Peoples  Liberation  Army,  the  party's
military  wing".   Prachanda  was  said  to  have  added  that  it  was  the
government's duty to allocate 50 percent of its budget to  people  in  rural
areas and to fulfil the  basic  needs  of  the  PLA.  "Otherwise  we  remain
compelled to collect taxes through our government". A May  16  report  gives
details of three other incidents involving  abduction  and/or  extortion.  A
May 18 report notes the evidence of US  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for
South and Central Asian Affairs Boucher  being  "wary"  as  to  whether  the
Maoists were genuinely committed to disarmament and acceptance of  the  rule
of law and democratic  political  process.  Boucher  said  that  the  Maoist
insurgency had been an exceptionally brutal one and their forces had  become
accustomed to control over the countryside exercised through terror.  A  May
18 report notes complaints by industrialists and entrepreneurs.   There  are
also reports for 22 May, 27 May, 29 May and  30  May  variously  chronicling
incidents of abductions, extortion  and  intimidation.  The  27  May  report
quoted  the  Industrial  Security  Group  (ISG)   comprising   six   foreign
diplomatic missions, including the US, France, Germany,  India  and  the  UK
expressing its deep concern over  continued  Maoist  extortion  and  violent
intimidation of businesses and industries across the country.   The  30  May
report states that  Maoists  made  "large-scale  military  recruitments"  in
several places of Nawalparasi district, coming just two  days  after  rebels
committed themselves to abiding by the 25-point code of  conduct  signed  on
May 26.

27. A 2 June  2006  report  says  that  tens  of  thousands  of  people  had
assembled at a point in Kathmandu to attend the mass meeting of the CPN.

28. A source called the People`s Review Weekly dated 12  June  reports  that
"Maoist people`s open court has been opened in  the  capital,  receiving  10
complaints on average a day."  A 3 June report mentions another incident  of
abduction and says that Maoists have been taking "road taxes" from  vehicles
using the Tansen-Tamghas roadway: "According to the  Maoists,  the  proceeds
of the "road-tax" will be used to  build  infrastructures  to  maintain  the
road for the People`s Army, a driver said".  A 6 June  report  describes  US
Ambassador to Nepal, James F Moriatry saying that although the US could  not
provide assistance to the rebels, since the US still considered  Maoists  as
terrorists, he recognised that other donor agencies could provide  food  and
other financial support to feed the rebels. The report continues:

   "He  accused  the  rebels  of  amassing  weapons  for  their  guerrillas,
   continuing  recruitment,  forcing  people  to  attend  its  rallies   and
   extorting from people and killing two political activists in Rautahat  in
   recent days".

29. A 7 June cutting refers to Maoists forcibly  taking  away  150  students
from schools in Rame-chhap to make  them  participate  in  rebel  programmes
recently

30. The Home Office OGN of July 2006 stated at 2.7 that:

   "In recent talks (June 2006) Nepal's new government  has  struck  a  deal
   with Maoist rebels, agreeing to dissolve parliament and set up an interim
   administration that would include the rebels, raising hopes for an end to
   a decade-long violence. The interim government will oversee elections for
   a special assembly meant to draft  a  new  constitution  and  review  the
   monarchy's role. The Maoist  leader  Prachanda  has  said  elections  are
   likely to be in March or April 2007. However, there are still a number of
   difficult issues that require further discussion such as  disarmament  of
   the Maoist rebels and  the  future  of  the  Monarchy,  for  example  the
   political  parties  are  undecided  about  whether  to  declare  Nepal  a
   republic."


31. A BBC News item dated 7 August 2006 states  that  although  the  Maoists
have extended  their  ceasefire  shortly  after  they  and  the  seven-party
alliance clinched a landmark power-sharing  deal  in  June,  the  two  sides
continued to differ over a government plan for the UN to be involved in  the
decommissioning of the rebels' weapons and over the future of the  monarchy.
It quoted the deputy chief of the CPN, Baaburam  Bhattarai  as  saying  "The
talks are very close to collapse. The dialogue process is stuck  at  a  very
sensitive stage". However, it added that he also said his  party  would  not
return to the jungle and would launch a peaceful movement in order  to  make
the country a democratic republic.

32. In a Guardian Unlimited press cutting of August 7 2006 it  was  reported
that deputy rebel chief Bauram Bhattarai considered that the  peace  process
between Maoist guerrillas and Nepalese  politicians  was  on  the  verge  of
collapse over the issues of the future of the monarchy and disarmament.  The
report ended:

   "Analysts say that the Maoists were attempting to strengthen  their  hand
   in the negotiations by talking tough. "The  international  community  has
   been quite firm. India, the US, the EU have all  told  the  Maoists  they
   cannot join the interim government with guns in hand",   said Kanak  Mani
   Dixit of Himal magazine. "What they need is a  face-saving  measure  (for
   the Maoists) because Nepal does not want to return to war".

The legal framework

33. Since the hearing of this appeal there have been two  important  changes
in the law. The first is in the form of  new  Regulations,  the  Refugee  or
Person in Need of International Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  SI
2006/2525 (hereafter  the  "Protection  Regulations").  The  second  is  the
Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, Cm6918  (hereafter   "the  Cm6918
Rules" or the "amended Immigration Rules"). These Regulations together  with
amendments to the Immigration Rules in part implement EU  Council  Directive
2004/83/EC on minimum standards for the qualification and  status  of  third
country nationals or  stateless  persons  as  refugees  or  as  persons  who
otherwise need international protection and the content  of  the  protection
granted, OJ L304/12 of 30.9.2004 (hereafter  "the  Directive";  articles  of
the Directive are cited simply as "A", e.g. A9).  By virtue  of  a  Practice
Direction from the President of the AIT issued on 9  October  2006,  we  are
obliged to apply these Regulations and  amended  Immigration  Rules  to  all
pending appeals, of  which  this  is  one.  We  considered  whether  it  was
necessary to notify the parties of these changes  so  as  to  give  them  an
opportunity to make submissions on the basis of  these  new  provisions.  We
decided it was not, as in our  view  these  provisions  are  not  materially
different from those in place previously. However, in view of the fact  that
they are new, it is appropriate to set out the legal framework so far as  it
is relevant to this case in more detail than usual.

34. The Protection Regulations set out, inter alia, definitions of  acts  of
persecution  (Regulation  5),  actors  of  persecution   or   serious   harm
(Regulation 3) and actors of protection (Regulation  4).   Regulation  4  in
its material parts states:

   " 1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a person  eligible  for
   humanitarian protection, protection from persecution or serious harm  can
   be provided by:
    (a) the State; or
    (b)  any   party   or   organisation,   including   any   international
    organisation, controlling the  State  or  a  substantial  part  of  the
    territory of the State.
   (2)Protection shall be regarded as generally  provided  when  the  actors
   mentioned in paragraph 1(a) and (b) take reasonable steps to prevent  the
   persecution or suffering of serious harm by operating an effective  legal
   system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of acts constituting
   persecution or serious harm, and the person mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)
   has access to such protection.
   ..."


35. This is word-for-word  the  text  of  A7  of  the  Directive   save  for
introductory words in Regulation  4(1)   "shall  be  regarded"  (instead  of
"is") and in Regulation 4(2)   the  omission  of  the  phrase  "inter  alia"
immediately before "by operating").

36.The amended Immigration Rules (Cm6918) contain  among  other  provisions,
paragraph 339K, which deals with the approach to past  persecution,  in  the
following terms:

   "339K. The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
   serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution or such harm, will
   be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-founded fear  of
   persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are good
   reasons to consider that such persecution or serious  harm  will  not  be
   repeated".


37. Also pertinent  to  this  appeal  is  paragraph  339O  headed  "Internal
Relocation". This states:

   (i) The Secretary of State will not make:
    (a) a grant of asylum if in part of the  country  of  origin  a  person
    would not have a well founded fear of being persecuted, and the  person
    can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of the country; or
    (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of  the  country  of
    return a person would not face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm,
    and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of  the
    country.
   (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin or  country  of
   return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of State, when  making
   his decision on whether to grant asylum or humanitarian protection,  will
   have regard to the general circumstances prevailing in that part  of  the
   country and to the personal circumstances of the person.
   (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return  to  the
   country of origin or country of return."


38. In considering the proper approach to the issue of  internal  relocation
we have also to apply the principles set out in the recent  House  of  Lords
judgment in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 which adopts the criteria now contained  in
paragraph 339O but also contains more detailed guidance.

39. The new Regulations and Rules also identify the right of a person to  be
considered as  to  his  or  her  eligibility  for  humanitarian  protection.
Paragraph 339 C (in its first part) provides:


   " A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the United  Kingdom
   if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
     (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port  of  entry  in
   the United Kingdom;
     (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of The
   Refugee or Person in Need  of  International  Protection  (Qualification)
   Regulations 2006;
     (iii) substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the person
   concerned, if he returned to the country of return,  would  face  a  real
   risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or,  owing  to  such  risk,
   unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; and
     (iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection".

40. The same paragraph in its second part  gives  a  definition  of  serious
harm:

   "Serious harm consists of:
    (i) the death penalty or execution;
   (ii) unlawful killing;
   (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a person
   in the country of return; or
   (iv) serious and individual threat to a  civilian's  life  or  person  by
   reason of indiscriminate  violence  in  situations  of  international  or
   internal armed conflict".

41. We remind ourselves at this point that by virtue  of  the  new  Practice
Direction we are obliged not only to consider  the  appellant's  asylum  and
human rights grounds of appeal. We also have to treat the grounds of  appeal
as including the ground that the decision of the respondent was contrary  to
the Immigration Rules relating to eligibility for humanitarian protection.

42. Where below we refer to "risk" or "real risk", this is to be  understood
as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively: (1)   whether  on  return
there  is  a  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  under  the  Refugee
Convention;  (2)  whether  on  return  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
believing that a person would face a real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm
within the meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration  Rules;  and
(3) whether on return there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  a
person would face a real risk of being exposed to a real risk  of  treatment
contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

Our assessment of general issues

43. We first address Mr Mullins' submission that we should not  proceed  (as
was intended by the previous panel) to make this  case  a  country  guidance
case in view of the fact that the current situation in Nepal  is  fluid.  As
noted in KA (Draft-related Risk Categories updated) [2005] UKAIT  00165,  it
is a matter for the Tribunal, not the parties, whether a case is to  proceed
as a country guidance case. Whilst we accept that conditions  in  a  country
being fluid may sometimes afford a good reason not to  proceed  with  giving
guidance in relation to claims made by asylum-seekers from that country,  we
consider that much depends on the  particular  context  and  the  extent  to
which it is possible, notwithstanding such  fluidity,  to  draw  conclusions
about risk categories. To take an obvious example, the fact  that  for  most
of the time since the 1990s Somalia  has  been  viewed  as  being  a  highly
unstable country  has  not  prevented  the  Tribunal  from  concluding  that
members of minority clans  from  that  country  are  generally  (albeit  not
universally) at risk on return.  Broadly  speaking  asylum-seekers  tend  to
come from countries whose conditions are unstable rather than stable,  fluid
rather than static. Since  one  of  the  main  purposes  of  the  Tribunal's
practice of country guidance is to ensure consistency in judicial  decision-
making on asylum or asylum-related appeals, it would be  self-defeating   if
it were not carried out  in  relation  to  cases  brought  by  nationals  of
countries which most frequently feature in the AIT's asylum appeal lists.

44. Turning to the situation in Nepal, Mr Mullins is right in  our  view  to
highlight the fact that the current situation there is fluid and that  there
remain major issues yet to  be  resolved  between  the  two  main  sides  in
ongoing peace negotiations. It is also  right  to  bear  in  mind  that  the
Maoist  insurgency  has  been  an  exceptionally  brutal  one   and   Maoist
insurgents have become used to the exercise of terror as a mode  of  control
over the countryside.  Having  said  that  it  is  clear  that  the  popular
uprising in 2006, which ended in Parliament curtailing  the  powers  of  the
monarchy in June 2006, has led to a  fundamental  change  in  the  political
situation. The attempt by King Gyanendra to  impose  direct  rule  and  then
take  the  war-ravaged  Nepalese  government  in  an  even  more  repressive
direction proved a watershed. It led to a  popular  uprising  and  the  King
being constrained to step aside and reinstate Parliament  under  an  interim
government involving seven different political parties.  It has resulted  in
the two sides reaching an agreement firstly on the setting up of an  interim
government which will at some point include the Maoists and secondly on  the
holding of elections to a constituent assembly to be held by April  2007  at
the latest. It has led to Maoist rebels have been  released  from  jail  and
all terrorism charges being  dropped.  At  the  invitation  of  the  interim
government and with the active approval of the Maoists,  a  UN  mission  has
visited  and  both  sides  have  agreed  to  keep  their  armies  under   UN
supervision. Although nothing is yet concretely concluded, there  have  been
landmark formal talks in mid-June in Kathmandu  between  the  Maoist  leader
Prachanda and Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala, resulting in  an  eight-
point agreement. Although there have been some level of ongoing  violations,
the ceasefire has generally been holding.

45. By any  standard  these  and  related  developments  constitute  a  very
significant change of circumstances. It is true and  important  to  bear  in
mind that it is reasonably likely that there will  be  ongoing  breaches  of
the  various  ceasefire  agreements,  occasional  future  setbacks  in   the
negotiations. However, we do not think on  the  basis  of  the  most  recent
evidence that Nepal is reasonably likely to see a  recurrence  of  the  same
scale or patterns of armed  conflict.  We  do  not  consider  it  reasonably
likely  that  there  will  be  a  return  either  to  wide-scale  government
targeting of Maoist insurgents and those suspected  of  supporting  them  or
(on the other hand) widespread targeting by Maoists of government  officials
and certain categories of civilians. There continue to be violations by  the
Maoists of the ceasefire agreements, but such acts are largely  concentrated
on obtaining monies by extortion, raids and other comparable measures.  From
the background evidence it is also clear that there is no longer in Nepal  a
situation of internal armed conflict in the international law sense of  that
term.

46. The following are cases which still appear  on  the  AIT  website  under
country guidance cases for Nepal: KH (Risk - Maoist) Nepal CG  [2002]  UKIAT
03945, IP (Risk  -  Maoist  -  Farmer)  Nepal  CG  [2002]  UKIAT  04038,  DG
(Journalist - Healthcare) Nepal CG [2002]  UKIAT  04284,  LG  (Maoist  -  Ex
-Military) Nepal CG [2002] UKIAT 04334, Gurung (Exclusion - Risk  -  Maoist)
Nepal CG * [2002] UKIAT 04870, GC (Relocation -  Maoists)  Nepal  CG  [2002]
UKIAT 05241 and RS (Relocation - Maoists) Nepal  CG  [2002]  UKIAT  05407.In
view of the fundamental changes in  the  political  and  military  situation
which have taken place in Nepal during 2006, we do  not  see  any  value  in
continuing to refer to previous Tribunal country guidance  cases  on  Nepal,
except  for  the  purposes  of  historical  reference,  for  example,   when
considering whether something claimed  by an appellant to have  happened  at
a certain period in the past,  was  consistent  with  the  country  guidance
assessment made in relation to that time.

Risks to Maoists

47. So far as the issue of risk  on  return  to  Maoists  from  the  current
government is concerned, we consider that the  latest  background  evidence,
which includes reference to the dropping of all  terrorism  charges  against
Maoist rebels and to a clear  commitment  from  the  interim  government  to
include Maoists both in the interim government (at some stage) and in a  new
regular  government  following  elections,  demonstrates  that  even  active
members of the CPN and members of the PLA would not be at risk on return  to
Nepal. In our view it  would  only  be  in  the  exceptional  case  that  an
appellant could show a continuing risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  or
treatment contrary to Article 3 by virtue of being,or being perceived as,  a
Maoist.

Risk from Maoists

48. So far as the issue of the risk on return at the hands  of  the  Maoists
is concerned, we also think that the same body of evidence makes clear  that
it would only be in respect of a very limited number of  categories  that  a
person would be at risk on return. In particular we  do  not  consider  that
such a risk (from Maoists) would arise simply by virtue of the fact  that  a
person was  a  government  official  or  involved  in  one  of  the  current
political parties. Whilst we do not seek in this determination  to  try  and
specify all the current categories of those who face a risk  on   return  to
Nepal, we would accept that such a risk may arise in a  person's  home  area
where he is (or would be perceived as being) a businessman or  industrialist
or entrepreneur. It  would  appear  that  the  CPN  (at  least  through  its
military wing) is continuing to engage in the practice of  extortion  and/or
abduction and for this purpose to  target  businessmen,  industrialists  and
entrepreneurs - broadly  speaking  those  perceived  as  having  significant
wealth. Whether or not it is correct that the Maoists have a  viable  option
of reaching an agreement with the current interim government and with  donor
agencies in a position to help them  pay  the  salaries  of  their  military
wing, it does appear  that  their  inability  to  raise  taxes  through  any
governmental  structure  means  that   they   are   continuing   to   target
businessmen, industrialists and  entrepreneurs  with  a  view  to  obtaining
financial resources with which to pay their own soldiers. Thus a person  who
was able to show that in Nepal he ran a business or was an industrialist  or
entrepreneur may on the facts of an individual case, be able to show a  real
risk of persecution/serious harm/treatment contrary to Article  3  in  their
home area. Whilst we accept that there continue to be raids and  attacks  on
governmental and non-governmental organisations, this  does  not  appear  to
involve any consistent pattern of targeting of those who  are  officials  in
these organisations.

Internal relocation

49. It is not necessary to consider the  issue  of  internal  relocation  in
respect of all parts of Nepal. That  is  because  in  our  view  the  latest
background evidence clearly demonstrates that  in  Kathmandu,  the  capital,
the situation is stable and there is an effective system of  government  and
law. There is nothing to indicate that in  Kathmandu,  apart  from  isolated
incidents, Maoists are acting with impunity against residents of that  city.
In the event that Maoists were to threaten serious harm to an individual  or
individuals in  Kathmandu,  we  consider  the  authorities  there  would  be
willing and able to protect them against such harm. This  observation  would
generally  apply  to  businessmen,  industrialists  and   entrepeneurs.   We
emphasise here that we are describing only what we consider to be  generally
the case. We would not rule out that  in  an  exceptional  case  it  may  be
possible for a person under real threat from  Maoists  in  their  home  area
(assuming that is somewhere other than Kathmandu) to show  that  he  or  she
would not have a viable internal relocation  alternative  in  Kathmandu.  We
emphasise, however, that the case would have to  have  exceptional  features
turning very much on the particular circumstances of the individual's  case.


50. It may be that for those who face a real threat from  Maoists  in  their
home area there is another part (or other parts) of  the  country  to  which
they could relocate. But since, as we understand matters, all  returns  from
the UK would be to Kathmandu, it is the  issue  of  internal  relocation  in
this city that would be the normal starting-point  for  any  inquiry  as  to
whether a person could show either or both that he would continue to face  a
real risk of persecution (or the suffering  of  serious  harm)  or  that  he
could not reasonably be expected to stay in  that  city.  The  same  applies
when considering internal relocation in the context of Article 3 ECHR.

The appellant's case

51.  Given  the  careful  terms  in   which   the   panel   at   first-stage
reconsideration adjourned the case for further reconsideration,  we  do  not
consider it would be right, as Ms Leatherland  seemed  to  urge  at  certain
points, to undertake a  re-examination  of  the  Adjudicator's  findings  of
fact. In any event, in cross-examination the appellant was asked to  clarify
why he had not given consistent evidence previously in respect of  his  past
efforts to obtain protection from the authorities and we  are  satisfied  by
the explanation he gave. We are also satisfied by the  explanation  he  gave
of the circumstances in which he had gone into hiding. We do not think  that
Ms Leatherland's  point  about  the  implausibility  of  the  appellant  not
approaching other party members  for  help  in  obtaining  protection  is  a
strong one, since on the accepted evidence the appellant was leader  of  his
party locally and he had no close  links  with  party  officials  elsewhere.
Having considered his various accounts we are satisfied that  the  appellant
had been broadly consistent in stating that : (1)  in June 1999 he had  been
beaten unconscious by Maoists and had then  been  taken  to  hospital,  only
going to the police in Kaski afterwards; and (2) after the attack in  August
2002 he had gone to Kathmandu to complain to the police, leaving  that  city
straightway after they asked  him  to  leave.   Given  that  the  police  in
Kathmandu had not only failed to offer him protection  but  had  refused  to
let him lodge his complaint and that thereafter his thoughts were intent  on
getting out of Nepal, we consider that we should not seek to interfere  with
the finding made by the  Immigration  Judge  that  the  appellant  had  been
unable to access adequate protection in Nepal. We are prepared to assume  in
the appellant's favour, therefore, that by virtue of his experiences in  his
home area between 1999 and August 2002, he did suffer past  persecution  and
serious harm and treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

52. We approach his case on the basis, therefore, that the past  persecution
he experienced is a serious indication that he  would  continue  to  face  a
real risk of persecution or suffering of serious harm if returned.  We  also
bear in mind that he was a party activist who had been targeted  for  attack
by local Maoists because he was a  party  activist  and  that  he  had  been
unable to obtain protection when he had sought it. We accept  also  that  he
has no immediate family and in Pokhara has only relatives.

53. However, in our view this  history  of  persecution  is  far  from  been
determinative  in this case, as there are good reasons for considering  that
he would not any longer face a repetition of similar  acts.   Even  assuming
that on return to his  home  area  he  would  resume  his  activities  as  a
Congress party member and local leader there, it is clear that  the  Maoists
have moved away from their long-term strategy of  armed  struggle.  Although
they have not declared a permanent cease fire and  although  there  continue
to be some level of violations by Maoists of the  ceasefire,  these  are  no
longer  widespread  and  primarily  involve  actions  intended  to  forcibly
extract monies from wealthy members of the population. In  particular  there
is nothing to indicate that Maoists in areas such as  Pokhara,  even  though
there are still isolated incidents of attacks by  them  in  or  around  such
areas, would be any longer interested in disrupting Congress party  meetings
or targeting local Congress party officials, such as this appellant.

54. However, even if we had been  prepared  to  accept  that  the  appellant
would still face a real risk of severe harm in his home area, we  would  not
have accepted that it would give rise even to local persecution, as  we  are
satisfied that there are good reasons for considering that  the  authorities
in his home area would now be able and  willing  to  protect  him.  We  draw
attention once again to the wholly different position in which  the  interim
government  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Maoists  on  the  other  now  find
themselves, a situation in  which  the  Maoist  leadership  is  now  seeking
participation in the parliamentary process and does not want to  "return  to
the jungle".  These developments have greatly enhanced the  willingness  and
ability of the authorities, at least in those areas of Nepal  not  currently
controlled by the Maoists, to afford protection to local populaces.

55. Accordingly we do not consider that the  appellant  would  face  a  real
risk of persecution or serious harm or treatment contrary to  Article  3  in
his home area of Pokhara.

56. In such circumstances it is not necessary for us to  address  the  issue
of internal relocation in his case. However, even if we  had  considered  he
would still face a real risk of persecution in his home  area,  we  consider
he  would  clearly  have  a  viable  internal  relocation   alternative   in
Kathmandu. As we have already noted, there is no evidence  to  suggest  that
the Maoists are able to undertake violent or illegal  actions  in  Kathmandu
except in isolated incidents; the Maoists now have a legal presence  in  the
capital and that itself is a  strong  indication  that  the  authorities  no
longer view their presence as a threat to law and  order.  Even  if  we  had
considered that the Maoists would be intent on targeting  the  appellant  in
Kathmandu (something we find remotely unlikely),  we  would  have  concluded
that the authorities there would be both willing and  able  to  protect  him
against such action.  Furthermore, we are quite satisfied that it  would  be
reasonable to expect this appellant to relocate to Kathmandu. He  is  young,
relatively educated, has not particular health difficulties and is a  member
of one of the most influential parties in the current political system.

57. For the above reasons, we conclude:

   The Immigration Judge materially erred in law.

   The decision we substitute is to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal.  The
   appellant is not a refugee. He is not a person eligible for  humanitarian
   protection under the amended Immigration Rules and he  does  not  face  a
   real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR. There was no Article 8
   issue in this case.


   Signed:
   Dr H H Storey, Senior Immigration Judge

Appendix: Background Materials

Kingdom of Belgium CEDOCA Mission to Nepal, 21 January-9 February 2002

US State Department Report Nepal, 2001, March 4 2002

Amnesty International: A deepening human rights crisis, December 2002

Amnesty International: Nepal: Human rights abuses have reached
unprecedented level, 19 December 2002

Amnesty International: Nepal: A spiralling human rights crisis, 4 April
2002

US State Department Report 2002, 31 March 2003

US State Department Report 2003, 25 February 2004
CIPU Nepal Country Report April 2004

Global IDP Project: Nepal..., 8 September 2004

Amnesty International: Nepal: Escalating "disappearances" amid a culture of
impunity, 27 October 2004

Human Rights Watch: Between a Rock and a Hard Place, October 2004

Amnesty International: Nepal: Killing with impunity, February 2005

Home Office Country Information Bulletin: Nepal 1/2005 18 February 2005

CIPU Country of Origin (COI) Request on Freedom of Movement/Internal
Relocation, 27 July 2005

BBC News Country Profile 2 August 2005

Foreign and Commonwealth Travel Advice for Nepal-  23 September 2005

Human Rights Watch, Overview of human rights issues in Nepal, 31 December
2005

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
situation of human rights and the activities of her Office including
technical cooperation, in Nepal dated 16 February 2006

US Department of State Report on Nepal -2005, 8 March 2006

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
"Investigations into violations of international humanitarian law in the
context of attacks and clashes between the Communist Party of Nepal
(Maoist) and Government Security Forces: findings and recommendations
January -March 2006

Amnesty International Press Release: Nepal: Human rights crucial at
dangerous political crossroads, 23 March 2006

ekantipur.com: items on Nepal 8, 11, 15, 1618, 22, 27, 29, 30 May 2006;  2,
3,4,6,7 June 2006

People's News Review Weekly, 12 June 2006

Amnesty International: Nepal: Solidarity brings prospect of permanent
peace, 14 June 2006

Home Office Operational Guidance Note Nepal v4.O 3 July 2006
The Hindu, 4, 28 July 2006

IRIN News.org 4 August 2006

2006 Guardian Unlimited, "Nepal...", 7 August 2006

GlobalSecurity.org: Insurgency in Nepal, 14 August 2006

International News Safety Institute (INSI)  update 14 August 2006


NB. Except in relation to 2006, the above does not include a large number
of press cuttings covering 2002-2005.

Approved for electronic distribution
