








R (on the  application  of  Munyua)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Parties' responsibility to agree costs) [2017] UKUT 00078 (IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                    Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                                    Order



                       The Queen on the application of

                                   MUNYUA

                                  Applicant

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent






                  Before Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


Where judicial review proceedings are resolved by settlement,  the  parties
are responsible for doing all they can to agree costs, both as to liability
and amount, rather than leaving this to the decision of the Tribunal, which
is likely to carry its own penalty.




On reading the parties' costs submissions, I decide as follows:

1. Judge Plimmer granted permission on 23 August 2016 on the  basis  of  the
   evidence put in before the decision of 3  March  2016,  particularly  the
   letter of 21 May 2015. While she referred to  post-decision  evidence  as
   well, she made it clear that permission was not, and could not be granted
   on that basis, though she encouraged the parties to  reach  a  reasonable
   resolution in the light of it.

2. It follows that the further  evidence  did  not  lead  to  the  grant  of
   permission, though it may have had a good deal to do with how the parties
   went on with the case after that. The terms of the consent  order  sealed
   on 24 November 2016 show  that  the  remedy  achieved  by  the  applicant
   involved not the reconsideration of the decision under challenge  on  the
   basis of the material before the decision-maker; but a fresh decision  on
   fresh submissions.

3. I bear in mind the guidance in M v London Borough of Croydon [2012]  EWCA
   Civ 595, especially at paragraphs 52 - 65, and particularly  at  57.  The
   terms of the grant of permission make it clear  that  the  applicant  was
   fully entitled to bring this claim on the grounds  pleaded:  if  she  had
   chosen to pursue it on the grounds set out in the grant, costs would have
   followed the outcome.

4. However, both parties sensibly followed the judge's indication, and  some
   encouragement ought to be given for that to be done in future cases.  The
   respondent's letter of 30 September offered essentially  the  result  now
   achieved, but with no order as to costs. The letter of 7 November made an
   offer in the same or very similar terms to the consent order,  and  there
   is nothing to suggest any unreasonable delay on the part of the applicant
   in taking it up.

5. I should like at this point to  draw  both  parties'  attention  to  what
   Stanley Burnton LJ said at paragraphs 75 - 77 of  the  Croydon  decision:
   there are too many cases in which courts, or now this Tribunal, are  left
   to decide the question of costs, because the parties have found that  the
   easiest solution from their own point of view. While  resolution  of  the
   substantive issues is to be encouraged, it is also necessary to encourage
   the actual resolution of costs issues, if judicial  time  is  not  to  be
   spent on them which could better be  used  in  dealing  with  substantive
   issues in other cases.

6. While I do not aim to give any comprehensive  guidance  as  to  how  this
   should be done, in this case an offer by the respondent in the letter  of
   30 September in the terms put forward, but including an offer of costs up
   to and including the grant of permission, would  most  likely  have  been
   accepted. If not, it would certainly have put the applicant  at  risk  of
   paying the respondent's costs from then on.

7. The result is that the respondent is to pay  the  applicant's  reasonable
   costs to date, to be assessed if not agreed. However on  this  I  repeat,
   with even greater force, my reference to what Stanley Burnton  said:  any
   unreasonable failure  by  the  parties  to  reach  an  agreement  between
   themselves is likely to be penalized in costs.
                                                                       [pic]
                                               (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                  25.01.2017



