
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



AH (Failed asylum seekers - involuntary returns) Eritrea CG [2006] UKAIT
00078


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Determination Promulgated|
|On 14 August 2006                       |                         |
|and 9  October 2006                     |27 November 2006         |
|                                        |                         |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                       Senior Immigration Judge Latter
                               Mrs R M Bray JP


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:               Mr M Jackson, Counsel
For the Respondent:           Miss S Leatherland, Presenting Officer (14
                       August 2006)
                                            Mr M Chamberlain, Counsel (9
October 2006)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Neither involuntary returnees nor failed asylum seekers are as such  at
    real risk on return to Eritrea.  The country guidance on this issue  in
    IN (Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea CG [2005] UKIAT 00106 and
    KA (Draft related risk categories  updated)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
    00165 is confirmed. NB: This decision should be  read  with  WA  (Draft
    related risks updated - Muslim Women) Eritrea CG [2006] UKAIT 00079

1.      This is the reconsideration of the appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision to remove the appellant as  an  illegal  entrant  made  on  22
    October 2004 following  the  decision  that  he  was  not  entitled  to
    asylum.   The appeal was originally heard by an  Adjudicator,  Mr  J.P.
    McClure, on 24 January 2005. He dismissed the appeal on both asylum and
    human rights grounds.  Permission to appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal was granted on 15  March  2005.   By  virtue  of  transitional
    provisions the appeal proceeded by way of a reconsideration.

2.      Following  a  hearing  on  8  December  2005  the  Tribunal  (Senior
    Immigration Judge Mackey, Mr S.J. Widdup and Mrs E. Morton)  held  that
    the Adjudicator had made a material error of law.  Its reasons were  as
    follows:

      "1.   Permission was granted by a Vice President  of  the  Immigration
      Appeal  Tribunal  and  the  matter  now   comes   before   us   as   a
      reconsideration under the transitional arrangements.  The Appellant is
      a national of Eritrea and seeks reconsideration of  the  determination
      of an Adjudicator Mr John  P  McClure  which  was  promulgated  on  15
      February 2005, wherein he dismissed an appeal against  a  decision  of
      the Respondent, who had refused leave to enter and  asylum  and  human
      rights claims.


      2.    The Vice President in granting permission stated that:

          "Arguments are advanced on the generalised  risks  on  return  in
          ground 2 and these may merit  further  scrutiny.   Criticism  was
          made of various country guideline cases including SE [2004] UKIAT
          00295."


      3.    It is to be noted at the outset that the determination in SE was
      withdrawn as a country guidance determination in May 2004 [in fact May
      2005].


      4.    We asked the parties to address  us  firstly  on  the  issue  of
      whether there was a material error of law in the determination of  the
      Adjudicator.


      The Appellant's Submissions


      5.    Mr Jackson  stated  that  he  adopted  the  grounds  which  were
      presented in support of the application  for  permission.   The  risks
      "per se" are set out between paragraphs 3 and 17 of those grounds.


      6.    He submitted that the Adjudicator  had  failed  to  address  the
      lengthy arguments that had been put up by him as  Counsel  before  the
      Adjudicator on the risks to this Appellant as a failed  asylum  seeker
      who, it would appear, would be forcibly returned to Eritrea.  He noted
      that there was some reference to arguments he  had  presented  between
      paragraphs 26 and 29 of the determination but  that  these  failed  to
      address the lengthy  criticisms  that  he  made  in  relation  to  the
      Tribunal determinations in SE and GY [2004] UKIAT 00327. At  paragraph
      26 the Adjudicator had referred to paragraph 27 of the decision in  SE
      stating that "it is made clear that mere returnees are not  at  risk."
      The Adjudicator had also gone on to note that SE  considered  the  May
      2004  Amnesty  International  Report.   Mr  Jackson   submitted   that
      unfortunately this overlooked a critical distinction that needed to be
      made between a mere returnee  and  a  failed  asylum  seeker  who  was
      forcibly being returned to Eritrea.  He submitted that the Adjudicator
      had failed to give the detailed consideration to this issue  that  was
      required.  In the hearing before the Adjudicator, as set  out  in  his
      grounds, he had  challenged  the  findings  in  paragraph  26  of  the
      determination in SE stating that it had a lack of rigour as it omitted
      to specifically address the potential  problems  for  those  who  were
      forcibly returned.  He advised us that he  had  given  submissions  on
      this issue for more than twenty minutes before the  Immigration  Judge
      and the arguments, as set out in the grounds, had been  fully  covered
      with the Adjudicator.  Unfortunately they were simply not picked up at
      all  in  the  conclusions  of  the  Adjudicator.   Some  reference  at
      paragraph 57 was made but again the Adjudicator had failed to  address
      the very serious issues and challenges  that  had  been  made  to  the
      determinations in SE and GY.  In this situation, particularly  as  the
      supporting information set out in the Amnesty International Report  of
      May 2004, which had also been before the  Adjudicator,  had  indicated
      that such persons who were forcibly returned "would particularly be at
      risk". He submitted that this was a very  categoric  statement.    His
      submissions to the Adjudicator on this point, and his challenge to the
      validity of the determination in SE that flowed from this, simply were
      overlooked by the Immigration Judge.  This he submitted was a material
      error of law.


      The Respondent's Submissions


      7.    Mr O'Leary submitted that the Adjudicator  did  appear  to  have
      covered the evidence that was before him by  making  reference  to  it
      between paragraphs 26 and 30.  He submitted it was not  necessary  for
      the Adjudicator to cover in detail all of  the  submissions  that  had
      been put to him and that his conclusions, reached in the round,  could
      therefore be seen as sustainable.   He  asked  us  to  note  that  the
      determinations in GY and SE had been considered  by  the  Adjudicator,
      along with the objective evidence that was mentioned.  The Adjudicator
      had  found  the  Appellant  largely  lacking   in   truthfulness   and
      accordingly had given no weight to his claim that he was a deserter or
      that he would be at risk as a returnee.  He agreed  that  more  detail
      may have assisted but submitted that the decision  itself  was  not  a
      perverse or unreasonable one.  The Adjudicator had relied on SE, which
      at that time was good law, and possibly  still  continued  to  be  so.
      Indeed he submitted that the situation for returnees had  not  altered
      and  had  been  reinforced  in  the  very  recent   country   guidance
      determination in KA (Draft Related Risk Categories Updated) Eritrea CG
      [2005] UKIAT 00165 promulgated 25 November 2005.  In this situation he
      submitted we should uphold the decision.


      8.    In reply Mr Jackson submitted that SE was not authority  on  the
      issue of failed asylum seekers and paragraph 27 of that  determination
      did not engage with the issue of forced returnees.  Most of that  case
      was  about  risks  to  deserters.   The  reasoning   within   SE   was
      substantively  flawed  particularly  by  reference  to  the  objective
      material and the failure to consider the  arguments  in  that  regard.
      Accordingly  that  rendered  the  determination  of  this  Adjudicator
      substantially flawed.  He referred us, as an example, to  the  reports
      of the  returnees  from  Malta  which  were  covered  in  the  Amnesty
      International Report (page 120 of the  bundle).   That  report  stated
      that some 95 of the persons returning  were  civilians  and  not  army
      deserters, indeed they amounted to some 43% of  the  total  number  of
      forced  returnees.   However  that  43%  continued  to   be   detained
      incommunicado and gave clear evidence of the  burden  of  proof  being
      established at the lower standard.


      9.     The  decision  and  reasoning  therefore   was   perverse   and
      unreasonable in the light of the submissions presented.


      10.  At this point we briefly adjourned to consider the error  of  law
      point.


      Conclusions on Error of Law Point


      11.   After very careful consideration of the grounds submitted by the
      parties, and the determination of the Adjudicator together with  their
      own study of the determinations in GY and SE, we conclude  that  there
      has been a material error of law  on  the  part  of  the  Adjudicator.
      There has been a failure to consider the substantive arguments of  the
      Appellant on the position of failed asylum seekers who are  forced  to
      return to Eritrea and their risks on return.


      12.  We then considered whether we  should  go  on  to  determine  the
      matter ourselves and hear further  submissions  or  evidence.   Before
      doing this we gave some consideration to the very recent determination
      in KA, which, on the face of it, appeared to state that  it  confirmed
      previous decisions that "returnees are not generally at  risk."   That
      decision also, specifically addressed that issue between paragraphs 54
      and 59.  From our brief consideration of those paragraphs we  are  not
      fully satisfied that the distinction  raised  by  Mr  Jackson  between
      "mere returnees" and "failed asylum seekers who are forcibly returned"
      is determinatively spelt out.  We therefore concluded  that  the  most
      appropriate action for us to take was to adjourn this matter  for  the
      continuation hearing where that issue could be specifically addressed,
      particularly in the light of the very detailed and related issues  set
      out in KA.  We therefore direct that a for mention hearing be held  at
      a mutually convenient date either before the end of the year or  early
      after the New Year vacation.  At the for mention hearing  all  of  the
      issues that are to be considered can be settled and estimates  of  the
      time,  necessity  for  interpreters  and  other  relevant   supporting
      information can be settled.  It appeared appropriate to  us  that  the
      matter should be set down before a  full  legal  panel  so  that  this
      somewhat  specific  issue,  upon  which  country  guidance  would   be
      valuable, could be settled."

Further Directions on the Country Guidance Issue

3.      Following that hearing there was a directions hearing  on  14  March
    2006 at which directions  were  given  for  the  second  stage  of  the
    reconsideration so that the Tribunal, if appropriate,  would  be  in  a
    position to give country guidance on the issue of whether failed asylum
    seekers  forcibly  returned  to  Eritrea  (as  opposed   to   returning
    voluntarily)  would  be  for  that  reason  alone  at  real   risk   of
    persecution.   This  issue  arises  directly  in  this  appeal  as  the
    adjudicator found that the appellant would not be at risk on account of
    his religion or as a suspected  deserter  or  draft  evader.   In  this
    determination the Tribunal will consider whether in the  light  of  the
    current evidence the country guidance on  this  issue  set  out  in  IN
    (Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea CG [2005] UKIAT 00106 and KA
    (Draft related risk categories updated) Eritrea CG [2005]  UKAIT  00165
    should be reviewed.  The relevant country guidance at the date  of  the
    hearing before the adjudicator was SE (Deportation -  Malta  -  2002  -
    general risk) Eritrea [2004] UKIAT 00295 (a country guidance case  from
    3 November 2004 until 24 May 2005 when it was superseded by IN).

Background
4.      The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea  born  in  January  1974.   He
    claims to have entered the United Kingdom on 30  August  2004  using  a
    passport provided by an agent to which he was not entitled. He  claimed
    asylum on 31 August 2004. His application was refused for  the  reasons
    set out in the respondent's reasons for refusal letter dated 19 October
    2004.   He had based his claim on being a Pentecostal Christian and  on
    the basis that he would be viewed by  the  Eritrean  authorities  as  a
    draft evader. The respondent did not find the appellant's account to be
    credible and his application was refused.

5.      He appealed to an  Adjudicator  and  his  appeal  was  heard  on  24
    January 2005.   The first limb of the appellant's claim was that he had
    converted and become a member  of  the  Pentecostal  Church  whilst  in
    Eritrea.  He said that he had carried out  his  military  service  from
    1994 onwards for a period of about eighteen months. He then returned to
    Asmara and worked as a lorry driver. In 1998 the unresolved border  war
    between Eritrea and Ethiopia led to the appellant  being  recalled  for
    further military service.  It  was  while  in  the  military  that  the
    appellant met a member of the Pentecostal  Church.   He  says  that  he
    converted in May 2001.    He claimed that in April 2004 he  was  caught
    reading the Bible  and  then  imprisoned  for  three  months.   He  was
    released when he signed an agreement not  to  practise  his  faith  any
    more.  He was allowed to visit his uncle. He told him that he could  no
    longer serve the government and asked his uncle for  help  so  that  he
    could leave Eritrea.  An agent was found and arrangements were made for
    the appellant's departure. He left Eritrea on 20 July  2004  travelling
    to Sudan where he remained until 28 August 2004.   He  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 29 August 2004, claiming asylum on 31 August 2004.

6.      The Adjudicator  did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  He was not satisfied that the appellant had converted to  the
    Pentecostal religion as he claimed.   He  also  rejected  the  evidence
    about the appellant's military service.  He was satisfied that  he  may
    well have served a significant period of time in the army and  that  he
    would have completed his military service.   The  Adjudicator  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant  would  be  of  further  interest  to  the
    Eritrean authorities. He would not be viewed as a deserter nor in point
    of fact was he a deserter from the army.  The Adjudicator said that  he
    was not satisfied that if this appellant  were  returned  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker he would be viewed as a person who had deserted from  the
    army and as such the Adjudicator was not satisfied that he  would  have
    any adverse interest from the authorities, whether by reason merely  of
    him being a failed asylum seeker or  otherwise.    On  this  basis  the
    appeal was dismissed on both asylum and human rights grounds.

7.      At the hearing of the second stage  of  the  reconsideration  before
    this Tribunal the appellant produced a bundle of documents (A)  indexed
    and paginated A1-E7 and 1-289.  This bundle  includes  expert  reports,
    background evidence and a number  of  Tribunal  determinations.     The
    respondent produced three bundles R1, R2 and R3 setting out  background
    evidence and determinations. At the adjourned hearing on 9 October 2006
    a witness statement was produced from Mr James Bennett of  the  Country
    Specific Asylum Policy Team dated 6  October  2006  with  a  number  of
    attached documents. After the hearing was concluded a  statement  dated
    16 October 2006 was produced from Mr Nic  Carlyle  of  the  Country  of
    Origin Information service providing further information about  flights
    to Asmara from the United Kingdom and Europe  including  the  route  of
    travel and the frequency of flights.   A  full  list  of  the  reports,
    documents and determinations produced are set out in the Annex to  this
    determination.

The evidence of Dr June Rock
8.        The   Tribunal   heard   evidence   from   Dr   Rock,   a   senior
    lecturer/research fellow at the Centre for Development Studies and  the
    School of Politics and  International  Studies  at  the  University  of
    Leeds.  Her report is at A, E1-4 and her qualifications and  experience
    at E5-7.  She was asked to comment on the risk on return to Eritrea  of
    a person forcibly returned as a failed asylum seeker and to consider in
    particular whether, if a person had  commenced  military  service,  the
    authorities' records would confirm this, the likelihood that  a  person
    would be able to leave the country illegally and what the  terms  would
    be of leaving legally and the consequences of  breaching  those  terms.
    She was also asked to advise on the consequences of leaving  illegally,
    of claiming asylum abroard and of not paying the diaspora tax.

9.      Her report  can  briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.   She  refers
    firstly to the fate of the 223 Eritreans  who  were  forcibly  returned
    from Malta in September 2002 and the 100 Eritreans deported from  Libya
    on 12 July 2004.  She also refers to the arrest and detention  of  four
    army deserters deported from Djibouti on 7 January  2005.   It  is  her
    view that  the  indiscriminate  treament  of  these  returnees  clearly
    suggests a real risk of  detention  or  worse  for  all  failed  asylum
    seekers whether viewed as draft  evaders/deserters  or  otherwise.   To
    confirm her view she reports that she has spoken  with  several  former
    Eritrean colleagues who all assure her that 'failed asylum seekers  are
    viewed by the authorities as opponents of the government and can expect
    to face arrest and detention on return'.  One source has told her  that
    "he knows of at least six failed asylum seekers deported from the US in
    2002 who were immediately detained on return and remain  in  detention,
    their whereabouts unknown". This is taken from the affidavit of support
    from witness W (referred to again in paragraph 11 below).

10.    Dr Rock says that in Eritrea military service  officially  lasts  for
    eighteen months but  in  practice  it  can  be  extended  indefinitely.
    Given the appellant's age together with the fact that he was  allegedly
    still in the army, it is her view that it is highly  unlikely  that  he
    would have been granted an exit visa and he would almost certainly face
    the risk of detention on return.  She restates  her  view  that  asylum
    claimants are viewed as opponents of the government and risk  detention
    on return.  Eritreans in the diaspora are required to pay 2% income tax
    to maintain their inherited family rights to  land,  housing,  business
    licences and other properties within Eritrea.   Failure  to  pay  these
    taxes results in the loss of these rights.  Dr  Rock  has  no  personal
    knowledge of what statistics are available for the  numbers  of  forced
    returnees.  She says that she is forced to conclude  that  there  is  a
    real risk of detention on return for all failed asylum seekers.

11.    In her oral evidence she confirmed the contents of her report.    She
    had not found any other expert who  had  been  aware  of  any  forcible
    returns save for a source we will identify solely  as  W  in  order  to
    preserve anonymity.  W has provided an affidavit of support setting out
    the circumstances in which he left Eritrea and was granted asylum.   It
    is his view that anyone who has left the country  and  is  in  the  age
    range of 18-60 would if returned be put in prison as the returnee would
    be a reserve even if not in the army.  The witness adds that  virtually
    everybody is a  hostage.   He  refers  to  relatives  who  were  caught
    crossing the border to a neighbouring country.  He also refers  to  six
    failed asylum seekers including five male forced deportees  aged  21-24
    deported from the USA in 2002 when he was still in Eritrea.  They  were
    immediately detained on return, their whereabouts unknown and they  are
    still in prison.  Dr Rock confirms that she cannot find anyone else who
    knows of any forced returns to Eritrea.   She  was  not  aware  of  any
    individual returns.

12.    In cross-examination Dr Rock accepted that she  may  not  have  heard
    about individual returns.  Amnesty was not allowed into Eritrea and the
    only information came by word of mouth.   Agencies operating in Eritrea
    could not criticise the government or get  information  from  it.   She
    regarded the comments of W as objective. He was someone who  wanted  to
    go back but took the view that the Eritrean government had betrayed the
    people. The six returnees he referred to had gone back in 2002.  W  was
    not an outspoken critic of the  government  as  he  had  a  family  and
    friends in Eritrea.

13.    The media in Eritrea was government controlled. The whole  population
    between 18 and 60 would be perceived  as  reserves.  The  EPLF  were  a
    highly disciplined organisation. Anyone opposing it would  be  seen  as
    opposed to the state.  She was asked if someone who had completed their
    military service could make a voluntary return.  She  said  that  there
    was no evidence to suggest this.   People were  forced  into  the  army
    after severe beatings.  No one would be seen as having completed  their
    military service.

14.    In answer to questions from the Tribunal Dr Rock  accepted  that  she
    had no idea how many people were able to leave  Eritrea  save  that  it
    would only be those trusted by  the  government.    She  had  read  the
    reports of voluntary returns from Sudan under  the  protection  of  the
    UNHCR.  A returnee would be suspected of  being  a  draft  evader.  She
    accepted that long  term  asylum  seekers  were  going  back  to  visit
    Eritrea. She said this was a difficult issue but they could go  in  and
    out but not if they had left Eritrea since the war began in 1998.   The
    issue then was whether they had left illegally or not.      Anyone  who
    had left illegally who went to the Eritrean Embassy for papers would be
    questioned.    The Eritrean government kept records of  dissidents.  It
    was Dr Rock's view that failed asylum seekers could come under risk  of
    general suspicion and detention on return.

15.    In re-examination she  said  that  Eritrea  had  local  neighbourhood
    committees, the kebeles.  They were run by the government and political
    zealots  would  know  the  history  of  everyone.   There   were   very
    sophisticated  records  in  addition  to   a   sophisticated   security
    apparatus.

The report of Dr Gaim Kibreab
16.    Dr Kibreab's background and qualifications are set out at D19-25  and
    his report is at  D1-18.    He  refers  to  the  thirty  years  war  of
    independence and the high ideals of the EPLF which promised to create a
    pluralistic   constitutional   government.     However,   instead    of
    implementing  those  ideals,  the  government  has  severely  curtailed
    political opposition and a number of basic human rights to  the  extent
    that Dr Kibreab describes it as a tyrannical regime in which  power  is
    exercised  without  constitutional  restraint.      In  his  view   the
    government's tyranny  is  becoming  worse  from  year  to  year.   When
    commenting on the risk on return to failed asylum seekers he says  that
    his knowledge is mainly based on the  experiences  of  those  who  were
    forcibly deported from Malta to Libya as well as  individual  Eritreans
    caught in the act of fleeing to Sudan or Ethiopia.    He says  that  if
    individuals caught fleeing are persecuted, a failed  asylum  seeker  is
    likely to face a greater risk of torture and  inhuman  treatment.  This
    would be because on top of evasion and desertion,  such  a  person  has
    demonstrably been disloyal to his country and government.

17.    His report says that  although  all  failed  asylum  seekers  face  a
    generalised risk on  return,  it  is  necessary  to  make  distinctions
    between the different categories. The reason why a distinction  may  be
    necessary is because even though all failed asylum seekers  face  risks
    of persecution, the scale of the risks are likely to vary depending  on
    the gravity of the crime as perceived by the government.  He identifies
    at D12-13 of his  report  twenty-four  categories  who  face  risks  on
    return. We need not set out the list in full but sufficient to note for
    the purposes of this determination that  the  first  eleven  categories
    relate in substance to military service and the following  thirteen  to
    members of particular religious organisations, political parties, human
    rights activists and others who might be perceived to be  opponents  of
    the government together with persons beyond  the  eligibility  age  who
    left Eritrea both legally and illegally.  It is  his  view  that  every
    failed asylum seeker would face a rigorous questioning regime and  that
    in a large majority of cases they  would  be  transferred  to  an  army
    prison for interrogation.  He says that returnees who fall into certain
    categories (1-7 and 12-21 of the list of  24)  face  imminent  risk  of
    persecution. He comments that the fact that the reports do not directly
    mention failed asylum seekers and that he has not heard about the risks
    that individual failed asylum seekers face  does  not  mean  that  they
    would be  treated  any  differently  from  political  prisoners,  draft
    evaders and deserters caught fleeing the country.

The written evidence from Mr Bennett
18.    Mr Bennett is employed by the Immigration Nationality Directorate  as
    a  country  policy  officer  covering  sub-Saharan   Africa   including
    Eritrea.   He confirms that there were two removals to Eritrea in  2005
    from the United Kingdom and two further removals in the period  January
    to June 2006.  These returnees were nationals of Eritrea and held valid
    identity documentation.     He  produces  statistics  of  returns  from
    mainly EU states showing two returns from Canada, Germany  and  thirty-
    nine voluntary and three involuntary from Sweden.   In  2006  the  only
    returns apart from the two from  the  United  Kingdom  have  been  nine
    voluntary returns from Sweden. He produces a UNHCR briefing note  dated
    15 August 2006 referring to the repatriation of Eritrean refugees  from
    Sudan passing the 50,000 mark and bringing to 50,479 the  total  number
    of returns to Eritrea since  the  beginning  of  the  voluntary  return
    operation in May 2005.   These figures need to be set in the context of
    the UNHCR organised voluntary repatriation programme in which more than
    118,000 refugees have returned since 2000.

The written evidence of Mr Carlyle

19.    This evidence confirms that there are no  direct  flights  to  Asmara
    from the United Kingdom.  However, indirect flights are  available  via
    Cairo, Milan and Rome.  There are also flights from  Sanaa  and  Jedda.
    According to information posted on a website "Virtual Tourist" in March
    2004 about flights to Asmara it is said that  getting  to  Eritrea  can
    sometimes be difficult because there are not that many flights and they
    are often fully booked  a  long  time  ahead  and  that  "the  Eritrean
    diaspora has led to many Eritreans travelling. Especially  true  during
    Christian and Muslim holiday times".

Submissions
20.    Mr Jackson submitted that the appeal should be allowed on  the  basis
    that the appellant if returned as a failed asylum seeker would  have  a
    political opinion imputed to him and be ill-treated as a  result.    In
    Eritrea the position was that  once  conscripted,  always  conscripted.
    There had been no voluntary returns in recent times. The  fate  of  the
    Maltese returnees emphasised the risk even to those  not  suspected  of
    being deserters.  If a returnee was detained it was  standard  practice
    that they would be ill-treated.   The respondent could not point to any
    examples of a returnee not being subjected to ill-treatment on  return.
    He submitted that the objective evidence painted a vivid picture  of  a
    paranoid government.   The very act of  claiming  asylum  abroad  would
    demonstrate an opposition to the regime.  There was no evidence of  any
    significant demobilisation. The regime ruled by force  and  fear.   The
    position had clearly changed since the Tribunal's determination in  SE.
     Given the objective evidence and the pattern of persecution and  ill-
    treatment of returnees, anyone forcibly returned would  be  at  a  real
    risk of ill-treatment.

21.    Mr Chamberlain reminded  us  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    Adjudicator's findings of fact that the appellant was not  someone  who
    had converted to the Pentecostal faith, nor had he been found to  be  a
    deserter.  The appeal related solely to the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk as a returned  failed  asylum  seeker.   The
    recent reported and Country Guidance cases had all held that there  was
    no such risk.  He submitted that there was no adequate futher  evidence
    to justify the Tribunal taking a different course.   Neither  the  oral
    evidence of Dr Rock nor the report of Dr Kibreab  added  materially  to
    the evidence previously available.   Dr Kibreab's report was  primarily
    based on the experiences of asylum  seekers  deported  from  Malta  and
    Libya; this evidence had been considered extensively by the Tribunal in
    IN and KA.  Dr Kibreab's report was premised on the assumption that the
    appellant  was  a  deserter  but  this  was  not  the  finding  of  the
    Adjudicator.    Similarly, Dr Rock's evidence was  primarily  based  on
    matters which had been  considered  already  by  the  Tribunal  in  the
    country guidance cases.  The report  placed  considerable  emphasis  on
    assuming the appellant to be a deserter.   It was accepted  that  there
    had only been a very small number of returns to Eritrea in 2005 and the
    majority were voluntary returns.   The problems of returns  arose  from
    the fact that the majority of Eritrean  failed  asylum  seekers  lacked
    valid identity papers  and  the  Eritrean  authorities  applied  strict
    documentation criteria and would not grant entry to returnees  who  did
    not have valid documents.

Consideration of the issues
22.    As the Tribunal  has  decided  that  the  original  Tribunal  made  a
    material error of law, we must now consider whether the  appeal  should
    be allowed or dismissed. We also  note  that  on  9  October  2006  the
    Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006 came into force.  These regulations implement in  part
    EU  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  on  minimum   standards   for   the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees.  By virtue of regulation 1(2) we  are  obliged  to
    apply these regulations to all pending  appeals.   However,  there  has
    been no submission that the new regulations have any  material  bearing
    on this appeal.

23.    The issue of whether a failed asylum seeker  for  that  reason  alone
    will face a real risk of persecution on return  to  Eritrean  has  been
    considered in a number of authorities.   At the time when  this  appeal
    was heard the leading authority was SE which explains why  the  grounds
    of appeal in this case take the form of a sustained  challenge  to  the
    Tribunal's reasoning in that appeal.   However,  there  have  been  two
    subsequent country guidance cases, IN and KA,  both  still  current  in
    which there was a comprehensive review of the evidence relating to  the
    situation in Eritrea. The general approach of  the  Tribunal  in  these
    determinations was approved by the Court of  Appeal  in  Ariaya  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 48.

24.    In IN at paragraph 44 (vii), the Tribunal held that:

             'The evidence does not support a proposition that there  is  a
             general risk for all returnees.  The determinations in SE  and
             GY are confirmed in this respect.  Insofar as they dealt  with
             the risk arising from the evasion of  military  service,  they
             have been superseded by further evidence  and  on  this  issue
             should be read in the light of this determination.'

    The issue was considered again in KA which confirmed in its conclusions
    in paragraph 113 (c) that:

             'The Tribunal  continues  to  take  the  view  that  returnees
             generally are not at real risk  of  persecution  or  treatment
             contrary to Article  3.   We  do  not  consider  it  has  been
             substantiated that failed asylum seekers would be regarded  by
             the  Eritrean  authorities  as  traitors  and  ill-treated  in
             consequence.'

    We must now consider whether there is any  proper  basis  on  which  we
    should revise that view.

25.    In his report Dr Kibreab confirms not only the tyrannical  nature  of
    the Eritrean regime but also the fact that the situation at present  is
    getting worse from year  to  year.   When  dealing  in  his  report  at
    paragraph 4.0 (A. D10) with the risk on return to failed asylum seekers
    and the questioning regime at the port of entry he says:

             'Our knowledge concerning the real risks failed asylum seekers
             face at the port of entry is  mainly  based  on  the  gruesome
             experiences of those who are forcibly deported from Malta  and
             Libya, as well as individual Eritreans caught in  the  act  of
             fleeing  to  Sudan  or  Ethiopia.    The  way   the   Eritrean
             government treated the deportees from Malta and Libya is  well
             documented and shall not be repeated here.  In the  course  of
             my research, I have interviewed many family members, relatives
             and friends of Eritreans who were caught  by  the  army  while
             fleeing the country to evade conscription, to desert from  the
             army, or for fear of persecution on account of their  religion
             (membership  in   banned   evangelical   churches,   Jehovah's
             Witnesses  and  minority  Muslim  groups)  political  opinion,
             membership in or sympathy with banned political  organisations
             or for other reasons.   These interviews were conducted within
             and outside Eritrea.   The  interviewees  invariably  reported
             that although they knew that their  loved  ones  or  relatives
             were caught while trying to cross into Sudan or Ethiopia, they
             were unaware of their whereabouts. Most of them were not  even
             sure whether they were still alive.


             Are the risks individual failed asylum seekers face on  return
             identical to those risks faced by the failed  border  crossers
             and the deported from Libya and Malta? There is no  reason  to
             suggest otherwise.  Some of the deportees from Malta were  not
             evaders or  deserters.   That  was  why  those  who  were  not
             evaders, deserters and beyond the eligible age  were  released
             after some time.   All those who  were  of  eligible  age  and
             those who fled either to evade conscription or to desert  from
             the army are  still  languishing  incommunicado  detention  in
             unknown places and are most probably subjected to torture  and
             other forms of inhuman treatment.   The same is true of  those
             who are deported from Libya and those who are  caught  fleeing
             the country.  As we saw, in the first  part  of  this  report,
             torture  and  degrading  treatment  are  common  practice   in
             Eritrean detention centres and prisons.  Any person who  flees
             the country to evade conscription or to desert from  the  army
             and is either caught in the act  of  fleeing  or  is  returned
             because his/her application for asylum is rejected faces  real
             risk of persecution  upon return.'

26.    The report goes on to say (A. D 11):

             'Although all failed asylum seekers face generalised  risk  on
             return, it is still necessary to make distinctions between the
             different categories.  The  differences  between  the  various
             categories of failed asylum seekers may  emanate  partly  from
             their pre-flight age, status and activities  and  partly  from
             their political activities and positions  in  the  country  of
             asylum concerned,  e.g.  UK.  The  reason  why  a  distinction
             between different categories may be necessary is because  even
             though  all  failed  asylum  seekers  face   real   risks   of
             persecution, the  scale  of  the  risks  are  likely  to  vary
             depending on the gravity of the "crime" as  perceived  by  the
             government.  In the following 24 categories of  failed  asylum
             seekers who face varied risk on return are identified.'

27.    Despite the report's  reference  to  the  24  categories  of  "failed
    asylum seekers" (to which we have already referred in paragraph 17)  in
    our view when more closely examined these are not categories of  failed
    asylum seekers as such but are rather sub-categories of those  who  may
    be at risk on return. A number  of  the  categories  identified  by  Dr
    Kibreab, such as deserters, draft  evaders,  members  of  a  number  of
    minority churches and political  opponents,  have  been  found  by  the
    Tribunal in country guidance cases to be at real risk on return.

28.    Dr Kibreab says at paragraph 4.1 (A. D13) that  every  failed  asylum
    seeker forcibly returned would  face  a  rigorous  questioning  regime,
    adding that:

             'The central aim of this often hostile and violent questioning
             is  to  establish  the  identity  of  the  person  or  persons
             concerned,   when   she   left   the   country,   under   what
             circumstances, why and  how  as  well  as  to  document  their
             political activities and position in exile.   More often  than
             not, this may involve soliciting of information from  Eritrean
             embassies, PFDJ offices and individual agents aboard who  keep
             records, including photos and audio visual evidence  taken  in
             association with demonstrations or public meetings.'

29.    In our judgment this evidence when analysed carefully indicates  that
    the Eritrean authorities are  seeking  to  identify  those  of  adverse
    interest to them.  It does not support a finding that all failed asylum
    seekers forcibly returned are at  a  real  risk  of  persecution.   The
    purpose of the interrogation is not to establish  simply  whether  they
    have made a failed claim for asylum but whether  they  are  of  adverse
    interest because of their actual  or  perceived  political  activities,
    religion opinions or evasion of military or national service.

30.    We accept Mr Chamberlain's submission that Dr Kibreab's  report  does
    not add in any material way to the substance to the evidence considered
    by the Tribunal in IN and KA based as it is to a large  extent  on  the
    experience of  asylum  seekers  deported  from  Malta  and  Libya.   Dr
    Kibreab's opinion on  the  risks  to  the  appellant  is  based  on  an
    assumption that the appellant would be seen as a deserter.   He says in
    paragraph 9:


               "From [the appellant's] statement, it is clear that he  falls
             into the category of desertion.  If he is returned to  Eritrea,
             he is at real risk of persecution"

    However, this was not the finding of fact made by the Adjudicator.

31.    Dr Rock's evidence is also based  primarily  on  the  experiences  of
    asylum seekers deported from Malta, Libya and Djibouti.   It  is  clear
    that she also placed considerable weight on the risks to the  appellant
    as a perceived deserter. In paragraph 8 of her report she says:

             "Thus,  given  the  appellant's  age  (thirty-two  years   old)
             together with the fact that he was allegedly still in the army,
             it is highly unlikely that he would have been granted  an  exit
             visa and will almost certainly face the risk  of  detention  or
             worse as a deserter on return."

    If the Adjudicator had accepted that the appellant was at real risk  of
    being viewed as a deserter, we  would  agree  in  accordance  with  the
    guidelines in IN and KA that there would be a real risk of persecution.
    In substance it seems to us that the point Dr Rock was seeking to  make
    was that the Adjudicator was wrong to find that the appellant  was  not
    as a deserter  because  no-one  can  finally  complete  their  military
    service because  of  the  liability  to  recall  for  further  service.
    However, this is a challenge to the Adjudicator's findings of fact  and
    it has not been shown that there is any proper basis for a challenge on
    legal grounds to those findings.   We also note  from  Dr  Rock's  oral
    evidence her comment that she is aware of long  term  "asylum  seekers"
    returning to visit Eritrea and distinguishing between  those  who  left
    the country before 1998 and afterwards. Although  the  matter  was  not
    explored in evidence, in the light of the lapse of time certainly since
    1998, the likelihood is that those who return to visit  will  be  those
    who have been granted asylum or some form of subsidiary protection.  If
    it is the case that some people who have applied for asylum in the past
    are now able to return for a visit, this must inevitably undermine  any
    submission that all failed asylum seekers would be  at  risk.   If  not
    even all successful asylum seekers are at risk,  it  cannot  be  argued
    that all failed asylum seekers are at risk.

32.    We have been referred to the evidence from W who says that  he  knows
    of at least six failed asylum seekers including five male deportees who
    were detained on return from the United States. It is said  that  their
    whereabouts are unknown and that they had been in  prison  since  2002.
    We are not satisfied that this evidence adds anything of  substance  to
    the evidence of the Maltese and Libyan returns. There  is  no  adequate
    evidence as to the basis on which their claims were made or refused and
    we  cannot  draw  from  this  scant  evidence  a  conclusion  that  all
    involuntary returnees would be at risk.   The  evidence  from  Dr  Rock
    about the return  of  long-term  asylum  seekers  draws  a  distinction
    between those who left before or after 1998 war with Ethiopia.  In  our
    judgment  this  distinction  provides  further  confirmation  that  the
    Eritrean authorities' are not interested in returnees as such but  with
    those suspected of evading military service.

33.    We take  into  account  the  fact  that  there  have  been  very  few
    voluntary or involuntary returns from EU countries, Australia,  Canada,
    New Zealand and Norway in 2005 and 2006.  The  figures  appear  in  the
    annex to Mr Bennett's statement.  There were  two  asylum  removals  to
    Eritrea from the United Kingdom in 2005 and two in the  period  January
    to June 2006. These returnees held valid identity documentation.  Apart
    from the United Kingdom, only Canada (2), Germany (2)  and  Sweden  (48
    voluntary, 3 involuntary), have initiated returns  of  failed  Eritrean
    asylum seekers in this period (numbers as indicated in brackets). There
    is no evidence that those returnees, limited though  the  numbers  are,
    have been ill-treated on return.  We would  have  expected  that  there
    would be at least some evidence  or  report  of  any  ill-treatment  on
    return.

34.    We also note, although this is a very different category  of  return,
    the fact that there have been a substantial number of returns under the
    auspices of the UNHCR of Eritrean refugees  from  Sudan.  We  note  the
    following from the Africa Dialogue October 2005:

             'Between 2001 and 2004 some 121,000 Eritrean refugees returned
             to their homeland, the majority from Sudan.  The government of
             Sudan currently estimates  that  close  to  110,900  Eritreans
             remain in the country.   Many have been there since the 1960s,
             one of the longest refugee situations UNHCR has  ever  had  to
             deal with. Last year over 9,800 refuges  returned  to  Eritrea
             from Sudan, less than the UNHCR had planned for.'

35.    According to a tripartite agreement, the  organised  repatriation  to
    Eritrea ended on 31 December 2004. Those registered refugees who return
    to Eritrea on an individual basis in 2005 and 2006 receive  a  returnee
    package from the UNHCR upon arrival in their home  country.  The  UNHCR
    continues  its  presence  in  Eritrea  with  two  field  locations  for
    regintegration purposes and to ensure sustainable  reintegration.    In
    the UNHCR news stories dated 15 August 2006 there  is  a  report  of  a
    convoy  of  fifty-eight  passenger  buses  leaving  Sudan  for  Eritrea
    carrying 1,770 refugees into Eritrean under the escort of senior  UNHCR
    and Sudanese officials.    The convey is described as  the  biggest  of
    the year and the fourth out of twenty-five return movements planned  up
    to the end of June 2006.   The report continues:

             'It is  part  of  a  UNHCR  organised  voluntary  repatriation
             operation designed to assist Eritrean refugees  to  return  to
             their home country in  safety  and  dignity  after  more  than
             thirty years of exile in Sudan.  So  far,  more  than  118,000
             refugees have returned home  under  this  programme  since  it
             began in 2002 including more than 3,200 this year.'

36.    In the briefing notes dated 15 August 2006 it is reported that:

             'The repatriation of Eritrean refugees from Sudan  passed  the
             50,000 mark last weekend when the ninety-first convoy  in  the
             year old return operation crossed from the eastern Sudan  town
             of Kassala to Tesseney in western  Eritrea.    Sudan's  convoy
             took home 960 Eritrean returnees, the majority  of  them  from
             Port Sudan, Sudan's north eastern port city on  the  Red  Sea.
             This brought to 50,479 the total number of returns to  Eritrea
             since the beginning of the voluntary return operation  in  May
             last year.'

37.    We accept that  these  returns  are  being  made  in  very  different
    circumstances and under the protection of the  UNHCR  and  whilst  this
    evidence does not detract from the evidence about the risks to those of
    adverse interest to the Eritrean authorities, it does in our  judgment,
    particularly when taken with the evidence of returns  by  the  Eritrean
    diaspora, indicate that the mere fact of having left Eritrea  and  then
    returning does not of itself make a returnee of adverse interest to the
    authorities.

38.    We take into account the fact that these are  voluntary  returns  and
    the argument put by Mr Jackson is that  it  is  failed  asylum  seekers
    returned involuntarily who are at real risk.   However, the  fact  that
    these returns have taken place in such numbers  does  tend  to  confirm
    that the Eritrean authorities are concerned not with returnees as such,
    whether voluntary or involuntary, but with those of adverse interest to
    them for specific reasons. We are not satisfied that there is any basis
    taking into account the evidence as a whole for drawing  a  distinction
    between those who return voluntarily whether as visitors  or  otherwise
    and those returned involuntarily.

39.    In summary we are not satisfied that there is  any  proper  basis  in
    the evidence for taking a  different  view  of  the  risk  to  forcibly
    returned failed asylum seekers or to returnees generally from that  set
    out in IN and KA. The evidence does re-emphasise  the  reality  of  the
    risk to those who can bring themselves within the currently  identified
    risk categories but  it  does  not  support  an  abandonment  of  those
    categories as unnecessary on the basis that any Eritrean national known
    to have claimed asylum unsuccessfully for that reason alone  is  likely
    to be at risk on  return  as  a  perceived  opponent  of  the  Eritrean
    regime.  The focus in claims by Eritrean nationals must continue to  be
    on whether the individual appellant, in the  light  of  his  particular
    circumstances, background and profile, is at real risk  of  persecution
    on return.  For these reasons we confirm the conclusions set out in  IN
    and in particular in paragraph 113 of  KA  on  the  risk  generally  to
    failed asylum seekers.

Decision
40.    The Adjudicator did make a material error of  law.   Having  reviewed
    the evidence, we substitute a decision dismissing the appeal on asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.








Signed
   Date
Senior Immigration Judge Latter




                                    ANNEX


Expert Evidence

Report prepared by Dr Giam Kibreab 1 August 2006.

Report prepared by Dr June Rock 4 August 2006.

Reports submitted by appellant relating to country situation in Eritrea.

US State Department Country Report 8 March 2006.

US State Department Report, "Supporting Human Rights and Democracy" 5  April
2006.

European Parliament: Motion for a Resolution on Human Rights  Violations  in
Eritrea 15 November 2004

Human Rights Watch Country Report 18 January 2006.

Annual Report of US Commission on International Freedom 3 May 2006.

Amnesty International, "Eritrea Religious Persecution" 7 December 2005

Voice of America News, "Eritrea Orders Aid  Group  to  Stop  Activities.  23
March 2006.

International Press Institute, "2005 World Press Freedom  Review"  30  March
2006.

Committee to Protect Journalists, "Ten  most  Sensitive  Countries  (Eritrea
Excerpt) 2 May 2006.

Reporters Sans Frontieres, "Eritrea Annual Report 2006" 3 May 2006.

Interpress Service News Agency, 1 May 2006.

BBC News "Quick Exit: BBC Expelled from Eritrea", 10 September 2005.

Amnesty International "Eritrea you have no right to ask, government  resists
scrutiny on human rights" dated 19 May 2004.

Eritrea CIPU Report dated October 2004.

Royal African Society Lecture, "Refugees and African Development:  the  Case
of Eritreans in the UK", 14 July 2005.

The voice of  America  News:  "Eritrean  Reportedly  Detained  Relatives  of
Military Service Evaders" 29 July 2005.

Reuters: "Eritrea Detained Thirteen UN Staff, Thirty More in Hiding  UN"  14
February 2006

Middle East Times "Eritrea Free Nearly All  Detained  Local  UN  staff"   23
February 2006.

Reuters: "Eritrea Re-registering De-mobilised Soldiers"  23 February 2006.

COI Report Extract 28 April 2006.

COI Report, "Treatment of Returned Failed Asylum Seekers, 26 April 2006.

Human Rights Watch Letter 8 August 2005.

UNHCR letter re Validity of UNHCR Eritrea Position.  21 October 2005.

Home Office letter re Removals to Eritrea. 10 January 2006.

Home Office etter re Removals to Eritrea.  10 February 2006.

International  Organisation  for  Migration  letter  re  voluntary  assisted
return reintegration programme to Eritrea.   5 April 2006.

Swiss Refugee Council letter re Return of Failed Eritrean Asylum Seekers  to
Eritrea.
20 April 2006.

Amnesty International letter 21 April 2006.

Human Rights Watch letter 5 May 2006.

Reuters UNI's scaling back its Ethiopia/Eritrea Mission.  13 April 2006.

BBC News:  "Eritrea to Expel UN Peacekeepers".  17 December 2005.

EUN Threatens to pull out of Eritrea  Ethiopia  Border  Dispute.  5  January
2006.

BBC News: "Horn Stalemate Shocks UN Envoy".  7 April 2006.

Eritrea Daily.net "Eritrea: A Myth of Self Reliance".  9 May 2006.

News 24.com "Eritrea Arrests UN Staff" 11 May 2006.

UK Home Office Science and Research  Group  COIS  Eritrea  Bulletin.   March
2006
23 March 2006.

UN Economic and Social Council: "Civil and Political  Rights  including  the
Question of Religious Intolerance" 27 March 2006.

BBC News:  "Eritrea Targeting Permitted Churches"  20 April 2006.

Open Doors USA, "Tragedy in Eritrea Hundreds of Christians Held  in  Squalid
Prison Cells" 20 March 2006.

Compass Direct (USA) "Another Christian Pastor, Scores of Muslims Jailed  in
Eritrea". 19 April 2006.

BosNewsLife News Centre:  "Eritrea Jails Seventy Five Protestant  Conscripts
for Reading Bibles and Praying" 6 February 2006.

BosNewsLife News Centre:  "Eritrea  Arrests  Dozens  of  Church  Leaders"  8
January 2006.

Religious Persecution Eritrea August 2004.


Documents submitted by respondent relating to country situation in Eritrea

COIS Report Eritrea October 2005

COIS Report Eritrea April 2006.

Operational Guidance Note, Eritrea dated 5 May 2006.

US Department of State Report 2005,  dated 8 March 2006.

Returns of Failed Asylum Seekers to Eritrea in 2005 and 2006 by the UK and
by EU States and Others - undated annex to statement of Mr J Bennett 6
October 2006.

Africa dialogue October 2005 Update of main voluntary repatriation
operations in Africa in 2005.

UNHCR News Story:  Eritrea Receives the biggest group of Returnees: 15
August 2006.

UNHCR Briefing Notes, Eritrea: Returns from Sudan surpass 50,000, 15 August
2006.

COIS Country of Origin Information Request relating to flights to and from
Asmara 16 October 2006.


                                     ***
