
LS (Mut'a or sigh?) Iran [2007] UKAIT 00072

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Manchester
Date of Hearing: 25 May 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                         Immigration Judge De Haney
                           Immigration Judge McAll

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Bhatti, of Just Immigration Services
For the Respondent:          Mr O'Leary, Home Office Presenting Officer

The Islamic institution  of  mut'a  or  sigh?  is  in  its  essence  neither
permanent nor exclusive.  It is not  marriage  within  the  meaning  of  the
Immigration  Rules,  and  its  existence  does  not  imply  a   relationship
continuing or intended to continue beyond its termination.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran,  appealed  to  an  Immigration  Judge
    against the decision of the respondent on 3 October 2006  refusing  her
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  the  sponsor.
    The Immigration Judge dismissed her appeal.  The appellant  sought  and
    obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus the  matter  comes  before
    us.

 2. The sponsor came to the United Kingdom in June  2003  and  was  granted
    refugee status the following month.  Before leaving Iran he had entered
    into what has been called a "temporary marriage" with the appellant for
    a period from 15 March 2003 to 13 April 2006.  The sponsor has not,  we
    understand, seen the appellant since he  left  Iran.   He  has  made  a
    number of attempts to see her in either  Syria  or  Turkey,  but  those
    attempts have been unsuccessful because  the  appellant  has  not  been
    granted a visa to leave Iran.

 3. Following the expiry of the temporary marriage,  the  sponsor  went  to
    Turkey and, because the parties could not meet, he telephoned her  from
    there and it is said that the result of that telephone call was a valid
    further temporary marriage, the contract of which we have seen.  It was
    registered on 22 April 2006 and expired on 22 April 2007.  The date  of
    the decision was, as we have said, 3  October  2006,  that  is  to  say
    during the period of the  second  (claimed)  temporary  marriage.   The
    reasons for refusal set out in the notice of decision are extensive and
    are as follows.  First, the Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  281  of  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC  395  (which  relate  to
    entry clearance with a view to settlement as a spouse), because he  was
    not satisfied that she was married to the sponsor, nor that she and the
    sponsor had met,  nor  that  she  and  the  sponsor  intended  to  live
    permanently with each other as husband and wife, nor that the  marriage
    was subsisting, nor that there  would  be  adequate  accommodation  and
    maintenance for them without recourse to public funds.   Secondly,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 290 of the Immigration Rules  (which  relates
    to entry clearance for marriage and settlement) for the  same  reasons,
    with the exception that the objection that the parties are not  married
    does not apply in this case.  Thirdly, the Entry Clearance Officer  was
    not satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 352A
    of  the  Immigration  Rules  (which  relates  to  entry  clearance  for
    settlement as the spouse of a refugee), because he  was  not  satisfied
    that the parties were married or that any marriage did not  take  place
    after the sponsor left Iran  in  order  to  seek  asylum,  nor  was  he
    satisfied that each of the parties intended to  live  permanently  with
    the other as his or her spouse and that the  marriage  was  subsisting.
    The reasons given in the notice of decision  for  those  views  include
    that proxy marriages are not recognised in the United Kingdom and  that
    the sponsor appeared to him to have been in the United Kingdom when the
    second claimed temporary marriage  took  place.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer also took the view that the evidence  of  contact  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor during the three years  of  their  separation
    was inadequate to prove any genuine subsisting relationship.

 4. An explanatory statement issued for the purposes of the appeal contains
    the following further observations:

        "I can see that the appellant and sponsor have met  and  that  they
        intend to live together as they have now provided evidence of  them
        together and of an ongoing relationship.  The matter that remains a
        concern to me is now their legal relationship.  Whilst a  temporary
        marriage is legal in  Iran  the  temporary  marriage  entered  into
        expired and was only renewed when the sponsor was in the UK.  I  am
        not satisfied that the renewal has any legal validity therefore  as
        the sponsor was not present in a  country  where  either  proxy  or
        temporary marriage was recognised.  The appeal does not dispute the
        fact that the lack of maintenance and accommodation available,  but
        instead relies upon the application falling within  the  parameters
        of paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules.   Whilst  there  was  a
        relationship and temporary marriage before the sponsor's  flight  I
        am not satisfied that forming a temporary marriage is indicative at
        the time of an intention to live permanently together and therefore
        to form a new family unit.  No explanation has been offered  as  to
        why only a temporary marriage had been entered into and  I  am  not
        therefore satisfied that the appellant and sponsor formed a  family
        unit prior to  the  sponsor's  flight.   In  the  round  I  am  not
        satisfied that the appellant meets the  requirements  of  paragraph
        352A of the Immigration Rules.


        The application then has to be considered either as a spouse  or  a
        fianc�e.  Both of these categories carry a requirement to  be  able
        to  maintain  and  accommodate  the  appellant  from   within   the
        relationship without  recourse  to  additional  public  funds.   No
        evidence has been provided to show that this is the case.   I  have
        also taken account of the provisions of  Article  8  of  the  Human
        Rights Act.  I consider that refusing this application is justified
        and proportionate in the exercise of the  immigration  control.   I
        note that refusing this application will not interfere with  family
        life, for the purposes of Article 8(1) as I am not  satisfied  that
        you have formed a family unit and I am satisfied that  steps  could
        be made in the future which would enable the appellant to travel to
        the UK without having recourse to additional public funds."

 5. Paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules is,  so  far  as  material,  as
    follows:

      "352A.     The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
        enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  or  civil
        partner of a refugee are that:
              i) the applicant is married to  or  the  civil  partner  of  a
                 person granted asylum in the United Kingdom; and
             ii) the marriage or civil partnership did not take place  after
                 the person granted asylum left the country  of  his  former
                 habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and
             ...
             (iv) each of the parties intends to live permanently  with  the
                 other as his  or  her  spouse  or  civil  partner  and  the
                 marriage or civil partnership is subsisting; and
             ... ."

 6. Before the Immigration Judge there was no appearance by or on behalf of
    the respondent, who has thus been presumed to have relied solely on the
    arguments deployed  in  the  notice  of  refusal  and  the  explanatory
    statement.  The Immigration Judge considered the material  before  him,
    which included oral evidence from the sponsor.  He noted that, in order
    to succeed in this appeal, the appellant needed to show either that she
    was married to  the  sponsor  or  that  she  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 290.  If the appellant  was  at  the  date  of  the  decision
    married to the sponsor, then, if her marriage pre-dated  the  sponsor's
    departure from Iran she might succeed under paragraph 352A; but, if her
    marriage post-dated the sponsor's departure, she could be  admitted  if
    she met only the requirements of paragraph 281.  In that  context,  the
    material parts of his determination are as follows:

      "41.  However, I am faced with the fact that the  temporary  marriage
             has expired.  It is a matter of fact that the  second  marriage
             document was not signed by the Sponsor and  had  to  have  been
             signed by proxy.  This would have been a new temporary marriage
             because the previous marriage had expired.


      42.   For the Appellant to be able to enter the  UK  under  Paragraph
             352A HC 395 the marriage must not take place after the  Sponsor
             had left Iran.  A temporary marriage can be  extended  if  both
             parties are in agreement but this does involve the signing of a
             new marriage contract.


      43.   I find that this new 'temporary  marriage'  would  not  satisfy
             paragraph 352A(ii) HC 395 because the marriage took place after
             he had been granted asylum and after he  had  left  his  former
             habitual residence.  The requirements  of  the  Rules  are  not
             therefore satisfied.


      44.   I turn now to the question of whether the Appellant could enter
             the UK under paragraph 290 HC 395.  The parties can demonstrate
             an intention to live  together  and  marry  but  the  Sponsor's
             accommodation is paid for by Housing Benefit as the Sponsor  is
             unable to work due to illness.  It was not submitted  that  the
             Sponsor  could  personally  maintain  the   Appellant   without
             recourse to public funds.


      45.   It was submitted that the Appellant would  easily  obtain  work
             due to her qualifications.  There is no evidence that she would
             obtain work or has a job offer and I am not satisfied that  the
             requirements of paragraph 290 HC 395 are satisfied.


      46.   The Appellant similarly  cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  of
             maintenance and accommodation  relating  to  paragraph  281  HC
             395."


    The Immigration Judge then went on  to  consider  the  arguments  under
    Article 8 and determined them too against the appellant.

 7. The grounds for reconsideration assert,  firstly,  that  "none  of  the
    issues upon which this appeal is dismissed were put to the  sponsor  to
    deal with", and that "the issues involved were not put to the appellant
    which renders the decision unsustainable".  The second ground  is  that
    the Immigration Judge attached too much weight to the fact  that  there
    was a period of time during which the parties  were  not  contractually
    bound to one another, when that period was only nine days.   The  third
    ground is that the Immigration Judge did not have proper regard to  the
    refugee status of the sponsor and in those  circumstances  should  have
    found that an extension of temporary marriage by proxy should have been
    allowed.  It is argued in the grounds that terms of the first  marriage
    contract which empower the wife with  the  right  of  substitution  and
    enable her to grant herself the remainder of the marriage period or end
    the temporary marriage are to be interpreted as allowing  the  marriage
    to be extended.  It is further submitted  that  "it  is  possible  that
    after speaking to and agreeing with the sponsor, the appellant probably
    discussed it with her family members and it took them some time to  get
    an appointment with the local priest which resulted  in  the  temporary
    marriage being registered on  22/4/2006,  nine  days  after  expiry  on
    13/04/2006".  The fourth ground is that the  Immigration  Judge  should
    have found that the second temporary marriage was a mere  extension  of
    the first and so enabled the appellant  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 352A  and  that  the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in  applying
    authorities on Article 8 relating to removal to a case where  what  was
    sought was entry clearance.

 8. We heard submissions on the grounds from  Mr  Bhatti  and  Mr  O'Leary.
    Neither adduced or sought to adduce any further evidence.

 9. So far as concerns the first  ground,  we  are  satisfied  that  it  is
    entirely lacking in merit.  The notice of decision and the  explanatory
    statement make it absolutely clear  that  the  issue  was  whether  the
    parties were married within the meaning of paragraph 281  or  paragraph
    352A of the Immigration Rules.   The  Immigration  Judge  decided  that
    issue on the evidence before him which, we note, included  no  evidence
    of foreign law that could have assisted him in determining  the  appeal
    in favour of the appellant, upon whom lay  the  burden  of  proof.   In
    those circumstances it is  almost  inevitable  that  his  decision  was
    against the appellant: certainly there is no procedural unfairness.

10. In order to consider the other grounds we need to say  something  about
    the type of relationship into which the appellant and the  sponsor  had
    entered.  Like the Immigration Judge, we have not had  the  benefit  of
    any evidence about it, but we can take  judicial  notice  of  its  main
    features.

11. Temporary marriage or mut'a (the word means "enjoyment")  is  forbidden
    by all the Sunni schools and most of the Shi'ites.  It is allowed  only
    by the Ithna Ashari Shi'ites, with the  consequence  that  it  is  most
    often encountered in Iraq and Iran, where  the  institution  is  called
    sigh?.  Its purpose  is  to  render  lawful  what  would  otherwise  be
    unlawful, and to make any children legitimate.   The  requirements  for
    mut'a are agreement to the relationship for a period of time (which may
    be from a fraction of a day to many years) and mahr or  dower  paid  to
    the woman.  A woman may be party to only one mut'a or marriage;  a  man
    is unrestricted in the number of times he  may  be  simultaneously  the
    subject of  this  relationship.   There  is  apparently  Privy  Council
    authority (Shoharat Singh v Mst Jafri Bibi (1914) 17 Bom L.R. 13)  that
    a relationship begun with the appropriate intention for mut'a continues
    as such during the whole period of cohabitation if no term is specified
    in the contract; but in other circumstances the  better  view  is  that
    nikah cannot be construed from a mut'a for no fixed period, because the
    intentions, as well as the effects on the man's capacity to enter  into
    further matrimonial contracts, are different.  Mut'a ends by expiry  of
    the term.  The man has no right to divorce the woman during the  terms,
    but may release her from  further  compliance:  this  is  called  hibae
    muddat, a gift of the term.  The woman has no power  to  terminate  the
    relationship.   The  mahr  is  payable  in  full  if  there  has   been
    cohabitation or if the relationship has been consummated.

12. We do not regard the question of whether a temporary  marriage  can  be
    concluded by proxy as so clear as  capable  of  being  the  subject  of
    judicial notice.  In particular, there is no evidence at  all  relating
    to the issue whether a temporary marriage can be created by a telephone
    call from Turkey.  That feature of itself would be enough to cause  the
    appeal to be dismissed if it depended on proof before  the  Immigration
    Judge that the second contract constituted a valid marriage between the
    appellant and the sponsor.  There was no evidence as to its validity.

13. The Immigration Judge did not, however, take that  point:  instead,  he
    took the view that even if the second contract was a valid marriage, it
    took place after the sponsor left Iran and therefore could not avail to
    the appellant for the  purposes  of  paragraph  352A:  the  appeal  was
    therefore, in his view, bound to fail because she could  not  meet  the
    maintenance and accommodation requirements of paragraphs 281 and 290.

14. So far as the structure of that  reasoning  process  is  concerned,  it
    seems to us that the Immigration Judge can have made no error.  On  the
    evidence there was no basis for saying that the  appellant  could  meet
    the requirements  of  paragraphs  281  and  290.   Paragraph  352A  was
    therefore indeed crucial.  The  argument  adduced  on  the  appellant's
    behalf is that the Immigration Judge should  have  treated  the  second
    contract not merely as valid but  in  truth  the  continuation  of  the
    first: it is said not  merely  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
    married at the date of  the  decision,  but  that  their  marriage  had
    effectively been in existence since before the date  of  the  sponsor's
    departure from Iran three and a half years previously.

15. We are entirely unable to accept that submission.  The period  of  time
    between the termination of the first mut'a and the inception or claimed
    inception of the second is entirely irrelevant: the only important fact
    is that there was an  interval,  during  which  the  parties  were  not
    married to each other, and during  which  the  appellant  was  free  to
    contract a marriage with somebody else.  If  the  second  contract  was
    effective, there can be no doubt that it was  the  contract  of  a  new
    temporary marriage, not a continuation of the old marriage.

16. Mr Bhatti submitted, on the basis of the grounds, that there were terms
    in the contracts indicating the possibility of an extension,  and  that
    for that reason the second contract should be regarded  merely  as  the
    extension of the first.  We are unable to accept his submissions.   The
    relevant clause of the contract has been translated as follows:

        "By a separate binding contract the husband  irrevocably  empowered
        the wife with right of substitution that in case the husband  fails
        to meet his religious responsibilities as  approved  mutually,  the
        wife can grant herself the remainder of the marriage period and end
        the temporary marriage."

17.  To  regard  that  clause  as  one  relating  to  the  continuance   or
    perpetuation of the temporary marriage is  obviously  contrary  to  its
    wording.  The effect of that clause is entirely clear.   It  records  a
    contract separate from that  of  the  marriage  itself,  by  which  the
    parties gave to the woman a power which the incidents of mut'a  do  not
    give her: that is, to dissolve the marriage.  As  the  man's  right  is
    expressed as giving the term to the woman, so  the  appropriate  phrase
    for the woman is that which is found in the contractual  term  we  have
    cited.  There is nothing else before us giving any  reason  to  suppose
    that at the time of  making  either  of  these  contracts  the  parties
    intended or envisaged that they would be the subject of continuance  or
    renewal.

18. A further question raised on the facts of this case is whether a  mut'a
    is capable of being regarded as a marriage  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This issue was not conceded by the respondent,  who
    conceded merely that temporary marriage was legal in Iran.  As we  have
    said, mut'a is not recognised by the vast majority of  Islamic  schools
    of jurisprudence.  It has two features that distinguish it particularly
    from marriage as understood in most cultures, including both  those  of
    Western Europe and those of the Sunni division of Islam.  One  is  that
    it is by nature essentially temporary: it is not of the nature of mut'a
    to be dissolved by death (although death during the term does  dissolve
    the relationship); the characteristic of mut'a is that it is terminated
    by mere effluxion of time.  Secondly, the relationship between the  man
    and the woman in mut'a  is,  so  far  as  the  man  is  concerned,  not
    exclusive.  His being a party to mut'a has no effect on his ability  to
    contract another similar arrangement with another woman, or to become a
    party to a nikah or regular marriage.  As is well  known,  the  classic
    Islamic rules restrict a man to four wives.  There  is  no  doubt  that
    women with whom he has the contract of mut'a do not count  towards  the
    four.

19. Notions of marriage naturally vary between  cultures,  but  we  do  not
    think that it would be wrong to regard permanence  and  exclusivity  as
    essential features of the institution.  Both may be subject to variable
    understanding or even undermining.  Rules allowing restricted polygamy,
    and rules permitting divorce, are found in many societies.  But it does
    not seem to us that an institution  which  by  its  nature  is  neither
    permanent or exclusive can properly be regarded as marriage.  If we had
    had to decide the issue, therefore, we should have  further  held  that
    mut'a is not marriage for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.

20. In the grounds for reconsideration, the appellant's  human  rights  are
    asserted rather casually at the end of the last ground.  The grounds on
    this issue are without merit.  There is no reason to suppose  that  the
    process, of determining whether an individual's situation is such  that
    proportionality demands an outcome in his case contrary to  that  which
    the Immigration Rules suggest, is different according  to  whether  the
    claimant is faced with removal or with refusal of entry.  The  position
    in the present case is that the parties chose an arrangement  that  was
    impermanent and which left them free to make other  arrangements  after
    it had concluded.  Nothing in the respondent's  decision  prevents  the
    appellant from obtaining entry  to  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  her
    application as a spouse that has been refused.  No Convention right  of
    hers is shown to be breached by the decision against which she appeals.



21. In summary, we find  that  the  Immigration  Judge  was  right  in  his
    conclusion that, because the second contract was not a continuation  of
    the previous marriage, the contract upon which the appellant relied  on
    the date of the decision did not pre-date the sponsor's departure  from
    Iran.  In any event, however, there was no basis upon  which  he  could
    have found in the appellant's  favour  that  the  second  contract  was
    validly entered into by telephone from Turkey,  and,  further,  in  our
    view mut'a is not "marriage" for the purpose of the  Immigration  Rules
    in any event.

22. For the foregoing reasons we find that the Immigration  Judge  made  no
    material error of law and we order that his  determination,  dismissing
    the appeal, shall stand.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
