
AO (internet evidence; disputed documents) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00073

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at:  Field House                                        Date of
Hearing: 29 July 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Taylor

                                   Between

                                     AO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           No appearance
For the Respondent:          Mr. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. In the very rare occasions when, with the agreement of  the  parties,  it
is appropriate to obtain evidence from  the  internet,  a  printout  of  the
evidence obtained should be signed and dated by the  Immigration  Judge  and
added to the file.

2. Despite the doubts that may be engendered by  the  appellant's  obtaining
further documents from the same apparent source as that from which  disputed
documents have been obtained, it may be necessary to allow some latitude  in
cases  where  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  has  failed  to  provide   the
respondent's bundle of documents.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appealed to the  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the respondent on 16 August  2007  refusing  him  entry
    clearance as a student.  The Immigration Judge  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant sought and obtained an order for  reconsideration.   Thus
    the matter comes before us.

 2. The reason for the refusal was that, according to the  respondent,  the
    appellant had submitted  both  a  bank  statement  and  an  educational
    certificate which did not bear comparison to "known genuine  examples".
    The Immigration Judge dealt with the matter without a  hearing,  as  he
    had been asked by the appellant to do.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    following what appears to be a usual practice,  had  failed  to  comply
    with either the Tribunal's  Procedure  Rules  (which  are  a  Statutory
    Instrument) or the Tribunal's directions: so the  papers  which  should
    have been before the Immigration  Judge  were  not.   As  he  observed,
    however,

      "Other than a lengthy generalised comment on both  the  documents  the
        appellant has made no effort to provide documentation  either  from
        the Union Bank or from WAEC confirming the authenticity about these
        documents.  It would have been simplicity itself to have written to
        the bank with the extract with the critical comments in the  letter
        of refusal and enclose a copy of the bank  statement  and  inviting
        the bank to comment on the allegations and then submitting  a  copy
        of the letter to the bank and their reply through  the  AIT.   This
        elementary step has not been taken and  I  have  no  hesitation  in
        finding that this bank statement is not a document upon  which  the
        appellant can rely.

      One might have thought that a similar procedure  to  be  followed  the
        WAEC [sic]or at least  an  attempt  made  to  verify  the  original
        certificate: I know not whether it would be easy  or  otherwise  to
        obtain confirmatory documentation but certainly I do  hold  against
        the appellant  that  no  attempt  has  been  made  to  verify  this
        document... ."

 3. The Immigration Judge thus found that he could  agree  with  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  He dismissed the appeal.

 4. In his grounds for reconsideration the appellant complains that he  did
    indeed send to the Tribunal a letter from his father's bank  confirming
    that funds were in the account, and a scratch card  that  would  enable
    the authenticity of his educational certificate to be checked.  It  was
    on that basis that reconsideration was ordered.  The Senior Immigration
    Judge wrote:

      "The grounds show an arguable case that there was  an  error  of  fact
        amounting to an error of law in that the Immigration Judge did  not
        have before him possibly  relevant  documents  that  the  appellant
        might reasonably have expected him to have before him and  I  order
        reconsideration on each point taken in the grounds.

      Certainly there is now on file a "scratch  card".   Exactly  how  this
        can be used evidentially may prompt some interesting argument."

 5. At the hearing before us there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    appellant.  His representative is, like him, in Nigeria.  We decided to
    proceed with the hearing in his absence.

 6. Mr Avery repeated the concerns set out in  the  explanatory  statement,
    the bundle now being before the Tribunal, and confirmed that he had  no
    objection to our using the scratch card if we could,  and  taking  into
    account whatever results we obtained.

 7. We have looked at the documents before us in the light of  the  grounds
    for reconsideration.  The letter purporting to confirm the  appellant's
    father's finances is an unimpressive document.  It is  dated  some  two
    weeks after the date of the Immigration Judge's  determination,  so  it
    could not have been before him in any event.  The typed content of  the
    letter is very badly out of alignment with the  colour  printing  which
    purports to authenticate it.

 8. We note what the Immigration Judge said about attempts  that  might  be
    made by the appellant to secure  authentication  of  financial  details
    from the bank.  We would, however, express a reservation.  It seems  to
    us that the suggestion that a dispute about a document can be  resolved
    by the appellant's obtaining  another  document  purportedly  from  the
    source needs to be received with some caution.  It is difficult to  see
    that a party who had expressed doubts about documents produced  by  the
    other party would regard a determination  based  on  further  documents
    produced in the same way as particularly persuasive.  It  is,  however,
    important to be fair to both sides.  The position  here  was  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had failed  to  provide  to  the  Tribunal  the
    documents he was by law obliged to provide.  In these circumstances  it
    may be right to allow a certain amount of breadth to the  appellant  in
    producing the evidence he needs in order to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.

 9. The scratch card is  a  device  enabling  the  appellant's  educational
    record to be authenticated on a limited number of occasions by the  use
    of a password at the  WAEC  website.   We  used  the  scratch  card  as
    instructed on it, entering the details given to  the  Tribunal  by  the
    appellant.  We obtained  a  result,  and  noted  that  it  was  in  the
    appellant's name and tallied with the examination number  and  date  of
    examination that  he  had  given.   We  printed  the  result  from  the
    computer, signed and dated it and  have  added  it  to  the  file.   We
    suggest that that is the appropriate procedure, and should  be  adopted
    in the future in the very rare cases when evidence is properly obtained
    from the internet.

10. Although the details of the candidate, the examination number  and  the
    examination session are the same as those recorded in  the  certificate
    produced to the Entry Clearance Officer and to us by the appellant, the
    results are not.  The WAEC record shows results in nine  subjects:  the
    certificate gives only eight.  Of those eight, the grades in  four  are
    different from those given by the WAEC website.  In fact, the record on
    the website is of a person who was substantially more successful in the
    examination than the appellant's  certificate  shows:  that  does  not,
    however, help the appellant to establish  that  the  certificate  is  a
    genuine document or, perhaps, that it refers to him at all.

11. The WAEC certificate is clearly unreliable.  The letter from  the  bank
    looks as though it is.  We decline to place any  weight  on  either  of
    them.   We agree with the Entry Clearance Officer and  the  Immigration
    Judge that the appellant has failed to discharge the burden  of  proof.
    We find that the Immigration Judge made no material error  of  law  and
    order that his determination dismissing this appeal shall stand.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

