
            AK (Citizens Directive; AP and FP applied) Sri Lanka [2007]
UKAIT 00074

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing:  27 June
2007

                                   Before:

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms N Rogers instructed by Wandsworth &
Merton Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) The decision of the  Tribunal  in  AP  and  FP  [2007]  UKAIT  00048  is
correct; (2) Nothing new relied upon before the  Tribunal  establishes  that
Art 3.2 of the Citizens Directive should be read as  conferring  substantive
rights of entry or residence upon the relatives of EU nationals not  falling
within the definition of "family member" in Art 2.2; (3) In  UK  law,  their
rights  of  admission  and  residence,  if  any,  are  defined  by  the  EEA
Regulations 2006.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This is a reconsideration on the application of  the  appellant  of  a
     decision of Immigration Judge Froom sent on 4 August 2006 in which  he
     dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
     of State to refuse to issue  him  with  a  residence  card  under  the
     Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (SI  2006/1003)
     (the "EEA Regulations").

  2. The factual basis of the appellant's claim is no longer  a  matter  of
     dispute.  He is a Sri Lankan national born on 10 December 1981.  Until
     2000 he lived in Sri Lanka when he came to the UK and claimed  asylum.
     That claim failed.  His cousin ("the sponsor") also lived in Sri Lanka
     until 1993.   The  appellant  lived  with  his  family  including  the
     sponsor until 1991 when due to the situation in Sri Lanka  they  split
     up.  In 1993, the sponsor went to live in France where she worked  and
     acquired French nationality in 2000.  The sponsor moved to the  UK  in
     2005 and has since that time lived with the appellant.

  3. The Immigration Judge accepted that the  appellant's  cousin  provided
     financial support, inter alia, to the  appellant  from  1993  when  he
     lived in Sri Lanka and subsequently when he came to the UK in 2000 (at
     least following the withdrawal of his NASS support)  including  paying
     for his education in the UK.  The appellant is, in fact, a student  in
     the UK having completed an engineering degree at  City  University  in
     London.  He has  subsequently  undertaken  accountancy  courses.   The
     Immigration  Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  became   partially
     financially dependent upon the sponsor in 1993 when in Sri  Lanka  and
     has been wholly dependent upon her whilst in the  UK  since  his  NASS
     support ceased in 2001.

  4. The appellant claims that he is entitled under EU law to reside in the
     UK as the cousin of an EU national working in the UK.  The Immigration
     Judge  decided  that  the  appellant  did  not  fall  within  the  EEA
     Regulations and consequently could not derive  a  right  of  residence
     from those Regulations.  Ms  Rogers,  who  represented  the  appellant
     before us,  accepted  that  this  was  correct.   Instead,  Ms  Rogers
     submitted that the appellant derived a  right  of  residence  directly
     from Art 3.2 of Council Directive 2004/38/EC and the Immigration Judge
     had been wrong to reach  a  contrary  view.   She  accepted  that  the
     Tribunal had recently decided in AP and FP (Citizens Directive Article
     3(2); discretion; dependence) India [2007] UKAIT 00048  that  no  such
     right was conferred by Art 3.2 but, she submitted, that  decision  was
     wrong and should not be  followed.   Ms  Rogers  provided  us  with  a
     helpful written summary of  her  submissions  which  she  supplemented
     orally.  She also provided us with a number of decisions  of  the  ECJ
     and a Communication from the EU Commission to the European  Parliament
     dated 6 January 2004 which she relied upon as showing  that  at  least
     the Commission considered that Art 3.2 conferred free movement  rights
     greater than the Tribunal in AP and FP accepted.

  5. We will return to Ms Rogers' submissions in more detail  shortly.   We
     must begin,  however,  with  the  relevant  domestic  legislation  and
     provisions of Directive 2004/38/EC.  These are fully set  out  by  the
     Tribunal in AP and FP.  However since  the  appellant  challenges  the
     correctness of AP and FP in this appeal it is necessary for us to  set
     them out for ourselves.

EEA Regulations and Directive 2004/38/EC

  6.  Council  Directive  2004/38/EC  (sometimes  known  as  the  'Citizens
     Directive') consolidates  and,  to  some  extent,  enlarges  the  free
     movement rights (admission and residence) of EU  nationals  and  their
     family members within the Member States.   The EEA Regulations seek to
     implement that Directive in our domestic law and apply  to  all  cases
     (including pending appeals) with effect from 30 April 2006 (see  Sched
     4, para 5 to the EEA Regulations and MG and VC [2006] UKAIT 53).  Both
     the Regulations and the Directive deal separately with, what  we  will
     call, 'close' family members and other family members which, using the
     terminology of the EEA Regulations, we  will  call  'extended'  family
     members.  At the heart of  this  appeal  is  the  scope  of  the  free
     movement rights of 'extended' family members and whether  they  mirror
     or approximate to those of 'close' family members.

  7. We turn now to the provisions in the  EEA  Regulations  dealing  first
     with "family members" and secondly  with  "extended  family  members".
     Although Ms Rogers accepts the appellant cannot bring  himself  within
     them, it is important to see their scope before moving on to  consider
     the terms of the Citizens Directive.

  8. Regulation 7 defines "family member"  for  the  purposes  of  the  EEA
     Regulations as follows:

           "7 (1) Subject to paragraph (2) [which is not material  for  the
           purposes of this appeal], for the purposes of these  Regulations
           the following persons shall be treated as the family members  of
           another person-
                 (a) his spouse or his civil partner;
                 (b) direct descendants of his, his  spouse  or  his  civil
           partner who are -
                       (i) under 21; or
                       (ii) dependants of his,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
           partner;
                 (c) dependent direct relatives in  his  ascending  line  or
                 that of his spouse or his civil partner;
                 (d) a person who is to be treated as  a  family  member  of
                 that other person under paragraph (3)
                 ... ."


  9. By virtue of reg 12(1) a family member must  be  issued  with  an  EEA
     family permit in certain circumstances:

           "12 (1) An entry clearance  office  must  issue  an  EEA  family
           permit to a person who applies for one if the person is a family
           member of an EEA national and -
                 (a) the EEA national is -
                       (i) is residing in the UK in  accordance  with  these
                       Regulations; or
                       (ii) will be travelling to the United Kingdom  within
                       six months of the date of the application and will be
                       an EEA national residing in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                       accordance with these Regulations on arrival  in  the
                       United Kingdom; and
                 (b) the family member will be accompanying the EEA national
                 to the United Kingdom or joining him there and -
                       (i) is lawfully resident in an EEA State; or
                       (ii) would meet the requirements in  the  Immigration
                       Rules (other than those relating to entry  clearance)
                       for leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the  family
                       member of the EEA national or, in the case of  direct
                       descendants or  dependent  direct  relatives  in  the
                       ascending line of his spouse or his civil partner, as
                       the family member of his spouse or his civil partner,
                       were the EEA national or the spouse or civil  partner
                       a  person  present  and   settled   in   the   United
                       Kingdom.... ."


 10. There are two important requirements in  reg  12(1)  which  we  should
     note.  First, the "family member" must be "accompanying" or  "joining"
     the EEA national who is coming to or already in the UK.  It  does  not
     cover the reverse situation where the "family member"  is  present  in
     the UK and is joined  by  the  EU  national.   Secondly,  the  "family
     member" must, before coming to the  UK,  either  be  already  lawfully
     resident in another EEA state  or  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
     Immigration Rules for entry.  The latter situation  would  cover  both
     family members who are illegally in another EEA state  and  those  who
     are outside the EEA and wish to enter the UK directly from there.

 11. It is not necessary for the purposes of this  appeal  to  set  out  in
     detail the provisions dealing with the free  movement  rights  that  a
     "family member" has  by  virtue  of  the  Regulations.   They  may  be
     summarised as follows.  Regulation 11(2) confers a right of  admission
     for  family  members  of  EU  nationals  on  production  of   relevant
     documentation including, possibly, an EEA family permit  issued  under
     reg  12(1).   Regulation  13(2)  provides  for  an  initial  right  of
     residence of 3 months  for  such  family  members.   Regulation  14(2)
     provides for an extended right of residence for a  family  member  of,
     inter alia, an EU national exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK  (a
     "qualified person").  Regulation 15(2) provides for a permanent  right
     of residence, inter alia, where the "family member" has resided in the
     UK in accordance with the Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  5
     years.  Regulation 17(1) and (2) provides for the issue of a residence
     card to a "family member".  A 'residence card' is the document  which,
     according to its definition in reg 2(1), is issued to a non-EEA family
     member as "proof of the holder's right  of  residence  in  the  United
     Kingdom".

 12. As will be clear from reg 7,  the  appellant,  who  is  the  sponsor's
     cousin, does not  fall  within  the  definition  of  "family  member".
     Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations defines the category of  "extended
     family member" as follows:

           "8 (1) In these Regulations 'extended  family  member'  means  a
           person who is not a family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under
           Regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the  conditions
           in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
           (2) A person satisfies the condition in this  paragraph  if  the
           person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil
           partner and -
                 (a) the person is residing in an EEA State in which the EEA
                 national  also  resides  and  is  dependent  upon  the  EEA
                 national or is a member of his household;
                 (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and
                 is accompanying the EEA national to the United  Kingdom  or
                 wishes to join him there; or
                 (c)the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has
                 joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues
                 to be  dependent  upon  him  or  to  be  a  member  of  his
                 household.
           (3) A person satisfies the condition in this  paragraph  if  the
           person is a relative of an EEA national or  his  spouse  or  his
           civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly  requires
           the personal care of the EEA national his spouse  or  his  civil
           partner.
           (4) A person satisfies the condition in this  paragraph  if  the
           person is a relative of an  EEA  national  and  would  meet  the
           requirements in the Immigration Rules (other than those relating
           to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to enter or  remain  in
           the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of the  EEA  national
           were the EEA national a person present and settled in the United
           Kingdom.
           (5) A person satisfies the condition in this  paragraph  if  the
           person is the partner of an EEA national  (other  than  a  civil
           partner) and can prove to the decision maker that  he  is  in  a
           durable relationship with the EEA national.
           (6) In these  Regulations  'relevant  EEA  national'  means,  in
           relation to an extended family member, the EEA national  who  is
           or whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of the extended
           family member for the purpose of paragraph (2), (3)  or  (4)  or
           the EEA national who is  the  partner  of  the  extended  family
           member for the purpose of paragraph (5)."


 13. A relative who satisfies one of these requirements may obtain  an  EEA
     family permit in accordance with reg 12(2) which is as follows:

        "12 (2) An entry clearance officer may issue an EEA  family  permit
             to an extended family member of an EEA national who applies for
             one if -
               a) the relevant EEA  national  satisfies  the  condition  in
                  paragraph (1)(a);
              b) the extended family member wishes to accompany the relevant
                 EEA national to the United Kingdom or to  join  him  there;
                 and
              c) in all the circumstances, it appears to the entry clearance
                 officer appropriate to issue the EEA family permit.
          2) Where an entry clearance officer receives an application  under
             paragraph (2) he shall undertake an  extensive  examination  of
             the personal circumstances of the applicant and if  he  refuses
             the application  shall  give  reasons  justifying  the  refusal
             unless this is contrary to the interests of national security.
           ... ."

 14. There is an important  difference  between  the  position  of  'close'
     family  members  and  'extended'  family   members   under   the   EEA
     Regulations.  The Regulations do not,  as  such,  confer  a  right  of
     admission or residence upon an "extended family member".   The  reason
     for this is that the regulations only apply to "family members",  i.e.
     the 'close' family members defined in reg 8.   However,  an  "extended
     family member" who  possesses  an  EEA  family  permit  (or  indeed  a
     residence card) is treated as a "family member" for  the  purposes  of
     the EEA Regulations by virtue of reg 7(3) which provides:

           "(3) Subject to paragraph (4) [which is  not  material  for  the
           purposes of this appeal], a person who  is  an  extended  family
           member and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a
           registration certificate or a residence card shall be treated as
           a family member of the relevant EEA national for so long  as  he
           continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4)
           or (5)  in  relation  to  that  EEA  national  and  the  permit,
           certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or revoked."

 15.  Thus,  being  in  possession  of  a  valid  EEA  family  permit   (or
     registration card or residence card) means that  the  same  rights  of
     admission and residence apply to 'extended' family members as apply to
     'close' family members under regs 11(2), 13(2), 14(2) and 15(2).

 16. It might be thought, therefore, that the Regulations  and  the  rights
     derived from them cannot apply to a  relative  who  falls  within  the
     definition of "extended family member"  in  reg  8  unless  they  have
     obtained an EEA family permit prior to arrival in the UK.  That indeed
     is, largely, the scheme of the EEA Regulations.

 17. How is this affected by reg 17(4)?  Reg 17(4) allows the Secretary  of
     State in his discretion to issue a  residence  card  to  "an  extended
     family member" of, inter alia, an EEA  national  who  is  a  qualified
     person.

           "17 (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an
           extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3)  [i.e.
           not in possession of a valid permit, card etc] who is not an EEA
           national on application if -
                 (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to  the  extended
                 family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with
                 a permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and
                 (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of
                 State appropriate to issue the residence card."


 18. As we saw earlier a "residence card" is a document that  is  proof  of
     its holder's right of  residence.   Given  that  an  "extended  family
     member" (without an EEA family permit) does not seem  to  fall  within
     any of the right-conferring regulations (namely,  regs  11(2),  12(2),
     13(2), 14(2) and 15(2)), how  reg  17(4)  is  to  be  applied  is  not
     entirely clear.  This is not a point that was taken before us  but  it
     does seem to be the appellant's situation here.  Even if he  satisfied
     the definition of an "extended family member" in reg 8(2) or  (4),  he
     has never had an EEA family permit or residence card.   His  right  to
     reside based on the EEA Regulations  which  would  be  proven  by  the
     residence card issued under reg 17(4) is not readily apparent.

 19. Putting that to one side, for  our  purposes  reg  8(2)  and  (4)  are
     particularly important as they bring within the definition and the EEA
     Regulations other "relatives" of the EEA  national.   Regulation  8(2)
     applies where the relative has been (or is) either resident  with  the
     EEA national or dependent upon them in another EEA state.   Where that
     is not the case, for  example,  where  the  relative  is  coming  from
     outside the EEA, that relative must, by virtue of  reg  8(4),  satisfy
     the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Again,  it  is  noteworthy
     that reg 8(2) contemplates the family member accompanying  or  joining
     the EU national in the UK.  It cannot apply where the family member is
     already in the UK and the EU national comes to the UK to live with the
     family member.  When applying reg 8(4) that will also be the situation
     under the Immigration Rules since we cannot think of an example  where
     the sponsor would not already have come to the UK and be resident here
     in order for the Immigration Rules to apply.   For  example,  in  this
     appeal the relevant provision (if any) of HC 395  is  para  317  which
     covers claims by "dependent adult relatives".  It requires in sub-para
     (ii) that the applicant "is joining or accompanying a  person  who  is
     ... in the United Kingdom".  Likewise reg 12(2)(b) only allows for the
     issue of an EEA family permit in  circumstances  where  the  "extended
     family member" wishes "to accompany" or "to join" the EEA national  in
     the UK.

 20. Ms Rogers accepts that  regs  8(2)  and  8(4)  do  not  apply  to  the
     appellant.  In relation to reg 8(2), he has never lived in another EEA
     state where he could have  lived  with  or  been  dependent  upon  the
     sponsor.  Prior to coming to the UK, he lived in Sri Lanka.  It  would
     have been different if he had lived in France whilst the  sponsor  was
     there but he did not.  Also, the appellant cannot  establish  that  he
     comes within any of the Immigration Rules.  The closest relevant rule,
     as the Immigration Judge noted, is para 317 of  HC  395  dealing  with
     dependent adult relatives.  However, a cousin of a sponsor is not  one
     of the relatives specified in para 317.  Consequently,  the  appellant
     is  not  an  "extended  family  member"  within  the  meaning  of  the
     Regulations. Thus, Ms Rogers relied directly on the Citizens Directive
     and, in particular, Art 3.2.  We must set out the whole of Art 3.   We
     also set out Art 2.2 which defines the term "family  member"  for  the
     purposes of Art 3.1:

           "Article 2


           Definitions


           For the purposes of this Directive:
                      1)  'Union  citizen'  means  any  person  having  the
                         nationality of a Member State;
                      2)  'Family member' means:
                 (a) the spouse;
                 (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has  contracted
                 a registered partnership, on the basis of  the  legislation
                 of a Member State, if the legislation of  the  host  Member
                 State  treats  registered  partnerships  as  equivalent  to
                 marriage and in accordance with the conditions laid down in
                 the relevant legislation of the host Member State;
                 (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of  21  or
                 are the dependants and those of the spouse  or  partner  as
                 defined in point (b);
                 (d)the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and
                 those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);
          3)  'Host Member State' means the Member State to  which  a  Union
             citizen moves in  order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free
             movement and residence.


           Article 3


           Beneficiaries


        1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to  or
           reside in a Member State other than that of  which  they  are  a
           national, and to their family members as defined in point  2  of
           Article 2 who accompany or join them.
        2. Without prejudice to any right to free  movement  and  residence
           the persons concerned may have in  their  own  right,  the  host
           Member State shall, in accordance with its national legislation,
           facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:
              a)  any  other   family   members,   irrespective   of   their
                 nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2 of
                 Article 2 who, in the country from which  they  have  come,
                 are dependants or members of the  household  of  the  Union
                 citizen having the primary right  of  residence,  or  where
                 serious health grounds strictly require the  personal  care
                 of the family member by the Union citizen;
              b) the partner with whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
                 relationship, duly attested.
           The host Member State shall undertake an  extensive  examination
           of the personal circumstances and shall justify  any  denial  of
           entry or residence to these people."

 21. As will be readily apparent, Art 3 draws the same distinction that  we
     see in our domestic EEA  Regulations.   Art  3.1  applies  to  'close'
     family members as defined in Art 2.2 and Art 3.2 applies to  others  -
     subject to its specific requirements.  That the distinction was  drawn
     at all between the two groups  of  family  members  suggests  somewhat
     persuasively that their positions were not be treated as the same  and
     in fact the two sub-paragraphs of Art 3 are worded quite  differently.
     Interestingly, Art 3.1 does not create any  rights  of  free  movement
     itself.  Those rights are set out subsequently in the Directive.  They
     only apply to 'close' family members.  All, in fact, Art 3.1  does  is
     set out the beneficiaries of the Directive -  'close'  family  members
     who wish to accompany or join the EU national in another member state.
       We mention this because if, as Ms Rogers submits, rights (similar to
     if not exactly the same as  those  for  'close'  family  members)  are
     created by Art 3.2 remarkably the Directive achieves this in one brief
     sub-paragraph for 'extended' family members whilst it takes  the  bulk
     of the remainder of the Directive to  identify  and  spell  out  those
     rights for 'close' family members.  This would, to say the least, be a
     curious style of legislative endeavour.

 22. Art 3.2, by contrast to Art 3.1, not only states  who  is  to  benefit
     from its provisions but also states what benefits they are to  obtain.
     Art 3.2 applies to "any  other  family  members"  (not  those  falling
     within Art 2.2) who are members of the EU national's household or  are
     dependent upon that person "in the country from which they come".   Ms
     Rogers' relies on Art 3.2 which she submits applies to the  appellant.
     Ms Rogers' submission is not without subtlety.  It is set out  in  her
     written submissions at paras 29-32.  We shall return to the detail  of
     those submissions later.  Unlike,  Art  3.1  and  its  application  to
     'close' family members, Mr Rogers'  submits  that  Art  3.2  does  not
     confer a substantive right of admission  and  residence  per  se  upon
     'extended' family members.  As we understand her submission, in  order
     to be effective the rights conferred by Art 3.2 require recognition by
     the Member State through the grant of a residence  card.   Ms  Rogers'
     developed this argument in order to  avoid  the  consequences  of  the
     Tribunal's decision in AP and FP which, if correct,  is  determinative
     of this appeal against the appellant.

AP and FP

 23. In AP and FP the appellants were citizens of India who wished to  join
     their father-in-law, who was a Portuguese citizen, and upon  who  they
     claimed to be dependent and their husbands in the UK.  It was accepted
     that they could not succeed under the EEA Regulations.  Instead,  they
     relied upon Art 3.2 of the Citizens Directive which  it  was  said  on
     their behalf created substantive rights of entry  and  residence.   It
     was  submitted  that  this  was  the  effect  of  the  Member  State's
     obligation  to  "facilitate"  entry  and  residence.    The   Tribunal
     disagreed.  The Tribunal first noted, in much the same way as we  have
     done, the obvious differences in wording between Art 3.1 and  3.2  (at
     [9]-[11]):

           "9. In our judgment, the starting-point must be the  distinction
           in the Directive between the close  family  members  defined  as
           "family  members"  in  Article  2(2),  who  clearly  are   given
           substantive  rights  of  free  movement  and  residence  by  the
           Directive, and  those  other  members  of  the  family  who  are
           comprised within the provisions of Article 3(2).   It  is  clear
           that the Directive treats these two groups differently; and  any
           proposed interpretation which does not do  so  must  be  doomed.
           What then are the differences?  There  appear  to  be  three  at
           least.


           10. First, by Article 3(1), the  Directive  is  made  simply  to
           "apply" to "family members" as  defined  by  Article  2(2);  but
           Article 3(2) does not apply the Directive in any  general  sense
           to  other  members  of  the  family.   Secondly,  whereas  other
           provisions of the Directive (principally in Chapters II-IV) give
           rights of entry and residence to EU citizens and  their  "family
           members", no such rights are given by  the  Directive  to  other
           members of the family, because the Directive (other than Article
           3(2)) does not apply to them, and because the rights  are  given
           to EU citizens and their "family members" as defined and not  to
           others.  A similar distinction, and similar wording, was  to  be
           found in Article 10 of Council Regulation  1612/68,  which  gave
           close relatives (as defined) a right to install themselves  with
           a national of a Member State,  but  required  Member  States  to
           "facilitate the admission" of  other dependent  family  members.
           Thirdly, the treatment of other members of the family in Article
           3(2) is characterised by the phrase "in accordance with its  [sc
           the host Member State's] national  legislation".   This  is  the
           clearest possible indication that  national  legislation  has  a
           role in the attribution  of  rights  to  other  members  of  the
           family: the position is not therefore entirely regulated by  the
           substantive provisions of the Directive that  have  force,  from
           the Directive, over the whole of  the  Union.   The  distinction
           between the two categories of family member is  thus  made  even
           clearer than it was in Article 10 of reg 1612/68, which did  not
           contain these words.


           11. Those differences  do  not  mean  that  Article  3(2)  gives
           nothing to those covered by it.  On  the  contrary,  it  clearly
           gives two rights.  The first is that, subject to  national  law,
           their entry and residence shall be "facilitated".  The second is
           that  there  shall   be   "extensive   examination"   of   their
           circumstances and a justification of  refusal.   The  second  of
           these rights is new.  The first is the right previously embodied
           in Article  10  of  reg  1612/68,  extended  in  its  scope  and
           clarified in its relation to national law."


 24. The Tribunal then turned to what is the proper meaning of "facilitate"
     in Art 3.2. (at [12]):

           "12. What, then, does "facilitate"  mean?   The  apparent  sense
           would be to make entry and residence easy,  or  easier:  but  it
           would evidently have to be entry  and  residence  in  accordance
           with national legislation that was made easy  or  easier.   That
           sounds very  much  like  a  prescription  about  procedure,  the
           substantive rights being given by the national legislation.   We
           think  that  that  is  exactly  what  is  meant.   If   national
           legislation permits a person's admission,  admission  is  to  be
           facilitated.  If not, there is  no  entry  or  residence  to  be
           facilitated in accordance with national legislation.


 25.  The  Tribunal  drew  the  distinction   between   "substantive"   and
     "procedural" rights and took the view that Art 3.2 is directed towards
     the latter which are important and a significant focus for  protection
     under EU law (at [13]-[15]):

           "13.  We  bear  in  mind  the  important  provisions  about  the
           procedural aspects of free movement rights in particular,  which
           have been in  the  relevant  legislation  since  the  beginning.
           Council Directive 68/360/EEC provides in Article 3 that  persons
           who have the substantive rights secured by that Directive  shall
           be allowed by other Member  States  "to  enter  their  territory
           simply on production of a valid identity card or passport";  and
           Article 6 of Council Directive 73/148/EEC prevents a State  from
           requiring anything (from an  applicant  entitled  because  of  a
           relationship to someone else) other than the  identity  card  or
           passport with which the individual entered the country and proof
           of the relationship.  Further, Article 5(1) of Council Directive
           64/221/EEC limits the time allowed for making a  decision  on  a
           first residence permit to six  months,  and  requires  that  the
           applicant be allowed to remain temporarily in the country  while
           the decision is made.  These provisions are an essential part of
           provisions for free movement.  Movement would not  be  free  if,
           whatever a person's substantive rights, he could in practice  be
           kept at the  border  by  national  requirements  for  particular
           documentation  or  kept  out  of  the  country  during  a   long
           bureaucratic  process.   Similarly,  the  movements  of  the  EU
           national would not be free if his family  members  might  suffer
           such difficulties  at  the  border:  he  might  be  hindered  or
           dissuaded from travel if his family  were  not  easily  able  to
           travel the whole  journey  with  him.   The  considerations  for
           obtaining a residence permit, by a  person  already  within  the
           borders of the state, are not identical, as explained in Chang v
           SSHD [2001] UKIAT 00012 at [24]-[26]:  but,  nevertheless,  they
           exist, and a developing law of free movement and residence could
           be expected to have provisions such as  these  relating  to  the
           recognition of the substantive rights under it.


           14. There is equally reason for procedural regulations  relating
           to those whose rights will depend on the  national  law  of  the
           country where the principal proposes to exercise a right of free
           movement or residence.  For in the same way as his rights may be
           hindered if, at the border, there may be delay or difficulty  in
           admitting a family member  who  is  entitled  under  EU  law  to
           accompany him, so they may be hindered if there may be delay  or
           difficulty in admitting a family member  who,  although  without
           substantive rights under EU law, is entitled to admission  under
           the law of the country he is seeking to enter.  We  may  use  an
           example.  Suppose a person seeking to exercise an  EU  right  of
           free movement has a niece, whom he would like to accompany  him.
           If he goes to a country where nieces are  (under  national  law)
           not entitled to admission, he knows in advance that there is  no
           purpose in his niece travelling with him, and so far as  EU  law
           is concerned his right of access to the country in  question  is
           not hindered because EU law  gives  no  right  of  admission  to
           nieces.  If, however, he chooses a country  whose  national  law
           allows the admission of nieces, delaying the  admission  of  his
           niece has the same clogging affect as delaying the admission  of
           any member of his closer family.  Similar  considerations  again
           apply to a person already in the country who seeks  a  residence
           permit: undue delay, or expulsion of the family member while the
           matter is considered, might well reduce  the  attractiveness  of
           the country in question for the principal: and that would  be  a
           clog or hindrance on his right of free movement and residence.


           15. It can thus readily be  seen  that  procedural  requirements
           relating to persons who have no substantive rights under EU  law
           are both explicable and indeed necessary to give full effect  to
           free movement and residence  provisions.  The  new  right  -  of
           extensive examination and a justification for any refusal - will
           no doubt serve to ensure that the  procedural  requirements  are
           observed.  We can, we think, be reasonably  confident  that  the
           procedure for application, reasoned refusal and right of  appeal
           provided under our own legislation meets the requirements of the
           last sentence of Article 3(2) of the 2004 Directive."

 26. Finally, the Tribunal examined  the  argument  that  Art  3.2  creates
     substantive rights in the context of other provisions in the Directive
     and took the view that this was not the proper interpretation  of  Art
     3.2 (at [16]-[17]):

           "16. We are aware that it has been suggested that the  scope  of
           the national legislation to which reference is made  in  Article
           3(2) is itself limited to matters of procedure: in other  words,
           that Article  3(2)  is  to  be  read  as  giving  some  sort  of
           substantive right to the wider family members to whom it refers,
           and that the procedural  aspects  of  those  rights  (only)  are
           subject to national legislation.  We do not think that that  can
           be right.  First, it would  be  remarkable  if  the  substantive
           residence and free movement rights of the wider  family  members
           were to be found in Article 3(2) and in such general  and  vague
           terms, whereas the rights of Union  citizens  and  their  closer
           family members are so closely defined and circumscribed  by  the
           detailed provisions of Chapters II-VI  (Articles  4-33)  of  the
           Directive.  Secondly, we note that the  procedural  requirements
           for those relatives that are admitted or allowed  to  remain  in
           the Member State  are  in  fact  prescribed  by  the  Directive.
           Article 8(5)(e) and (f) cover the formalities  for  registration
           certificates, and permit certain documents  to  be  demanded  of
           those within Article 3(2), over and above the requirements to be
           met by others.  Article 10(2)(e) and (f) cover  the  formalities
           for  residence  cards,  and  require  certain  documents  to  be
           demanded of those  within  Article  3(2),  over  and  above  the
           requirements to be met by others.  In this context the  apparent
           liberty to make national legislation on procedural matters would
           be largely illusory, and it is in any event  inconceivable  that
           there  would  not  be  in  Article  3(2)  a  reference  to   the
           prescriptions of Articles 8 and 10, if it were really  the  case
           that the "national legislation" to which reference is there made
           were confined to the matters in fact dealt  with  later  in  the
           Directive.  It seems to us that the terms of Articles 8  and  10
           are  a  further  reason  for  supposing   that   the   "national
           legislation" to which reference  is  made  in  Article  3(2)  is
           national legislation which may, but is not  obliged  to,  confer
           substantive rights of  free  movement  and  residence  on  those
           family members covered by that paragraph.


           17. Article 7(4) of the Directive is  a  clear  pointer  to  the
           conclusion that no rights of residence are conferred by  Article
           3(2).  Article  7  as  a  whole  is  concerned  with  rights  of
           residence for over three months.  Paragraph (1) gives the  right
           to  certain  Union  citizens,  including  in  subparagraph   (c)
           students, and in subparagraph (d) Union citizens who are  family
           members accompanying Union citizens.  Paragraph  (2)  gives  the
           right also to  family  members  who  are  not  themselves  Union
           citizens, who accompany or join Union citizens.  "Family member"
           has, of course, the meaning given by Article 2(2):  that  is  to
           say, we are concerned here with close family members.  Paragraph
           (4) is as follows:


                    'By way of derogation from paragraphs 1(d) and 2  above,
                    only the spouse, the registered partner provided for  in
                    Article 2(2)(b) and dependent children  shall  have  the
                    right of residence as family members of a Union  citizen
                    meeting the conditions under (c)  above.   Article  3(2)
                    shall apply to his/her dependent direct relatives in the
                    ascending  lines  and  those  of  this/her   spouse   or
                    registered partner.'


           This is very revealing.  The right of residence does not  accrue
           to all the "family members" of students.  It accrues only  to  a
           narrower group.  The other "family members" of a student do  not
           have the right of residence but Article 3(2)  applies  to  them.
           It appears to us to follow that Article 3(2)  does  not  give  a
           right of residence to those within it. "

 27. As a consequence, the Tribunal concluded at [18]:

           "...the position is that we do  not  accept  that  Article  3(2)
           gives, or is intended to give, or has to be read as giving,  any
           right of free movement or residence to those who  have  no  such
           right apart from it.  Any  such  rights  will  be  dependent  on
           national  law,  which,  however,  has  to  be  administered   in
           accordance with  the  requirements  of  facilitation,  extensive
           examination and justification of refusal."

The challenge to AP and FP

 28. Ms Rogers took issue with AP and FP and invited us not to  follow  it.
     At root her argument is that the Tribunal's reasoning in AP and FP  is
     erroneous.   As  we  understood  her  submissions   she   relied,   in
     particular, on two principal grounds:

           1. The Tribunal had confused "substantive  rights  of  admission
           and stay" with "substantive requirements of admission and stay";
           2. The Tribunal had failed to consider relevant ECJ case law and
           the communication from the Commission to  the  Parliament  which
           would suggest a different interpretation of Art 3.2.

 29. As regards Ms Rogers first submission, it is set out at paras 29-32 of
     her written  submissions.   To  understand  its  full  impact,  it  is
     necessary to set those paragraphs out in full:

           "29. The Appellant submits that it is important to differentiate
           between


                 a) substantive rights of admission and stay
                 b) substantive requirements of admission and stay
                 c) procedural rights in seeking admission and stay
                 d) procedural requirements of admission and stay

           30. The Appellant submits that  the  Tribunal  has  fallen  into
           error in conflating a) and b).


           31. The Appellant readily  accepts  that  whilst  those  persons
           falling under Article 2(2) of the Directive have  a  substantive
           right - namely a directly enforceable Community law right  -  to
           be admitted and to remain in the host Member State  with  an  EU
           national, those falling under Article 3(2) do not  have  such  a
           right.  They have a right  to  have  their  admission  and  stay
           "facilitated" only.  The  difference  will  be  that  whereas  a
           Article 2(2) family  member  cannot  be  required  to  obtain  a
           residence card to prove  his  or  her  right  of  residence  for
           instance or at least only administrative penalties  (on  a  non-
           discriminatory  basis)  may  follow  for  failing  to  obtain  a
           residence card, a Article 3(2) family member may be required (if
           such requirement is set out in national legislation)  to  obtain
           the residence card to prove that he has been granted  the  right
           to remain.  Thus whereas the Article 2(2)  family  member  needs
           only the Member State to recognise his rights the  Article  3(2)
           family member needs the Member State to  grant  him  the  right.
           The procedure for obtaining such recognition may vary  from  one
           Member State to another.


           32. However this does not mean that the substantive requirements
           imposed on family members under Article 3(2) can  or  will  vary
           from one Member State to another.  The mischief in Regulation  8
           of the EEA Regulations is that it purports  to  define  extended
           family members by reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules.   Thus
           according to the logic of Regulation 8, if  the  person  is  not
           provided for at all in the Immigration Rules, then  such  person
           has no right to be considered for admission or stay in  the  UK.
           If the Immigration rules states [sic] that a person can only  be
           admitted or remain if they meet certain  criteria  such  as  the
           "most exceptional compelling circumstances" test, then a  person
           who cannot meet such  a test, by definition is not  an  extended
           family member and will not  be  entitled  to  have  his  or  her
           admission or stay considered."

 30. With respect, we find the distinction between (a) and (b) set  out  in
     paragraph 29 to be one so fragile as not to be capable of bearing  the
     weight Ms Rogers would have it bear.  It is  in  truth  a  distinction
     without a difference.  It is said that  'close'  family  members  have
     rights that exists independently of  their  recognition  by  a  Member
     State.  That much we agree with.   It  is  clearly  supported  by  the
     jurisprudence of the ECJ (e.g Procureur de Roi v  Royer  (Case  48/75)
     [1976] ECR 497) and is recognised in our own EEA Regulations  where  a
     residence card is defined  as  a  document  which  is  "proof  of  the
     holder's right of residence" (reg 2(1)).  That wording  is  replicated
     for 'permanent residence cards' and  'registration  certificates',  in
     the  latter  instance  the  document  issued  to  EEA  nationals.   By
     contrast, it is said that 'extended' family members only  have  rights
     if they are granted by the Member State.  Until that point the  rights
     are  only  inchoate  and  conditional  upon  conferment  (not   merely
     confirmation) by the Member State.  Ms Rogers' submission  would  seem
     to be that Member States have an obligation  to  confer  those  rights
     through "national legislation".  That seems to be the  import  of  her
     submissions (see in particular para 31).  At worst, they can  only  be
     limited or hedged-about with  procedural  requirements  but  no  more.
     There is an inherent problem with Ms Rogers'  argument.   We  are  not
     entirely clear how the appellant could benefit in this appeal  if  the
     rights have not, in fact, been conferred upon him.  The UK might well,
     if she is correct, be in breach of its  obligation  to  implement  the
     Directive by enacting "national legislation".  However, since Art  3.2
     requires "national legislation" to be in place,  he  would  still  not
     have a directly enforceable right of entry and  residence  unless  and
     until it has been implemented.

 31. Also, in our view, the 'extended' family member's rights of entry  and
     residence either exist automatically or they do not.   If  the  Member
     State may not refuse to confer the rights, the rights are  essentially
     indistinguishable from those granted to 'close' family members by  the
     Directive.  In other words, Ms Rogers' argument collapses in on itself
     and ultimately leads to an assertion  of  rights  equal  to  those  of
     'close'  family  members.   That  position  is  untenable  given   the
     differential wording of Arts 3.1  and  3.2  taken  together  with  the
     contextual arguments so carefully analysed by the Tribunal in  AP  and
     FP.  As in that case, the only sustainable distinction that we can see
     is that between "substantive rights" and "procedural requirements".

 32. Ms Rogers submits  that  the  consequence  is  that  the  position  of
     'extended' family members may be different in each of  the  27  Member
     States.  So they may be; but Ms Rogers did not  place  before  us  any
     material to support her  assertion  that  this  could  not  have  been
     intended.  Whilst the Citizens Directive  can  properly  be  seen,  at
     least in general, as a harmonising provision (see  e.g.  recital  (14)
     dealing  with  documentation),  it  is  hard  to  see  Art  3.2  as  a
     harmonising provision.  The wording of Art 3.2 and  its  reference  to
     Member States facilitating entry and  residence  "in  accordance  with
     national  legislation"  strongly  suggests  that  the  possibility  of
     national differences is contemplated.  We cannot be sure,  because  no
     relevant material was put before  us,  but  it  is  not  difficult  to
     imagine that the more limited effect of Art 3.2 was all that could  be
     agreed politically at an EU  level  when  considering  the  rights  of
     family members  who  do  not  fall  into  the  'close'  family  member
     definition.   The existence and scope of any rights were to be left to
     the Member States themselves.

 33. The distinction resonates, in our view, in the different wording found
     in recital (5) dealing with the "rights" of 'close' family members and
     recital (6) in relation to 'extended'  family  members.   Recital  (5)
     states that:

           "[t]he right of all Union Citizens to  move  and  reside  freely
           within the territory of the Member States  should  ...  be  also
           granted to their family members, irrespective of nationality."

 34. By contrast,  in  recital  (6)  which  obviously  immediately  follows
     recital (5) the position of 'extended' family members is not expressed
     in terms of their "rights"  of  entry  and  residence  but  rather  as
     follows:

           "... the situation of those persons who are not included in  the
           definition of family  members  under  this  Directive,  and  who
           therefore do not enjoy an automatic right of entry and residence
           in the host Member State, should be examined by the host  Member
           State on the basis of its own national legislation, in order  to
           decide whether entry and residence  could  be  granted  to  such
           persons, taking into consideration their relationship  with  the
           Union  citizen  or  any  other  circumstances,  such  as   their
           financial or physical dependence on the Union citizen."

 35. Clearly, 'extended' family members have no "automatic" right of  entry
     and residence under the Directive and each Member State is entitled to
     consider their entry and residence "on the basis of its  own  national
     legislation" having regard to their relationship to  the  EU  national
     and any other  circumstance.   That,  it  seems  to  us,  is  entirely
     consistent with the effect of the EEA Regulations, in  particular  the
     terms of reg 8.  That some relatives do not succeed - whether  because
     of an absence of dependency or because  their  relationship  does  not
     fall within those permitted under the Immigration Rules - is part  and
     parcel of the process  under  the  national  legislation  specifically
     contemplated by recital (6).

 36. If we turn to the case law and  other  material  that  Ms  Rogers  put
     before us, it does not in our view take her arguments any further.  We
     were referred to the ECJ's decisions in Jia v Migrationsverket (Case C-
     1/05); MRAX v Belgium (Case C-459/99); Commission  v  Spain  (Case  C-
     157/03); R v SSHD ex p Yiadom (Case C-357/98)  and  Carpenter  v  SSHD
     (Case C-60/00)).  We do not propose to examine these decisions in  any
     detail.  None deal  directly  with  the  Citizens  Directive  and,  in
     particular, Art 3.2.  None deal with the position of anyone other than
     'close'  family  members.   None  provide  guidance  on   the   proper
     interpretation of wording similar to that found in Art 3.2.  Ms Rogers
     did  not  press  them  before  us  either  in  her  oral  or   written
     submissions. We do not find them of any real assistance  in  resolving
     the issue before us.

 37. More relevant, perhaps, is the  Commission's  Communication  with  the
     Parliament dated 12 January 2004.  Ms Rogers relies, in particular, on
     passages at pp. 3 and 9  of  the  document.   They  concern  the  free
     movement of partners in a durable relationship.   Those  partners  who
     are in such a relationship which the host Member State  recognises  in
     its law, fall within the 'close' family  members  group  in  Art  2.2.
     Thus, they have the same  rights  of  entry  and  residence  as  other
     'close' family members such as spouses.  We were invited  to  consider
     the  situation  in  Member  States  which  do  not   recognise   those
     relationships.  At p. 3 of  its  Communication,  the  Commission  says
     this:

           "the concept of family: the definition in Article   2(2)(b)  has
           been confined to registered partnership where the legislation of
           the host Member State regards  this situation as  equivalent  to
           marriage.  Unlike the amended proposal, it  does  not  cover  de
           facto durable  relationships.   This  restriction  is,  however,
           offset  by the addition of a new provision in Article 3 by which
           the  Member  States  will  have  to  facilitate  the  entry  and
           residence of a partner in a durable relationship with the  Union
           citizen having the primary right of residence;"

 38. Further at p.9 the Commission says this:

           "The definition  given  in  Article  2  (2)(b)  of  the  amended
           proposal included both registered partners and partners having a
           de facto relationship, if the  law  of  the  host  Member  State
           recognises this type of situation.  The Council has  decided  to
           restrict this definition to registered partners, if the  law  of
           the  host  Member  States  treats  registered  partnerships   as
           equivalent to marriage.


           At the same time, the text of Article  3  has  been  amended  to
           provide that any Member State  must  facilitate  the  entry  and
           residence of the partner to whom the Union citizen is linked  by
           a  duly  attested  durable  relationship.   The  Commission  has
           accepted the approach proposed by the Council.  While it is true
           that the definition of Article 2(2)(b) is more limited than  the
           text of the amended proposal, it must  be  considered  that  the
           content of Article 3 has been extended to include  any  type  of
           durable relationship.  The Commission considers that the concept
           of durable relationship may cover different situations: same-sex
           marriage, registered partnership, legal cohabitation and common-
           law marriage.  The concept of facilitation has been clarified in
           recital 6a.


           The Commission considers that the text of  the  common  position
           represents  a  fair  compromise  which  makes  it  possible   to
           facilitate the right to free movement and residence of unmarried
           partners of Union  citizens  without  imposing  changes  in  the
           national laws of the Member States."

 39. We have some doubts as to the value of this  kind  of  document  as  a
     legitimate aid to construction of the Directive (see e.g. R v IAT ex p
     Antonissen (Case  C-292/89)  [1991]  ECR  I-745  (minutes  of  Council
     meeting)).  Be that as it may, on examination  it  does  not  in  fact
     assist Ms Rogers.  She submits that the Commission's position is  that
     partners in de facto relationships will be covered by Art 3.2.   There
     is no doubt that this is correct: an 'extended' family member includes
     under Art 3.2 "the partner with whom the Union citizen has  a  durable
     relationship, duly attested".   However,  the  Commission's  statement
     goes no further than stating that their entry and  residence  must  be
     "facilitate[d]".   We note the Commission's  reference  to  what  that
     obligation entails in what is now recital (6) which  we  set  out  and
     referred  to  earlier.   Ms  Rogers  would  have  us   interpret   the
     Commission's statement as accepting that Art 3.2 confers  a  right  of
     entry and residence  or,  in  her  watered-down  version,  creates  an
     inchoate right that Member States need to recognise  for  it  to  take
     effect.  With respect,  the  Commission's  publication  says  no  such
     thing.  It is entirely unclear on what it means will be the effect  of
     applying Art 3.2  to  such  partnerships.   The  Commission  makes  no
     reference to the limitation upon the obligation on a Member  State  to
     facilitate,  namely  to  do  so  "in  accordance  with  its   national
     legislation" but its reference to what is now recital (6) is,  in  our
     view, a recognition of  the  lesser  obligation  imposed  upon  Member
     States in the case of 'extended' family members.

 40. Indeed, it seems  to  us  that,  if  Ms  Rogers  is  right  about  the
     Commission's understanding of Art 3.2, it exposes the unsustainability
     of the proposed reach of Art 3.2 which is being pressed upon us.   The
     Commission's interpretation so understood would seem  to  recognise  a
     right of entry and residence since a Member State (who  by  definition
     did not recognise such relationships) would be  required  to  admit  a
     partner to such a relationship despite the fact that the  relationship
     fell outside the relevant part of the  definition  of  'close'  family
     members under Art 2.2.  Can it really be suggested that Art  3.2  has,
     in this particular context, the effect of nullifying the limitation on
     Member State's obligations under Art 3.1 where they do  not  recognise
     in their  domestic  law  durable  relationships  of  this  sort?   The
     exclusion that Member States were  allowed  in  implementing  Art  3.1
     would be removed by the effect of Art 3.2.  That cannot, in our  view,
     have  been  intended  and  is  a   powerful   argument   against   the
     interpretation of Art 3.2 pressed on us by Ms Rogers.

 41. We are not persuaded by Ms Rogers' spirited challenge to  AP  and  FP.
     Nothing she has said or shown us leads us to conclude  it  is  wrongly
     decided.  AP and FP is correctly decided.  We could repeat the reasons
     of the Tribunal in AP and FP but that would  be  pointless.   We  have
     already set them out earlier.  Given the differential wording in  Arts
     3.1 and 3.2 and the careful articulation of the rights of 'close' (but
     not 'extended') family members in the Citizens Directive, Art  3.2  is
     not capable of being read so as to bestow the  rights  claimed  by  Ms
     Rogers.  For the reasons we have given and those in AP  and  FP,  with
     which we entirely agree, Art  3.2  does  not  create  any  substantive
     rights of entry or residence for 'extended' family members such as the
     appellant.

 42. For these reasons we consider,  despite  Ms  Rogers'  invitation,  the
     issue to be acte clair and not a matter which should  be  referred  to
     the ECJ.

 43.  The  Immigration  Judge's  decision  was  correct  in  law  and   the
     determination dismissing the appeal stands.





                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                                   Date:

