


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                             MA (Galgale - Sab clan) Somalia CG [2006] UKIAT
                                                                       00073


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 May 2006                                |On 17 July 2006              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE KING TD
                        MRS A J F CROSS DE CHAVANNES

                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Weber, Legal Representative, Refugee Legal
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Parker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


The Galgala is a "sab" or low caste clan, similar to  the  Tumal,  Yibir  or
Midgan Clans.
There are, however, two significant aspects  of  difference.  There  are  no
designated areas in which the Galgala may live; and they can no longer  look
to a major clan as patron. They  may  therefore  have  less  expectation  of
protection than others. These two  differences  mean  that  members  of  the
Galgala in general would, on return, face a real  risk  of  persecution  and
treatment contrary to Article 3.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Somalia  born  on  5  May  1985.   He
    originally entered the UK on 28 March 1999 with a  false  passport  and
    claimed asylum.  On 10 July 2002 the respondent refused  to  grant  him
    asylum under paragraph 336  of  HC  395.   The  appellant  was  granted
    limited leave to enter the UK until 4 May 2003.  He  lodged  an  appeal
    against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  which  was  heard  by   an
    Adjudicator on 25 August 2004.  It was accepted that the appellant  was
    a member of the Galgale tribe.  It was not accepted by the  Adjudicator
    that the Galgale were a persecuted minority in Somalia nor  indeed  was
    his overall claim as to his experiences in Somalia  accepted  as  being
    credible.  Although the Adjudicator accepted that the  appellant  would
    face a generally very high risk of becoming a victim of crime  were  he
    to be returned to Somalia, it was not considered  that  Article  3  was
    engaged on the basis of general risk.  The  Adjudicator  dismissed  the
    appeal of the appellant both on asylum  grounds  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The appellant sought reconsideration of that decision  and  the  matter
    came before the Tribunal on 1 December 2005 to determine whether or not
    there had been an error of law in the determination.  The Tribunal held
    that in determining  the  credibility  of  the  appellant  and  of  his
    witnesses, the Adjudicator had failed to show that she had  taken  into
    account his young age.  As to the risk of return it was found that  the
    findings  of  the  Adjudicator  in  paragraphs  60  and   71   of   the
    determination were contradictory and that reference to "generally  very
    high risk" indicated the imposition of a higher threshold than that  of
    real risk.

3.   Second-stage reconsideration was directed, all issues to  be  at  large
    save for the fact that there was to be no dispute that the appellant is
    a member of the Galgale clan.

4.   Thus as it was, the matter came before us for  reconsideration  on  all
    issues other than clan membership.   The  reconsideration  hearing  was
    conducted on 14 March 2005 and the 26  May  2006.   The  appellant  was
    represented by Ms H Weber, a  legal  representative  from  the  Refugee
    Legal Centre (London).  The respondent was represented by Mr L  Parker,
    a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

5.   The appellant adopted his witness statements  of  21  August  2001,  29
    July 2003, 1 April 2004 and 25 August 2004.  He gave oral  evidence  in
    support of his claim.

6.   When war broke out in Somalia the appellant was some 5  years  old  but
    he had memories of moving from house to house in Mogadishu.  It was his
    understanding from his family that this state of affairs lasted about a
    year and a half.  The family then  moved  to  Afgoye,  staying  with  a
    grandmother who had livestock and a  farm.   The  family  consisted  of
    mother and father, six boys and four girls.  His father  seldom  stayed
    with the family for fear of attack or from fear of attracting attention
    to the family.  He would come and go bringing food or  supplies.   Life
    generally was difficult because of the  lack  of  food  and  resources.
    Generally speaking the family were left alone to get on with their life
    together in that region.  It was his understanding that the family left
    Mogadishu in 1993 and remained in Afgoye until 1998/1999.

7.   There came an incident when two uncles were staying in the  house  when
    it was attacked by armed men.  One uncle sought to  intervene  to  stop
    the men taking the appellant's sister NA and  that  uncle  was  killed.
    The other uncle came out and was also killed.  His little sister  Sofir
    was also shot.

8.   Given the violence of that incident the family attempted to  move  back
    to Mogadishu but did not feel safe there.  Everything was destroyed and
    broken so the family returned to Afgoye.

9.   Arrangements were made by the  appellant's  father  and  an  uncle  who
    lived in Saudi Arabia to remove the  children  from  the  region.   The
    appellant's sister, SA, went first in  1998.   The  appellant  left  in
    1999.  The appellant's sister NA came to the United Kingdom in November
    2000.  Since his arrival in the United Kingdom the appellant has had no
    contact with any of his family members in Somalia.  He lives  with  his
    two sisters in the home of their uncle, AA.

10.   When  questioned  about  the  chronology  of  events  in  Somalia  the
    appellant was somewhat vague claiming that he was  very  young  at  the
    time and that decisions were made by those older than he.   During  the
    six or seven years that the family were in Afgoye there was very little
    for them to do.  He spent most of the time around the  house  and  with
    the family.  All he knew was that the grandmother owned  the  house  in
    which they lived.  There were others houses in  the  vicinity:  he  was
    unaware of the clan  structure  of  his  neighbours.   It  was  agreed,
    however, that for the most part the family had been left in peace apart
    from the incident of violence which he has described.

11.  The appellant called as a witness his elder sister NA who was  born  on
    10 October 1978.  She adopted her witness statement found at pages  145
    to 147 of the appellant's bundle of documents.  She came to the  United
    Kingdom on 19 November 2000.

12.  She was 12 years old when the civil war broke out.  At  that  time  the
    family lived in Mogadishu in  an  area  called  Tawfiq  in  the  Yaqsid
    district.  They had to leave their home and  were  being  hunted  down.
    They stayed in different parts of Mogadishu in abandoned houses and  in
    derelict buildings hiding from the fighters of the Hawiye clan.  During
    this time the women and children had to stay  separate  from  the  men.
    The family fled thereafter to Afgoye, staying there  essentially  until
    1999.  The incident  of  violence  was  conducted  by  the  Hawiye  who
    attacked Afgoye.  She described the incident in similar terms  to  that
    of the appellant.  The family returned to Mogadishu but only for a  few
    weeks and then returned back to Afgoye.  Arrangements were made for her
    to be taken from Somalia and she remembers leaving in a lorry to Kenya.
     She stayed in Nairobi with other refugees until arrangements could  be
    made for her to come to the United Kingdom.

13.  She described herself as the eldest of  the  family  and  set  out  the
    names and ages of the other  siblings.   She  agreed  that  during  the
    period 1993 to 1999 the family had  been  relatively  safe  in  Afgoye.
    They helped their grandmother with her livestock.  She  herself  helped
    with looking after  the  younger  children.   Life  was  difficult  and
    occasionally her father would call in with some money or some  food  to
    help.  Some of the neighbours in Afgoye were of the same  clan  as  she
    was.

14.  Our attention was drawn to the witness statement of SA.  She  has  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain  as  a  refugee  and  her  statement
    essentially mirrors that of  her  sister.   The  uncle  in  the  United
    Kingdom, Mr AA, also has made a statement to which  our  attention  was
    invited.  He came to the United Kingdom in  1990  and  spoke  a  little
    about the history of the clan.

15.  Dr Virginia Luling gave oral  evidence  before  us.   She  adopted  her
    report dated 22 January 2006 to be found at pages 212  to  219  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  A further report was  cited,  namely  that  of  12
    March 2006, served by way of additional evidence.  Her principle  field
    of study was in Southern Somalia, and in  particular  in  the  town  of
    Afgoye.

16.  She said that the Galgala  (Galgalo  or  Galegale)  were  a  small  low
    status group who perform tasks such as slaughtering animals and  making
    shoes.  They were especially known as wood carvers.  In  one  way  they
    were similar to the Midgan and other "caste" groups in  Somalia.   They
    were to be regarded as a special case in that unlike most of the  caste
    groups they had been singled out for massacre in recent times  and  did
    not receive the protection from "noble" clans which they formerly  did.



17.  Unlike the Midgan, or other caste groups, the Galgala were  not  widely
    scattered throughout Somalia but traditionally lived in  Gedihir  among
    the Abgal and in an unspecified location in Majerten territory.   Until
    the 1980s the Galgala were an obscure sub-clan.  In the middle  of  the
    1980s they were taken up by the then President Mohammed Siyad Barre, in
    keeping with his practice of patronising small,  powerless  groups  and
    turning them into his loyal servants.   It  seemed  that  he  used  the
    pretext of their legendary origin among the Majerten, who were a  Darod
    clan, to enhance their position.  The  Galgala  became  instruments  in
    harassing political opponents  which  made  them  extremely  unpopular.
    After  the  fall  of  Siyad  Barre  the  Galgala  became   particularly
    victimised.  In particular they were victimised by their former patrons
    the Abgal and there was a notorious massacre  of  the  Galgala  in  the
    Mogadishu stadium, others were killed in  Mogadishu  or  by  the  Abgal
    militia.  Many of the Galgala owe their survival to  Abgal  Sheikh  who
    gave them sanctuary and set up a camp for them.  There was much killing
    in Mogadishu, particularly of those suspected of belonging to the Darod
    and Galgala.  Brutal reprisals took place at  the  beginning  of  1991.
    During the last days of his rule Siyad Barre had  misused  the  Galgala
    community by arming them against the Abgal and  following  his  defeat,
    the Abgal killed many Galgala and forced many others to  abandon  their
    homes.

18.  There are no population figures for the Galgala that would seem  to  be
    available.  They were always a small group,  probably  never  numbering
    more than a few thousand.  Most of them lived in  the  Gedihir  village
    just north of Mogadishu, along the coast and in the city itself.   They
    also lived around a small  village  of  Adal  on  the  coast  north  of
    Mogadishu.

19.  There are two branches of the Galgala, the Aden and Mohamed.  There  is
    a suggestion that their origin may have been among the Majerten in  the
    north east and that some may have remained among the Majerten.   It  is
    not clear to Dr Luling  whether  the  Majerten  origin  is  objectively
    accurate or whether it was an  invention  for  the  purposes  of  Siyad
    Barre.

20.  From information gleaned from people living near Mogadishu  in  January
    2006 it seemed that there are very few of the Galgala  community  still
    in Mogadishu.  Those that remain are discreet  about  disclosing  their
    identification.  Survivors from  the  massacre  in  Mogadishu  fled  to
    Kismayo and Kenya.  Those  remaining  in  Somalia  live  as  Internally
    Displaced People in Adale near Mogadishu and Kismayo.  Conditions under
    which IDPs live are known to be extremely harsh.  Reference was made in
    the report of Dr Luling to the  UNCU/OCHA  report  "Study  on  Minority
    Groups in Somalia" (July 2002, section 3.3) which indicated that  there
    are nearly 5,000 Galgala IDPs in  Kismayo  and  elsewhere.   Since  the
    Galgala identify  themselves  with  the  Majerten  sub-clan  they  have
    received  minimal  clan  support  from  the  Darod  clan  in   Kismayo.
    According  to  Dr   Luling,   minimal   support   is   a   considerable
    understatement.  They have no support at all and on the  contrary  have
    been targeted by the Darod clan, the Marehan and their allies the Habar
    Gidir, who have now taken  over  Kismayo.   In  her  report  Dr  Luling
    continues:

         "According to the United Nations  Co-ordination  Unit  in  Somalia
         (UNCU) 8 April 2003, UN Report on Internally Displaced  Persons  in
         Somalia (section 7.1.1.1-2).


         There are  5,000  Galgala  IDPs  in  Kismayo.   Because  of  their
         position as minorities, the IDPs from the Bantu and Galgala  suffer
         a  wide  range   of   human   rights   violations   which   include
         discrimination and economic exploitation by  the  Habar  Gedir  and
         Marehan militia who are now in control of the city.  On the  ground
         that they are affiliated with the Majerten, the Galgala suffer more
         than even the Bantu IDPs because they are considered as part of the
         enemy.  As a  consequence  many  Galgala  were  summarily  executed
         during the conflicts  during  the  Mejerten  and  Habar  Gedir  and
         between Marehan and Kismayo.  Because of the fear  of  persecution,
         many Galgala IDPs fled Kismayo to Kenya, while others  remained  as
         IDPs."

21.  It is reported that in the Nuh Mohamed  camp  in  Kismayo  gunmen  rape
    women and girls.

22.  It is said that about 2,000  Galgala  IDPs  are  exiles  in  their  own
    former territory at Adale on the coast north  of  Mogadishu.   Although
    they are less threatened there than  in  Kismayo  the  same  report  at
    section 7.33 reports that:

         "The  Galgala  IDPs  suffer  gross  human  rights  violations  and
         deprivation of many of their rights.   The  Galgala  IDPs  complain
         that their traditional symbol on their animals  for  identification
         was erased by the Abgal,  with  an  intention  to  appropriate  the
         Galgala livestock.  The Galgala IDPs  also  suffer  discrimination.
         They allegedly claim that some members of the  IDP  community  were
         denied to buy animals and houses in Adale.  They were  also  denied
         integration into the main  population.   Health  condition  of  the
         people in Adale is rated as very poor."

23.  The conclusion of Dr Luling's is that the survivors in  Adale  seem  to
    eke  out  a  barely  tolerated  existence  subject  to  harassment  and
    deprivation.

24.  The Galgala clan was not to be confused with the Galjaal  which  was  a
    large and important Hawiye clan.

25.  In the report of 12 March 2006 Dr Luling indicates that the  Yibir  and
    the Midgan live scattered all over the pastoral areas of Somalia and do
    not have one particular clan as patron.  They would adopt as patron who
    ever happened to be the powerful clan or sub-clan in a given area.  The
    Midgan, Tumal and Yibir traditionally lived in the areas of  the  four,
    main nomadic clan families of  Darod,  Isak,  Dir  and  Hawiye  in  the
    northern and central Somalia.

26.  In her oral  evidence,  Dr  Luling  confirmed  that  the  reports  were
    accurate.  Commenting generally as to the chronology of the account  as
    given by the appellant and his witnesses  she  noted  that  the  Somali
    people use the Islamic calendar rather than the western calendar.   She
    confirmed that the results of her enquiries would reveal that very  few
    Galgala now lived in Mogadishu for  the  reasons  as  set  out  in  her
    report.  Galgala are to be found either in Kenya or in the IDP camps in
    Somalia.  One particular camp at Qoryoli town, 100 kilometres south  of
    Mogadishu, may contain some Galgala.  Also Galgala live in Adale  which
    is some 150 miles from Mogadishu.  They live  however  without  support
    and in dire conditions.

27.  The town of Afgoye since 1993 remained under the control of  the  Habar
    Gidir clan, which is a sub-clan of the Hawiye.   Within  the  community
    nature of society in Somalia, the details of clan membership are almost
    always known.  There have however been a flood of refugees in 1991  and
    1992.  She had last visited Afgoye for a visit in 1996 and before  that
    in 1986 for a few months.  Dr Luling indicated that from her  enquiries
    from her contacts living in the area she could find  no  trace  of  any
    Galgala now living in the Afgoye area.  Any that were  there  would  be
    vulnerable to the militia of the Habar Gidir.  It is her  opinion  that
    any  Galgala  living  outside  the  camps  would  do  so  without   any
    protection.  It  would  not  be  possible  for  Galgala  to  return  to
    Mogadishu.

28.  We have regard to a report by Cedric Barnes dated 7  March  2006  which
    can be found  at  pages  219  to  221  of  the  appellant's  bundle  of
    documents.  It in fact refers to Dr Luling's report and in her comments
    relating to the Galgala.  He describes the Galgala as being located  in
    Mogadishu and Gadihir in middle Shabell region  identifying  themselves
    with the patrons representing the sub-clans  of  Majerteen.   Majerteen
    are a sub-clan of the Darod.

29.  We  have  also  had  our  attention  drawn  to  a  document  which  was
    electronic mail from Ahmed  Mohamud  Farah  of  the  Galgallo  Minority
    Refugee Community dated 7 December  2000.   He  spoke  of  the  Gagallo
    living in the Shabell region of Somalia before the civil war among  the
    Abgal.  He said that in Mogadishu in the camps were some 450  families,
    in Kismayo in the camps 1,150  families,  in  the  Shabell  region  640
    families and in Kenya in the camps 458 families.  The  source  of  such
    information and statistics is not stated.  We  were  not  addressed  by
    either party on that particular document but we cite it for the sake of
    completeness.

30.  Both parties then made their submissions to us  and  we  regard  it  as
    important to summarise the arguments which each advances.

31.  Mr Parker submits that the Galgala as "caste" clan is in  no  different
    position to the Tumal, Yibir or Midgan clans.  He develops his argument
    by reference to Home Office Operational Guidance  Note  of  Somalia  v9
    issued on 21 November 2005 at chapter 9.  In traditional Somali society
    a number of "occupational castes" live scattered among the majority  of
    "noble" Somali clans.  Northern Somali Pastoral  Society  distinguishes
    three occupational castes, the  Midgan,  Tumal  and  Yibir.   They  are
    referred to collectively as "Sab" (which means low  caste).   The  word
    "Sab" refers to professional castes without territorial, geological  or
    ethnic foundation and are less than 1%  of  the  country's  population.
    Three quarters of them are shoemakers, barbers, blacksmiths and  others
    are weavers.  The Sab are  attached  to  noble  Somali  tribes  through
    patronage and perform specific duties in return for which they are paid
    and allowed to remain in the territory of the tribe of attachment.  The
    Sab attached to a noble tribe identify themselves with it  in  relation
    to other tribes.  They have no recognised genealogy of  their  own  and
    are not landowning groups.  Conventional paths  of  upward  and  social
    mobility are not open to them.  Although the position of the  Sab  have
    many points in common with the position of  slaves  in  Somali  society
    their position was nevertheless distinct.  Although they own  no  land,
    they are nevertheless distinct communities with their own customs.  The
    Sab have the right to move from noble family to family at will.

32.  For the past few decades many Midgan, Tumal and Yibir had  migrated  to
    the cities where they have  been  employed  by  politicians  from  more
    powerful clans as drivers, bodyguards and spies.  Siyad Barre  elevated
    certain Midgan to important positions in the ministries of defence  and
    education.  The castes traditionally live over the areas  of  the  four
    main nomadic clan families of Darod, Isak,  Dir  and  Hawiye.   Midgan,
    Tumal and Yibir live scattered all over Somalia but mostly in  northern
    areas.  There are no indications that their security is  at  risk  from
    targeted actions from other clans.

33.  In the connection our attention was drawn to the United Nations  Report
    on Internally Displaced Persons  in  Somalia,  2002,  particularly  the
    Generic Clan Chart of July 2002 attached to that report.  On that chart
    it can be seen that the Galgale are linked with the Sab  grouping  with
    many other clans, such  as  the  Yibir,  Tumal,  Madhiban.   Mr  Parker
    submits that therefore there is no distinction to be made  between  the
    Galgale and the other small caste tribes.

34.  Mr Parker further developed his argument by reference to  the  decision
    of the Tribunal in YS and HA (Midgan - Not generally at  risk)  Somalia
    CG [2005] UKIAT 00088.  In that decision the  Tribunal  held  that  the
    Midgan or Madhiban were not generally at risk because it  was  part  of
    the tradition of that clan to obtain the protection of a local  patron.
    Mr Parker submits that that was precisely what was done in the case  of
    the appellant and of his family.

35.  The fact that the appellant and his family were able to live in  Afgoye
    for so many years without incident indicates that they had in  practice
    the protection of the majority clan in control of the area.  They would
    not have been tolerated otherwise.   We  were  invited  to  follow  the
    reasoning of the Tribunal in YS and HA and apply it also to the Galgala
    clan.

36.  As with all the caste clans the  Galgala  can  be  readily  assimilated
    into the predominant population.  Our attention was drawn to the  Study
    on Minorities in Somalia, a report to  be  found  at  page  88  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  The report at paragraph  2.1  confirmed  that  the
    clan has physical appearances similar to that of the dominant clans, as
    well as having ethnic and cultural  similarities.   What  distinguishes
    these assimilated minorities are their distinct economic background.

37.  Further reliance is placed on that particular report  which  says  that
    the Galgala have assimilated into the Abgal in  Jowhar  and  Mogadishu.
    They also identify  themselves  as  Nuh  Mohamud,  a  sub-clan  of  the
    Majerten clan.   Thus  it  is  submitted  that  the  Galgala  have  the
    patronage of more than majority clan.

38.  As to credibility generally, we were asked to find that the account  of
    the appellant lacked credibility to a significant extent.  It was clear
    from the objective evidence that there was indeed  a  massacre  of  the
    Galgala in Mogadishu in 1991.  It was not feasible or  believable  that
    the appellant and family could have stayed in Mogadishu for  a  further
    two years thereafter.  It is clear from  the  objective  evidence  that
    most of the Galgala either fled to Kenya, or to Qoryoley in  the  lower
    Shabell.  The Habar Gidir were of the Hawiye clan as  were  the  Abgal.
    It would not have been possible for the appellant  and  his  family  to
    have lived in Afgoye unless given the protection of the  majority  clan
    there.  If they had that protection then it is not  credible  that  the
    incident of violence as described occurred  at  all.   The  appellant's
    sister had spoken of Hawiye militia attacking the town but they were of
    the same clan as those who lived in the town.   The  vagueness  of  the
    appellant as to dates and  events  relied  upon  indicated  a  lack  of
    credibility.  Although the appellant stated that he lived from hand  to
    mouth, nevertheless he and his sisters were able to come by substantial
    sums of money in order to effect their departure.  All of which went to
    support the contention, submits Mr Parker, that the appellant's  family
    enjoyed a reasonable lifestyle under the protection of a majority  clan
    and did not suffer the deprivations as described.  There was no  reason
    therefore why they could not return to the same  area  to  continue  to
    enjoy the same protection.

39.  Ms Weber directs our attention to her skeleton argument.   She  submits
    that first of all the Galgala are indeed  part  of  the  Sab  group  of
    clans.  It is common ground and indeed recognised in  YS  and  HA  that
    such clans are more vulnerable than many  others  depending  for  their
    wellbeing upon the protection of a major  clan.   She  submits  however
    that the Galgala are more vulnerable  than  others  because  they  have
    forfeited their traditional patron.  The  society  in  Somali  is  very
    traditional.  The  other  sub-groups  have  the  tradition  of  allying
    themselves with a variety of patrons whereas the Galgala have not.   We
    were asked to note that during  the  regime  of  Siyad  Barre  he  made
    attempts to elevate the status of all the minority clans.  That created
    some difficulties for a number of the clans thereafter but  mostly  for
    the Galgala who were systematically eliminated by the Abgal and treated
    with the utmost disrespect by the Darod and other majority clans in and
    around Mogadishu.  Without a patron it is a matter  of  chance  whether
    any particular group of Galgala will  enjoy  protection  or  otherwise.
    Such a lottery is not to be regarded as acceptable.

40.  We were invited to find that  the  appellant's  account  was  indeed  a
    credible one.  Afgoye was controlled by the Habar Gidir,  part  of  the
    Hawiye clan.  Often the Habar Gidir was in  conflict  with  the  Abgal,
    thus there would be no reason to believe otherwise than that the  Habar
    Gidir would be sympathetic to the  victims  of  the  Abgal.   The  fact
    however that the appellant and his family could live  in  the  area  of
    Afgoye without incident  did  not  mean  that  they  had  the  positive
    protection of the controlling clan.  It was  submitted  that  the  fact
    that that protection was not available was demonstrated by  the  attack
    upon them by the invaders into the area.  No doubt had that  protection
    been available it would have been extended to them by  the  militia  of
    the Habar Gidir.  Thus their protection was at most right to exist  and
    nothing more.  We were invited to have regard to  the  youthfulness  of
    the appellant and his sister to explain the lack of detailed  knowledge
    as to their predicament and circumstances when living in Somalia.

41.  Although it is right to note that the Galgala live  in  IDP  camps,  it
    has been held by the Tribunal that such conditions cross the  threshold
    of Article 3.  To return the appellant to Afgoye  would  be  simply  to
    expose him to a risk of exploitation or violence.  Unlike the other Sab
    groups there is no designated area in Somalia to which the Galgala  can
    go and no traditional patron to be associated with.  As Dr Luling  made
    clear in her report there are  very  few  Galgala  living  in  southern
    Somalia, otherwise than in IDP camps.  Isolation and lack of protection
    indicate a real risk of persecution and/or of ill-treatment.   We  were
    therefore invited to allow the appeal.

42.  We remind ourselves of the importance of considering the claim  of  the
    appellant within the overall  context  of  the  objective  evidence  as
    presented.  There was the appellant's bundle itself consisting of  some
    399 folios together with the  additional  reports  of  Dr  Luling.   Mr
    Parker most helpfully provided two bundles of documents containing  the
    Somalia Operation Guidance Note v9 of 21 November 2005, the  Report  on
    Minority Groups in Somalia/Joint British, Danish and Dutch Fact-Finding
    Mission to Nairobi, Kenya of 17 -  24  September  2000,  the  US  State
    Department on Somalia dated 28 February 2005 and one of 8  March  2006.
    In addition there was the report on  Internally  Displaced  Persons  in
    Somalia which was prepared by the UNCU/UN-OCHA 2002.   In  addition  we
    have considered a number of Tribunal authorities.  We will not set  out
    in great detail the  general  situation  in  Somalia.   Such  has  been
    referred to in many a Tribunal decision.  Rather  we  concentrate  upon
    two issues in this appeal, namely the credibility of the  appellant  as
    to his experiences in Somalia and the nature and protection which would
    be available to him were he to return as a member of the Galgala clan.

43.  The first matter which exercises our attention  is  to  understand  the
    classification or membership of the Galgala.  The suggestion is  raised
    by Mr Barnes in his report  that  the  Galgala  comprise  0.2%  of  the
    population and identify themselves as descendents of Mohamud  and  Omar
    Mahamud, sub-clans of the Majerten.  The latter being of course a  sub-
    clan of the Darod which is itself a majority clan.   The  Generic  Clan
    Chart of July 2002 attached  to  the  report  on  Internally  Displaced
    Persons in Somalia 2002 makes a distinction between the Somale and Sab.
     The Majetan and the Hawiye and Haber Gidir are said to be part of  the
    "Somale" clan.  There seems to be a degree of conflict in the objective
    evidence on this aspect.  The Report  on  Minority  Groups  in  Somalia
    dated 2000 at chapter 9 speaks of the Midgan, Tumal and  Yibir  as  Sab
    and in that fairly lengthy chapter it  discusses  their  structure  and
    difficulties.   No mention is made, however, in  that  chapter  of  the
    Galgala.  In the Study of Minorities in Somalia report set out at  page
    88 (or 108) of the appellant's bundle it is  said  that  the  Gayaboye,
    Tumal, Yibir and Galgala are  ethnically  associated  with  the  Somale
    which forms a dominant clan in Somalia.  However  cultural  stigma  and
    traditions have excluded them as outcasts from the Somale  clan.   Most
    of the minority groups have assimilated into other  Somale  clans  with
    whom they live.  It is repeated that the Galgala have assimilated  into
    the Abgal in Jowhar  and  Mogadishu  but  identify  themselves  as  Nuh
    Mohamud, a sub-clan of  the  Majerten  clan.   Other  clans  that  have
    assimilated themselves are the Isak  in  Somaliland  or  the  Darod  in
    Puntland.

44.  On the other side the Home Office Operational Guidance  Notes,  Somalia
    6 May 2004, paragraph  3.7.3.8  links  the  Midgan,  Tumal,  Yibir  and
    Galgala together as minority groups speaking of  them  as  occupational
    caste groups.  Dealing with  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
    location the report goes onto say:-

         "Minority groups will be safest in  areas  where  they  enjoy  the
         protection of a dominant clan.  'Occupational caste' groups such as
         the Midgan, Tumal and Yibir are among  minority  groups  that  have
         also been able to secure such protection, though to a lesser extent
         in rural areas."

    The Report on Internally Displaced  Persons  in  Somalia,  UNCU/UN-OCHA
    2002 would seem to be supportive of the proposition  that  the  Galgala
    are members of Sab as illustrated in the Generic Clan Chart.  It speaks
    in another chart of the Galgale having the protection of the Abgal.


45.  As Dr Luling made clear in  her  report,  the  precise  origin  of  the
    Galgala is far from clear but it is possible that their Majerten origin
    was an invention by Siyad Barre to link them with his clan,  the  Darod
    clan.

46.  Looking at the objective evidence as a whole, we  prefer  the  evidence
    of Dr Luling as to the association of the Galgala with the Abgal and we
    place considerable weight upon the UNCU/UN-OCHA  report  on  Internally
    Displaced Persons in Somalia.  It is a report of  some  detail  and  we
    accept, on the basis of that evidence and of the evidence of Dr Luling,
    that the Galgala fall within the Sab caste  clans,  and  as  such  fall
    within the similar category of clan as of the Midgan, Tumal and  Yibir.



47.  The Tribunal in YS and HA considered in some  detail  the  Midgan  clan
    and we do not  repeat  all  that  is  set  out  in  that  most  helpful
    determination.  The nature of the clan is set out  in  some  detail  at
    paragraph 42 of that decision.  The relationship of that clan to others
    is set out at paragraphs 43 to 44.  A summary of the conclusions of the
    Tribunal are  set  out  at  paragraph  73.   Paragraph  73(vii)  has  a
    particular  relevance.   That  provides  that  Midgan  who  enjoy   the
    patronage and protection of a noble clan when  they  left  Somalia  can
    normally be expected to regain such patronage  and  protection  in  the
    event of  their  return.   The  protection  afforded  would  extend  to
    provision being made upon return for their internal safe travel back to
    rural areas.  However a Midgan who  has  lost  protection  of  a  local
    patron and who has not found alternative protection in a city would  be
    vulnerable to persecution.   The  same  would  apply  to  any  loss  of
    protection in the home area.

48.  What is urged upon us is to find  that,  so  far  as  the  Galgala  are
    concerned, they face two disadvantages.  The first being that they were
    or are still associated with the Siyad Barre regime  in  the  minds  of
    other clans, and secondly that they have lost the protection  of  their
    patron the Abgal.  To use the word "loss" is perhaps an  understatement
    because the Abgal continue, it would seem,  to  bear  the  Galgala  ill
    will.

49.  As to the general issue of reputation, it is perhaps  helpful  to  bear
    in mind the Report on Minority Groups in  Somalia,  and  in  particular
    chapter 9 to which  reference  has  already  been  made.   As  we  have
    commented, that tends to concentrate upon the Midgan, Tumal and  Yibir.
    It is noted from paragraph 9.3.1 that Siyad Barre,  in  his  policy  of
    modernisation and abolition  of  tribalism,  tried  to  emancipate  the
    minorities.  Some members of the occupational castes, especially Midgan
    and Yibir, held important offices during his regime  including  in  the
    military.  As a result the occupational castes  supported  Siyad  Barre
    and were accordingly expelled after his downfall.   Midgan,  Tumal  and
    Yibir, not being party to any peace agreement, found recovery after the
    war especially difficult.  It is said that during the  civil  war  that
    followed Siyad Barre's downfall in 1991 the occupational castes were in
    general not specifically targeted, although particular individuals  and
    families who had visibly supported the Barre regime were vulnerable  to
    targeted retaliation.  Yibir as with the Galgala were armed and sent to
    kill Abgal clansmen who in turn attacked them.   Similarly  the  Midgan
    and Tumal found their role in the conflict earned them hostilities from
    SNM rebels and of the Isak clans in general.   Many  fled  in  fear  of
    retaliation to Ethiopian Puntland.  Matters would seem now to be  on  a
    more even keel, and as the report indicates:

         "There are no indications that the security of Midgan,  Tumal  and
         Yibir is at risk from targeted actions by other clans.  At the same
         time, indications are  that  their  relationships  with  the  major
         Somale clans have not improved much from traditional times and that
         they  are  still  discriminated  against  in  social  and  economic
         spheres."

    It is agreed that the Galgala suffered as a result of their association
    with Siyad Barre regime and so did the other clans.  Such may of course
    be a matter of fact and degree as it  would  seem  certainly  from  the
    report by Dr Luling that the Galgala were in particular used  by  Siyad
    Barre to harass his political opponents and they reaped very  much  the
    reward of that relationship at the hands of the Abgal.  The passage  to
    which we have already referred  is  contained  in  Dr  Luling's  report
    citing the UNCU Report  of  April  2003  on  the  Internally  Displaced
    Persons in Somalia, section 7.1.1.1-2 speaking of  the  wide  range  of
    human violations inflicted on  the  Galgala  by  the  Habar  Gidir  and
    Marehan militia, even the fact that the Galgala suffered more than even
    the Bantu  IDPs  because  they  were  considered  part  of  the  enemy.
    Although  couched  in  general  terms  the  report  would  seem  to  be
    supportive of the proposition as  advanced  to  us  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that of all of the Sab castes, the Galgala seems to have been
    the least popular because of its perceived political support for  Siyad
    Barre.  It also seems to be common ground that  they  have  lost  their
    patron, the Abgal.

50.  We remind ourselves of the definition of refugee as set out in  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The burden and standard of proof  is
    to the lower standard, namely "a reasonable likelihood" or  "a  serious
    possibility".  We apply a similar low standard to the  issue  of  human
    rights bearing in mind in particular the decisions in Ullah and  Kacaj.
    We remind ourselves of the importance of taking a holistic approach  to
    the evidence, seeking to place  each  factor  and  aspect  of  evidence
    within its proper context within the whole.

51.  We are asked on behalf of the respondent to make an adverse finding  of
    credibility in respect of the appellant's evidence.  The  vagueness  as
    to chronology and dates is obviously a matter of some concern, although
    in fairness to the appellant and to his witnesses  they would have been
    very young at the time of the events which they seek to  describe.   It
    lies in strange contrast with a lifestyle of abject poverty that  funds
    were found to be available to the appellant and his sisters to come  to
    the United Kingdom.  It was said that such funds came from their father
    and from an uncle in Saudi Arabia.  Clandestine entry into  the  United
    Kingdom is also a factor  which  would  tend  to  weigh  against  their
    credibility.  Mr Parker prays in aid  the  fact  that  as  Galgala  the
    appellant and his family are unlikely to have  survived  two  years  in
    Mogadishu immediately following the civil war.

52.  We place in the balance, however, that the lifestyle  as  described  by
    the appellant and his witnesses is  one  which  matches  the  objective
    evidence.  The fact that there would seem to be few Galgala  in  Afgoye
    town now does not necessarily mean  that  there  were  not  some  on  a
    previous occasion.  The appellant spoke  of  the  attack  as  being  an
    attack upon the town itself, rather than upon the family in particular.
     So far as can be gathered from  the  Report  on  Internally  Displaced
    Persons in Somalia and the schedule attached thereto, Afgoye  town  and
    the surrounding areas has been the subject  of  a  number  of  specific
    conflicts, also in the Kismayo area there had seemed to be  a  conflict
    between Darod and Hawiye in 1992 with the Habar Gidir militia  in  1995
    and Garre militia in 1993.  The point made by Ms Weber on behalf of the
    appellant is that ad hoc protection is only as good as  the  good  will
    that currently exists.

53.  We remind ourselves, when assessing  credibility,  that  the  issue  of
    clan membership is not in doubt  nor  indeed  did  Mr  Parker  seek  to
    suggest on behalf of the respondent that the appellant and  his  family
    had never lived in the area of Afgoye.  It would have been open for the
    respondent to have made the suggestion that, given the nature  of  clan
    membership, the appellant and family had in fact  left  Somalia  and/or
    were living in Kenya or in an IDP  camp.   That  was  not  however  the
    suggestion that was made, rather reliance was placed upon the fact that
    the appellant did live in Afgoye.  Given the  warring  situation  which
    existed between clans and the precarious nature of any protection which
    may then have extended towards the appellant and his family, we do  not
    discount the experience of violence which he has described.   That  the
    Galgala should experience violence at the hands of militia forces  from
    time to time is very much in keeping with the objective evidence.   The
    appellant has not sought to exaggerate the difficulties  which  he  and
    his family experienced in Afgoye.  It would  have  been  easy  to  have
    described many attacks and much violence but he has not  done  so.   We
    find generally the account to be credible.

54.  We remind ourselves, however,  that  credibility  is  not  the  central
    issue in this appeal.  The central issue being of  course  the  ability
    and safety of return.

55.  We recognise at the outset that there are two significant  distinctions
    as between the Galgala and the Midgan,  Tumal  and  Yibir  clans.   The
    first is that of territory.  It is clear from  the  generality  of  the
    reports that there are areas in Somalia to which the Midgan can  return
    to.  There are areas in which they live and  in  which  they  have  the
    protection of the noble clans.  There is no clear  evidence  before  us
    that such designated areas exist in  the  case  of  the  Galgala.   The
    evidence as presented before us indicates that for the most  part,  the
    Galgala have been removed either by force  or  by  voluntary  departure
    from their traditional area in the lower Shabell.  Those who remain are
    in IDP camps in Kismayo town, Qoryole town and in  Adale.   The  letter
    from the chairman of the Galgalo Minority Community is perhaps somewhat
    out of date, 2000, when it speaks of some 640 families in  the  Shabell
    region.  That may serve to reinforce the credibility of  the  appellant
    that there other families in the area but the situation may  well  have
    changed.  The evidence from Dr Luling was that from  her  contacts  she
    could detect very few in Mogadishu or in Afgoye and very few  otherwise
    than in Kenya or in the camps.  It would be easy to  suggest  that  the
    appellant could safely return to Afgoye but that would be to ignore the
    possible changes which may have taken place in the  period  since  1999
    when he left.  It would seem  from  the  evidence  of  Dr  Luling  that
    whatever community of Galgala there may have  been  in  Afgoye  now  no
    longer live there.  Whether that is a result of  simply  leaving  or  a
    result of hostile activity towards them cannot be determined  with  any
    accuracy.  The appellant however would be returning in isolation  to  a
    community which was not his own.  We have no doubt that to do so  would
    expose him to the possibility of violence or extortion.   It  is  clear
    from the reports to which reference has been  made  that  there  exists
    still some degree of hostility towards the Galgala in the lower Shabell
    region by a number of the clans.  If those in IDP camps group  together
    for safety are without great safety, it follows that individuals within
    a community may be less protected than otherwise  might  be  the  case.
    Thus we can find no indication  that  there  is  any  traditional  area
    within Somalia to which the appellant can return to join a  significant
    number of Galgala.

56.  The second issue of course is that of protection,  and  we  accept  the
    submissions  which  have  been  made   that,   given   the   particular
    circumstances the Galgala clan and their loss  of  their  main  patron,
    they will have less expectation of protection and indeed less  evidence
    of receiving it than the other tribes to which reference has been made.

57.  Return to the IDP camps exposes the appellant to the harsh regime  that
    is to be found in there.  We have  briefly  summarised  part  of  those
    difficulties.  There is little protection of  the  communities  against
    the wishes of the majority clans' militia who rape and  loot  seemingly
    at will.  Indeed the Tribunal was recently held that anyone who was  at
    risk of being compelled to live  in  an  IDP  camp  would  have  little
    difficulty in making out their claim under Article 3 ECHR, if not under
    the Refugee Convention.  In M and Others (Lone Women - Ashraf)  Somalia
    CG [2005] UKIAT 00076.  We are also sensitive to remarks recently  made
    by the Court of Appeal in the recent case of Januzi [2006] UKHL 5.

58.   In  all  the  circumstances  we  find  that  the  appellant   suffered
    persecution in the past for a Convention reason, namely  by  reason  of
    tribal membership.  We find no reason to believe  that  that  risk  has
    been removed with the passage of time and accordingly we find that  the
    appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution  were  he  to  return.
    Further we find that the nature of the treatment which he is likely  to
    receive would be such as to affect his safety  and  well-being  to  the
    extent that it crosses the threshold of Article 3 of the ECHR.

59.  Given the findings which  we  have  made  it  is  perhaps  academic  to
    further consider the issue of Article 8.  It  was  not  raised  in  the
    grounds seeking reconsideration, nor indeed have we been  addressed  on
    the  point.   As  the  Tribunal  decision  of  AH  (Scope   of   S.103A
    Reconsideration) Sudan [2006] UKAIT 00038  promulgated  on  April  2006
    makes clear reconsideration is limited to the grounds of appeal to  the
    Tribunal.  The appeal in respect of Article 8  was  not  one  of  those
    grounds.

60.  For the above reasons the  original  decision  of  the  Adjudicator  is
    quashed and a new decision substituted,  namely  that  the  appellant's
    appeal in respect of asylum is  allowed.   His  appeal  in  respect  of
    Article 3 of his human rights appeal is also allowed.




Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge King


                                 APPENDIX  A
      Cases, expert reports and background material before the Tribunal


Cases

DJ (Bantu - not generally at risk) Somalia [2005] UKIAT 00089
YS & HA (Midgan - not generally at risk) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00088
HY (Yibir - YS & HA applied) Somalia [2006] UKIAT 00002

Expert Reports

Country Report  by Dr Cedric Barnes . 11.6.2004 with update letter 7.3.06
Letter from Dr Virginia Luling dated 15.1.2006 with Report dated 22.1.06.
Electronic mail from Dr Virginia Luling ,dated 12.3.2006.
Electronic mail from Ahmed Mohamud Farah, of the Galgalo minority refugee
Community (annexed to the report of Dr Luling).

Background Material

Somalia operational Guidance Notes v 9.0 and 10.0, issued 21.11.05 and
5.5.06.
COIS Report - Somalia, issued April 2006.
USSD reports on Somalia 28.2.2005 and 8.3. 2006.
UNCU/UN-OCHA Somalia report: Internally Displaced Persons combined report
on Somalia, July 2002.
CIPU report on Somalia , April 2005, annexes B and C.
Joint British, Danish and Dutch fact- finding mission to Nairobi, Kenya
17 - 24 September 2000.
Letter from Somali Minister for Refugees and Diaspora to Asylum Aid
3.6.2004.
Letter from Amnesty International to SSHD, 10.6.2004.
Article from the Guardian 15.6.2004, Deportees sent back from War Zone.
Danish Immigration Service Report on human Rights and Security in Central
and Southern Somalia, 7 - 21 January 2004.
UNCU/UN - OCHA Report on Somalia: Study on Minority Groups in Somalia July
2002.


