

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

              MA (rule 51(4) - not oral evidence) Somalia [2007] UKAIT 00079


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 24 July 2007                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE



                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ADDIS ABABA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton, Counsel, instructed by Messrs
                    Lawrence & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer

Rule 51(4) is confined to written evidence and cannot be used to  prevent  a
person from giving oral evidence to the Tribunal. There will rarely  be  any
point in relying on rule 51(4) to exclude a witness statement  of  a  person
who is to give oral evidence.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Somalia born on 25  January  1989,  applied
    on 16 May 2005 for entry clearance to enter the United Kingdom  as  the
    spouse of a person settled here (the sponsor).

2.   On 14 November 2005 the respondent refused the appellant's  application
    and the appellant appealed  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    against that refusal.  On 16 March  2006  the  appellant's  appeal  was
    heard by Immigration Judge  Britton,  sitting  at  Newport,  who  by  a
    determination dated 6 April 2006 dismissed the appellant's appeal.

3.   On 2 May 2006 a Senior Immigration  Judge  ordered  reconsideration  of
    the determination on a number of the grounds set out in the application
    for reconsideration.  The first  of  these  concerned  the  Immigration
    Judge's decision to refuse to let one of the appellant's witnesses give
    evidence before him.

4.   The witness  in  question  was  a  citizen  of  The  Netherlands,  also
    originally from Somalia, who has since 2003 had  been  working  in  the
    United Kingdom as a bus driver.  His witness statement,  signed  on  13
    March 2006, (three days before the Immigration  Judge  hearing)  stated
    that the witness knew the appellant and his sponsor, having met them in
    2000 when  the  witness  was  on  holiday  in  Ethiopia.   The  witness
    statement continued by stating that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
    living in a single  room.   The  witness  subsequently  recognised  the
    sponsor in 2005 at a social gathering.   Having  asked  her  about  the
    appellant, the sponsor informed the witness that he was still in  Addis
    Ababa.  The sponsor borrowed the witness's mobile  phone  in  order  to
    telephone the appellant.

5.   The statement ended by the witness asserting that he was  in  no  doubt
    that the appellant and the sponsor were married and that  when  he  had
    seen them in Ethiopia they were a close and young couple who loved  and
    cared for each other a lot.

6.   Paragraph  15  of  the  determination  records  what  happened  at  the
    hearing:-

         "15. Ms Hannant [the Home Office Presenting  Officer]  objected  to
             [the sponsor] giving evidence, on the day of  the  hearing  as
             the statement has not been submitted in  accordance  with  the
             Directions  given  and  the  respondent  has  not  been  given
             sufficient time to make checks on the witness.  It is noted he
             is a Dutch national, and I ruled that the respondent  has  not
             been given sufficient time for them (sic) to  make  enquiries.
             No explanation had been given as to why this statement had not
             been served in accordance with the Directions given especially
             as the witness is working for London First."

7.   The Immigration Judge went  on  to  make  various  adverse  credibility
    findings  regarding  the  appellant's  claim.    In   particular,   the
    Immigration Judge did not believe that the  couple  had  actually  been
    married before 2005.

8.   The grounds accompanying the application for  reconsideration  asserted
    that the evidence of the witness had been "absolutely  crucial  to  the
    main issues in the case" (paragraph 4) and that, in  refusing  to  hear
    the  witness,  the  Immigration  Judge  failed   to   give   sufficient
    consideration to the overriding objective in the Immigration and Asylum
    Procedure Rules 2003 (sic).  He also failed to give relevant reasons as
    to why he had excluded the evidence.  Given  that  the  witness  was  a
    Dutch national, the grounds contended that

         "It is not clear what enquiries the respondent would have wanted to
         or indeed been able to make - the Secretary of State would  usually
         carry out checks on witnesses who have at some point  in  the  past
         made applications to the Secretary of State to ascertain details of
         their own immigration history as well as to link their  files  with
         that of the appellant in  question  where  the  appellant  and  the
         witnesses are related.  This is not such a case as the witness here
         ... being a national of an EEC country who is in the UK in exercise
         of his Treaty rights would not  have  been  required  to  make  any
         applications to the Secretary of State  in  order  to  be  able  to
         remain in the UK legally.  Consequently, the importance of such  of
         a check appears to have been overstated in this case.  There  would
         have been no prejudice to the respondent in calling the witness, on
         the contrary, the witness would have assisted the court in reaching
         a timely and just determination in the case."

9.   Although the grounds  refer  to  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
    (Procedure) Rules 2003, those were not the Rules in force at  the  date
    of the hearing before the Immigration Judge.  It is,  however,  helpful
    to begin by looking at what would have been the relevant  provision  of
    the former Rules, namely, rule 48(5):-

         "(5) An Adjudicator or the Tribunal must not consider any  evidence
             which is not filed or served in accordance  with  time  limits
             set out in these Rules or  directions  given  under  rule  38,
             unless satisfied that there are good reasons to do so."

10.  The Immigration Appeal Tribunal was on several  occasions  required  to
    consider the scope and effect of rule 48(5).

11.  In MD (Good reasons to consider) Pakistan [2004] UKIAT 00197,  the  IAT
    heard an appeal against the determination of  an  adjudicator  who  had
    refused to hear the appellant give evidence in an asylum appeal, on the
    ground that the appellant's witness statement had not  been  served  in
    due time before the hearing.  The Tribunal found that  the  adjudicator
    erred in law in applying rule 48(5), as there was no indication in  the
    determination that the adjudicator had considered  whether  there  were
    good reasons why he should have considered the  evidence  in  question.
    In so finding, the Tribunal also had regard  to  rule  4  of  the  2003
    Rules, which provided that it  was  the  overriding  objective  of  the
    Rules, "to secure the just, timely and effective disposal of appeals."

12.  In EA (immigration - Rule 48(5)) Ghana  [2004]  UKIAT  00227,  the  IAT
    found that an adjudicator had correctly applied rule 48(5), in refusing
    to permit the  introduction  of  late  written  evidence  in  an  entry
    clearance appeal, where the appellant was abroad.  At paragraphs  9  to
    11 of its determination, the Tribunal found that what,  in  the  asylum
    context, might be regarded as constituting "good reasons" to admit  the
    evidence in question would not necessarily amount to such a  reason  in
    the context of an immigration appeal, where "life and death  issues  do
    not normally arise" and a fresh claim by the appellant could  be  made.
    Furthermore, because the respondent in an entry clearance appeal  would
    be an entry clearance officer,  it  was  less  easy  for  a  presenting
    officer to obtain instructions with regard to late evidence.

13.  In BY (A good reason to exclude) Nigeria [2004] UKIAT 00319, which  was
    also an entry clearance appeal, the IAT found that the adjudicator  had
    not erred in law  in  refusing  to  admit  evidence  served  after  the
    requisite time limit.   At  paragraph  21  of  its  determination,  the
    Tribunal noted with approval the distinction  drawn  in  EA,  observing
    that "'good reasons' might well be harder to find in immigration  cases
    and than in asylum and human rights cases  where  the  consequences  of
    error can be very grave."

14.  The relevant rule in the present appeal is rule  51(4)  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005:-

         "(4) Where the Tribunal has given directions  setting  time  limits
             for the filing and serving of written evidence,  it  must  not
             consider any written evidence which is not filed or served  in
             accordance with those directions unless satisfied  that  there
             are good reasons to do so."

15.  As can immediately be seen, there is a significant  difference  between
    rule 51(4) and former rule 48(5).  Rule 51(4) purports to preclude  the
    Tribunal from considering written evidence, which has not  been  served
    in time, unless satisfied that there are good reasons.  The  difference
    in wording between the two rules is plainly  deliberate.   It  has  the
    effect that, in a case such as the present one,  where  a  party  or  a
    witness wishes to give oral evidence before the Tribunal but a  witness
    statement has not been lodged within the required timescale before  the
    hearing, the person concerned cannot be precluded by  rule  51(4)  from
    giving oral evidence.  Although it is theoretically  possible  for  the
    Tribunal, by way of directions under rule  45,  to  restrict  the  oral
    evidence it hears, both the overriding objective in rule 4 of  securing
    that the proceedings are handled as fairly, quickly and efficiently  as
    possible and the general administrative law requirement  that  Tribunal
    proceedings should be  fair,  will  make  it  extremely  rare  for  the
    Tribunal to be able to refuse to hear  a  witness  who  has  ostensibly
    relevant evidence to give. Where the person concerned is the  appellant
    it is even harder to envisage circumstances  in  which  such  a  course
    would be valid.

16.  The fact that rule 51(4) is confined to written  evidence  in  practice
    means that there will rarely be any point in the Tribunal  excluding  a
    witness statement of a person who is to give  oral  evidence.   Such  a
    course of action would merely  serve  to  extend  the  proceedings,  by
    requiring a representative to ask  questions  in  examination-in-chief,
    which might otherwise have been dealt with by  asking  the  witness  to
    adopt his or her statement.

17.  In the present case, the Immigration Judge  not  only  failed  to  have
    regard to rule 51(4) and to note the true ambit of that  provision;  he
    also failed to  consider  whether  there  might  be  good  reasons  for
    admitting the relevant witness statement.

18.  The fact that rule 51(4) cannot be employed to prevent  a  person  from
    giving oral evidence before the Tribunal does not in any way compel the
    Tribunal  to accord the same weight to the evidence of a witness  whose
    written statement has arrived too late  to  enable  the  respondent  to
    carry out any relevant checks as regards the witness or  the  substance
    of his or her  evidence,  as  would  be  the  case  where  the  witness
    statement has properly been served in accordance with the timescale set
    by the Tribunal's directions.  On the  contrary,  it  is  open  to  the
    respondent to submit in such a case that the weight to be accorded  the
    witness's evidence should be limited.

19.  On 21 November 2006,  the  Tribunal  (Miss  E  Arfon-Jones  DL,  Deputy
    President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal and Senior Immigration
    Judge P  R  Lane),  having  found  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the  Immigration  Judge,  was  unable  to  proceed  to
    substitute a fresh decision to  allow  or  dismiss  the  appeal.   Oral
    evidence needed to be taken.  The Tribunal  accordingly  adjourned  the
    reconsideration to a new date, to be heard at Field House.

20.  The adjourned reconsideration took place on  24  July  2007,  when  the
    Tribunal heard evidence from the sponsor and a witness,  Mr  H.   There
    was also before the Tribunal a bundle of documentary evidence,  indexed
    on its face, submitted on behalf of the  appellant  under  cover  of  a
    letter dated 17 July 2007, and a packet of  original  telephone  cards,
    receipts for money transfers and letters  from  the  appellant  to  the
    sponsor.

21.  It was common ground on 24 July  that  those  requirements  are  to  be
    found in paragraph 352A, which reads as follows:-

         "352A.   The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                  enter or remain in the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  or
                  civil partner of a refugee are that:


             (i)  the applicant is married to or the  civil  partner  of  a
                  person granted asylum in the United Kingdom; and


             (ii) the marriage or civil  partnership  did  not  take  place
                  after the person granted asylum left the  country  of  his
                  former habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and


             (iii)    the applicant would not be excluded  from  protection
                  by virtue of article 1F of the United  Nations  Convention
                  and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees if he were
                  to seek asylum in his own right; and


             (iv)     each of the parties intends to live permanently  with
                  the other as his or her spouse or civil  partner  and  the
                  marriage or civil partnership is subsisting; and


             (v)  if seeking leave to enter, the applicant  holds  a  valid
                  United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for   entry   in   this
                  capacity."


22.  Ms Ong conceded that the appellant and  sponsor  had  been  married  in
    Ethiopia in  1999.   She  also  took  no  issue  with  the  appellant's
    assertion, that the marriage took place after the sponsor (who has been
    recognised in the United Kingdom as a refugee) left Ethiopia, which was
    at that point her habitual residence, in order to seek  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom.

23.  The sole issue therefore is whether the appellant, as at  the  date  of
    decision, intended to live permanently with the sponsor as his  or  her
    spouse (and vice versa) and that the marriage was subsisting.

24.  The sponsor gave evidence with the assistance of an interpreter in  the
    Somali language.  The sponsor told the Tribunal that she  left  Somalia
    for Ethiopia in 1995 and  left  Ethiopia  for  the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2001.  Having received a  refugee  travel  document  from  the
    United Kingdom Government in 2003, she was asked why the appellant  had
    waited until 2005 in order to make an application to join  her  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The sponsor said that she did not have her  own  place
    until 2005.  She confirmed that the marriage registration  document  at
    pages 16 to 20 of the appellant's bundle was obtained in  Ethiopia,  in
    order to demonstrate that the marriage had taken place.  She had  taken
    persons who had witnessed the  marriage  to  confirm  to  the  relevant
    authorities in Ethiopia that the marriage had indeed occurred.

25.  The sponsor was asked about various photographs in  her  bundle.   Some
    had been taken in 2003 in Ethiopia, showing her husband, but  the  rest
    had been taken in 2005, when she visited her husband in  that  country.
    Those photographs had been taken in order to enable  the  appellant  to
    remember her husband.

26.  The appellant's application form appeared to  have  had  an  alteration
    made to the date of birth of the appellant,  whereby  1989  had  become
    1979.  The sponsor confirmed that the appellant had  been  born  on  25
    January 1979.  The sponsor produced for the Tribunal her own  photocopy
    of the application document, as submitted to the British Embassy, which
    she had obtained from that embassy.

27.  Cross-examined, the sponsor said that she went to Ethiopia on 20  March
    2005 and left on 3 April.  She had not brought with her  the  originals
    of the photographs in the bundle. Those originals were  at  home.   The
    sponsor said that she had met the witness, Mr H, in  Ethiopia  in  June
    2000.  The mother of the witness lived in the same residential building
    as did the sponsor and the appellant.  The sponsor was unsure how  many
    people in total lived in the building, but they included the owners  of
    the property.

28.  The sponsor was unsure at this point how long  she  and  the  appellant
    had lived in the house but she had met the mother of the  witness  when
    the mother had moved into the property.  The mother had been living  in
    that house for about a month, when the witness  arrived  to  visit  his
    mother.

29.  The sponsor told the Tribunal that the appellant was no  longer  living
    in the house nor, so far as she  was  aware,  was  the  mother  of  the
    witness.

30.  Kitchen and bathroom facilities in the  property  were  shared  between
    the occupants.  The witness had arrived in June  2000  and  stayed  for
    about a month.  He lived in the house with  his  mother.   The  sponsor
    named the witness and his mother.  The sponsor was unsure whether other
    persons had visited the witness's mother.  She and the mother were  not
    close friends but merely neighbours.

31.  The sponsor said that the  appellant  left  the  property  in  question
    around the middle of  2003.   She  had  bought  her  husband  a  mobile
    telephone, in order to communicate with him.  She could  not  recollect
    the telephone number of the appellant's mobile but  it  was  programmed
    into her own handset.

32.  The sponsor was asked why there was considerable e-mail  correspondence
    (in printed form) from the appellant to the sponsor  but  nothing  from
    her to him.  The  sponsor  said  that  she  did  send  replies  to  the
    appellant.  She could not recall when she began to e-mail the appellant
    but said that she first started to communicate with him after  she  had
    been in the United Kingdom for two months.  Prior to that time she  had
    been "busy with my life".

33.  The sponsor said that she knew her husband's date of birth  because  he
    had told her what it was.  Her solicitor had requested her  to  confirm
    that the date of birth and the appellant had therefore written it down.
     This was at some time in 2005.

34.  The sponsor was asked about page 4 of the Statement of  Evidence  Form,
    Part B, which had been completed by the sponsor in connection with  her
    application for asylum.  At 2.3 under "date of birth" the  sponsor  had
    written "25".  Asked what that meant, the sponsor said that it was  his
    date of birth.

25.  Re-examined, the  sponsor  confirmed  that  she  sent  e-mails  to  the
    appellant and that  those  which  she  had  sent  were  stored  on  her
    computer.  She had not printed them off because she did  not  think  it
    necessary.

26.  Mr H gave evidence with the assistance of an interpreter in the  Somali
    language.  He said that that he was born in Somalia on 12 December 1974
    and  is  a  citizen  of  the  Netherlands.   He  was  referred  to  the
    photographs in the  appellant's  bundle  and  identified  by  name  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  He confirmed that he had met the couple  in
    2000 in Ethiopia.  The witness's written statement  which  he  adopted,
    explained how he had met the  sponsor  again  in  2005  in  the  United
    Kingdom at a social gathering and had recognised  her.   He  had  asked
    about the appellant and the sponsor had informed the witness  that  the
    appellant was still in Ethiopia.  The sponsor on that day borrowed  the
    witness's mobile phone in order  to  ring  the  access  number  on  her
    telephone card, which enabled him to speak to the appellant,  as  there
    was no credit on the sponsor's "pay as you go" telephone.  The  witness
    was "in no doubt that they are married. When I saw them in Addis  Ababa
    I felt that they were a close and young couple who loved and cared  for
    each other a lot.  I still believe that to be  the  case  and  observed
    that [the sponsor] was finding life quite lonely and difficult  without
    him here".   During  the  witness's  telephone  conversation  with  the
    appellant, the latter confirmed that  he  too  was  "very  unhappy  and
    lonely and hoping that he would meet up with his wife again very soon".

27.  Cross-examined, the witness was asked when  in  2000  he  had  gone  to
    visit his mother.  He said it was June.  He had been in Ethiopia  on  a
    visit for approximately a month and during that time he  had  lived  in
    the same house as was  occupied  in  part  by  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.  He could not recall how many other people lived in the  house
    but his mother occupied one room and the appellant and the sponsor  and
    the appellant occupied another room next to it.  The  witness's  mother
    had been in that house for quite a while but he never asked his  mother
    how long she had lived there.  Nor could he remember exactly  when  his
    mother had left Somalia, although he thought  it  was  around  1994  or
    1995.  He was in contact with his mother in 1998.

28.  The witness was asked about the facilities in the house.  He said  that
    toilet and kitchen facilities were shared in common.   His  mother  had
    her own telephone, which was a  land-line.   However  if  someone  else
    telephoned to speak to a person in the house, his  mother  would  allow
    the occupant to use the telephone.

29.  The witness said that his mother had now returned to  Somalia,  but  he
    was unsure when that had occurred.

30.  Asked about his contact with the  appellant  and  sponsor,  whilst  the
    witness had been living under the same roof, he said that  this  merely
    consisted of greeting one another when they saw each other, which would
    be frequently.

31.  Re-examined, the witness produced  his  current  Netherlands  passport,
    issued on 4 Augusts 2003.  In his statement,  the  witness  said  that,
    unlike the position in the  United  Kingdom  where  all  passports  are
    returned  to  their  holders,  the  Netherlands'  authorities  retained
    expired passports and  he  could  not  therefore  show  stamps  in  his
    passport to confirm that he had made a visit in 2000 to Ethiopia.

32.  In response to a question from the Tribunal, the witness said  that  he
    and his mother would be invited from time to time into the  room  which
    the appellant and sponsor occupied and they would in  turn  be  invited
    into his mother's room.

33.  In closing submissions, Ms Ong  relied  upon  the  notice  of  refusal,
    subject to the fact that (as already noted) the respondent accepts that
    the relevant provision of the Immigration Rules is paragraph 352A.  The
    relevant provisions of the notice of decision are  those  which  stated
    that the appellant had failed to produce any satisfactory  evidence  of
    any regular contact with the sponsor  between  1999  and  2001  or  any
    satisfactory evidence that the  sponsor  had  supported  the  appellant
    financially on a regular basis.  The respondent  also  noted  that  the
    appellant did not know anything about the  sponsor's  circumstances  in
    the United Kingdom.   The  various  telephone  cards  produced  by  the
    appellant in order to demonstrate  contact  with  the  sponsor  in  the
    United Kingdom were not such as to  show  that  a  subsisting  marriage
    existed at the date of decision.  The majority of the  money  transfers
    and the e-mails also post-dated the decision.  An exception was that at
    page 94 of the appellant's bundle.  The remainder, according to Ms Ong,
    immediately pre-dated the application and there  was  nothing  from  an
    earlier time.  The materials appeared to have  been  generated  at  the
    point when the sponsor went to Ethiopia  in  order,  it  was  said,  to
    obtain confirmation of  her  marriage.   The  e-mails  themselves  were
    lacking in quality and were entirely one-sided with  nothing  emanating
    from the sponsor.  The photographs were curious, in that the photograph
    of the appellant said by the sponsor to originate from 2004 showed  him
    dressed in the same clothes as in the photographs said to emanate  from
    2005.  The money transfer evidence was also unsatisfactory.  The letter
    of 17 March 2004 from Dalsan International Transfer  Services  referred
    to records which were said to show regular remittances on the  part  of
    the sponsor but there were no receipts to confirm that.

34.  For the appellant, Ms Laughton relied upon her skeleton  argument.   No
    weight could, she said, be placed upon the respondent's assertion  that
    the  appellant  at  interview  knew   nothing   about   the   sponsor's
    circumstances in the United Kingdom.   No  record  had  been  made  and
    produced of  that  interview.   So  far  as  evidence  of  contact  was
    concerned, this went back to March 2005 and could be used  as  evidence
    of intervening devotion.  The e-mails  had  to  be  understood  in  the
    context of the couple communicating on the telephone.

35.  It was, according to Ms Laughton, striking that the  sponsor  had  been
    able to remit to Ethiopia regular payments of $100 for  the  appellant,
    notwithstanding that she was on income support in the  United  Kingdom.
    This was extremely indicative of an existing  marriage,  since  it  was
    difficult to conceive why the sponsor would do this, other than out  of
    affection for her husband.

36.  In reaching a determination in this case the  Tribunal  has  considered
    all of the evidence, both oral  and  written,  and  has  reviewed  that
    evidence as a totality.  So far as paragraph  352A  is  concerned,  the
    burden of proof  is  on  the  appellant  to  show  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that he meets the requirements of the Rules.

37.  The Tribunal acknowledges that the appellant and the sponsor have  been
    married and that there is no reason to assume that  the  marriage  does
    not exist in a legal sense.  The Tribunal finds, however, having regard
    to all the evidence, that as at the date of decision the appellant  has
    not shown on balance that, at the date of decision,  the  marriage  was
    subsisting in the sense that it was a genuine  emotional  relationship,
    where each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other.

38.  The Tribunal bears in  mind  the  need  to  be  sensitive  to  cultural
    differences, in assessing the evidence of those who  do  not  originate
    from the United Kingdom or, indeed, Western  Europe.   That  said,  the
    Tribunal has not been given any evidence to  show  that  cultural  (or,
    indeed, any other) reasons could explain why the sponsor did  not  seek
    to make contact with the appellant for several months after she arrived
    in the United Kingdom on the basis that she was "busy  with  my  life".
    Similarly,  the  Tribunal  does  not  consider  that  the   appellant's
    explanation for the delay in the application being made,  namely,  that
    she was without suitable accommodation, was an inadequate  one.   There
    is no evidence to show that the sponsor was living in circumstances  in
    the United Kingdom during  the  period  between  2002  and  2005  which
    effectively precluded the appellant from living with her,  if  admitted
    to the United Kingdom; nor is there evidence to show that  the  sponsor
    was unaware of the steps that would be taken by those  responsible  for
    the provision of public housing to ensure  that  she  and  her  husband
    could live together,  following  a  successful  application  for  entry
    clearance.

39.  It was significant that the sponsor  indicated  that  she  only  became
    aware of  the  appellant's  date  of  birth  after  her  solicitor  had
    requested her to ascertain that  information.   The  sponsor  was  also
    vague as to when this had happened; merely believing  that  it  was  at
    some point in 2005.  That the sponsor had been unaware of her  spouse's
    actual age for some six years after their marriage is not supportive of
    a claim to be in a genuinely  subsisting  marital  relationship.   This
    point is  underscored  when  one  examines  Part  B  of  the  sponsor's
    Statement of Evidence Form,  produced  when  she  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom and claimed asylum, where the  appellant's  date  of  birth  is
    given merely as "25".

40.  Whilst the Tribunal accepts Ms Laughton's submission  that  the  nature
    of the communications between the appellant and  the  sponsor  is  such
    that evidence of such communications may, in the nature of  things,  no
    longer be extant for much of the  period  between  the  time  when  the
    sponsor decided to make efforts to resume contact  with  the  appellant
    and late 2005, the Tribunal does nevertheless consider  that  something
    more could be expected to subsist if the relationship had been  of  the
    kind asserted. There was no adequate explanation  for  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence regarding email messages from the sponsor  to  the
    appellant.  So far as money transfers are concerned, the only  receipts
    which have been produced post-date the decision and the  Tribunal  does
    not consider that they relate to circumstances as at that date (section
    88(5)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002).   The
    letter of 17 March 2005 from Dalsan International Transfer Services  is
    highly unsatisfactory.  It is unclear what the  legal  nature  of  that
    body might be.  The brief letter asserts that  records  show  that  the
    sponsor "has been one of our customers from Sept 2003 to this date" and
    that she "usually remitted funds to her husband".  The letter  ends  by
    saying that the writer is "able to  confirm  from  records,  that  [the
    sponsor] remitted $100 to her husband regularly on a monthly  basis  up
    to and including last month (February 2005)".  For anyone genuinely  in
    the business of providing financial services such as  money  transfers,
    the substance and tone of the letter are frankly highly peculiar.   One
    would have expected at least that the  writer  would  have  set  out  a
    schedule of dates and sums  transferred  if,  as  is  asserted,  Dalsan
    International Transfer Services held records thereof.   The  expression
    "usually remitted funds to her husband" also  raises  the  question  of
    whether the sponsor made transfers to other persons  abroad.   That  in
    turn brings the Tribunal to the issue of the source of the monies  used
    by the sponsor.  It appears that at all material times the sponsor  has
    been in receipt of state benefits in the United  Kingdom.   Indeed,  Ms
    Laughton asked the Tribunal to find that a genuine marital relationship
    must exist because it would otherwise be difficult at best to see why a
    person  subsisting  on  state  benefits  would  make  such  sacrifices.
    However, without evidence of the income and outgoings of the sponsor it
    is not possible to make such an inference.

41.  Such written communications between the parties as we have are  largely
    stilted and lack the appearance of being genuine.  For instance,  on  9
    November 2005, the appellant apparently wrote to  the  sponsor  in  the
    following terms:

     "Hello, sweet angel I am doing well and hope you the same  during  this
         difficult time wish you a better life at all times.

         I really do worry about you because we have not seen each other for
         some time.  I would like to reunite with you and have  better  life
         sweet.


         If god accepts we will meet in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  near
         future.


         May god bring us together?"


42.  There is in general an absence of enquiries about  the  sponsor's  life
    and experiences in the United Kingdom, just as, with one or  two  minor
    exceptions, the appellant gives the sponsor no information  about  what
    he is doing in Ethiopia.  Similar problems arose in the  oral  evidence
    of the sponsor, who was somewhat vague  on  the  subject  of  when  the
    appellant had finally left the place in which he had been  living  when
    she visited him in Ethiopia in 2000 and had met the  witness.  Although
    she said she had the appellant's telephone number programmed in her own
    telephone handset, it was noteworthy that the  sponsor  could  not  say
    what that number was.  There was considerable vagueness in the evidence
    of both the sponsor and the witness as to how many  other  people  were
    living in that house.  Although the Tribunal noted,  and  gives  weight
    to, the extent to which the evidence of the  sponsor  and  the  witness
    coincided as regards the use of shared facilities and the dates of  the
    witness's visits to his mother in the house, it is noteworthy that  the
    sponsor had no idea of whether other  people  had  come  to  visit  the
    mother, notwithstanding that any such visitors must have had  the  same
    or at least similar visibility, so far as the sponsor was concerned, as
    the witness who, according to the sponsor and the witness, was no  more
    than a person with whom the sponsor passed the time of  day,  when  she
    encountered him.

43.  The  witness's  evidence  was  also  unsatisfactory,  in  that  it  had
    apparently never occurred to him to ask his mother  how  long  she  had
    been living in the house in question.  Nor was he  aware  of  when  his
    mother had left Somalia in order to go to  Ethiopia,  merely  believing
    that it was sometime in 1994 or 1995.   Furthermore,  the  witness  was
    "not sure" when his mother had left the house in Ethiopia in  order  to
    return to Somalia.  In view of these matters, the Tribunal is unable to
    place any significant weight on the witness's claim that the  appellant
    and the  sponsor  were  emotionally  close  or  that  the  sponsor  has
    demonstrated an emotional need to be reunited with the appellant in the
    United Kingdom.

44.  The photographic evidence does not  materially  assist  the  appellant.
    Whilst the Tribunal accepts that the sponsor is featured in several  of
    the photographs with a man said to be the appellant, it is curious that
    the appellant is wearing identical clothing in the photograph  said  to
    be from 2005 as in photographs said to be from 2004.   Even  the  angle
    of the knot in his tie is the same.

45.  The originals and photocopies of phone cards  also  do  not  carry  the
    appellant's case materially forward.  They do  not  show  to  whom  the
    cards belonged nor, obviously, how they were used.  Given  the  general
    difficulties that exist with the rest of  the  evidence,  the  Tribunal
    does not accept the assertion that the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the
    written communications is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  parties
    communicated more fully and more  emotionally  during  their  telephone
    conversations.

46.  In conclusion, the Tribunal  finds  that  the  evidence  before  it  is
    insufficient  to  show  on  balance  that  the  appellant   meets   the
    requirements of paragraph 352A of the Immigration  Rules.   So  far  as
    article 8 is concerned, the appellant's case founders on the first  or,
    if not that, then certainly the second of the five  questions  of  Lord
    Bingham set out at paragraph 17 of the opinions in Razgar  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27,  suitably  adapted  to
    reflect the fact that this is not a case of removal but of  refusal  to
    grant entry clearance: namely, (1) is the refusal an interference  with
    the exercise of the appellant's right to respect for  his  family  life
    and (2) if so, will the interference have consequences of such  gravity
    as potentially to engage the operation of article 8? On the  Tribunal's
    findings there has not been shown to be an intention to live  together.
    In any event, however, the United Kingdom's obligations under article 8
    to facilitate family reunion are not to be equated  with  a  right  for
    married couples and others to compel the United Kingdom to give  effect
    to  their  choice  of  residence  (Konstantinov   v   The   Netherlands
    (Application no. 16351/03) ECtHR (Third Section), 26 April 2007).

47.  Ms Laughton's skeleton argument contains the assertion that  a  refusal
    of entry clearance would result in  the  permanent  separation  of  the
    sponsor and the appellant, since the appellant is said to be living  in
    Ethiopia illegally and "as such the UK cannot  expect  the  sponsor  to
    break another country's laws by going to live there illegally as well".
     There is no evidence to substantiate  that  assertion.   Even  if  the
    appellant is living illegally in Ethiopia, a fact of which the Tribunal
    is not satisfied on the evidence before it, he has been in that country
    for several years, during which time  he  has  married.   There  is  no
    suggestion whatsoever that he leads any form of clandestine  existence.
    Given that Ethiopia is a party to the Geneva Convention of 1951,  there
    has been no explanation advanced as to why (if such be  the  case)  the
    appellant has not sought  refugee  status  in  Ethiopia.   Furthermore,
    there is an absence of evidence to  show  that  the  sponsor  would  be
    living illegally if she went back to live in  Ethiopia.   Although  her
    SEF alleged difficulties in that country, prior to her  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom, the Tribunal has not been shown  anything  to  indicate
    that those assertions played a part in her being given  refugee  status
    in this country or that they were the subject of positive  findings  of
    fact by an adjudicator.  In any event, the  sponsor  has,  by  her  own
    admission, returned to Ethiopia for several weeks in 2005.  No evidence
    has been presented to show that  the  Ethiopian  authorities  would  be
    reasonably likely to refuse the sponsor admission in  order  to  resume
    living with the appellant.

48.  The original Tribunal made a material error of law  and  this  Tribunal
    accordingly substitutes for it a decision of its  own,  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal with reference to the Immigration  Rules  and  under
    the ECHR.







Signed                                  Date: 31 July 2007


Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane
