
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      OM (AA(1) wrong in law) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00077

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  16 October 2006                             |03 November 2006           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Mather
                      Senior Immigration Judge Perkins

                                   Between

                                     OM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Dassa, Counsel instructed by Chipatiso & Co.
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer


Country guidance stands until it is replaced or found to be  wrong  in  law.
It will not be appropriate to grant an adjournment on  the  grounds  that  a
party is seeking to challenge  a  relevant  country  guidance  case  in  the
higher courts.

Where a country  guidance  case  is  replaced  because  of  changed  country
conditions or because further evidence has emerged, that will not mean  that
it was an error of law for an immigration judge to have followed  it  up  to
that point. Where, however, a country guidance case is found to  be  legally
flawed the reasons for so finding will have existed both  before  and  after
its notification. It is a determination inconsistent  with  other  authority
that is binding on the Tribunal (see AIT Practice Directions 18.2) In  those
circumstances, which will be encountered only rarely, any  determination  of
an appeal decided substantially on the basis of that country  guidance  will
be legally flawed also and cannot stand.

AA  (Involuntary  returns  to  Zimbabwe)  Zimbabwe  [2005]  UKAIT  00144  CG
("AA(1)") was found by the Court of Appeal in AA & LK [2006]  EWCA  Civ  401
to be legally flawed in its approach to  the  assessment  of  the  evidence.
Accordingly it must now  be  seen  as  never  having  been  correct  country
guidance.

Although in AA & LK there was no challenge by the respondent to the  Article
3 assessment reached in AA(1), that assessment was based  on the  same  body
of evidence considered in respect of the asylum grounds of appeal.   AA(1)'s
assessment of that evidence having been found  legally  flawed,  it  was  no
longer possible to support a finding of an Article 3 violation by  reference
to that assessment.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe.   He  is  now  in  his  early
      twenties.  He appeals a decision of the respondent on 11 March 2006 to
      refuse him asylum and a decision on 23 March 2006 to remove him as  an
      illegal immigrant.  It is the appellant's case that he  is  a  refugee
      and that removing him is contrary to his protected human rights.   His
      appeal was dismissed by Immigration Judge Timpson in  a  determination
      promulgated on, or about, 22 May 2006. Reconsideration was ordered by
      Senior Immigration Judge Warr in the following terms:


         "The appellant was not found to be a credible witness.
         The Tribunal is to  give  further  consideration  to  returnability
         issues in the light of AA and LK [2006] EWCA Civ 401.  The  grounds
         of application are arguable."

   2.  None  of  the  grounds  criticise  the  Immigration  Judge's  adverse
      credibility finding.

   3. On 12th April 2006 the Court of Appeal held in AA & LK v  SSHD  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 401 that the Tribunal's decision in AA  (Involuntary  returns
      to Zimbabwe) Zimbabwe [2005] UKAIT  00144  CG  ("AA(1)")  was  wrongly
      decided and remitted it to be reheard by the Tribunal. Over five  days
      commencing on 3rd July 2006 the Tribunal duly reheard  the  appeal  of
      the appellant in AA(1). The Tribunal received and  considered  a  good
      deal of further evidence. By its decision in AA (Risk for  involuntary
      returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061 ("AA(2)") the Tribunal held,
      inter alia, that a failed  asylum  seeker  returned  involuntarily  to
      Zimbabwe does not face on return a real risk  of  being  subjected  to
      persecution or ill-treatment contrary to article  3  on  that  account
      alone. In so doing it reaffirmed the decision in SM and Others (MDC  -
      Internal Flight - Risk Categories) Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKAIT 00100.

   4. The Tribunal has refused an application for permission  to  appeal  to
      the Court of Appeal against AA(2). The application has been renewed to
      the Court of Appeal.

   5. The appellant asked that we adjourn the hearing of  this  appeal  lest
      anything of significance to it should  be  decided  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal if it gave permission to appeal the decision in AA(2).

   6. We reminded ourselves that the overriding objective of  the  Tribunal,
      set out  in  paragraph  4  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
      (Procedure) Rules 2005 is stated as follows:


         "The  overriding  objective  of  these  Rules  is  to  secure   the
         proceedings before the tribunal are handled as fairly, quickly  and
         efficiently as possible; and, where appropriate,  that  members  of
         the  tribunal  have  responsibility  for  ensuring  this,  in   the
         interests of the parties to the proceedings and in the wider public
         interest."

   7. Our power to adjourn the hearing of an appeal is  very  limited.  Rule
      21(2) of the Rules demands that:
         "The Tribunal must not adjourn  a  hearing  of  an  appeal  on  the
         application of a party, unless satisfied  that  the  appeal  cannot
         otherwise be justly determined."

   8. We refused this application for an adjournment. We must apply the law,
      including Tribunal country guidance, as it is, not as it might  be  on
      some future occasion that cannot be  determined.  If  there  ever  are
      circumstances where it is necessary for the just disposal of an appeal
      to await a decision of the Court of Appeal, they are not present here.
      The fact that a party to an appeal that  has  resulted  in  a  country
      guidance decision is seeking permission to appeal does not justify  an
      adjournment of another appeal in which the country  guidance  decision
      is relevant to the issues.

   9. It will be apparent from  the  above  that  Immigration  Judge  Timson
      promulgated his decision after the Court of Appeal had given judgement
      in AA and LK but before the Tribunal had given  its  determination  in
      AA(2). Accordingly this reconsideration  is  not  concerned  with  the
      application of AA(2).

  10. In AA and LK the Court of Appeal overturned the decision in AA(1)  and
      the Immigration Judge should have asked himself what relevant  country
      guidance there remained for him to consider.

  11. The requirement to follow and apply country guidance  cases  was  made
      clear recently in HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006]  UKAIT
      00062. At paragraphs 141 and 142 the Tribunal said this:

         "Country Guidance cases

         141  As the concept of Country Guidance cases was mentioned in  the
         opinions in Januzi, (see esp. paragraph  50  (Lord  Hope)),  it  is
         necessary to remind ourselves of the legal  basis  underlying  that
         concept. Until the advent of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, a
         case styled by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal as Country  Guidance
         carried persuasive force but had no statutory  authority.  Since  4
         April 2005,  however,  the  position  has  changed.  On  that  day,
         paragraph 22(1)  of  Schedule  2  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 inserted into  section  107
         (practice directions) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 a new subsection (3), in the following terms:-

          "(3)  A  practice  direction  may,  in  particular,  require  the
          Tribunal to  treat  a  specified  decision  of  the  Tribunal  as
          authoritative in respect of a particular matter."

         The President's Practice Direction 18.2,  made  on  4  April  2005,
         provides as follows:-

          "18.2 A reported determination of the  Tribunal  or  of  the  IAT
          bearing the letters "CG" shall be  treated  as  an  authoritative
          finding  on  the  country  guidance  issue  identified   in   the
          determination, based upon the evidence before the members of  the
          Tribunal or the IAT that determined  the  appeal.  As  a  result,
          unless it has been superseded  or  replaced  by  any  later  "CG"
          determination, or is inconsistent with other  authority  that  is
          binding  on  the  Tribunal,  such  a  country  guidance  case  is
          authoritative  in any subsequent  appeal, so far as that appeal:

           (a)    relates to the country guidance issue in question; and

           (b)    depends upon the same or similar evidence."

         142  There is thus a statutory basis that underpins the  CG  system
         and which requires Country Guidance issues to  be  treated  by  all
         divisions of the Tribunal as authoritative. Practice Direction 18.2
         ensures that, as Lord Hope makes plain in paragraph 50  of  Januzi,
         each case is dependent on its own facts but, as PD 18.4  emphasises
         (and as was noted with approval by the Court of  Appeal  in  R  and
         others v Secretary of State for Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
         982), legal error will attend a failure to follow extant,  relevant
         Country Guidance. Given that the AIT is a "single  tier"  Tribunal,
         it is particularly important that  everyone  concerned  appreciates
         the underlying legal framework."

  12. Country guidance stands, in accordance with the  Practice  Directions,
      unless and until it becomes unreliable. Broadly, this can  happen  for
      one of two reasons. Firstly, fresh evidence can emerge that casts  new
      light on circumstances in the country  considered.  This  can  be  the
      result, for example, of a change of regime or of a new report  from  a
      respected non governmental organisation. In such an event the Practice
      Directions permit a different conclusion from  that  required  by  the
      existing  country  guidance.  Secondly,  country   guidance   can   be
      overturned because the case  was  decided  wrongly  in  law.  In  this
      situation such country guidance would have been wrong in law  when  it
      was promulgated, as would be any  decisions  that  followed  it.  This
      latter situation is likely to be encountered only rarely. The decision
      in AA(1) is an example of country guidance that was wrong in  law.  It
      was overturned by the Court of Appeal. Any decision that  followed  it
      was, as a consequence, wrong in law too.

  13. In this appeal the Immigration Judge, rightly, did not rely on  AA(1).
      As a consequence of the criticism of AA(1) by the Court of  Appeal  in
      AA and LK, the case of SM and Others (MDC -  Internal  Flight  -  Risk
      Categories) Zimbabwe [2005] UKAIT 00100 was again  the  most  relevant
      country guidance case on Zimbabwe and  the  Immigration  Judge  really
      should have relied on it expressly  unless  he  considered  there  was
      fresh evidence pointing to different conclusions.

  14. In SM the Tribunal identified various categories of people who  risked
      persecution or other ill treatment in Zimbabwe. The appellant  is  not
      in any such category. He was not believed and he was not  at  risk  of
      persecution or ill treatment for some other reason merely by reason of
      being a returned asylum seeker. Paragraphs 51(e) and  (i)  of  SM  are
      particularly clear. They state:


         "e)  The current atmosphere of hostility to the  return  of  failed
         asylum seekers does not of itself  put  at  risk  those  who  would
         otherwise not be at real risk but does serve to reinforce the  fact
         that asylum claims must be considered with care and where there  is
         any uncertainty, any doubts must be  resolved  in  the  applicant's
         favour.
         i)   There is no general risk for failed asylum seekers of a breach
         of article 3 as a result of  the  current  hostility  towards  such
         returnees."

  15. The Immigration Judge's determination would have been better if it had
      been reasoned more fully but his decision to dismiss the appeal  under
      the Refugee Convention was plainly open to him on the evidence  before
      him and his skimpy analysis  and  explanation  did  not  amount  to  a
      material error of law. Ms Dassa, rightly,  accepted  as  much  in  her
      submissions.

  16. However this case had been argued on the basis  that  the  appellant's
      claim to be a refugee and his claim that his removal would  contravene
      his rights under the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  did  not
      necessarily stand or fall together. Ms Dassa  submitted  that  on  the
      Article 3 issue the Immigration Judge should have followed AA(1),  not
      SM.

  17. Miss Dassa relied on the grounds supporting the  application.    Point
      11 is in the following terms:


         "The Court of Appeal on 12 April 2006 pronounced its  deliberations
         in the appeal of AA and LK [2006] EWCA Civ 401 to the  effect  that
         generally an individual who can voluntarily return  safely  to  his
         country of nationality is not a refugee, notwithstanding that on  a
         forced return he would be at risk (para.99) but it is necessary  to
         consider whether such an individual would in fact be at risk if  he
         did return voluntarily."

  18. We would accept that point 11 accurately describes what the  Court  of
      Appeal in AA and LK said about the need to consider risk if return  is
      voluntary, but that point does not determine  anything  about  whether
      there is risk.

  19. Points 12 and 13 of the grounds state:


         "12. It is respectfully submitted that this leaves the question  of
         the appellant's position under Article 3 of ECHR to  be  considered
         because  she  has  quite  clearly  indicated  that  she  will   not
         voluntarily return to Zimbabwe.
         13   The Court of Appeal (for the reasons it set out  in  para.107)
         of AA and LK made no findings on  this  situation.    Against  that
         background therefore we submit that if this appellant  were  to  be
         involuntarily  returned  to  Zimbabwe  then  she  falls  into   the
         situation identified in the AIT decision of [AA(1)] (which  remains
         effective for this purpose) whereby her documents would be  in  the
         possession of the airline pilot and her details would become  known
         to the Zimbabwean authorities on her  arrival  at  Harare  Airport.
         In this circumstance we submit that the learned judge was bound  by
         the law (despite any findings on the credibility of  the  appellant
         generally) as it currently stands and which is set out in  the  AIT
         decision of [AA(1)], i.e. he would be at real risk of Article 3 ill-
         treatment  under  the  1950  Convention  if  returned  to  Zimbabwe
         involuntarily.  Therefore,  the  learned  judge  erred  in  law  by
         inadequately applying country guidance cases."

  20. We  agree that in  AA  and  LK  the  Court  of  Appeal  expressed  its
      dissatisfaction with the Respondent's  refusal  to  deal  with  issues
      linked to Article 3 (see paragraph 108), but the Court  in  that  case
      did not decide that returning  someone  to  Zimbabwe  contravenes  his
      protected human rights.

  21. Furthermore, these grounds wrongly assume that the  judgement  of  the
      Court of Appeal in AA and LK had no impact  on  the  decision  of  the
      Tribunal in AA(1) insofar as the latter held that removal to  Zimbabwe
      would contravene a person's protected human rights.   In AA and LK the
      Court of Appeal was very critical of the Tribunal's  analysis  of  the
      facts in AA(1).   Paragraph 72 of the judgment  is  particularly  apt.
      The court said:


         "At all events, in a case which was said to be finely balanced, the
         AIT was wrong to say that the body of evidence  from  a  source  of
         separate people went all one way, and that the Secretary  of  State
         had  not  relied  on  any  evidence  indicating   that   individual
         Zimbabwean returned failed asylum seekers had not been ill treated,
         even if he did not adduce any evidence of his  own.   Indeed,  when
         the AIT referred to Mr  Walsh's  analysis  of  the  fourteen  cases
         notified by the Zimbabwe Association they only mentioned the  three
         cases  which  could  have  given  rise  to  a  finding  of  serious
         mistreatment and said nothing about his evidence to the effect that
         none of the other eleven  cases  involved  treatment  reaching  the
         Article 3 persecution threshold."

  22. It must follow from this that anything  the  Tribunal  said  in  AA(1)
      concerning the risk on return - whether as regards persecution or ill-
      treatment  -  was  inadequate  because  the  evidence  had  not   been
      considered properly.   It follows from  this  that  the  assertion  in
      point 13 of the grounds before us - that the Tribunal's assessment  of
      the evidence  in  AA(1)  continued  to  be  authoritative  in  certain
      respects -  is wrong.

  23. Accordingly the Immigration Judge did not err in  law  in  failing  to
      follow AA(1). Whilst he did  not  state  that  he  was  following  the
      guidance given  in  SM  instead,  the  decision  he  made  was  wholly
      consistent with SM as well as with the  body  of  evidence  which  was
      before him.

  24. Although of no direct relevance we note that the  subsequent  decision
      in AA(2), which was not available to the Immigration Judge who decided
      this appeal, generally upholds SM although identifying two  additional
      factors of relevance.

Decision
The original Tribunal did not make a material error of law and the  original
determination of the appeal stands.






Signed                                  Date 27 October 2006

Senior Immigration Judge Perkins
