


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       LH and IP (gay men: risk) Sri Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|on 6 - 8 August 2014                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                   LH & IP
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Mr I Palmer and Ms S Pinder, instructed by Fadiga &
Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1) Having regard to the provisions of articles 365 and 365A  of  the  Sri
      Lankan Penal Code, gay men in Sri Lanka constitute a particular social
      group.

   2)  'Gay men in civil partnerships' in Sri  Lanka  do  not  constitute  a
      particular social group for the purposes of  the  Refugee  Convention.
      The Sri Lankan authorities' failure to recognise  alternative  marital
      and quasi-marital statuses such as  civil  partnership  or  homosexual
      marriage which are available in other countries of the world does not,
      without more, amount to a flagrant breach of core human rights.

   3) Applying the test set out by Lord Rodger in the Supreme Court judgment
      in HJ (Iran) & HT  (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2010] UKSC 31, in general the treatment of gay men in  Sri
      Lanka does not reach the standard of persecution or serious harm.

   4) There is a  significant  population  of  homosexuals  and  other  LGBT
      individuals in Sri Lanka, in particular in Colombo.   While  there  is
      more risk for lesbian and bisexual women in rural  areas,  because  of
      the  control  exercised  by  families  on  unmarried  women,  and  for
      transgender individuals and sex workers in the cities, it  will  be  a
      question of fact whether for a particular individual the risk  reaches
      the international protection standard, and in particular,  whether  it
      extends beyond their home area.


   5) Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in  an  appellant's
      home area, there may be an internal  relocation  option,  particularly
      for individuals returning via Colombo from the United Kingdom.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Anonymity

    1. An anonymity  direction  remains  in  place  unless  or  until  this
       Tribunal, or any other appropriate  Court,  directs  otherwise.   No
       report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify
       the appellants.  Failure to comply with this direction could  amount
       to a contempt of court.

    Background

    2. The appellants are citizens of Sri  Lanka  who  entered  the  UK  as
       students, LH on 2 February 2011 and IP on 17  December  2010.   They
       first met here, and entered into a civil partnership on 29  November
       2011.  The respondent accepts that the appellants are gay  and  that
       they are civil partners, a status not recognised in Sri Lanka.    On
       2 February 2012 they applied for leave to remain in the UK,  outside
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules, on  the  basis  of  their
       private and family life with each other pursuant to Article 8  ECHR.
       The respondent considered that removal  of  the  appellants  to  Sri
       Lanka would  not  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
       private and family life and refused  both  applications  by  letters
       dated 12 April 2012. There are currently no removal directions.

    3. The appellants have not made an asylum  or  humanitarian  protection
       application at an Asylum Screening Unit, but  in  their  grounds  of
       appeal they included Refugee Convention and humanitarian  protection
       grounds in addition to the principal  Article  8  ECHR  claim.   The
       Refugee  Convention  reason  relied  upon  by  these  appellants  is
       membership of a particular social group, either as gay  men,  or  as
       gay men in a civil partnership.  The appellants in their appeals  to
       the First-tier Tribunal also  invoked  the  humanitarian  protection
       provisions in the Immigration Rules at paragraph 339C.  Again,  that
       application was not made properly to the Asylum Screening  Unit  but
       for  clarity,  we  have  nevertheless  dealt   with   it   in   this
       determination.

    Procedural history

    4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes dismissed the  appellants'  appeals
       in a determination promulgated on  20  July  2012.   Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Allen set that determination aside  by  a  decision  dated  30
       November 2012, for inadequacy of reasoning  regarding  the  risk  to
       them on return to Sri Lanka.

    5. The appeals were identified for possible  country  guidance  on  the
       risk to gay men in Sri  Lanka,  with  particular  reference  to  any
       difference arising out of civil partnership  status.   There  is  no
       current reported authority on the risk to gays or  LGBT  persons  in
       Sri Lanka, or in relation to civil partnership. We have  had  regard
       to UNHCR guidance as to the best practice in referring to those with
       same-sex  preferences  given  on  23  October  2012  in  the   UNHCR
       Guidelines on International Protection No. 9  -  Claims  to  Refugee
       Status based on Sexual Orientation and/or Gender Identity within the
       context of Article 1A(2) of the  1951  Convention  and/or  its  1967
       Protocol  relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees.   The  Guidelines
       recommend the use of "LGBTI" [lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender
       and  intersex]  and   its   component   terms   in   preference   to
       "homosexuals".  Wherever possible  in  this  determination  we  have
       followed that guidance.

    6. We are obliged to both sides for their care and effort in presenting
       the  case.   There  was  no  significant  difference  between   them
       regarding the legal framework within which  we  have  to  reach  our
       decision, and before the hearing, they had agreed a list of possible
       issues for the Upper Tribunal, pursuant to directions.

    7. The determination which  follows  takes  into  account  all  of  the
       evidence and submissions, including the country documents listed  at
       Appendix A and summarised in Appendix B.  We have  both  contributed
       to the determination.  We are aware that since the hearing of  these
       appeals, there have been elections in  Sri  Lanka  and  that  former
       President  Rajapakse  and  his  family  are  no  longer  in   power.
       However, it has not been suggested that  there  is  any  significant
       difference in the treatment of LGBT individuals as yet.  Any  future
       change would require further country guidance.

    The issues

    8. In all cases where the test set out by Lord Rodger  in  the  Supreme
       Court judgment in HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 [HJ and HT] test applies,  it  is
       necessary to make a finding as to the relevant sexual orientation of
       the individual in question.   In  the  present  appeals,  since  the
       parties have entered into a civil partnership, the  respondent  does
       not dispute their homosexual orientation and we accept that they are
       two gay men who entered the United Kingdom as  students.   Both  are
       Sinhalese citizens of  Sri  Lanka.  The  parties  proposed  that  we
       formulate the country guidance issues as follows:


         Refugee claim/humanitarian protection


         (1)      In the context of refugee claims of Sri Lankan  nationals,
             do gay men  constitute  a  particular  social  group  for  the
             purposes of the Convention?
         (2)      In the context of refugee claims of Sri Lankan  nationals,
             do gay men  in  civil  partnerships  constitute  a  particular
             social group for the purposes of the Convention?
         (3)      Applying the test set out by Lord Rodger  in  the  Supreme
             Court judgment in [HJ and HT] at paragraph 82:
             (i) Does the background evidence demonstrate that  a  gay  man
                  who lives openly in Sri Lanka is liable to be persecuted?
             (ii)      Does the background evidence  demonstrate  that  gay
                  men in civil partnerships who live openly  as  couples  in
                  Sri Lanka are liable to be persecuted?
             (iii)     In the context of refugee claims of Sri  Lankan  gay
                  men/gay men in civil  partnerships,  what  form,  if  any,
                  would the persecution take?
             (iv)      Would the appellants themselves live openly  as  gay
                  men/as gay men in a civil partnership if they returned  to
                  Sri Lanka?
             (v) Would they live as gay men/gay men in a civil  partnership
                  discreetly in order to avoid persecution?
             (vi)      If they would live discreetly, why would they do so?


         (4)      In light of the conclusions to the issues listed above, if
             the appellants do not qualify for protection under the Refugee
             Convention  do  they  qualify  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian
             protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules?


         Article 8 ECHR
         (5)      In light of the appellants'  civil  partnership,  do  they
             enjoy family life within the meaning of Article 8 ECHR?
         (6)      Would it be a flagrant breach of the appellants' right  to
             respect  for  family  life  if  removed  to   Sri   Lanka   in
             circumstances  where  it  can  be  demonstrated   that   civil
             partnerships are not recognised in law and there  exist  other
             forms of societal and  cultural  discrimination  against  such
             partnerships?

    9. The questions set by Lord Rodger in HJ and HT  are  mainly  factual,
       with  reference  to  the  particular  circumstances  of   individual
       appellants.  We observe that  the  issues  identified  conflate  the
       country guidance needed with the factual matrix in relation to these
       appellants and the remedy sought.  Issues (3)(v) and (vi) appear  to
       overlap.  While  the  framing  of  the  issues  has  been  a  useful
       exercise, when giving our guidance we have done so  more  concisely,
       reserving questions of fact and outcome to the consideration of  the
       individual appeals.

   10.  The  only  one  of  the  HJ/HT  questions  which  is  suitable  for
       examination  as  country  guidance  is  whether,  on  the  available
       evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that gay men, or if appropriate,
       other LGBTIQ individuals, living openly in Sri Lanka would be liable
       to persecution or serious harm and thus  entitled  to  international
       protection.  The remaining factual questions will  be  answered,  in
       relation to these appellants, by reference to  the  answer  to  that
       question. There is no significant  distinction  between  family  and
       private life in these appeals.

   11. That is the basis on which we approached the evidence  (written  and
       oral) and the submissions before us.

    The legal framework

   12. The appellants invoke the protection of the Refugee  Convention  and
       also of the ECHR.  The Refugee Convention definition, and  those  in
       Articles 3 and 8 ECHR are well known and we do not  need  to  repeat
       them here.

   13. In relation to humanitarian protection, the appellants rely  on  the
       Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, and EU  Council
       Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the  Qualification   Directive").   Article
       9(1)(a) of the Qualification Directive requires acts of  persecution
       to be 'sufficiently serious by their  nature  or  repetition  as  to
       constitute a severe violation of basic human rights,  in  particular
       the rights from which derogation cannot be made under Article 15(2)'
       of the ECHR,  and  Article  9(1)(b)  includes  'an  accumulation  of
       various measures, including violations of  human  rights,  which  is
       sufficiently severe as to affect an individual in a similar  manner'
       as that in Article 9(1)(a).

   14. The definition of persecution  in  the  Qualification  Directive  at
       Article 9(2) is not exhaustive, but includes the following:

         "9(2)    Acts of persecution as  qualified  in  paragraph  1,  can,
             inter alia, take the form of:
             (a) acts of physical or mental  violence,  including  acts  of
                  sexual violence;
             (b) legal, administrative, police,  and/or  judicial  measures
                  which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which  are
                  implemented in a discriminatory measure;
             (c) prosecution or punishment  which  is  disproportionate  or
                  discriminatory;
             (d) denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate
                  or discriminatory punishment; ...
             (f) acts of gender-specific or child-specific nature."

    The criminal law in Sri Lanka


   15. Homosexual activity, or the procurement thereof, is illegal  in  Sri
       Lanka. The Penal Code of Sri Lanka provides at section 365:

            Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order  of
        nature with any man,  woman,  or  animal  shall  be  punished  with
        imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend  to
        10 years, and shall also  be  punished  with  fine  and  where  the
        offence is committed by a person over 18 years of age   in  respect
        of any person under 16 years of age shall be punished with rigorous
        imprisonment for a term not less than 10 years and not exceeding 20
        years and with fine and shall also be ordered to  pay  compensation
        of an amount determined by the court to the person  in  respect  of
        whom the offence was committed for injuries caused to such person.


         And at s. 365A (introduced by the Penal Code (Amendment) Act  (No.
    22 of 1995):

         Any person who, in public or private, commits, or is a party to the
         commission of, or procures or attempts to procure the commission by
         any person of, any act of  gross  indecency  with  another  person,
         shall  be  guilty  of  an  offence,  and  shall  be  punished  with
         imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend  to
         two years or with fine or  with  both  and  where  the  offence  is
         committed by a person over eighteen years of age in respect of  any
         person under sixteen years of age shall be punished  with  rigorous
         imprisonment for a term not less than ten years and  not  exceeding
         twenty years and with  fine  and  shall  also  be  ordered  to  pay
         compensation of an amount determined by the court to the person  in
         respect of whom the offence was committed for the  injuries  caused
         to such person.

   16. It is common  ground  that  these  provisions  have  the  effect  of
       criminalising homosexual conduct; that s.365 dates from  before  Sri
       Lanka's  Independence  in  1948;  but  that  there  have   been   no
       prosecutions since Independence.  The  appellants  argue  that  even
       without prosecution, the indirect consequences of  these  provisions
       may contribute to persecution or ill-treatment, and may be  relevant
       also in the Article 8 ECHR assessment, if it can be shown that  they
       impact on the ability of homosexual or LGBTI individuals, singly  or
       in couples, to maintain their private and family life.

   17. We begin  by  reviewing  the  country  evidence  before  us,  before
       proceeding to consider the individual situation of these  appellants
       in that context.  The country background evidence before  the  Upper
       Tribunal runs to almost 600 pages in two bundles, and is summarised,
       so far as relevant to the issues in these appeals and  the  position
       of LGBT individuals in Sri Lanka, at Appendix B below.  A full  list
       of all the documents before us appears in Appendix  A.  Even  before
       the existence of civil partnerships, and now gay marriages,  it  was
       accepted that a same-sex relationship in  appropriate  circumstances
       would constitute family life under Article 8 ECHR, with  or  without
       the addition of the discrimination protection  in  Article  14  ECHR
       (see, for example,  Schalk & Kopf v Austria (30141/04) (22  November
       2010); Vallianatos &  Others  v  Greece  (29381/09  &  32684/09)  (7
       November 2013); and the judgment of Lord Justice Sedley in  Krasniqi
       v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  391).   The  capability  to  register  civil
       partnerships, and now to marry, puts the  question  beyond  dispute.
       The respondent has not sought to suggest that the  parties  here  do
       not have family life together.

    Particular social group

   18. We have considered the risk on return to Sri Lanka for gay men,  and
       we are satisfied, having regard to the Supreme Court judgment in  HJ
       (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2010] UKSC 31 that it is correct to treat gay men in Sri
       Lanka as  a  particular  social  group.  We  shall  also  make  some
       observations on the evidence  concerning  lesbians  and  transgender
       individuals in Sri Lanka which has been presented to us.

   19. Following the judgment of the Supreme Court in  HJ  and  HT,  it  is
       established that homosexuals  are  capable  of  being  a  particular
       social group within the  meaning  of  the  Refugee  Convention.   At
       paragraph 65 in the opinion of Lord Rodger  in,  he  summarised  the
       basis of protection for members of a particular social  group  under
       the Refugee Convention thus:


           "65.  ...so far as the social group of gay people  is  concerned
           the underlying rationale of the Convention is that  they  should
           be able to live freely and openly as gay men and lesbian  women,
           without fearing that they  may  suffer  harm  of  the  requisite
           intensity or duration because they are  gay  or  lesbian.  Their
           home state should protect them and so enable  them  to  live  in
           that way. If it does  not  and  they  will  be  threatened  with
           serious harm if they live openly, then  most  people  threatened
           with persecution will be forced to take what steps they  can  to
           avoid it."

       The HJ and HT analysis is reflected in  issue  (3)  at  paragraph  9
       above.

   20. In  X,  Y  and  Z  v  Minister  voor  Immigratie  en  Asiel  v  Hoog
       Commissariaat van de Verenigde Naties voor de  Vluchtelingen  [2013]
       EUECJ C-199/12, the Court of Justice of the European Union held that
       where a practice, such as homosexuality, was  made  illegal  by  the
       laws of a particular state, that  criminalisation  of  itself  would
       support a finding that the group  whose  actions  were  criminalised
       were a particular social group.  Whether the particular social group
       so identified was at risk  of  persecution  would  depend  first  on
       whether the state in question enforced the legislation, and if  not,
       would be a question of fact as to  the  risk  from  other  non-State
       actors of persecution.  The CJEU summarised its findings thus:

           "1.   Article 10(1)(d) of Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  of  29
                April 2004 on minimum standards for  the  qualification  and
                status of third-country nationals or  Stateless  persons  as
                refugees or as  persons  who  otherwise  need  international
                protection and the content of the protection granted must be
                interpreted as meaning that the existence of criminal  laws,
                such as those at issue in each of  the  cases  in  the  main
                proceedings, which specifically target gay men, supports the
                finding that those persons must be  regarded  as  forming  a
                particular social group.

           2.    Article 9(1) of  Directive  2004/83,  read  together  with
                Article 9(2)(c) thereof, must be interpreted as meaning that
                the criminalisation of  homosexual  acts  per  se  does  not
                constitute  an  act  of  persecution.  However,  a  term  of
                imprisonment which sanctions homosexual acts  and  which  is
                actually applied in the country of origin which adopted such
                legislation must be regarded as being a punishment which  is
                disproportionate or discriminatory and thus  constitutes  an
                act of persecution.

           3.    Article 10(1)(d) of Directive 2004/83, read together  with
                Article 2(c) thereof, must be interpreted  as  meaning  that
                only homosexual acts which are criminal in  accordance  with
                the national law of the Member States are excluded from  its
                scope. When assessing an application for refugee status, the
                competent authorities cannot reasonably expect, in order  to
                avoid the risk of persecution, the applicant for  asylum  to
                conceal his homosexuality in his country  of  origin  or  to
                exercise  reserve  in   the   expression   of   his   sexual
                orientation."

    Are civil partners or persons in  gay  marriages  a  particular  social
    group in Sri Lanka?

   21. Although civil partnerships and gay marriages are not recognised  in
       the law of Sri Lanka, we  are  not  persuaded  that  it  is  helpful
       further to narrow the proposed particular social group  beyond  that
       of gay men, or where appropriate, LGBT  individuals.   There  is  no
       definition in the Refugee Convention of what is meant by  particular
       social group, but Article 10 of the Qualification Directive seeks to
       define particular social group:


                 "10.  Reasons for Persecution

                 1.   Member States shall take the following elements  into
                 account when assessing the reasons for persecution:
                 ...



                 (d)   a group shall be  considered  to  form  a  particular
                 social group where in particular:
                       -      members  of  that  group   share   an   innate
                       characteristic, or a common background that cannot be
                       changed, or share a characteristic or belief that  is
                       so fundamental  to  identity  or  conscience  that  a
                       person should not be forced to renounce it, and
                       -     that group  has  a  distinct  identity  in  the
                       relevant country, because it is  perceived  as  being
                       different by the surrounding society;
                       depending on the  circumstances  in  the  country  of
                       origin, a particular social  group  might  include  a
                       group based on  a  common  characteristic  of  sexual
                       orientation. Sexual orientation cannot be understood
                       to  include  acts  considered  to  be   criminal   in
                       accordance with national law of  the  Member  States:
                       Gender related aspects might be  considered,  without
                       by themselves alone creating a  presumption  for  the
                       applicability of this Article; ..."

   22. However, the couple will be removed together and whether the failure
       of the Sri Lankan authorities to recognise civil partnerships itself
       engages Article 3 or Article  8  ECHR  is  doubtful.   The  evidence
       before us does not show that those who have entered abroad into  gay
       marriages or civil partnerships have  a  distinct  identity  in  Sri
       Lanka.    Nor,   arguably,   is   that   status   an    unchangeable
       characteristic, though the parties of course intend it to be so.  We
       have therefore asked ourselves whether the status, of itself, is 'so
       fundamental to identity and conscience that a person should  not  be
       forced to renounce it'.  Again, the evidence before us is  that  the
       Sri Lankan state simply does not engage with  the  status  of  civil
       partner at all.  Individuals in such relationships are not forced to
       renounce them: the status is ignored.   There  is  no  provision  on
       official forms for it, but it continues to exist.

   23. Extraterritorial Article 8 arguments must reach a high standard.  In
       EM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 64, the House  of  Lords  considered
       the Article 8 rights of a mother who, if returned  to  Lebanon  with
       her child, would be required to relinquish custody  to  its  father,
       pursuant to Shari'a law.  In his opinion, Lord Hope  said  that  the
       breach feared must be flagrant, 'destroying or nullifying the family
       life that  they  have  enjoyed  together',  with  reference  to  the
       decision of the House of Lords in N v Secretary  of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2005] UKHL 31 and D v United  Kingdom  [1997]  ECHR
       25:

                 "7.   It  seems  to  me   that   the   Strasbourg   court's
                 jurisprudence  indicates  that,  in  the  absence  of  very
                 exceptional  circumstances,   aliens   cannot   claim   any
                 entitlement under the Convention to remain here  to  escape
                 from the discriminatory effects of the system of family law
                 in their country of origin. ...

                 15. The guidance that is to be  found  in  these  decisions
                 indicates that the Strasbourg court would be likely to hold
                 that, except in wholly  exceptional  circumstances,  aliens
                 who are subject to expulsion cannot claim an entitlement to
                 remain in the territory of a Contracting State in order  to
                 benefit from the equality of treatment as  to  respect  for
                 their family life that they would receive there which would
                 be denied to them in the receiving state. ... On  a  purely
                 pragmatic basis the Contracting States cannot  be  expected
                 to return aliens only to a  country  whose  family  law  is
                 compatible with the principle of non-discrimination assumed
                 by the Convention.
                 16. How then can one distinguish between those cases  where
                 a violation of articles 8 and 14 that results from applying
                 Shari'a law will be flagrant, from those where it will not?
                 ...[In this appeal] the complaint is about the  effects  of
                 discriminatory family law on the relationship  that  exists
                 between individuals. It has not been suggested in this case
                 that there is a risk that the application  of  the  Shari'a
                 law  would  result  in   persecution   of   the   appellant
                 approaching the level prescribed  by  article  3.  So  that
                 check as to whether a flagrant breach has been  established
                 cannot be relied on in the assessment.
                 17... [T]he key to identifying those cases where the breach
                 of articles 8 and 14 will be flagrant lies in an assessment
                 of the effects on both mother and child  of  destroying  or
                 nullifying the family life that they have shared  together.
                 The cases where that assessment shows  that  the  violation
                 will be flagrant will be very exceptional.  But  where  the
                 humanitarian grounds against their removal are  compelling,
                 it must follow that there is an obligation not  to  remove.
                 The risk of adding one test to another is obvious.  But  in
                 the absence of further guidance from Strasbourg as  to  how
                 the flagrancy test is to be applied in article 8  cases,  I
                 would adopt that approach in this case."
   24. There were similar facts in SS (Malaysia) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
       888, where the Malaysian appellant's main concern was that her  son,
       born in 2006, should continue to be brought up  as  a  Catholic  and
       not, as his father wished, as a Muslim.  It was most likely that  in
       Malaysia he would be allowed to live with her until he was about 15,
       but she would not be allowed to bring him up as a nominal Christian.
        Relying heavily on EM (Lebanon), Lord Justice Moore-Bick, with whom
       the other judges agreed, said this:


                 "17.  The real complaint ... is  that  the  courts  of  the
                 appellant's own country resolve disagreements  relating  to
                 the religious upbringing of children in a way which differs
                 from our own and which she finds  uncongenial.   To  return
                 her and her son ... would  not  in  my  view  amount  to  a
                 flagrant denial of her Convention rights or  those  of  her
                 son; nor would it be contrary to his best interests."

   25. For the purposes of these appeals,  we  are  not  satisfied  on  the
       evidence before us that the Sri Lankan state's failure to  recognise
       the appellants' status as  civil  partners  has  been  shown  to  be
       sufficiently flagrant of itself to destroy or nullify  their  family
       life:  on the contrary, if removed they will be removed together and
       the status will continue to exist,  albeit  not  recognised  in  Sri
       Lanka.   We do not consider that  individuals  whose  civil  partner
       status or status as married homosexuals is not  reflected  in  their
       legal status in their country of origin form a  separate  particular
       social group or that Article 8 ECHR is engaged by that aspect of the
       factual matrix alone.

    Country evidence


    The Equal Ground reports


   26. Equal Ground is an organisation in Sri Lanka  which  supports  LGBTI
       persons there.  Its Executive Director is Ms Rosanna Flamer-Caldera.
         Ms  Flamer-Caldera  uses  the  abbreviation  LGBT  (lesbian,  gay,
       bisexual and transgender) in her report, but in her  oral  evidence,
       she also used LGBTI and sometimes LGBTIQ.  For the  purpose  of  the
       individual appellants here, there is no relevant  difference,  since
       they are both gay men.

   27. Equal Ground's reports are pivotal in  this  case,  since  they  are
       accepted and referenced in the US State Department Report,  FCO  and
       UKBA evidence,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Canadian  IRB  and  the
       international NGOs.   Ms  Flamer-Caldera's  evidence  also  overlaps
       significantly, if not entirely, with that of Mr Guruparan.

   28. Several of Equal Ground's public reports appear in the  bundle:   an
       undated report entitled "Struggling against homophobic violence  and
       hate  crimes"  based  on  interviews  with  109  individuals  in  13
       districts of Sri Lanka during April-June  2011;  a  report  dated  9
       December 2012 entitled "Towards  a  lesbians,  gays,  bisexuals  and
       transgendered (LGBT) stigma and discrimination index for Sri  Lanka"
       (the 'Pilot Study'), based on interviews with 119 persons  known  to
       Equal  Ground;  a   January   2013   situation   analysis   entitled
       "Strengthening of legal protection for LGBT in Sri  Lanka:  road  to
       decriminalization" and a report for the  UNHCR  General  Council  in
       March 2014 entitled "Human rights violations against  lesbian,  gay,
       bisexual and transgender people in Sri Lanka: a shadow report".

   29. The reports all  set  out  the  legal  framework  and  the  criminal
       penalties available for same-sex sexual activity in  Sri  Lanka.  As
       they cover much of the same  ground,  the  Equal  Ground  background
       evidence can be  summarised  together.   The  Equal  Ground  reports
       acknowledge that there have  been  no  successful  prosecutions  and
       indeed, in 50 years of the Sri Lankan state, hardly anyone has  been
       charged.  Examples are given of repression of lesbian  and  bisexual
       women who were forced by their families to marry men; of pressure on
       Equal Ground's partner organisation when it tried to run a  HIV/AIDS
       workshop; and of attacks on transgender individuals working  in  the
       sex industry or appearing in public dressed as a member of their new
       gender identity group.  There was marginalisation and discrimination
       against LGBTIQ individuals at school with the result that  many  did
       not complete their education. The  former  President  Rajapaksa  had
       personally removed from his  draft  human  rights  action  plan  any
       mention of legalising homosexuality. The  reports  note  that  while
       there are Pride  activities  in  Sri  Lanka,  there  are  no  public
       marches.

    Miss Rosanna Flamer-Caldera's evidence

   30. This witness is the executive director of Equal Ground.  Ms  Flamer-
       Caldera's November 2013 report for these  appellants  discusses  the
       criminalisation of same sex behaviour in  Sri  Lanka;  instances  of
       police victimisation of gay men, including examples of rape  by  the
       police (derived from a report by an Equal Ground field officer); the
       government's intolerance of  LGBT  people,  and  its  reluctance  to
       establish non-discriminatory remedies; the hidden status of  lesbian
       and bi-sexual women, who risk having  their  relationships  thwarted
       and being forced  into  heterosexual  marriages  by  their  parents;
       blackmail, stigmatisation; discrimination in access to work,  health
       services and education; impunity for crimes committed  against  LGBT
       individuals, who fear reporting to the police  and  are  subject  to
       further attacks if they do; incitement of homophobia in  the  media;
       and state harassment of LGBT human rights defenders,  including  CID
       pressure on field activities, amounting to a gagging order.  In  its
       final paragraph the report says:

         Under the circumstances described above, it  is  our  opinion  that
         LGBT persons face insurmountable opposition  from  the  government,
         media and law enforcement agencies.  LGBT persons are being  forced
         underground and into the  closet,  interventions  on  HIV/Aids  and
         other health related  issues  for  the  LGBT  community  are  being
         stopped or hampered and those who perpetrate  crimes  against  LGBT
         persons go unpunished.



   31. We turn now to consider the evidence prepared by  Ms  Flamer-Caldera
       in these appeals, and the oral evidence  she  gave.  Her  report  is
       dated  November  2013,  and  begins  by  summarising  the   relevant
       international  Conventions  and  the  criminalisation  of   same-sex
       activity in Sri Lanka.  There had been  an  attempt  to  repeal  the
       relevant provisions in 1995 but the effect was  worse,  not  better,
       since the  word  'males'  in  the  original  text  was  replaced  by
       'persons', thereby  criminalising  lesbian  as  well  as  homosexual
       sexual activity. The report states that there is no right to privacy
       in the Sri Lankan constitution.   The report  confirmed  that  there
       had been no prosecutions of gay men or lesbians under  sections  365
       and 365A, but its effect was to provide a tool for harassment of the
       LGBT community such that its members were afraid to report incidents
       of violence and other violations to the police, for  fear  of  being
       further stigmatised and victimised by the police.

   32. Ms Flamer-Caldera's report gave a number  of  examples  of  problems
       which had occurred in the writer's knowledge:

              i) in 2009, a homosexual  member  of  Equal  Ground  had  felt
                 unable to report to the police the theft by  his  boyfriend
                 of his Apple laptop;

             ii) in 2010, the Equal Ground offices were  burgled,  but  they
                 did not report the burglary  to  the  police  for  fear  of
                 'systematic harassment' from the  police  once  the  office
                 location was known;

            iii) LGBTIQ individuals were unable to access proper health care
                 for fear of  disclosing  their  sexual  orientation  and/or
                 gender identity.  They feared that  health  care  personnel
                 would  treat  them  indifferently,  or  with  disdain.   An
                 example was given of a female to male transsexual  who,  as
                 reported in  an  Equal  Ground   Field  Officer  report  in
                 October 2013, had a pain in the night, apparently while  in
                 hospital, and vomited all over his bed.  Nobody  came  when
                 he cried out for help, and in  the  morning,  a  male  head
                 nurse and minor staff took off the sarong  he  was  wearing
                 "to examine my genitals".  Difficulty in  interaction  with
                 hospital staff had led to an  increase  in  HIV  infections
                 amongst gay men and bisexuals from 11% in 2011  to  15%  in
                 2013;

             iv) At school, bullying, marginalisation and discrimination led
                 many LGBTIQ individuals  to  drop  out  of  education.   An
                 example was given, from the same Field  Officer  report  of
                 October 2013, of a female to male transsexual who had faced
                 problems and school,  in  the  workplace  and  in  society,
                 because she insisted on dressing and behaving as a boy.

              v) Another example, from an Equal Ground Field Officer  report
                 in August 2013, was of  a  bisexual  male  who,  some  time
                 earlier when he was 16 years of age, had been raped by  two
                 senior students in his school toilets.  No one was there to
                 help him.

   33. Equal Ground had submitted detailed reports regarding the  situation
       of LGBT individuals in Sri Lanka to  inform  the  UNHCR's  Universal
       Periodic Review (the UPR) in 2008 and 2012.  The 2008 UPR  had  been
       disappointing, in that it failed to include any observations on  the
       position of LGBT individuals.   In 2012, Equal  Ground  submitted  a
       further three reports to the UNHCR for the UPR, and  in  that  year,
       Canada and Argentina supported calls for  the  decriminalisation  of
       homosexuality in Sri Lanka.  Equal Ground had been invited to attend
       meetings before and after the publication of the UPR.  During  those
       meetings, the Sri Lankan President's Special Envoy  to  Geneva,  the
       Honourable Mahinda Samarasinghe, and the Attorney General, and other
       civil society figures  had  told  Equal  Ground  categorically  that
       homosexuality would never be decriminalised in Sri  Lanka.  The  Sri
       Lankan government's current action plan on human rights contained no
       proposal  for  legalising  homosexuality,   the   President   having
       personally removed it from the draft.

   34. Examples were given of repression of lesbian and bisexual  women  in
       Sri Lanka by their families:  one woman was locked up and forced  to
       marry a man eight years younger than she was, once her  family  knew
       of her orientation; another was refused permission to work  and  not
       allowed to use her mobile phone or contact  her  girlfriend;  and  a
       third, who had been living with her female partner  and  caring  for
       her ailing mother, was forced after her mother's death  to  marry  a
       man, on pain of losing all the  property  bequeathed  to  her.   The
       woman married as her brother insisted:  her partner killed  herself.
        There was an increased rate of self-harm by lesbian women,  due  to
       "internalised  homophobia"  and  they  were   also   vulnerable   to
       blackmail.

   35.  Internalised  homophobia  and  self-harm  was  an  issue  for  LGBT
       individuals in general. All LGBT individuals suffered discrimination
       in access to work, health services and education.

   36. Working  from  YouTube  interviews,  the  report  gave  examples  of
       treatment meted out to a graduate  student  working  on  a  Masters'
       thesis on Safer Sex  in  Galle,  in  southern  Sri  Lanka,  who  was
       interviewing several men in a public  place.   He  was  accosted  by
       police, and they were arrested and  several  of  them  beaten.   The
       researcher was  slapped  and  threatened  with  years  in  jail  for
       'promoting homosexuality'.   He was thrown into  a  cell  with  such
       force that he fell and damaged his ankle.  An effeminate man who was
       being interviewed by the researcher was anally raped with  a  wooden
       stick by three  police  officers  in  the  same  incident.   Another
       YouTube interview recorded police harassing two homosexual  men  who
       were accused of having sex in a  public  lavatory  in  Colombo;  the
       police arrested them, called them derogatory names, and  demanded  a
       bribe to release them.

   37. The media was hostile to the LGBT community; an article in the  July
       2010 Sri Lankan Daily Mirror deplored moves to promote homosexuality
       and to treat heterosexuality as outdated.   Unnamed  public  figures
       were accused of turning heterosexuals gay, and the article concluded
       that "the country can do well without these  undesirable  elements".
       A Sinhalese  newspaper,  The  Rivera,  had  published  a  series  of
       articles every weekend for a month (in context,  it  seems  to  have
       been September 2011) asserting that the LGBT community was  "harming
       the cultural decencies and morality of Sri Lanka"  and  planning  to
       open 24 homosexual centres in all districts of the island, with "the
       ulterior motive of harming the cultural decencies  and  morality  of
       Sri Lanka". The articles related to  the  CoJ,  warning  parents  to
       protect their sons, equating homosexuality  with  paedophilia.   CoJ
       had subsequently closed down and no longer operated.

   38. Pleas to decriminalise  homosexuality  continued  to  fall  on  deaf
       Government  ears.   Government  controlled  newspapers   and   blogs
       contained hate inciting and homophobic articles,  including  attacks
       on Radio Neth FM by clergymen in September 2013.  On 17 August 2013,
       Lakbima (a Sinhalese newspaper) made an inflammatory criticism of  a
       workshop held in Anuradhapura by a  partner  organisation  of  Equal
       Ground, which had been authorised by  the  Ministry  of  Health  and
       which in reality, far from being an attempt to brainwash children to
       be homosexual, was a peer educator's workshop on  MSM  (men  seeking
       men) and HIV/AIDS.

   39. On 10 December 2012 and  in  early  February  2013,  the  Women  and
       Children's Bureau of the Sri Lankan police made presentations on the
       increasing problem with child abuse in Sri Lanka, which they  stated
       was increasing because  of  the  growing  homosexual  culture.   The
       underlying suggestion was, again, that gay men are all  paedophiles.
       Equal Ground was specifically  identified,  along  with  Ms  Flamer-
       Caldera, as being responsible for  spreading  homosexuality  in  Sri
       Lanka, and by implication, promoting paedophilia.

   40. Ms Flamer-Caldera gave evidence to us by video link from  Australia.
       In examination-in-chief further to her report,  she  was  questioned
       firstly about the closure in late 2011 of another LGBT  organisation
       "Companions on a Journey" (CoJ).  Ms Flamer-Caldera was  unaware  of
       the full details; her understanding was that the closure of CoJ  was
       not directly persecutory but was related to the  executive  director
       being suspected of embezzlement of funds, as a result of  which  the
       Sri Lankan CID went to CoJ's office  to  investigate  its  finances.
       The incident was "blown out of proportion" by  the  press  who  made
       insinuations about sexual behaviour in the office and allegations of
       paedophilia, based on CoJ's office being situated next  to  a  boys'
       school.  The organisation closed its doors  and  the  staff  members
       were  left  with  no  resources.   The  director  and  his   partner
       disappeared.

   41. Ms Flamer-Caldera explained that Equal Ground's  activities  in  the
       field in Sri Lanka are mainly centred on women's rights and HIV, but
       also related to commercial sex workers in the  LGBT  community.   In
       one incident a field officer was visited by the CID and told not  to
       hold workshops discussing homosexuality or the  Penal  Code.   As  a
       result, Equal Ground suspended those planned activities.

   42. Over the last ten years, annual celebrations had been  held  in  Sri
       Lanka by LGBTI persons in Sri Lanka  ('Pride'  events)  which  Equal
       Ground was instrumental in organising.  Sri Lankan Pride events were
       not public street parades as in other countries:   the  organisation
       had to be careful about where to hold them.  During  the  first  few
       years, Pride events were held on public  parts  of  the  beach,  but
       there was trouble in 2010 when  a  disruptive  mob  threw  sand  and
       stones.  Since then the events have taken place on the private beach
       of a hotel where the management is very supportive.  All events were
       held now in secure locations which could not be raided  or  targeted
       by extremist groups.  Equal Ground was careful  to  make  sure  that
       friendly High Commissions and  heterosexual  persons  took  part  in
       Pride events, so that any police raid would give rise to  a  lot  of
       questions.   During the last year, all Pride events except one  were
       held at the German Cultural Institute, i.e. "on German  soil".   The
       other was held on the private beach  of  a  hotel.  Events  in  2014
       attracted about 2000  people.   There  were  more  events  in  2013,
       including a drag fashion show attended by about 400-450 people.

   43. The Secretary of State's assertion  that  gays  were  becoming  more
       visible in Sri Lanka was put to Ms Flamer-Caldera for comment.   She
       believed that to be so, mainly due to advocacy of LGBT  rights,  but
       with visibility came greater intimidation and violence.  The risk to
       those who were openly gay in Sri Lanka was not always the same.  For
       people with money, it did not matter very much.  The majority,  with
       modest or low income, suffered the most.  All  gays,  regardless  of
       their financial status, suffered some discrimination throughout life
       but the well-off were much better able to cope.  Ms Flamer-Caldera's
       own position was highly visible, but she had not  been  detained  or
       harassed.  She could not fully explain why, but felt very fortunate.
        Although very vocal, she had excellent relations with Embassies and
       High Commissions of countries  such  as  the  UK,  Canada,  USA  and
       Norway.   Ms   Flamer-Caldera   was   from   a   prominent   family.
       Nevertheless, she was nervous at times, particularly when travelling
       through  the  airport,  where  human  rights  defenders  were  often
       arrested.

   44. Ms Flamer-Caldera was referred to a  Pilot  Study  prepared  by  her
       organisation, entitled "Towards an LGBT  stigma  and  discrimination
       index for Sri Lanka".  She thought  the  number  of  respondents  on
       which the study was based was about 130.  As to the examples  quoted
       in her report, the witness said that she used only cases  which  she
       could substantiate, by which she meant that if information had  been
       obtained through a third party, it would  be  cited  only  if  Equal
       Ground could contact the victim.  Hearsay evidence was not  included
       in the study.  The sample group were people who were "out", at least
       to Equal Ground, though not  necessarily  to  their  families.   The
       report  showed  23  instances  in  that  small  group   where   non-
       heterosexuals were living together, that is to say, just over 30% of
       those in the study group.  Ms Flamer-Caldera considered that the 30%
       would normally be two people living  together  under  the  guise  of
       friendship,  rather  than  openly.   Her   interpretation   of   the
       statistics was that it was possible for 2 gay men to live  together,
       but only so long as they did not disclose  their  relationship.   By
       non-disclosure she meant that their relationship would not be  known
       to a landlord, who would be unlikely to want to rent to a homosexual
       couple.   Asked about difficulties which gay men might have if  they
       did disclose their sexuality, Ms Flamer-Caldera stated that she knew
       one person who was openly gay, who worked  as  an  official  in  the
       Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and who had managed to get  by  without
       hiding his sexuality.

   45. In cross-examination, Mr Whitwell put to Ms Flamer-Caldera  an  item
       in the Pilot Study stating that 84% of respondents said that in  the
       past 2 years they had never been excluded from social gatherings  on
       the  basis  of  gender  identity,  gender   expression   or   sexual
       orientation.  Ms Flamer-Caldera agreed, but stated that  there  were
       no openly gay venues or  events  in  Sri  Lanka.   Asked  about  the
       survey's report that 95% of respondents had  never  been  physically
       abused during the two years before the survey was taken, Ms  Flamer-
       Caldera acknowledged that finding.  Her evidence was that the  Pilot
       Study was the  best  which  could  currently  be  achieved  but  she
       recognised its limitations, since it  was  based  on  a  very  small
       sample, only 130 respondents.   Ms  Flamer-Caldera  considered  that
       many LGBTI persons  who  had  been  harassed  would  not  have  come
       forward, which would have affected the outcome of the survey.

   46. Ms Flamer-Caldera's evidence was that it was difficult to generalise
       as to which groups among LGBTI were at most risk of  persecution  or
       harm in Sri Lanka.  Some gay men  were  living  on  the  margins  of
       society, and cruising in known areas of Colombo, which increased the
       risk to them.  Equal Ground had reports of the police picking up men
       from those areas in order to extort large sums or to extract  sexual
       favours.  The publication Ceylon Today in January 2012 had disclosed
       the known cruising spots in Colombo  and  its  outskirts.   Lesbians
       were even more "invisible" than gay men.  They did not have the same
       freedom to leave the home and  were  very  unlikely  to  make  their
       relationships public. Where their sexual preference was known,  they
       were particularly marginalised by society  and  in  their  families.
       There  were  instances  of  their  being  forced  into  heterosexual
       marriages and physically violated.  Transgendered people  were  also
       on the margins.  However, Ms Flamer-Caldera considered that  it  was
       difficult to say that one section of the LGBTI community  was  worse
       off than others.

   47. When asked again about the circumstances of the closure of  CoJ,  Ms
       Flamer-Caldera  was  not  sure  whether  it  had  been   on   sexual
       orientation grounds or was  the  result  only  of  an  enquiry  into
       embezzlement.

   48. Regarding the reference to a "gagging order" affecting Equal Ground,
       mentioned in her November 2013 report, Ms  Flamer-Caldera  explained
       that she did not mean an  actual  order  against  the  organisation.
       She meant the attempt  to  restrict  an  Equal  Ground  workshop  on
       HIV/AIDS which had  been  sanctioned  by  the  Ministry  of  Health.
       Before it took place, a derogatory article published in a  newspaper
       alleged that Equal Ground would try  at  that  workshop  to  recruit
       persons, including children,  to  homosexuality.  Ms  Flamer-Caldera
       stated that a CID officer had visited the Equal Ground field officer
       running the workshop, to discuss the  allegation  and  the  proposed
       content of the workshop.  The CID officer agreed to the Equal Ground
       field officer putting their discussion off to the evening,  and  the
       field officer avoided the discussion altogether by not  arranging  a
       further meeting.  The Equal Ground field officer had then been  able
       to proceed with the workshop,  skirting  around  the  parts  of  the
       proposed agenda dealing with sexuality and the  law.   No  harm  had
       come to him or anyone who attended.

   49. Ms Flamer-Caldera  was  asked  to  explain  a  number  of  incidents
       mentioned in her report, and cited in identical terms in that of  Mr
       Guruparan, based on YouTube clips.  She explained that  these  clips
       were not footage of actual incidents but showed a  victim,  under  a
       concealed  identity,  saying  what  had  happened.   The   incidents
       mentioned in the reports were synopses of the YouTube items and were
       used because they came directly from victims: Equal Ground  had  not
       contacted the individuals directly.  It was put  to  her  that  this
       contradicted her evidence about not  relying  on  hearsay  or  third
       party information, but Ms  Flamer-Caldera  considered  that  as  the
       YouTube clips were voiced by those affected, the Equal Ground report
       was not hearsay in relation to these incidents.

   50. Ms Flamer-Caldera agreed that there was not  much  evidence  in  the
       Pilot Study or  elsewhere  regarding  discrimination  against  LGBTI
       individuals in the provision of health care, but she said  this  was
       explained by  the  fact  that  most  gays  did  not  disclose  their
       orientation when requesting health care.  The Pilot  Study  did  not
       reflect the true situation.  Equal Ground dealt  with  reports  from
       hundreds of people each month, which disclosed major discrimination.
        In one instance, a homosexual Equal Ground  employee  who  had  HIV
       died of a massive heart attack.  An autopsy  had  not  been  carried
       out, as it should have been in the case of a sudden death.  When his
       friends tried to obtain release of the body, the police referred  to
       the deceased as a 'faggot'.  The funeral directors initially refused
       to take the body and it was eventually released in a  sealed  casket
       just before the burial.  It had not been  possible  to  respect  the
       deceased's wish to be cremated rather than buried.

   51. Ms Flamer-Caldera was asked about the finding in the study that over
       30% of respondents  had  been  able  to  live  together  in  a  non-
       heterosexual relationship, many for over five  years.   The  witness
       reiterated that they mostly did so as  friends  or  room  mates  and
       their sexual orientation was not necessary known to family,  friends
       or wider society, even when they were in  long  term  relationships.
       The respondents in the  survey  had  been  able  to  make  anonymous
       disclosure to Equal Ground, which was not evidence  that  they  were
       otherwise open about their sexuality.

   52. The problems reported to Equal Ground were mainly at  the  level  of
       harassment and discrimination.  There were few if any complaints  of
       torture, but some reports of rape, including many instances  of  the
       police requesting sexual favours.  It was not  possible  to  produce
       figures on the scale of incidents reported to Equal Ground,  due  to
       lack of resources to compile such an analysis.

   53. The panel asked Ms Flamer-Caldera to comment on  the  evidence  from
       Professor Good that the lack of privacy in Sri Lanka was  such  that
       same sex couples could not live together without the nature of their
       relationship becoming known.   Her  evidence  contradicted  that  of
       Professor Good:  she stated that quite a few people were able to  do
       so, since not everyone lived in  thin-walled  apartments,  and  many
       were in rented  houses.   Although  Sri  Lankans  do  want  to  know
       everyone's business, LGBTI people often did not tell  the  truth  to
       protect their position, or in other words they were obliged to  live
       a lie.  They would describe their partner as 'my friend' to  deflect
       enquiries.  Landlords would not rent to openly homosexual or lesbian
       couples.  It was easier for  the  better-off  to  make  satisfactory
       living  arrangements.   Most  of  those  who  lived  together   were
       economically self  sufficient,  living  at  a  distance  from  their
       parents in relatively  good  jobs.   Less  prosperous  young  people
       tended to live with their parents until marriage.

   54. Finally, Ms Flamer-Caldera told us that Equal Ground has 14 staff at
       its office in Colombo and 5 field officers  in  the  districts,  all
       full-time staff.  It is funded from a variety of sources,  prominent
       among which are the US State Department and the Finnish and Canadian
       governments.  (The evidence also  mentions  help  from  the  German,
       Norwegian and UK governments.)

    Professor Anthony Good

   55. This witness is Professor Emeritus in  Social  Anthropology  at  the
       University of Edinburgh, and a recognised expert on Sri  Lanka.   He
       provided a report dated 8 July 2014.   The  background  evidence  on
       stigmatisation of homosexuality in Sri Lanka is surveyed.  Professor
       Good considered that the continued existence of anti-sodomy laws was
       indicative of prevailing  social  attitudes,  and  that  the  stigma
       against  homosexuality  applied  particularly   to   the   receptive
       participant.   On  the  perception  of  homosexual  men  in  society
       generally, Professor Good cited a report to UNHCR by Equal Ground, a
       Sri Lanka LGBTI organisation, and some further  material.   We  will
       consider the  Equal  Ground  report  separately,  since  it  is  the
       principal source underlying most of the background materials  before
       us, including some of those on which  Professor  Good  has  in  turn
       relied.  Professor Good's opinion  was  that  while  homosexual  men
       might be able to move about  relatively  freely  and  conceal  their
       homosexual relationship, fear of "... being revealed  and  condemned
       to death severely limits the ability of  gay  and  bisexual  men  to
       engage in a loving relationship  in  accordance  with  their  sexual
       orientation".  The cases are mentioned are of two homosexual couples
       who have had to flee to seek asylum in the Czech Republic and in the
       UK.  Few details were provided.

   56. One of  the  agreed  questions  for  Professor  Good  concerned  the
       perception of homosexual couples living  together.   He  found  this
       question hard to answer, not having  knowingly  encountered  such  a
       situation.  He accepted that there appeared  to  be  evidence  of  a
       consensus among foreign same-sex couples travelling to Sri Lanka  as
       tourists that no problems were experienced unless  they  engaged  in
       public displays of affection.  He noted that  male  friends  holding
       hands in public was  not  normally  construed  as  having  a  sexual
       connotation, but that might well be different if it  were  suspected
       that those concerned were gay men.

   57. As to the understanding of the principle of same sex marriage in Sri
       Lanka, Professor Good cited a government source making it clear that
       the Sri Lankan authorities had no intention of legalising  same  sex
       marriage.  He considered that the comments generated  by  that  news
       "indicate the wide spectrum of attitudes towards same  sex  marriage
       among Sri Lankans".

   58. Professor Good found it unsurprising that the appellants had  sought
       to conceal their sexuality from their  families  and  from  all  but
       their  closest  friends  in  the  UK,  given  the   stigma   against
       homosexuality in Sri Lanka, the centrality of marriage to all social
       life there, and the expectation that all Sri Lankans will marry.  It
       was his opinion that it would be virtually impossible  for  them  to
       keep their relationship secret if they were to return.  Sri Lanka is
       such an inquisitive society that the fact that they were in a formal
       relationship, even although not officially recognised in Sri  Lanka,
       would soon become apparent to relatives and neighbours.  They  could
       reside together, but not as a couple.  They  would  be  expected  to
       contribute  towards  the  economic  well  being  of  their   family.
       Marriage being perceived as a universal  and  universally  desirable
       state, a wish not to marry "would be seen as highly deviant".

   59.  In  examination-in-chief  further  to  his  report  Professor  Good
       explained that there was considerable confusion in  the  Sri  Lankan
       press and public mind  between  homosexuality  and  paedophilia,  in
       particular because of concern over growth in sex tourism, often seen
       as  related  to  sex  with  children.   He  was  aware  of   various
       administrative and government  forms  in  Sri  Lanka  requiring  the
       declaration of marital status, and that a local government  official
       is  responsible  for  enumerating  households  and   recording   the
       population.  Such forms  generally  asked  for  a  statement  of  an
       individual's  relationship  to  the  head  of  household.   However,
       Professor Good was not very familiar with the forms  and  could  not
       offer any conclusions thereon.

   60. In cross-examination, Professor Good said  that  he  had  no  direct
       experience of  working  with  the  LGBTI  community  in  Sri  Lanka.
       Although he had written many reports on the country,  this  was  the
       first in  which  a  civil  partnership  was  one  of  the  features.
       Professor  Good  has  written  at  least   one   report   in   which
       homosexuality was one of the issues.  In Professor  Good's  opinion,
       some of the Sri Lankan population would be aware of the concept of a
       civil partnership.  He could not speculate on the proportion.  There
       was an expectation in Sri Lanka that everyone would wish  to  marry,
       and almost all adults did eventually marry, although again Professor
       Good had no statistics  to  support  that  assertion.   Public  hand
       holding between two men was not generally seen as sexual.  Professor
       Good considered that a gay couple living together in Sri Lanka would
       eventually be recognised as such, but he could not say  how  quickly
       that would happen.  There was simply much less privacy in Sri Lankan
       society than in the UK, with many people living in flats with  paper
       thin walls, where everything  would  be  heard.   Sri  Lankans  were
       inquisitive and people knew a great deal more about each other.  The
       speed of discovery of a relationship might well depend on the socio-
       economic status of the partners.  Professor Good  was  reluctant  to
       comment on the level of risk which might arise once a homosexual  or
       lesbian  relationship  became  known:  he  considered  that  for   a
       Sinhalese  same  sex  couple,  there  would  be  a  high  degree  of
       stigmatisation.  If there were difficulties, they would  receive  no
       assistance from the police, rather the reverse.  It was his  opinion
       that the risk of violence and extortion was highest for  transgender
       individuals and commercial sex workers.

    Mr Kumaravadivel Guruparan

   61. Mr Guruparan is a lecturer in law at the University of Jaffna and  a
       practising  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka,  presently  on  study  leave  at
       University College,  London,  and  studying  for  his  PhD  in  both
       universities.  He provided a report dated 12 May 2014  in  which  he
       explained that section 365 provides both the substantive law and the
       punishment for homosexual acts, and that section  365A  extends  the
       scope  of  the  criminal  law  to  anyone  party  to  commission  of
       homosexual acts, potentially bringing persons such as a landlord  or
       medical service provider within  the  scope  of  the  criminal  law.
       Although the amendment in 1995 was initially proposed with a view to
       liberalising the law, the eventual outcome was to the  contrary,  by
       introducing section 365A and by extending the provisions beyond male
       sexuality, so that lesbian acts are also criminalised.  Although the
       Constitution provides the right to equality irrespective  of  sexual
       orientation, pre-existing law is stated not to be a contravention of
       that Constitutional provision.

   62. Mr Guruparan's evidence was that while prosecutions have been  rare,
       the law has been used "to carry out arbitrary arrests, detention and
       torture by the Sri Lankan police" and that it has led  to  "flagrant
       abuse" of powers of arrest  and  detention.   Arrests  lead  not  to
       charges but to "bribery, blackmail, extortion, violence  or  coerced
       sexual  favours".   He  gives  examples  which  he  says  have  been
       "verified by the  author  of  this  report  by  cross-checking  with
       multiple sources":

                 "In 2012 a lesbian was arrested and charged  with  vagrancy
                 when the police found her walking back to her  motor  cycle
                 on a beach near  Colombo.   The  police  commented  on  her
                 masculine appearance and the  fact  that  she  was  wearing
                 pants, and she was heavily questioned for her  decision  to
                 ride  a  motorcycle.   The   lesbian   was   detained   for
                 approximately 5 hours before the police released her.


                 In another case reported in 2013,  a  man  from  Kandy  who
                 travelled to Colombo to sit for an accounting exam.   While
                 staying in the area, he and a Belgian male friend shared  a
                 room just outside Colombo at a guest house known  to  be  a
                 place where gay men commonly stay.  On evening, after the 2
                 men had returned from dinner, the  police  broke  down  the
                 door of their room and  arrested  both  men  under  section
                 365A.  The police forced the Sri Lankan man's fingers  onto
                 unused condoms and planted the condoms at the scene  before
                 taking both men to the police lock up.  To  obtain  release
                 from the detention, the men  were  forced  to  agree  to  a
                 settlement under which the Sri Lankan man had to  agree  to
                 be identified as a state witness against  his  friend,  and
                 the Belgian man had to pay a fine.


                 Another example from  2013  involves  2  gay  men  who  are
                 arrested by police at a public rest  room  in  Colombo  and
                 taken to a police station.   At  the  station,  the  police
                 officers  explained  their  reason  for  the  arrest  using
                 derogatory terminology for gay individuals and accused  the
                 2 men of having sex in the  rest  room.   The  police  then
                 drove the 2 men to another location,  where  the  men  were
                 forced to pay the police a bribe to be released."


   63. The report goes on to detail the case of the former Foreign Minister
       Mr Samarawera, the only political  figure  who  has  been  semi-open
       about his sexual orientation.  After a  burglary  at  his  house  in
       January 2014 the party in power twisted the case by identifying  the
       burglar as the politician's gay  partner  and  threatened  him  with
       charges  of  homosexuality.   The  report  quotes  Mr   Sumarawera's
       statement to the press.  It  is  a  bitter  complaint  of  political
       victimisation.   It  includes  the  comment  that  the  politician's
       private life "though private has never been a secret" and  that  his
       family and most of his parliamentary colleagues  "...  including  my
       constituents ... have appreciated my honesty and for never  allowing
       my private life to get in the way of public  service".   The  report
       concludes that the appellants, if  returned,  faced  a  "substantive
       risk of being persecuted".

   64. In cross-examination, it was put to  Mr  Guruparan  that  while  the
       legal framework regulating homosexual behaviour in Sri  Lanka  might
       be within his area of expertise, he was not an expert regarding risk
       and vulnerability.  He was asked what he meant specifically when  he
       said in examination-in-chief that there was a risk  of  torture  for
       gay men:  he relied upon the examples  given  above.   Mr  Guruparan
       stated that he had cross-checked the accounts  in  his  report  with
       lawyers in Colombo and in Kandy.  Regarding the incident involving a
       Sri Lankan and a Belgian, Mr Guruparan did not know the precise date
       of the offence but his sources had confirmed  that  it  happened  in
       2013.

   65. Mr Whitwell put to Mr Guruparan the text of the December 2013  Equal
       Ground report on human rights violations against  LGBTI  individuals
       in Sri Lanka, in which the same incidents were cited, in  identical,
       or almost identical words.  The item  regarding  a  lesbian  on  the
       beach is repeated word for word.  The item regarding  a  Sri  Lankan
       and a Belgian was also identical save for Mr Guruparan's addition of
       the date of the incident, which Equal Ground sourced to an anonymous
       call to the Equal  Ground  hotline  in  2008.   The  arrest  of  two
       homosexual men in a public rest room was sourced to a  YouTube  clip
       entitled "Colombo incident in 2006".

   66.  Notwithstanding  the  near-identity  of  the  texts,  Mr  Guruparan
       maintained that his report was based on conversations  with  lawyers
       directly involved in the cases.  He conceded after a  few  questions
       that he might have seen the Equal Ground report, but he said that he
       had not compiled his own report by "cutting and  pasting"  from  it.
       He was unable to explain the changes of date or  the  near-identical
       text.

   67. When asked about the references in his report to a risk of  torture,
       Mr Guruparan stated that he meant psychological torture only. He had
       been unable to identify or verify any incident of physical  torture.
       Mr Guruparan confirmed that no landlord or medical provider had been
       prosecuted, but considered  nevertheless  that  the  possibility  of
       prosecution might operate as a deterrent.  His conclusion that there
       was a risk of 'persecution' on return  was  not  intended  to  be  a
       reference  to  persecution  as  defined  legally  by   the   Refugee
       Convention.


    Further country evidence

   68. As well as the material in the bundles  placed  before  us  by  both
       sides in advance, additional items were produced in  course  of  the
       hearing.

   69. A letter from the British High Commission Colombo to the  respondent
       dated 13 January 2014 is in reply to a request for  comment  on  the
       position of LGBT individuals in Sri Lanka and on the role  of  Equal
       Ground.  The letter says  that  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  an
       official government position.  The President has said  nothing.   It
       is  rare   for   anyone   else   to   speak   openly.    Calls   for
       decriminalisation  have  been   rejected.    Lack   of   prosecution
       demonstrates a general tolerance.  The issue is of a  low  priority.
       Opinions are much divided.  Public events are held, and Equal Ground
       say that you do not get much resistance to Pride, but the reason  is
       that the events are hosted as "private  yet  very  public  functions
       that do not require prior approval so there  is  little  opportunity
       for interference".  Equal Ground  is  the  main  LGBT  organisation,
       established for nearly  10  years.   It  has  had  some  impact  but
       changing attitudes and society is a long process.

   70. A report from the publication Ceylon Today dated  19  November  2013
       had been mentioned by Ms Flamer-Caldera.  It is  entitled,  "Are  we
       ready" and begins:

          "Homosexuality has always been a contentious issue  in  Sri  Lanka
          with passionate advocates of equal rights walking  hand  in  hand,
          while the most vociferous of critics of such  equality,  literally
          shunning the very thought of people from  the  same  gender  being
          intimate with each other."

       It goes on to quote the views of a  cross-section  of  people,  some
       hostile to equal rights for LGBTI, others sympathetic.

   71. Finally, we were provided with a bundle of forms  from  various  Sri
       Lankan government departments such as applications for  a  residence
       visa,  citizenship,  a   travel   document,   a   police   clearance
       certificate, national identity card, and a  driving  licence.   Some
       would not apply to the appellants,  but  others  would.   The  forms
       generally ask about  civil  status:  single,  married,  widowed,  or
       divorced.  They do not include an option such  as  "civil  partner".
       (The absence is unsurprising, there being no such status  under  Sri
       Lankan law.)

    The individual appellants

    LH's evidence

   72. LH adopted and relied upon his witness statements of  28  June  2012
       and 13 May  2014,  in  which  he  described  the  formation  of  his
       relationship with IP in the UK, before which he did not know that he
       was homosexual.  They had got to know each other while  both  living
       in accommodation in Watford.  LH had studied hotel  and  tourism  in
       Sri Lanka and wished to improve his English.  They became  attracted
       to  each  other:   LH  found  that  emotionally  distressing   since
       previously he had thought himself to be heterosexual.  He came  from
       a Buddhist Sinhalese family in Sri Lanka and was concerned about his
       parents' reaction, since he considered them unlikely to tolerate any
       form of same sex relationship.  Finally,  they  both  accepted  that
       they belonged together, and made arrangements to register  as  civil
       partners on 29 November 2011.

   73. The couple had kept their United Kingdom  civil  ceremony  very  low
       key,  due  to  what  LH  described  as   "the   stigma   surrounding
       homosexuality among Sri Lankans".   They were very  happy  together:
       IP had been very supportive when LH's father died in 2012.  LH noted
       that Sri Lanka is a predominantly Buddhist country where no same sex
       relationship is ever  condoned,  and  homosexuality  is  a  criminal
       offence.  No-one expresses such feelings in the public  domain.   If
       they did, the public would "take the law into their  own  hands  and
       mete out the necessary punishment".  It was his understanding  that,
       despite rumours about certain high profile  persons  in  Sri  Lanka,
       politician or other high profile person had ever openly voiced their
       sexual orientation.  "The respondent fails to appreciate  that  [we]
       are two young men who wish to live  our  lives  freely  in  an  open
       society.  By returning to Sri Lanka, we would be denied  this  basic
       right".

   74. In his 2014 statement, LH noted that the  parties  were  now  living
       together in a property in Hampshire, where a close mutual friend had
       provided them with accommodation.  Their close friends knew  of  the
       relationship and that they had entered into a civil partnership.  He
       was still in contact with his  family,  who  knew  that  he  had  an
       immigration appeal pending, but not the details.  He  had  not  told
       them of his sexuality or of the relationship with IP.   He  had  two
       sisters in Negombo, one of  whom  was  married.   The  other  was  a
       daughter and was currently supporting his widowed mother.

   75. LP considered that if removed to Sri Lanka, his mother  and  sisters
       would insist that he returned to Negombo to  work  and  support  the
       family, and that he enter into an arranged marriage  with  a  woman.
       They  would  never  allow  the  couple  to  continue  in  an  openly
       homosexual relationship.  The relationship would have to be  carried
       out in secret otherwise they  would  be  subjected  to  torture  and
       humiliation; they would not even be able  to  kiss  in  public.   He
       pleaded with the Tribunal to allow the couple to continue to live in
       the United Kingdom.

   76. After adopting his witness statements, the  appellant  was  tendered
       for cross-examination.  LP disclosed (with evident reluctance)  that
       although his course ended after about one year and 2 months  and  he
       has been in the UK for 3 years, he has carried on  receiving  money
       from his family, at least until the last 3  months  or  so,  on  the
       basis that he is a student.  He did not want to go on  taking  their
       money, because he did not wish to continue making misrepresentations
       to them.  His evidence was that the couple were living discreetly in
       the United Kingdom and that only two or  three  close  friends  here
       knew of his sexual orientation.  He acknowledged that to be known as
       homosexual would not present any problem here, even with members  of
       the Sri Lankan community, but "... if by any chance we  have  to  go
       back, this message could go to my family".  It was put  to  LP  that
       his primary concern was family disapproval, and he replied,  "That's
       how it is - our family members would not like this".

   77. LP knew there was a law against homosexual activity and thought that
       if caught he could get a 20 year prison sentence.  When  pressed  on
       what he feared from the legal system, he said "We can't  go  to  the
       police station and make a  complaint".   He  had  heard  of  a  "gay
       marriage" at which both parties had been arrested by the police.  He
       did not know what happened thereafter.  When LP was asked why he and
       his partner could not live together in Sri Lanka in the same way  as
       they do in the United Kingdom, he replied, "You can  stay  together,
       but if the family comes to know, they will ask me to marry a  woman.
       We won't be able to stay together, because of that".  It was put  to
       him that this was an acknowledgement that he and his  partner  could
       live together, although they would be under pressure to  marry.   He
       said, "There is no freedom in Sri  Lanka  and  we  cannot  go  about
       anywhere, we would be like prisoners".  On it being put to him again
       that he and his partner could live together in Colombo or in  Kandy,
       he replied "We cannot live like that because I am male, at some time
       I will have to care for my parents, that is the Sri Lankan culture".
        Asked finally to explain his fears of return, the  appellant  said,
       "My family won't like it, the community won't like it, and  the  law
       won't like it".

   78. In response to the panel's questions LH said that in  the  last  few
       months his friends have helped to provide food and that he could get
       money again from his family if necessary.  He was asked  to  explain
       the circumstances under which he might have to make a complaint at a
       police station.  He replied in terms of  the  community's  curiosity
       about two men living together, and the need to name the head of  the
       family  when  complying  with  the  requirement  to   register   for
       elections.  He had heard that there were  some  gay  events  in  Sri
       Lanka.

    IP's evidence

   79. IP adopted his witness statements of 26 June 2012 and 13  May  2014,
       and was tendered for  cross-examination.   His  2012  statement  was
       along similar lines to that of LH.   He  had  completed  accountancy
       studies in Sri Lanka and come to the United Kingdom to  improve  his
       English and enhance his career prospects in Sri Lanka.   He  already
       knew that he was homosexual.  The  English  as  a  Foreign  Language
       course he was pursuing began on 4 January 2011 but he attended  only
       until August 2011.  He had met LH in their accommodation in February
       2012, the relationship developing gradually.  They were  both  aware
       that their families would be totally disappointed and  would  disown
       them if they ever came to know about the relationship.  He found  LH
       to be an extremely caring and loveable person:  this was  the  first
       person with whom IP had been sincerely in love.

   80. His evidence was that apart  from  their  families  disowning  them,
       there would be general public hostility to  same  sex  relationships
       and many lived in fear, suppressing their sexuality.  Although there
       were rumours about certain leading politicians and artists, they had
       never been publicly 'outed' and were the  subject  of  'rumours  and
       gossips' rather than certainty as to their orientation.  There  had,
       to his knowledge, been high profile attempts to change the law which
       had failed.  The respondent was wrong in stating that Sri Lanka  had
       a sizeable homosexual population,  or  that  homosexuals  were  more
       visible in couture, politics and local sidewalk cafes.   He  and  LH
       would not have the protection which  being  a  high  profile  person
       gave.  They would  not  be  able  to  live  "a  life  more  akin  to
       normality" if returned to Sri Lanka.

   81. In his 2014 statement, IP stated that their close friends were aware
       of the relationship; that he had parents, a brother and a sister  in
       Sri Lanka who were aware of an immigration appeal being pending, but
       not of the details; and that his family were completely  unaware  of
       the relationship he had with LH, or of his  sexuality.   The  family
       home was in Kurunegala, a major city in central  Sri  Lanka  with  a
       population over 28,000, mainly Sinhalese.  If he were returned,  his
       family would expect him to live close to home in Kurunegala  and  to
       marry a woman.  LH and IP would have to continue their  relationship
       in secret, due to the risk of  ridicule,  harassment,  blackmail  or
       other persecutory treatment.  Their families, friends and neighbours
       would ostracise, ridicule and harm them.   Normal  family  life  for
       them would be impossible in Sri Lanka.  IP  asked  the  Tribunal  to
       allow the couple to remain in the United  Kingdom  where  they  were
       free to continue a normal family life together.

   82. In cross-examination, IP was asked  to  clarify  why  he  could  not
       continue living with his partner in Sri  Lanka  as  he  did  in  the
       United Kingdom.  He said this was not possible because "we cannot go
       to the police station or to the hospital together and do  anything".
       Asked to clarify, he said that if they  had  to  go  to  the  police
       station enquiries would be made as to whether they were  married  or
       not, and a marriage such as theirs was wrong in Sri Lanka.   It  was
       put to IP that as he did not tell his parents about his relationship
       he was hardly likely to tell the police.  IP said he was  unable  to
       tell his parents.  Asked again to explain why they would  be  unable
       to live together in Sri Lanka, he  said,  "Firstly  there  would  be
       problems with my family.  Secondly, my parents  expect  me  to  take
       care of them.  The other problem is from the community,  because  it
       will be against the law".

   83. IP confirmed that he was aware that there have been no prosecutions,
       but he asked who would be answerable if a  problem  did  arise,  and
       said that perhaps there had not  been  one  in  the  last  64  years
       because no-one had previously been in a civil partnership.   He  was
       asked how it might  become  known  that  he  entered  into  a  civil
       partnership in another country.  He replied, "By  registration  law,
       when you fill in a form you will have to say that you are  married".
       Various  forms  require  disclosure  of  marital  status,  such   as
       applications for a passport, a driving licence or a job.

   84. Questioned by the panel about how problems might arise  in  relation
       to a hospital, the appellant said that if he and  his  partner  went
       together to hospital when one fell ill, they would be asked  who  is
       the next of kin.  When she married, his sister was  likely  to  move
       out of the family house.  In time,  he  and  his  brother  would  be
       expected to  arrange  the  care  of  their  parents,  financial  and
       personal.  He was willing to help his parents, but not  to  marry  a
       woman.  As to what difference it made in  this  respect  whether  he
       lived in Sri Lanka or in the United Kingdom, and whether or not  his
       parents knew of his orientation, he replied, "The problem is that  I
       have to live with my partner.  When that happens, I  don't  know  if
       that will be a problem for my family.  They won't like it".

    Submissions for Respondent

   85. For the respondent, Mr Whitwell in his skeleton argument argued that
       gay men in a civil partnership in Sri Lanka were  not  a  particular
       social  group.   That  question  was   too   narrow   and   sterile.
       Notwithstanding the illegality of homosexual conduct in  Sri  Lanka,
       there was general tolerance in practice.  The Sri Lankan  government
       did   not   have   an   official    position    on    homosexuality:
       decriminalisation was spoken about in society, although opinions  on
       the subject were much divided.  Homosexuality was more visible  than
       ever before, including public events such as the Pride celebrations.
         Sri  Lankan  society  was  predominantly  Buddhist,  and  Buddhism
       regarded  homosexuality  as  essentially  a  question   of   private
       morality.

   86. Mr Whitwell asked us to put little weight  on  the  evidence  of  Mr
       Guruparan:  he was a lawyer, and that was his area of expertise, not
       the general treatment of LGBTI individuals.  The examples  he  cited
       were not reliably sourced and indeed,  it  was  unclear  whether  he
       himself  had  verified  them.   Mr  Guruparan's  report  elided  the
       distinction between discrimination and persecution and was of little
       assistance to the Tribunal. There  was  no  evidence  of  systematic
       state  persecution.   There  was  opportunistic  targeting,   social
       hostility and discrimination which might in an individual case reach
       the threshold for Article 3, but that had to be decided on a case by
       case basis.

   87. The respondent accepted that, as civil partners, the appellants  had
       family life together:  however, that family life could be  continued
       in Sri Lanka.  The background evidence did not show nullification or
       destruction of the very essence of the rights guaranteed by  Article
       8 and did not come close to  the  threshold  required.  The  present
       appellants maintained a very low profile in terms of their sexuality
       in the UK.  Only a very few close friends are aware.  In  Sri  Lanka
       they would also choose to live discreetly because that is what  they
       prefer and due to social pressure, such as not wishing  to  distress
       their parents or embarrass their friends.  Social pressure  of  that
       nature does not call for Refugee Convention protection.

   88. In oral submissions, Mr Whitwell submitted that the oral evidence of
       the appellants indicated that their prime concern was  the  reaction
       of their  families.   He  pointed  to  the  difference  between  the
       evidence of Professor Good and Ms Flamer-Caldera  over  whether  the
       relationship between the appellants would inevitably become known by
       their living together.  Mr Guruparan  had  effectively  conceded  in
       oral evidence that he was qualified to comment  only  on  the  legal
       position, not on general risk on return.  The examples on  which  he
       purported to do so turned out to be not based on his  own  enquiries
       but on incidents reported in 2006 and 2008 and misleadingly updated.
        That called into doubt the alleged validation of the information by
       the witness.

   89. The Equal Ground Pilot Study  suggested  that  reports  of  physical
       harassment were rare.  While the issue by its nature  was  difficult
       to subject to statistical analysis, the evidence could not  yield  a
       finding that there was anything reaching the level required  by  the
       Qualification Directive or Article 3.  The study found that a  large
       proportion of respondents managed to live with  their  partners  and
       did not report any denial of medical treatment or  adverse  response
       from employers.

   90. The respondent relied on information in the public  domain  relating
       to foreign travellers, which  although  not  directly  relevant  was
       indicative of the general social environment.  Holidays  are  openly
       and freely marketed on a gay-friendly basis.  The case fell  at  the
       second hurdle of HJ and HT.  Alternatively, it should be found  that
       the  appellants  would  behave  discreetly  on  return,  simply   as
       reflecting their nature, which even in  the  United  Kingdom,  where
       they were  undoubtedly  safe  and  were  civil  partners,  was  very
       discreet.

   91. Mr Whitwell acknowledged that the evidence from Equal Ground  should
       be given some weight.  Although Ms Flamer-Caldera  is  an  activist,
       her organisation was supported by the  United  Kingdom  Foreign  and
       Commonwealth Office and by the US State  Department.   However,  the
       results of the Pilot Study did not sit well with Ms Flamer-Caldera's
       conclusions in the report prepared for this case.  The case  studies
       produced by Equal Ground  showed  that  although  difficulties  were
       encountered, gay couples and even lesbian  couples  did  succeed  in
       living  together,  sometimes  with   family   knowledge   of   their
       relationship, and for extended  periods.   Although  Professor  Good
       said that it was extremely rare for Sri Lankans not  to  marry,  the
       figures in the Pilot Study suggested well over half  of  respondents
       had elected not to marry.

   92. Mr Whitwell submitted that the core of the appellants' reluctance to
       return was a preference for the quality of life they found here as a
       homosexual couple, and that they had not established that  it  would
       be unlawful either under the Refugee Convention or  on  humanitarian
       protection or human rights grounds for them to return to Sri Lanka.

    Submissions for Appellants

   93. For the appellants, Mr Palmer's skeleton argument  argued  that  (i)
       "gay men and gay men in civil partnerships" constituted a particular
       social group, as established by authority, by UNHCR guidance and  as
       found in the  First-tier  Tribunal;  (ii)  the  background  evidence
       demonstrated a real risk of a homosexual man suffering  persecution,
       a risk enhanced in the case of homosexual men in civil partnerships;
       (iii) individual homosexual men  and,  in  particular,  gay  men  in
       United Kingdom civil partnerships, enjoyed private and  family  life
       under Article  8;  and  that  (iv)  "whereas  current  human  rights
       jurisprudence does not give a right to marry to  same  sex  couples,
       the effect of removal ... would entail  a  flagrant  denial  of  the
       right to family life ... as a gay couple but also as individual  gay
       men", reaching the high threshold set by EM (Lebanon).

   94. Mr Palmer maintained that the background evidence established a real
       risk  of  intimidation,  harassment,  discrimination,  arrests   and
       violence on a scale  and  of  a  frequency  such  as  to  reach  the
       persecution threshold.  There was a sustained and  systemic  failure
       of  state  protection,  there  being  no  evidence  to  support  any
       contention  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  offer   protection.
       Rather, the state was complicit.  There is no LGBTI support  network
       in existence: rather, LGBTI groups had  been  and  continued  to  be
       subject to harassment, raids and surveillance  by  the  authorities.
       The Equal Ground Pilot Study had been drawn upon in the Secretary of
       State's  own  Operational  Guidance  Note  and  Country  of   Origin
       Information Report, and the organisation was presented with a cheque
       by the British High Commission in Colombo marking International  Day
       Against Homophobia.  The  Upper  Tribunal  should  give  significant
       weight to that study, and to the other Equal Ground evidence.    The
       appellants invited the  Tribunal  to  find  that  Mr  Guruparan  was
       qualified to comment on the issues, noting that Professor  Good,  an
       expert whose status could not reasonably be doubted, had deferred to
       him on matters of law in his oral evidence.  The first,  second  and
       third questions in HJ and HT should be answered  in  favour  of  the
       appellants.

   95. The appellants' evidence in their witness statements was  conclusive
       of the fact that they would not live openly as homosexual men or  as
       a homosexual couple in Sri Lanka.  Their credibility  had  not  been
       doubted in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  their  evidence  had  not
       changed.  As to the fourth question, their evidence  was  that  they
       would live discreetly both for cultural and social reasons  and  for
       fear of persecution.    The  appellants  enjoyed  both  private  and
       family life together.  They had a right  to  remain  together  as  a
       couple "without enforced self repression of their civil  partnership
       and  their  sexual  identity,  without  fear  of  serious  harm  and
       discrimination and without the psychological  stress  and  suffering
       that would undoubtedly flow from being unable to remain as a  couple
       and/or to freely express their sexuality".  If returned, they  would
       be  forced  to  act  discreetly  to  avoid  "state  and  non   state
       persecution,  extreme  societal  and  cultural  discrimination   and
       stigma".  They credibly asserted that there was  no  possibility  of
       being able to remain as a couple but they would be "forced  to  live
       separately and to agree to their families' demands and to enter into
       arranged marriages with women".  The appellants submitted that to be
       forced by their families and society into marriage  with  women,  or
       into keeping their relationship and sexual orientation secret  would
       be a flagrant violation of their right to respect  for  private  and
       family life.

   96. In his oral submissions Mr Palmer contended that  the  evidence  was
       sufficient to establish a risk of persecution if the appellants were
       to be returned to Sri Lanka.    In HJ and HT, the appellant HJ, from
       Iran, had faced gross and  manifest  persecution.   Cameroon  was  a
       country where prosecutions were rare and  the  circumstances  (apart
       from the existence of any level  of  prosecution)  were  similar  to
       those in Sri Lanka.  HT's case had also succeeded.  The  Sri  Lankan
       Government position was not unclear.  The former President has  made
       extreme remarks against lesbians in particular,  occasioned  by  the
       Norwegian Ambassador having a  same-sex  partner.   There  had  been
       other  vicious  anti-gay  remarks  by  members  of  the  government.
       Contrary  to  the  submission  that  the  state  engaged  in  benign
       collaboration with Equal Ground, the evidence from Ms Flamer-Caldera
       was that the dissemination of information was  controlled  and  that
       effectively the organisation had been subject to a gagging order.

   97. Although the Secretary of State made much of the existence of  Pride
       events, these could be held only because a safe,  secure  venue  had
       been found.  Equal Ground was not a  highly  visible  group  in  Sri
       Lankan society.  Ms Flamer-Caldera significantly  pointed  out  that
       with  greater  visibility  there  came  greater   intimidation   and
       violence.

   98. Although the Penal Code was not used to  prosecute  gay  men,  their
       landlords or medical providers,  and  was  not  a  direct  means  of
       persecution, it was the tool by which openly  homosexual  men  could
       readily be targeted, as Equal Ground demonstrated  in  its  reports.
       The Tribunal should find that there was plainly  significant  under-
       reporting of such incidents.  The written reports  by  Equal  Ground
       cited only specific and verified cases, but it was significant  that
       Ms Flamer-Caldera in  oral  evidence  explained  that  many  further
       instances went unrecorded.  Her evidence should be given significant
       weight in establishing general risk.  The lack of more detailed  and
       specific evidence was due to the fear which existed  throughout  the
       community, which arose from the existence of the  legislation.   Not
       only the state, through legislation, but society in general took  an
       adverse view of the LGBTI community.  There were  numerous  examples
       of homophobic publications.  Equal Ground's evidence  in  its  Pilot
       Study was carefully qualified.  Although some same sex couples  live
       together, Ms Flamer-Caldera made it clear that most do not, and that
       even those are living together do  not  disclose  their  orientation
       publicly, due to fear.

   99. Mr Palmer accepted that there was a significant  difference  between
       the evidence from Professor Good and from  Ms  Flamer-Caldera  about
       the  practicality  of  living  together.   He  submitted  that   the
       description given by either expert amounted to persecution, although
       in somewhat different forms.  The  evidence  was  overwhelming  that
       homosexual  men  living  openly  together  would  be  at   risk   of
       persecution.  To live as civil partners  would  enhance  that  risk,
       because it was less easy to hide sexuality.  It  was  accepted  that
       these appellants would not engage in highly risky behaviours such as
       visiting cruising areas.   They  would  have  to  live  in  absolute
       secrecy due to the family reaction  and  the  treatment  they  might
       encounter  from  both  state  and  non  state  agents  in  a  deeply
       homophobic society. Mr Palmer said that a  finding  that  homosexual
       men in a civil partnership constituted a particular social group  in
       Sri Lanka would be justified.  There  could  be  little  doubt  that
       members of that particular sub-group would be at enhanced risk.

  100. Turning to Article 8, Mr Palmer accepted that  family  life  between
       the appellants would continue in  Sri  Lanka,  notwithstanding  non-
       recognition of their civil partnership.   The  determining  question
       was not whether any interference would  go  to  family  life  or  to
       private life, but the level  at  which  it  would  occur.   For  the
       appellants to be required to deny their formal relationship amounted
       to a denial of their right  to  be  together.   He  asked  that  the
       appellants would not in fact be able to live with each other in  Sri
       Lanka but would be forced to separate  and,  at  the  insistence  of
       their family, required to  enter  into  heterosexual  relationships.
       That would amount to a  complete  nullification  of  their  existing
       family life.

    Discussion

  101. We began by considering what weight we could place on  the  evidence
       of the country experts.  Ms  Flamer-Caldera  is  an  internationally
       acknowledged expert on the circumstances of LGBT persons (and indeed
       LGBTIQ, although that is not relevant on the facts of this  appeal).
       We were glad to have her assistance in these appeals and we have had
       careful regard to her evidence,  which  in  general  we  found  very
       helpful.  Mr Whitwell was right to point out that Ms  Flamer-Caldera
       is committed to a cause, but he did not  ask  us  to  disregard  her
       evidence.  She did not seek to disguise her campaigning agenda,  but
       it is difficult to imagine that  there  could  have  been  a  better
       informed witness on the subject.   We  found  her  to  be  fair  and
       careful in her oral evidence, speaking to what is very much her area
       of special knowledge, and willing to qualify her  conclusions  where
       appropriate.

  102. The case examples cited by Equal  Ground  include  several  gay  and
       lesbian couples living together  whose  families  know  about  their
       relationship.  It is not surprising that known  instances  are  few,
       given prevailing general social reticence, but the evidence is  that
       some gay and lesbian couples are able to live together at least semi-
       openly.   The statistics and the very useful tables provided in  the
       Pilot Study indicated that a significant number of  the  respondents
       were in long-term relationships, 31% of which had  lasted  for  more
       than four  years.   71%  had  never  been  excluded  from  a  social
       gathering or activity on the  basis  of  their  gender  identity  or
       sexual orientation; 87%  had  never  been  excluded  from  religious
       places or activities in the preceding two years and  78%  had  never
       faced exclusion from family activities  in  that  period.   80%  had
       experienced no physical abuse or serious harassment in the preceding
       two years, though 62% had experienced verbal abuse on at  least  one
       occasion and most people  felt  gossiped  about.   The  overwhelming
       majority of those who did experience discrimination suffered it from
       families and friends, although sometimes also from neighbours.   76%
       had not experienced any problems with housing or inability  to  rent
       accommodation, and 75% had not lost their jobs in the  previous  two
       years, with 88% reporting that they had not been  refused  promotion
       nor had their jobs altered for that reason.

  103. Of the smaller group who had experienced difficulties, in almost all
       of the statistical analyses most of those who had difficulty did  so
       at least partly on the basis of their gender  identity.   Only  very
       small numbers were affected  on  the  basis  of  sexual  orientation
       alone.   Ms Flamer-Caldera's executive summary of  the  Pilot  Study
       evidence indicated that there were high levels of  abuse  and  harm,
       without  differentiating  between   gender   identity   and   sexual
       orientation.   In  oral  evidence   she   acknowledged   significant
       difficulties in the statistical significance and  data  analysis  in
       all three of the background reports produced.  Her statements in the
       summary of the Pilot Study, in  particular,  are  reflected  in  the
       international materials as indicating  high  levels  of  difficulty,
       whereas the statistics will not bear that interpretation.  That  has
       tended to distort not just the Equal Ground reports but also some of
       the international reports.

  104. Professor Good is not and did not purport to be a  specialist  about
       LGBTI in Sri Lanka: this was his first expert report  on  the  topic
       for the Upper Tribunal.  We noted also that Professor Good  has  not
       lived in Sri Lanka for some considerable time.  Both Professor  Good
       and Ms Flamer-Caldera said that most landlords  preferred  to  avoid
       gay tenants, but there was no evidence of this going to  the  length
       of active enquiries by landlords as to their tenants' sexuality.  In
       relation to the conflict between Professor Good's evidence and  that
       of Ms Flamer-Caldera as to the living conditions and the possibility
       of living privately in Sri Lankan  cities,  we  have  preferred  the
       evidence of Ms Flamer-Caldera that it is indeed possible  to  do  so
       and that discovery of a relationship between two persons of the same
       sex would not necessary occur just because the walls were  too  thin
       or the properties too closely serried for  private  activity  to  be
       unheard and unobserved. We note that both witnesses agreed that such
       a relationship would be likely to  be  passed  off  as  two  friends
       sharing accommodation. Based on Ms  Flamer-Caldera's  oral  evidence
       and on the statistics in the Equal Ground Pilot Study (and accepting
       that depended on a small and not wholly  representative  sample)  we
       are unpersuaded that remaining unmarried in cities such  as  Colombo
       is as rare, or perceived to be as  socially  deviant,  as  Professor
       Good thought.

  105. We have considered what weight we can give to  the  evidence  of  Mr
       Guruparan.  We have concluded that his evidence did not add anything
       useful.  The examples  he  gave  came  from  other  sources  and  we
       consider it more likely than not that  the  examples  he  gave  were
       simply lifted verbatim from the Equal Ground Pilot  Study  examples.
       He was unable to explain satisfactorily  how  he  had  verified  the
       information so as to give it any greater force.

  106. We remind ourselves, applying the decision of the Court  of  Justice
       of the European Union in X, Y and Z that while the existence of laws
       criminalising  homosexual   activity   supports   a   finding   that
       homosexuals form a particular social group,  such  laws  do  not  by
       themselves constitute persecution, unless the criminal sanctions are
       actually applied.  The CJEU held that when assessing an  application
       for refugee  status  the  competent  authorities  cannot  reasonably
       expect an asylum applicant to  conceal  his  homosexuality,  nor  to
       exercise reserve in the expression of  his  sexual  orientation,  in
       order to avoid the risk of persecution if one exists.  The X, Y  and
       Z judgment is in line  with  the  decision  of  the  United  Kingdom
       Supreme Court in HJ and HT  in  the  latter  respect  and  puts  the
       question of the  existence  of  a  particular  social  group  beyond
       challenge  in  countries  where  homosexuality  remains  a  criminal
       offence.

  107. Sections 365 and 365A of the Sri Lankan Penal Code therefore  create
       a particular social group of homosexuals, lesbians, and  others  who
       have a  same-sex  sexual  identity.  There  have  been  few  if  any
       prosecutions and no convictions,  so  there  is  no  presumption  of
       persecution.  The question whether there is a risk of persecution in
       the HJ and HT sense is one of fact, having regard to the evidence of
       what actually happens in Sri Lanka. We have not found  it  necessary
       to further refine the particular social group to  introduce  a  sub-
       group of those who have entered  into  civil  partnerships  or  have
       acquired a same-sex  marital  or  quasi-marital  status  in  another
       country.

  108. It seems tolerably clear from the evidence before us that  for  male
       sex  workers  and  transgender  individuals  there  is  a  risk   of
       harassment, blackmail, and, on occasion,  serious  harm  capable  of
       amounting to persecution, by reason of the public  nature  of  their
       sexuality. Also, given the cultural constraints on the  position  of
       women in rural areas, lesbian and bisexual women may be at  risk  of
       persecution or serious harm there.  It is unclear whether that  risk
       continues for those who live away  from  their  families  in  larger
       cities, and specifically in Colombo.

  109. The population of Sri Lanka is about  20  million  people,  of  whom
       nearly 5 million live in the Colombo area.  The evidence  before  us
       indicates that there are large numbers of homosexuals in Sri  Lanka,
       in particular in Colombo. In  2010,  the  Collective  for  Economic,
       Social and Cultural Rights estimated that there were 24,000 - 37,000
       men who have sex with men (MSMs) in Sri  Lanka.  In  2011,  the  Sri
       Lankan  health  authorities  estimated  that   there   were   30,000
       homosexuals in Sri Lanka.  Unpublished data referred  to  by  Ceylon
       Today in 2014 was unable to reconcile estimates of 8,000-35,000  for
       the number of MSMs in Sri Lanka.   We  suspect,  under  the  country
       circumstances we have described,  that  even  the  higher  of  these
       figures may be underestimated.

  110. The risk  for  gay  men  is  not,  we  consider,  at  the  level  of
       persecution or serious harm in Sri Lanka  as  a  whole.   The  legal
       potential  of  sanctions  underlies  the  instances  of  the  police
       arresting homosexual men and subjecting  them  to  abuse,  sometimes
       violent, and to extortion.  Although the examples to which  we  have
       been referred appear to us to be generally credible, they  are  few,
       they date back over a period of up to 8 years, and the same ones are
       cited repeatedly in the various reports. The level of abuse  in  the
       reports generally falls short of the level of persecution.  The main
       exception is the allegation that the police sometimes rape  gay  men
       in  custody.   That  allegation  was  not  established  by  specific
       instances, save  for  the  transgender  individual  in  the  student
       research  example,  which  tends  to  support  the  drawing   of   a
       distinction between the treatment  of  transgender  individuals  and
       that of gay men in general.  The evidence suggests that  such  risks
       as there are apply more to some homosexual men than for others.  The
       examples cited and the general opinion  of  the  experts  centre  on
       transgender  persons,  commercial  sex  workers,  and  visitors   to
       cruising areas or other homosexual pick up venues.

  111. The state has little or  no  interest  in  recording  such  matters.
       There are no official statistics.  Numerous  members  of  the  LGBTI
       community confide in Equal Ground, but  it  is  a  relatively  small
       organisation in a country with a large population.  We conclude that
       instances  of  abuse  of  members  of  the   LGBTI   community   are
       underreported.  Taking that into account, and accepting  that  there
       are some incidents at the serious end of the scale, including  rape,
       the appellants have not been able  to  point  to  more  than  a  few
       specific instances at or  near  the  level  of  persecution.   These
       appear  to  arise  from  opportunism  and  exploitation,  not   from
       systematic hostility.

  112. We find force in the argument that in such  cases  as  are  recorded
       there is a failure of state protection.    The perpetrators named in
       most if not all of the instances cited to us  are  police  officers.
       There is no evidence that such abuse is ordered from a  high  level,
       but nor is there any evidence that the state does anything  to  stop
       it.  On the contrary, the perpetrators, as far as we can see,  enjoy
       complete immunity.


  113. As to the climate of  public  opinion,  politicians,  including  the
       former President, make homophobic statements.  Mr  Palmer  drew  our
       attention to reports that in June 2013 President Rajapaksa  said  he
       would refuse entry to Sri Lanka  of  the  same-sex  partner  of  the
       Norwegian ambassador.  The outcome, if the matter came to  anything,
       was not followed up in evidence.  There are homophobic publications,
       but there is also evidence of a public debate about  gay  rights  in
       which both sides are heard, and of known  homosexual  persons  being
       able to get on with their lives without  major  difficulty.   It  is
       right that the homophobic side of the debate is vigorously expressed
       and that, at least in some of  the  blog  posts  we  have  seen,  it
       approaches  the  level  of   hate   speech   and   often   conflates
       homosexuality and paedophilia. Same-sex orientation is seen by  many
       people, including some politicians, as unacceptable; but while there
       are expressions of homophobia in the media there is also open debate
       in which tolerant voices are heard.


  114. The former Foreign Minister who declared his sexual orientation  was
       out of government when we heard these appeals.  He spoke  about  the
       issue in public only  because  he  had  to,  but  we  thought  it  a
       significant detail that he has been at  least  semi-open  about  his
       orientation  and  that  his  family,  most  of   his   parliamentary
       colleagues, and his constituents (i.e., the wider  public)  had  not
       previously given him any difficulty.

  115. We do not accept  the  submission  for  the  appellants  that  LGBTI
       groups, due to their nature, are from time to time  the  subject  of
       harassment  or  raids  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   As   the
       circumstances of the closure of  CoJ  ("Companions  on  a  Journey")
       emerged in evidence, this attracted  homophobic  publicity,  but  we
       find from Ms Flamer-Caldera's evidence that  the  closure  was  more
       closely related to an  inquiry  into  allegations  of  embezzlement,
       rather than being a homophobic crackdown by the authorities.   Pride
       events are arranged and staged with  great  care,  but  they  happen
       regularly, under secure conditions but not in secret.

  116. The only  significant  ongoing  LGBTI  support  organisation,  Equal
       Ground, is able to carry on its activities  without  major  problems
       from the authorities. There may be an element of  surveillance,  but
       again as the circumstances  of  the  "gagging  order"  developed  in
       evidence a different picture emerged, indicating some  exaggeration:
       there was in fact no gagging order but a degree of negotiation after
       a visit by the authorities, and Equal Ground was able to avoid  that
       problem relatively easily, without any further repercussions.

  117. The appellants in their statements  said  that  Buddhism,  the  main
       religion in Sri Lanka, is one of the sources of hostility  to  same-
       sex sexual activity.   This  proposition  was  not  given  any  real
       significance in submissions and we were  not  referred  to  anything
       specific in the  background  evidence,  so  we  limit  ourselves  to
       observing that the tenor of such evidence as was before us  is  that
       while open to various interpretations on the  subject,  Buddhism  is
       not generally considered to  foster  hostility  to  same-sex  sexual
       activity. We note,  in  particular,  that  the  child  in  the  'gay
       marriage' case went to a Buddhist  monastery  and  became  a  novice
       monk.

  118. The evidence of general persecution of gay men thus  amounted  to  a
       low number of serious incidents.  Equal Ground is the  immediate  or
       underlying source for almost all of that information.  While we have
       accepted that there is under-reporting, we are unable to agree  that
       the incidents involving gay men are of a scale, frequency or pattern
       to constitute a general risk of persecution.  Although  there  is  a
       lack of state protection, there  is  no  evidence  of  serious  harm
       except in those isolated instances.  There may be a few  members  of
       the wider LGBTI community who suffer difficulties at  the  level  of
       persecution, but the evidence is not there to indicate  that  it  is
       only because they are gay men.


  119. The appellants alleged that they might be forced contrary  to  their
       orientation into a heterosexual marriage.  If that were the case, it
       would certainly be capable of  amounting  to  persecution,  but  the
       evidence before us did not support their statements.  There was some
       evidence of rural lesbians and bisexual women being forced into same-
       sex marriage, but little or no evidence to support such a  risk  for
       gay  men,  particularly  if  they  chose  to  exercise  an  internal
       relocation option to the more gay-friendly cities such  as  Colombo.
       It was not suggested in submissions for  the  appellants  that  they
       came from powerful families whose reach might be  nationwide.  If  a
       risk exists, we find that  internal  relocation  would  normally  be
       sufficient to enable an individual to avoid the  risk,  since  risks
       are usually from  family,  friends  or  neighbours.   Colombo  would
       perhaps be the obvious  choice  for  internal  relocation,  and  was
       mentioned in a number of the  press  reports  as  having  many  LGBT
       individuals living there, but the principal distinction made in  the
       country materials is between rural and city environments, suggesting
       that internal relocation options  may  exist  to  other  Sri  Lankan
       cities also.

  120. We do not consider that the Sri Lankan state's failure to  recognise
       the status of civil partnership is sufficient on its own  to  engage
       Article 8 ECHR.  We accept that ordinary life in Sri Lanka  involves
       completing  government  forms,  forms  for   potential   or   actual
       employers, and so on, many of which in the ordinary way  ask  for  a
       person's  marital  status.   The  civil  partnership   between   the
       appellants carries no recognition  in  Sri  Lanka,  so  the  correct
       answer as a matter of law on such forms will be "single".

  121. There is a wide international variation in marital or  quasi-marital
       status available to same-sex partners, and in recognition  of  those
       statuses.  Neither the United Kingdom's civil partnership contracts,
       nor the gay marriage status now available both in the United Kingdom
       and in most parts of the United States, are recognised in Sri Lanka.
        The same is true of the French PACS status, which is a  contractual
       arrangement short of marriage available to same-sex and opposite sex
       partners, but which is not recognised outside France.

  122. In the debate over the successive introduction of heterosexual civil
       partnership, same-sex civil partnership and same-sex marriage in the
       UK, the complaint  was  commonly  heard  of  inability  to  have  an
       official expression of a deeply felt relationship.   No  doubt  that
       was and is a genuine grievance.  However, we think it would  go  too
       far to hold that non-recognition elsewhere of  such  unions  confers
       entitlement to international protection.  It  is  a  grievance  well
       short of the standard explained in cases such as EM (Lebanon) and SS
       (Malaysia), that of a flagrant breach of a core human right.

    Country guidance

  123. We have considered the questions identified by the parties in  these
       appeals, although not all of those are relevant for the purposes  of
       country guidance.  The following guidance is given:


          1) Having regard to the provisions of articles 365 and 365A of the
             Sri Lankan Penal Code, gay men in Sri Lanka  are  a  particular
             social group.


          2) 'Gay men in civil partnerships' in Sri Lanka do not  constitute
             a particular social group  for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
             Convention. The Sri Lankan authorities'  failure  to  recognise
             alternative marital and quasi-marital statuses  such  as  civil
             partnership or homosexual marriage which are available in other
             countries of the world does not,  without  more,  amount  to  a
             flagrant breach of core human rights.

          3) Applying the test set out by Lord Rodger in the  Supreme  Court
             judgment in HJ and HT, in general the treatment of gay  men  in
             Sri Lanka does not reach the standard of persecution or serious
             harm.

          4) There is a significant population of homosexuals and other LGBT
             individuals in Sri Lanka,  in  particular  in  Colombo.   While
             there is more risk for lesbian  and  bisexual  women  in  rural
             areas,  because  of  the  control  exercised  by  families   on
             unmarried women,   and  for  transgender  individuals  and  sex
             workers in the cities, it will be a question  of  fact  whether
             for a particular individual the risk reaches the  international
             protection standard, and  in  particular,  whether  it  extends
             beyond their home area.


          5) Where a risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  exists  in  an
             appellant's home area, there  may  be  an  internal  relocation
             option, particularly for individuals returning via Colombo from
             the United Kingdom.

          6) The lack of  recognition  of  alternative  marital  and  quasi-
             marital  statuses  such  as  civil  partnership  or  homosexual
             marriage which are available in other countries of the world is
             not of itself capable of amounting to a flagrant breach of  the
             appellants' right to respect for family life on return  to  Sri
             Lanka.

    The individual appellants


  124. These appellants are gay.  They are in a civil partnership.  One  of
       them did not know he was gay before leaving Sri Lanka; the other has
       not given evidence of any  serious  difficulties  experienced  while
       living there.  In the United Kingdom, where they are  not  at  risk,
       their lifestyle is particularly discreet: very few  people  know  of
       their sexual orientation and they do not make use of the freedom  to
       go out and express their sexual orientation in public.

  125. HJ  and  HT  established  that  there  was  no  test  of  reasonable
       tolerability, but nor is there a clear dividing line  between  those
       who would prefer to live openly and those who would prefer  to  live
       discreetly, because everyone's circumstances are different.  We have
       considered the facts in HJ and HT, as Mr Palmer invited us to do but
       we do not consider them to be on all fours with the situation in Sri
       Lanka.

  126. The present case is  essentially  an  individual  and  fact-specific
       inquiry, not involving a guarantee of  the  human  rights  standards
       that are applied by the receiving country within its  own  territory
       and concentrating on what  is  actually  likely  to  happen  in  the
       receiving country, "often  ... a difficult task since  much  of  the
       relevant evidence will come from the  claimant,  who  has  a  strong
       personal interest in its outcome".  The reasons for  the  choice  of
       discretion are at the heart of the issue. The appellants  of  course
       would prefer their status to be regarded as it is  in  the  UK,  but
       that is not the law in Sri Lanka.


  127. To forecast future behaviour is  difficult,  even  for  the  persons
       concerned,  under  circumstances  which  they   do   not   wish   to
       contemplate.  These appellants are a particularly  discreet  couple,
       even in the United Kingdom, where there is no need  for  discretion.
       They mostly stay at home and just enjoy each  other's  company.   If
       the appellants are removed together, they continue as  a  matter  of
       United Kingdom law to  be  each  others'  civil  partners,  and  the
       evidence suggests that they will be able to live together in a  city
       in Sri Lanka, probably Colombo.  The private way in which they  live
       in the United Kingdom could be replicated there.

  128. We do not think the appellants were dishonest witnesses, but we  did
       find them unwilling  to  face  up  realistically  to  their  future,
       wherever they are to spend it.  Their  answers  to  questions  about
       their possible return were defensive, unforthcoming  and  rehearsed.
       They were quick to say  that  they  would  have  problems  with  the
       police, with health services, and  with  official  forms;  but  when
       asked to explain what the problems might be, they could envisage  no
       clear  scenario  of  difficulties  with  police  officers,   medical
       providers, or officialdom.

  129. The reality of the appellants' concerns was vividly  apparent  while
       each of them gave evidence.  The appellants  dropped  out  of  their
       English studies when they met, but have continued to  receive  money
       from family members in Sri Lanka, without explaining  their  present
       circumstances.  They have not told their parents that they are  gay,
       or that they live together, or  that  they  have  stopped  studying.
       They do not wish to contemplate their  families  becoming  aware  of
       their orientation and relationship.  They  both  maintain  relations
       with their families and we think they both intend to continue to  do
       so, wherever they live.  Those issues will have to be dealt with  on
       return and are likely to cause difficulty in their  families  for  a
       time.

  130. The appellants are likely to be expected to help to care  for  their
       parents when they are older and both  indicated  that  in  principle
       they would not  object  to  doing  so,  subject  to  their  families
       respecting their sexual  orientation  and  their  partnership.  More
       likely than not, their families will be told or will  recognise  the
       reality that they are gay at some point in the medium  to  long-term
       future.  That can be a difficult stage of life in countries with  no
       legal barriers to same-sex relationships.  International  protection
       is neither a legal entitlement nor a practical means of avoiding it.

  131. We were invited to find that on  return  the  appellants  could  not
       continue  with  their  relationship  but  would  be   coerced   into
       heterosexual marriages.  The evidence of families  forcing  gay  men
       (as opposed to lesbians and bisexual women) to marry  against  their
       wishes was sparse in the materials before us, nor have we  seen  any
       evidence that these particular families are likely to apply pressure
       so intense  as  to  force  these  appellants  into  doing  so.   The
       appellants appeared to us to be at least  normally  resilient  young
       men who have lived abroad and looked after each other for  a  period
       of some years.  We find it much more likely than  not  that  in  Sri
       Lanka the appellants would elect to  continue  their  life  together
       rather than returning to live with their families  of  origin.    We
       also find that they would both be willing to help those families  if
       and when the need arises.  Neither  of  them  will  be  providing  a
       daughter-in-law to assist, but that is another reality to  be  faced
       up to sooner or later, wherever the appellants live.

  132. The appellants may not come from  the  richest  backgrounds  in  Sri
       Lanka but both wider families are of reasonably  substantial  means,
       able to provide for the appellants  in  the  United  Kingdom,  where
       living costs are much higher, over a period  of  three  and  a  half
       years.  The appellants are quite well-educated and  used  to  living
       away from their families.  We see no reason why they would not  fall
       into the category described  by  Ms  Flamer-Caldera  of  a  same-sex
       couple in a long-term relationship who could set up and  maintain  a
       household together.  We  recognise  her  caveat  about  the  use  of
       discretion, but that is  the  appellants'  preference  even  in  the
       United Kingdom, where they are not at risk and have a wide range  of
       choices.

  133. The appellants have stated concerns about  the  state,  the  police,
       other government officials, medical professionals, landlords and the
       general public, but we do  not  think  any  of  those  are  of  real
       substance either in their own minds or in the environment  in  which
       they would have to live.  By far their greatest concern  is  "coming
       out" to their families.  They would be able to live together in  Sri
       Lanka according to their personal inclinations in much the same  way
       as they do in the UK.  There would be some  disadvantages  in  their
       living circumstances, including  absence  of  legal  recognition  of
       their  relationship,  but   none   of   the   realistically   likely
       consequences of their return approaches  the  level  of  a  risk  of
       persecution, and there would  be  no  disproportionate  interference
       with their rights to private and family life.

  134. We have tried to proceed from the general to the particular  and  in
       so doing have necessarily departed from the  format  of  the  issues
       agreed by the parties, which run those aspects together, and some of
       which do not accommodate a "yes or no"  answer.   We  summarise  our
       principal findings as follows.  We accept that gay men in Sri  Lanka
       constitute  a  particular  social  group  for   Refugee   Convention
       purposes.  Their status as civil partners does not bring them within
       a narrower particular social group, because the status has not  been
       shown to enhance risk.  Only the wider definition is  justified.  We
       find that these appellants would live discreetly in Sri Lanka in the
       same way as they do in the UK in accordance with their  preferences,
       not in order to avoid persecution. The alternative  of  humanitarian
       protection does not arise:  these  appeals  stand  or  fall  on  the
       Refugee Convention issue since there is  no  differential  fact  set
       engaging only humanitarian protection.

  135. Article 8 ECHR is engaged because the appellants  enjoy  family  and
       private  life  together.   However,  any  difficulties  they   would
       encounter  in  Sri  Lanka  including  social,  cultural  and   legal
       discrimination are not, on these facts, at a level  which  could  or
       would amount to a flagrant breach of their core human rights  so  as
       to render their removal disproportionate, if removal directions were
       set again.

    Disposal


  136. On 12 April 2012 the appellants were served with decisions  to  vary
       leave to remain and with decisions to remove.  In light of  Adamally
       & Jaferi [2012] UKUT 00414, such decisions  could  not  properly  be
       made at  the  same  time.   (The  position  has  since  changed,  by
       amendment of s.47 of  the  2006  Act  on  8  May  2013.)   In  these
       proceedings, the removal decisions were withdrawn by the respondent.
        The matter makes no difference to the substance of our decision.

  137. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  has  been  set  aside.   We
       remake the decision as follows: the appeals, as  originally  brought
       to the First-tier Tribunal, are dismissed on all grounds.

                               [pic]
                                28 January 2015
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal



                                 APPENDIX A

                     Documents before the Upper Tribunal

|Date       |Author                    |Title                               |
|2002       |                          |                                    |
|Undated    |Victor C de Munck Ph.D,   |Sri Lanka                           |
|           |Robert T Francoeur, with  |                                    |
|           |comments by Patricia      |                                    |
|           |Weerakoon Ph.D            |                                    |
|2005       |                          |                                    |
|17 February|Sydney Star Observer,     |Gay rights are human rights         |
|           |Australia                 |                                    |
|2008       |                          |                                    |
|17 January |Canadian Immigration and  |Sri Lanka: Laws proscribing         |
|           |Refugee Board             |homosexual acts and whether they are|
|           |                          |applied in practice:  treatment of  |
|           |                          |homosexuals by authorities, by      |
|           |                          |society at large and by Muslim      |
|           |                          |community                           |
|2009       |                          |                                    |
|July 27    |Interpress Service News   |Rights, Sri Lanka: Gay community    |
|           |Agency                    |takes heart in Indian court ruling  |
|2010       |                          |                                    |
|Undated    |Andrea Nichols, University|Dance Ponnaya, Dance! Police abuses |
|           |of Missouri-St Louis, St  |against transgender sex workers in  |
|           |Louis County              |Sri Lanka                           |
|27 April   |UNHCR Human Rights Council|Report of the Special Rapporteur on |
|           |                          |the right of everyone to the        |
|           |                          |enjoyment of the highest attainable |
|           |                          |standard of physical and mental     |
|           |                          |health, Anand Grover (late          |
|           |                          |submission)                         |
|5 July     |Lakbima News              |"We are all human" says gay rights  |
|           |                          |activist                            |
|10         |Collective for Economic,  |Implementation of the International |
|September  |Social and Cultural Rights|Covenant on Economic, Social and    |
|           |in Sri Lanka              |Cultural Rights: Civil Society      |
|           |                          |Report                              |
|2011       |                          |                                    |
|January    |Women's Support Group Sri |The status of lesbians, bisexual    |
|           |Lanka                     |women and transgendered persons in  |
|           |                          |Sri Lanka:  NGO shadow report to the|
|           |                          |Committee on the Elimination of All |
|           |                          |Forms of Discrimination Against     |
|           |                          |Women                               |
|1 March    |International Lesbian,    |Erasure of the gays in Sri Lanka    |
|           |Gay, Bisexual, Trans and  |                                    |
|           |Intersex Association      |                                    |
|April-June |Equal Ground              |Struggling against homophobic       |
|           |                          |violence and hate crimes            |
|21         |Sri Lanka news -          |Sri Lanka faces increase in         |
|September  |Adaderana.lk              |homosexuals                         |
|2012       |                          |                                    |
|13 January |Canadian Immigration and  |Sri Lanka: treatment of sexual      |
|           |Refugee Board             |minorities, including legislation,  |
|           |                          |state protection and support        |
|           |                          |services                            |
|7 March    |Home Office UKBA          |Sri Lanka Country Report            |
|26 June    |Appellant IP              |Witness statement                   |
|28 June    |Appellant LH              |Witness statement                   |
|23 October |UNHCR                     |Guidelines on international         |
|           |                          |protection no 9:  claims to refugee |
|           |                          |status based on sexual orientation  |
|           |                          |and/or gender identity within the   |
|           |                          |context of Article 1A(2) of the 1951|
|           |                          |Convention and/or its 1967 Protocol |
|           |                          |relating to the status of refugees  |
|November   |Coalition for sexual      |Joint stakeholder submission to the |
|           |rights                    |Universal Periodic Review: CREA,    |
|           |                          |Equal Ground, The Sexual Rights     |
|           |                          |Initiative and the Women's Support  |
|           |                          |Group                               |
|9 December |Equal Ground              |Towards a lesbians, gays, bisexuals,|
|           |                          |transsexuals and transgendered      |
|           |                          |(LGBT) stigma and discrimination    |
|           |                          |index for Sri Lanka                 |
|21 December|UNHCR                     |UNHCR eligibility guidelines for    |
|           |                          |assessing the internal protection   |
|           |                          |needs of asylum seekers from Sri    |
|           |                          |Lanka                               |
|2013       |                          |                                    |
|Undated    |Freedom House             |Freedom in the World 2013           |
|January    |Equal Ground              |Strengthening of legal protection   |
|           |                          |for LGBT in Sri Lanka:  road to     |
|           |                          |decriminalisation                   |
|10 February|Ceylon Today: Anukshi     |When words do more than hurt        |
|           |Jayasinha                 |                                    |
|July       |United Kingdom Home Office|Sri Lanka Operational Guidance Note |
|           |                          |v.14                                |
|1 July     |Prathiwadhiya Blogspot.com|Should the Norway ambassador's      |
|           |                          |homosexual mania be allowed in our  |
|           |                          |country?                            |
|14 July    |Sri Lanka Sunday Times    |Grama Niladhari: Grassroots         |
|           |                          |go-between between State and common |
|           |                          |man                                 |
|19 August  |Prathiwadhiya Blogspot.com|Here are the real false devotees    |
|23 August  |Gay Star News             |Sri Lanka's 1st gay marriage ends in|
|           |                          |arrests for corruption              |
|24 August  |Prathiwadhiya Blogspot.com|Is this Sri Lanka or is it a colony |
|           |                          |of faggots?                         |
|30 August  |Prathiwadhiya Blogspot.com|What could have been broken off by a|
|           |                          |tip of a fingernail needs the use of|
|           |                          |an axe                              |
|1 September|The Nation                |A society's struggle against        |
|           |                          |abandoning homosexuality            |
|6 September|Prathiwadhiya Blogspot.com|Daily Mirror media reports support  |
|           |                          |homosexuality                       |
|23         |Pink News                 |Former Commonwealth Head of Human   |
|September  |                          |rights condemns Sri Lanka over gay  |
|           |                          |harassment                          |
|28         |Prathiwadhiya Blogspot.com|Residents' of Annuradhapura         |
|September  |                          |district, are you aware of this?    |
|November   |Equal Ground              |Report on the situation of LGBT     |
|           |                          |persons in Sri Lanka submitted in   |
|           |                          |the matter of LH and IP (Sri Lanka) |
|14 November|Gay Star News             |Sri Lanka begins 'systematic        |
|           |                          |targeting' of gays                  |
|14 November|Gay Star News             |Sri Lanka gays forced underground as|
|           |                          |world leaders gather for summit.    |
|December   |Equal Ground              |Human rights violations against     |
|           |                          |lesbian, gay, bisexual and          |
|           |                          |transgender (LGBT) people in Sri    |
|           |                          |Lanka: a shadow report              |
|           |                          |Submitted for consideration at the  |
|           |                          |110th session of the UNHCR human    |
|           |                          |rights committee, March 2014, Geneva|
|2014       |                          |                                    |
|Undated    |Freedom House             |Freedom in the World 2014           |
|12 January |Ceylon Today              |Colombo a hive of 'gay' activity    |
|27 February|US State Department       |Country report on human rights      |
|           |                          |practices 2013 - Sri Lanka          |
|10 April   |Foreign and Commonwealth  |Human rights and democracy report   |
|           |Office                    |2013 - Section XI:  Human rights in |
|           |                          |countries of concern - Sri Lanka    |
|12 May     |Mr Kumaravadivel          |Country expert report               |
|           |Guruparan, University of  |                                    |
|           |Jaffna, Sri Lanka         |                                    |
|13 May     |Appellant IP              |Further witness statement           |
|13 May     |Appellant LH              |Further witness statement           |
|29 May     |La Trobe University,      |Homophobia and the legality of gay  |
|           |Australia                 |sex in the Commonwealth             |
|8 July     |Professor Anthony Good    |Report on Mr LH and Mr IP           |
|7 August   |Professor Anthony Good    |Email attaching information on      |
|           |                          |duties of Grama Sevaka/Grama        |
|           |                          |Niladhari, character certificate,   |
|           |                          |passport applications, and police   |
|           |                          |clearance certificate, with copy    |
|           |                          |forms attached.                     |


                                 Appendix B

                   Summary of country background evidence

    A.     Equal Ground

   1. The reports prepared by Ms Rosanna Flamer-Caldera, Executive  Director
      of the Sri Lankan LGBT support organisation, Equal  Ground,  form  the
      basis of much of the international evidence before us.  The first such
      report in the bundle, prepared from evidence taken between  April-June
      2011, is entitled "Struggling against  homophobic  violence  and  hate
      crimes".  The report, which is undated, was based on 109 interviews in
      13 districts of Sri Lanka. After setting out the legislative  history,
      the report gives a number of examples of difficulties  experienced  by
      LGBT persons with reference to sections 365 and 365A of the Sri Lankan
      Penal code which criminalise same-sex activity, recording  that  there
      are a dearth of cases under which 'prevent[s] an in-depth analysis  of
      how the law has been interpreted'.

   2. Other provisions of the Sri Lankan Penal Code which have been used  in
      homosexual cases are section 352, which concerns enticing or taking  a
      minor out of lawful  guardianship  and  is  sometimes  used  where  an
      underage lesbian leaves home for an older woman Similarly,  for  adult
      women, section 353 which deals with abduction may  be  used  to  force
      women to return to their families.

   3. Where  child  abuse  is  concerned,  the  courts  in  Sri  Lanka  have
      'systematically failed  in  ensuring  the  certainty  of  punishment'.
      Section 360E of the Penal Code which  dealt  with  solicitation  of  a
      child for sexual abuse was arguably better  suited  for  dealing  with
      that particular issue.

   4. Transgender persons and homosexual prostitutes  may  be  arrested  and
      harassed under sections 2 and 3 of the Vagrants'  Ordinance  1842  for
      behaving  in  a  'riotous,  disorderly  manner'   or   being   'common
      prostitutes'  acting  in  an  indecent  manner.    The  provisions  in
      question are not specific to homosexual activity and deal with  public
      behaviour:  the maximum fines are 5 Rupees  under  section  2  and  10
      Rupees under section 3.  Arrests under  these  sections  are  said  to
      subject the individuals to harassment, ridicule, and  the  payment  of
      bribes to secure their release.

   5. Homosexuality is regarded as a mental illness in Sri Lanka, the report
      says:   in  several  cases,  LGBT  individuals  have  been  taken   to
      psychiatrists  or  psychologists  in  the  hope  of   'curing'   their
      homosexuality.   Medical  treatment  was  not  in  general  denied  to
      homosexuals but there were difficulties in  finding  sufficient  LGBT-
      friendly psychiatrists or psychologists, and  fear  of  discrimination
      could lead to failure to divulge  all  relevant  circumstances  to  an
      individual's doctor.  The report notes that the difficulties  for  men
      are in mainly 'in the  public  realms':  women  are  harassed  at  the
      private and community level, and transgender  and  cross-dressers  are
      constantly harassed by the police, arrested and abused.  A  number  of
      women have been  the  subject  of  kidnapping  charges  against  their
      partners, even though  they  were  adults,  but  the  cases  were  not
      followed through and charges were dropped.  Culturally,  parents  have
      control of their daughters' lives and daughters leave  home  only  for
      marriage, the  report  asserts.   The  courts  failed  to  distinguish
      reliably  between  consensual  and  non-consensual  homosexual  sexual
      activity.

   6. Details are given of a number of specific incidents. In November 2012,
      two men arrested in a public  lavatory  while  engaging  in  oral  sex
      pleaded guilty to a charge of  gross  indecency  and  were  fined  Sri
      Lankan Rupees 1500 each (about 7.50). The report  states  that  there
      have been no other cases  relating  to  adults,  but  refers  to  R  v
      Wickremasinghe [1934] LKHC 7, in which the High  Court  of  Sri  Lanka
      dealt with a case of sexual abuse of a child under 16.  In Amerasinghe
      v Daluwatta [1998] LKCA 128/98,  in  dealing  with  procedural  errors
      regarding an allegation of homosexuality against a member of the Army,
      the court did not deal with the  homosexuality  at  all.   Neither  of
      those cases relates to the modern form  of  section  365  or  the  new
      section 365A.  Much of the report deals with  what  happens  in  other
      parts of Asia under similar provisions, in particular in India.

   7. The Sri Lankan constitution states at Article 12 that 'all persons are
      equal before the law' and have the right to equal  protection  of  the
      law.  Article 13 requires due process and article 15 protects  freedom
      of expression and free speech.   The  constitution  prohibits  gender-
      based discrimination.  However, it does not contain express protection
      against discrimination on  the  grounds  of  sexual  orientation:  the
      report  considers  that  LGBT  persons  are  protected  only  if  they
      'maintain a hetero-normative performance'.  There have been  cases  of
      transgender men and women being arrested for 'misleading the  public'.
      There have been no cases where the Labor Tribunal  dealt  with  unfair
      dismissal based on sexual orientation.

   8. In August 1999, a letter published in The Island (which is not in  the
      material before us) urged the unleashing of  convicted  rapists  at  a
      proposed conference on lesbian  issues.   A  complaint  to  the  Press
      Council was not successful and the complainant was fined.   The  Press
      Council considered that '...lesbianism itself is an act of sadism, and
      salacious publication of any opinion against such activities does  not
      amount to a promotion of sadism or salacity...'.

   9. The next Equal Ground report is that of 9 December  2012,  'Towards  a
      lesbians,  gays,  bisexuals,  transsexuals  and  transgendered  (LGBT)
      stigma and discrimination index for Sri Lanka'  (the  'Pilot  Study').
      The Pilot Study records the outcome of interviews of 119 persons known
      to Equal Ground, of whom 55% were Buddhist, 20% Christian, 15% Muslim,
      6% Hindu, and the others of unspecified religion.  85%  were  educated
      to secondary school level or above and 66% were in employment, with  a
      further 22% self-employed. 65% lived in a city, 16% in a town, and 17%
      in a rural area or village. As would be expected from their education,
      they were relatively well off, with 40% earning over Rupees  40,000  a
      year.  A quarter were gay men and a further 18% were bisexual men; 29%
      were lesbian and 18% transgender.

  10. Of  that  group,  33%  were  currently  single,  40%  in  a  committed
      homosexual relationship, and 14% in an open  relationship.   Only  13%
      were in a heterosexual marriage, and 9% of those were also in  a  same
      sex  relationship.  Of  those   who   were   in   a   non-heterosexual
      relationship, 30% lived with their partners, but  70%  did  not.   The
      relationships which had lasted for over 4 years came to 31%  of  those
      in a relationship, with 20% having been  in  a  relationship  for  5-9
      years.  17% were in relationships which had lasted less than a year.

  11. 71% of the sample had never been excluded from a social  gathering  or
      activity on the basis of their gender identity or sexual  orientation;
      20% had been excluded only a few times. 87% had  never  been  excluded
      from religious places or activities in the last  two  years;  78%  had
      never faced exclusion from  family  activities  in  the  same  period,
      although 18% had been excluded a few times, but less than 1% had  been
      excluded  often.   Most  of  the  respondents  were  aware  of  gossip
      concerning them, with only 25% never having become  aware  of  gossip.
      46% were aware of frequent gossip. 62%  had  been  victims  of  verbal
      abuse, harassment or threats, in most cases only a few times. 38%  had
      not had any such experience.

  12. However, when considering more serious ill-treatment such as  physical
      abuse, harassment, assault, rape  and/or  battery,  in  the  last  two
      years, 80% had  not  had  any  such  experience.   Less  than  1%  had
      experienced it 'often',  with  even  smaller  numbers  reporting  that
      serious ill-treatment had occurred 'a few times' or 'once'.  Only  one
      such individual had experienced serious ill-treatment on the basis  of
      sexual orientation, with the other 22 persons experiencing it  on  the
      basis of their gender identity (that is to say, they were  transsexual
      or transgender).

  13. A similar pattern emerged for  emotional  or  psychological  abuse  or
      trauma: over  a  2  year  period,  38%  of  the  respondents  had  not
      experienced any such difficulty; 62% had, but only six individuals had
      been affected by reason of their sexual orientation alone, but for  58
      individuals (49% of  the  sample)  there  was  an  element  of  gender
      identity underlying their treatment. The same pattern  continued  when
      the respondents were asked about blackmail and/or manipulation in  the
      last two years: 54%  had  no  such  experience.   Less  than  1%  were
      blackmailed or manipulated often, but 32% had that  experience  a  few
      times.  Only 6 individuals, much less than 1% of the sample, had  that
      experience on grounds of sexual identity alone.  For 39% of the sample
      group, blackmail and/or  manipulation  was  related  to  their  gender
      identity, either wholly or partially.

  14. The study  recorded  that  the  overwhelming  majority  of  those  who
      experienced  discrimination  were  discriminated  against   by   their
      families, friends or neighbours, although there were also problems  in
      the workplace and from the clergy on occasion.  No legal  actions  had
      been undertaken by any of the respondents.

  15. In other areas, 76% of the sample had  no  problems  with  housing  or
      inability to rent accommodation.  Less than  1%  had  that  experience
      often, and almost all of those who did have a problem  related  it  to
      their  gender  identity  or  expression,  not  merely   their   sexual
      orientation.  25% of the sample had lost jobs in the last  two  years,
      but less than 1% of the sample lost jobs for reasons related  only  to
      sexual orientation.   The  picture  in  relation  to  the  refusal  of
      employment or work opportunities was much the same.  Almost all of the
      respondents (88%) reported no refusal of promotion or  alterations  to
      the nature of their work or job descriptions on  the  basis  of  their
      sexual orientation, gender identity or expression. The  vast  majority
      (the table is difficult to read) had not  experienced  any  denial  of
      health services on either ground.

  16. In its conclusion and recommendations, the Pilot Study noted that most
      of the social exclusion was from friends, but that it was  to  friends
      also that there was the highest level of  disclosure  of  individuals'
      sexual orientation and gender identity.   In  most  cases,  the  study
      revealed that more people were discriminated against on the  basis  of
      gender identity/expression  or  both  sexual  orientation  and  gender
      identity/expression, rather than sexual orientation alone.  There  was
      concern regarding a perceived lack of  safe  home  environments,  with
      some LGBT individuals being stigmatised and discriminated  against  by
      their family members in the home, their  same-sex  partners  and  even
      neighbours.  This part of the report lacks quantitative focus  and  is
      less helpful:  "The study revealed that between 4.2% and 74.79% of the
      respondents   face   some   form   of   LGBT   related   stigma    and
      discrimination...the study  reported  high  levels  of  verbal  abuse,
      emotional abuse and blackmail alongside gossip." The Pilot Study  also
      reported fear of being 'outed' among those who had not experienced any
      problems.

  17. The report noted that many organisations in Sri Lanka offer assistance
      to LGBT people and some were primarily  focused  on  addressing  LGBT-
      related issues. The research project made recommendations to the state
      of Sri Lanka, but would also look at  improving  the  quality  of  the
      study.

  18. The next of the Equal Ground documents is  a  January  2013  situation
      analysis entitled 'Strengthening of legal protection for LGBT  in  Sri
      Lanka: road to decriminalization".  The study's  limitations  are  set
      out at the beginning:  it was noted  that  the  quantitative  research
      could not be conducted in depth and that the study  focused  on  urban
      spaces such as the main towns of each district; and further, that case
      law on child abuse cases and adult consensual sex under  sections  365
      and 365A were hard to access:  the  report  had  depended  heavily  on
      published articles about child rights.  There is little  new  material
      in this report, which recommends decriminalisation of adult  same  sex
      consensual  intercourse  in  private;  the   passing   of   laws   and
      implementation  of  non-discrimination  policies,  to   ensure   equal
      protection, equal opportunity and substantive rights; police training;
      sensitisation  of  lawyers;  and  awareness  creation  in  Sri   Lanka
      generally.

  19. The last Equal Ground document in the background bundle  was  prepared
      and submitted for consideration at the  110th  session  of  the  UNHCR
      General Council in March 2014 in Geneva and is entitled 'Human  rights
      violations against  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual  and  transgender  (LGBT)
      people in Sri Lanka: a shadow report'.    This  report  gives  further
      examples:  a lesbian wearing trousers and of a  masculine  appearance,
      arrested and questioned for five hours by the police when walking back
      to her motorcycle in 2012, and charged  with  vagrancy;  an  anonymous
      call to Equal Ground in 2008 by a man who said that while staying in a
      known gay guest house in Colombo with a male friend, the police  broke
      down the door, forced him to put his fingerprints on  unused  condoms,
      and to give evidence against his friend, who was  fined.   It  records
      the account of a  graduate  student  in  Galle  who  was  interviewing
      several men and one transgender woman for his  thesis  on  safer  sex:
      the men were arrested and beaten and the transgender  woman  sodomised
      with  a  wooden  stick;  the  student   was   accused   of   promoting
      homosexuality, slapped, and thrown into a police cell with such  force
      that he injured his ankle.  The example of the  two  gay  men  in  the
      public toilet in Colombo who had to pay a fine was also included.

  20. The report records difficulty experienced by Equal Ground in  relation
      to a series of peer educators workshops  on  stopping  the  spread  of
      HIV/AIDS organised by a partner organisation in August 2013:  a State-
      controlled newspaper,  Lakbima,  printed  an  article  entitled  'Male
      prostitution brothels run by homosexual groups', in which  it  claimed
      that  the  children  were  being  brainwashed  to  become  homosexual.
      Officers from the CID visited the Executive Director  of  the  partner
      organisation and questioned him, before telling him he could  continue
      the workshops only if homosexuality, human rights and section 365A  of
      the Penal Code were not mentioned.  The partner organisation curtailed
      its HIV/AIDS workshops in that area and withdrew  an  application  for
      funding from the Global Fund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis and  malaria,
      one of the very few working with the MSM  (males  who  have  sex  with
      males)  population  in  Sri  Lanka.   There  had  been  other  similar
      incidents.

  21. In another incident, sometime between 2008-2010, two women working  in
      the same workplace in Nuwara Eliya district were suspected of being in
      a relationship and were harassed to such  an  extent  that  they  left
      their jobs. The incident was reported to Equal Ground in an  anonymous
      call on 29 July 2013.  Later in 2013, an employer discovered  that  he
      had a lesbian tea picker among his employees and forced her to work on
      one of the most treacherous, steep slopes. A transgender man lost  his
      job in early 2013 because a security guard, searching his  belongings,
      found Equal Ground material there. He told the factory management, who
      threatened to tell the man's family of his sexuality, then fired  him.



  22. The report dealt with difficulties in housing, and with  hate  crimes.
      A 19-year old transgender woman reported anonymously to  Equal  Ground
      in 2013 that she had been cycling home one evening when a man  stopped
      her, dragged her into a  forest  and  raped  her.   Another  anonymous
      report in August 2013 was of a bisexual male who at the age of 16  had
      been taken into a school washroom and raped by two older students.  In
      October 2013, a transgender man reported being attacked in front of  a
      hardware store, where he and his boyfriend were standing.  He is  said
      to have suffered a serious blow to his eye, and alleged that  two  men
      on motorbikes followed them home.

  23. The report gave examples of forced marriages entered into  by  lesbian
      women under family pressure:  in one case,  the  relationship  of  two
      lesbians was discovered and one woman's family caused her to  marry  a
      Sri Lankan man; when she was  unhappy  and  tried  to  return  to  her
      parents' home, they chased her back to her husband.  In another  case,
      a woman was separated from her female partner, locked up by her family
      and given in marriage to a man eight years younger than  she  was.  In
      the third example given, a woman from  Nuwara  Eliya  lived  with  her
      girlfriend and they looked after her ailing mother together.  When her
      mother  died,  the  woman's  brother  threatened  to  take  away   her
      inheritance unless she  married  a  man.   The  woman  complied:   her
      girlfriend killed herself.

  24. The report prepared  in  November  2013  by  Equal  Ground  for  these
      proceedings follows the  familiar  format.   It  sets  out  the  legal
      position in Sri Lanka and the state's failure to meet  the  Yogyakarta
      principles.  It confirms that sections 365 and 365A are  not  used  to
      prosecute LGBT individuals, but rather to harass and target  them  and
      violate constitution and fundamental rights in  that  way.   The  LGBT
      community are  secondary  citizens,  afraid  to  report  incidents  of
      violence for fear of further stigmatisation or  victimisation  at  the
      hands of the police. Examples were given: in 2009,  a  gay  member  of
      Equal Ground chose not to report the theft of his Apple laptop by  his
      former boyfriend to the police; in 2010, Equal Ground's  offices  were
      burgled but they did not report it for fear of  systematic  harassment
      once the police knew where their offices were; and in 2013,  a  female
      to male transsexual reported having been required to remove the sarong
      he was wearing during a medical examination for vomiting in  hospital.
      HIV infections had risen from 11% in 2011  to  13%  in  2013.   LGBTIQ
      individuals  often  dropped   out   of   school   due   to   bullying,
      marginalisation and discrimination.

  25. The President had personally  removed  from  the  draft  human  rights
      action plan any reference to legalisation of homosexuality.

  26. Examples were given of violence against lesbian and gay women  in  Sri
      Lanka:  families often forcibly married off women who were found to be
      in lesbian relationships, and depression and even self-harm  could  be
      the consequences. Lesbian women  who  were  not  yet  'out'  could  be
      blackmailed; they were sometimes raped to  'cure'  them,  or  sent  to
      institutions which purported  to  cure  homosexuality.   Religion  and
      beatings were also used to try to drive out the homosexual orientation
      of lesbian and bisexual women.   The report relied on the Pilot  Study
      as  evidence  that  'many  participants'  were  excluded  from  social
      gatherings, work, education, and sometimes healthcare,  by  reason  of
      their sexual orientation or gender identity.  Many had reported  being
      harassed, threatened, assaulted, raped or battered for those  reasons.
      The example of the student researcher in Galle  and  the  police  ill-
      treatment of those he  was  interviewing  was  included,  as  was  the
      example of the gay men in a public toilet in Colombo, who  were  fined
      for public indecency and released on payment of a bribe.

  27. The hostility of some publications, and the assertion that gays sought
      to convert heterosexuals, is set out. The conflation of being gay with
      being a paedophile was prevalent.  There had  been  a  spike  in  hate
      speech against the LGBT community due  to  a  rapid  rise  in  Sinhala
      Buddhist Nationalism, which is  described  as  'akin  to  Islamic  and
      Christian right wing extremism'.   A  Nationalist  Facebook  page  had
      sought to incite violence against Equal Ground, identifying Ms Flamer-
      Caldera, its Executive Director, and stating that the organisation was
      'only a front to debase the  fabric  of  society'  in  Sri  Lanka  and
      convert all Sinhala Buddhists to  homosexuality.

    B.    Collective for Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights in Sri Lanka

  28. In its report of September 2010 on the implementation of the
      International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in Sri
      Lanka, this civil society group notes that:

           "125. Sri Lanka is one of the few  countries  in  the  Asia  and
           Pacific region with  a  low  level  of  HIV  prevalence.  Recent
           figures reveal that transmission through homosexual and bisexual
           acts amount to 11%, and it is estimated that the country  has  a
           population of 24,000  -  37,000  men  who  have  sex  with  men,
           considered to be at greatest risk.

           126. Much needs to be done to address the  absence  of  policies
           which  reflect  the  needs  of  persons  of   different   gender
           identities and the  criminalisation  of  same  sex  orientations
           render it difficult for people from these communities to  access
           public health services in a manner that is open and  informative
           about their medical and personal histories. Thus, services which
           are available to people living with HIV/ AIDS  are  accessed  by
           those who are willing to face stigmatisation  or  have  to  hide
           their sexual orientation. ...

           158. It is appropriate to mention here that  significant  issues
           such as reproductive health and rights, sexual rights as well as
           gender and related topics are inadequately  represented  in  the
           curricula of the Sri Lankan education  system  including  higher
           education which has resulted in poor awareness and  even  poorer
           understanding of most of these issues.

           159. The rigid religious interpretations and traditional  social
           perspectives have been thrusting patriarchal and heteronormative
           values on children preventing them from discussing these 'social
           taboos'  openly  for  a  greater  tolerance  and  understanding.
           Consequently, the harsh attitude  extending  to  phobia  towards
           different sexual orientations has led  to  physical  and  mental
           harassment and discrimination, resulting in  dropping  out  from
           school, and even leading to suicide."

   C. Women's Support Group Sri Lanka (WSG)

  29. The WSG prepared a shadow report in January 2011 entitled "The  Status
      of Lesbians, Bisexual Women and Transgendered Persons  in  Sri  Lanka"
      for submission to the UNHCR Committee on the Elimination of all  forms
      of  Discrimination  Against  Women  (CEDAW).   The   report   is   not
      specifically concerned with the position of gay  men,  but  of  women,
      whether lesbian or bisexual, and transgender individuals.

  30. The WSG report notes the criminalisation of homosexuality, albeit with
      very few prosecutions and no convictions in 50 years, and assesses the
      effect of that legislation as follows:
           "This criminalization paves the  way  for  police  and  anti-gay
           groups to brand all lesbian, bisexual, transgendered persons  as
           'perverts' and criminals. The  fear  of  being  apprehended  and
           identified as a  person  of  non-normative  sexual  behavior  or
           practice leads to a cycle of  silence  by  members  of  the  LBT
           community, by their families and friends and by the society as a
           whole and makes them vulnerable to a range of  abuses  including
           extortion,  intimidation,   unlawful   arrest   and   detention,
           harassment and  torture.  Homophobic  and  transphobic  articles
           repeatedly appear in the  media,  especially  the  print  media,
           including in some State owned newspapers and in newspapers  that
           follow State policy. These articles constitute a means by  which
           society  strengthens  its  resistance  to  recognition  of   LBT
           communities and continues to isolate, ridicule and justify  acts
           of violence on members of the LBT communities.  With  regard  to
           women's sports teams, there have been unofficial  reports  where
           women who are key players in the National team have  lost  their
           positions once it has been speculated that they are lesbians. In
           this sense, there is direct  discrimination  which  impedes  the
           full enjoyment of the right to equality by  specific  categories
           of women in Sri Lanka  who  face  discrimination  due  to  their
           sexual orientation and gender identity/expression."

      The abbreviation 'LBT' (lesbian, bisexual and transgender) excludes
      consideration of the position of gay men.

   D. International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association
   (ILGA)

  31. A report by ILGA dated 1 March 2011 is entitled 'Erasure of the Gays'.
       The premise of this short  article  is  that  male  homosexuality  in
      particular is confined to a Colombo elite and not an option across the
      country.

           "Homosexuality is  often  sidelined  by  the  mainstream  social
           discourse in Sri Lanka. This does not suggest that  our  society
           does not tolerate homosexuality; rather  it  seems  resolved  to
           overlook  it  by  rejecting  it  completely  from  the   popular
           consciousness.  This   defensive   approach   to   homosexuality
           signifies a need to conserve the sexually  homogenous  character
           superimposed on  our  society.  Thus  homosexuality  is  not  an
           "issue." However this does not mean that  the  Sri  Lankan  LGBT
           community does not have  issues.  These  issues  could  only  be
           addressed through foregrounding homosexuality per se. In as  far
           as our society does not acknowledge the LGBT community as a part
           of  its  fabric,  their  grievances  will  remain  unrecognized.
           ...Homosexuality, at least on paper,  remains  a  crime  in  Sri
           Lanka.

  32. The article records the evidence of an individual, Nishada,  described
      as 'an insider of the LGBT rights  discourse'  who  feels  disapproval
      when he is seen in public with his boyfriend.

           "... Nishada  tells  me  that  gays  are  hardly  ever  harassed
           physically, although he claims that the Nacchi community, or men
           who think  of  themselves  as  women,  are  often  subjected  to
           harassment. Nacchi people he says is the "face"  of  Sri  Lankan
           LGBT community. "They are  great  dancers;  they  get  paid  for
           dancing at weddings. Sometimes when  they  return  from  wedding
           ceremonies, the police would stop them and  take  their  money,"
           Nishada says. The dress and behaviour of the Nacchi  people,  or
           the "queens,"  make  them  easily  recognizable  targets.  As  a
           socially  marginalized  group  they  are  vulnerable  and  often
           sexually exploited, I gathered from Nishada. ...

           He says that many gay men  and  women  are  stuck  within  their
           unhappy  marriages  (obviously  making  their  spouses   equally
           unhappy) because they are compelled to remain closeted owing  to
           the stigma attached  to  homosexuality.  It  seems  to  me  that
           homophobia in our society works at an insidious level;  it  does
           not  openly  manifest  itself  as  it  is  jettisoned  from  the
           collective consciousness of the masses.  It  is  at  micro-level
           that the homosexuals are discriminated and condemned,  often  by
           the immediate  family  members.  This  makes  it  difficult  for
           homosexuals to openly acknowledge themselves and  embrace  their
           identity.  ...

           Nishada says that HIV positive homosexuals are often discouraged
           from seeking medical attention as homosexuality is  a  crime  in
           our country.  He  also  adds  that  on  the  grounds  of  sexual
           orientation, they are often  discriminated  at  health  clinics.
           This connectivity compels homosexuals to remain  without  proper
           medical attention, which is hazardous to their health  and  that
           of the entire body-politic. ... He stresses that decriminalizing
           homosexuality can substantially lessen the  stigma  attached  to
           this orientation, and this in turn would  encourage  homosexuals
           to seek medical attention.

           I was once told by an elderly, university educated  woman  whose
           son is a homosexual that,  homosexuality  is  a  myth  prevalent
           among the "English speaking people in Colombo." It is  certainly
           a myth prevalent among most  of  the  straight  members  of  our
           society that homosexuality is a "disease"  that  can  be  cured,
           especially by counselling. It is this kind of mythology that gay
           activism should seek to counter.

           Nishada says that there are four gay rights organizations  which
           are actively engaged in promoting the rights of the  Sri  Lankan
           LGBT community. ...However, he admits that  these  organizations
           are elitist in character and the administrative positions in the
           organizations are reserved for an elite coterie.  Nishada  tries
           to rationalize this state of affairs by saying  that  given  the
           nature of  the  issue,  only  those  who  are  economically  and
           socially empowered can be openly gay. However  it  seems  to  me
           that this marginalization of the non-English speaking, subaltern
           homosexual has paved the way for the collective  self  closeting
           of the LGBT  community.  Colombo-centric  homosexual  mainstream
           hardly ever leaves its elitist cocoon. Even though I do not wish
           to underrate the  work  that  is  being  done  by  the  existing
           organizations, grassroots level  alternative  organizations  are
           necessary to take gay activism to a national level.

           I have suggested in this article that  homosexuality  should  be
           'issufied' - i.e. it should be made  an  issue.  This  does  not
           suggest that homosexuality is not already an  issue;  rather  my
           point is that it is  not  an  issue  because  society  does  not
           acknowledge it as  such.  Same  politics  are  at  work  when  a
           Sinhalese argues that ethnicity is not  an  issue  or  when  the
           elite declare that  class  is  not  an  issue.  The  ability  to
           overlook differences is the prerogative of the privileged group.
           Homosexuality should be  recognized  in  order  to  empower  the
           homosexuals.... Issufying homosexuality  entails  the  potential
           danger of exciting homophobia at a macro-level, but  this  would
           inevitably happen as more and more homosexuals are opting to  be
           openly gay. The Sri  Lankan  body-politic  would  soon  have  to
           perceive homosexuality, and acknowledge it  as  a  part  of  the
           social-fabric."

   E. UNHCR

  33. The UNHCR eligibility guidelines of December  2012  agree  that  there
      have been very few prosecutions,  but  that  there  is  hostile  press
      coverage of the LGBT community, with accusations levelled against  CoJ
      of  'promoting  homosexuality'  in  the  context   of   its   HIV/AIDS
      conference.  The organisation is said to have closed because of police
      interest in its staff, but there  is  no  mention  of  the  corruption
      issues which Ms  Flamer-Caldera  thought  might  well  have  been  the
      principal reason.  There is little differential assessment of the risk
      to gay men in Sri Lanka.  The report concludes that:

           "LGBTI   individuals   may,   depending   on   the    individual
           circumstances of the case, be in need of  international  refugee
           protection often, but not exclusively, on account  of  belonging
           to a particular social group. Depending on the circumstances  of
           the case, the same may apply to partners and other dependants of
           individuals with the above profile. LGBTI individuals cannot  be
           expected to be discreet about their sexual orientation or gender
           identity in order to avoid persecution".

  34. The guidelines identify a heightened risk for  lesbians  and  bisexual
      women, who face homophobic abuse and physical violence, privately  and
      in public, particularly in rural Sri Lanka.  They reflect difficulties
      experienced by transgender, transsexual and intersex  persons,  albeit
      the evidence is not particularly strong or precise:

           "The absence of precise and  specific  information  or  reported
           incidents relating to the treatment of these persons should  not
           be understood as indicating an absence of risk of serious harm."



      Persons undergoing gender reassignment have reportedly had  difficulty
      in amending government documents to reflect their reassigned gender.

   F. Freedom House

  35. The Freedom House report for 2013 is mostly concerned with the overall
      political situation in Sri Lanka after the civil war.  It  deals  only
      very briefly with sexual matters, recording  that  rape  and  domestic
      violence against women are problematic, that women are the subject  of
      discrimination and that  existing  protection  laws  are  only  weakly
      enforced. The reports note that "child rape  is  a  serious  problem".
      Both the 2013  and  2014  reports  deal  with  the  question  of  LGBT
      orientation in the same brief terms:

           "Members of the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual,  and  transgender)
           community face  social  discrimination  and  some  instances  of
           official harassment. Sex "against the  order  of  nature"  is  a
           criminal offense, though cases are rarely prosecuted."

   G. Canadian IRB

  36. The Canadian IRB Response to Information Request of  13  January  2012
      entitled  "Sri  Lanka:  Treatment  of  sexual  minorities,   including
      legislation,  state  protection,  and  support  services"   is   based
      principally on evidence from Equal Ground, including some  undisclosed
      correspondence in 2010 and 2011  between  Ms  Flamer-Caldera  and  the
      Research Directorate. The report confirms that the  law  criminalising
      homosexuality is rarely enforced and has led to no convictions in  the
      50  years  of  its  existence.   It  records  difficulties  for   LGBT
      individuals in rural Sri Lanka, as a result  of  which  they  tend  to
      migrate to the cities where it is possible "for them  to  meet  others
      who are like them and have relationships, albeit on the down low".

           "The Executive Director of EQUAL GROUND  expressed  the  opinion
           that LGBTIQ people in the Tamil or Muslim communities  may  face
           greater   difficulties   because   these   groups   are   "ultra
           conservative" (EQUAL GROUND 7  Dec.  2011).  However,  she  also
           noted that the LGBTIQ community is "increasingly" threatened  by
           Sinhalese Buddhist nationalists, among others,  who  claim  that
           "homosexuality is  a  western  value  which  erodes  Sri  Lankan
           culture, morals and family values" (ibid.).

           The Executive Director also provided the  following  information
           regarding socio-economic and  regional  differences  within  Sri
           Lanka with regard to the  LGBT  community:  [T]here  is  a  huge
           difference in how people  are  treated  based  on  their  socio-
           economic status. LGBTIQ persons in the rural areas for  example,
           suffer enormous hardships - stigma and discrimination is rife  -
           and they cannot be  openly  gay  or  enjoy  a  normal  same  sex
           relationship. Most rural gay men especially,  migrate  to  urban
           areas where there are more opportunities for them to meet others
           who are like them and have relationships,  albeit  on  the  down
           low. (ibid.)

           The Xinhua news agency states that most homosexuals in Sri Lanka
           live  in  the  larger  cities  (21  Sept.  2011).   In   further
           correspondence with  the  Research  Directorate,  the  Executive
           Director of EQUAL GROUND stated that "a  significant  number  of
           LGBT persons" live in Colombo (EQUAL GROUND 12 Dec.  2011).  The
           Executive Director added that acceptance levels in Colombo  were
           "slightly better" that those of other areas, but that "[i]n most
           places in Sri Lanka,  marginalization  and  homophobia  are  the
           norm" (ibid.)."

  37. The report notes the  additional  difficulties  for  rural  women  and
      lesbians in general:

           "A report on the situation of lesbian and bisexual women in  Sri
           Lanka produced by EQUAL  GROUND,  based  on  research  conducted
           between April 2010  and  June  2011,  states  that  lesbian  and
           bisexual women are more vulnerable than  gay  and  bisexual  men
           because women are not seen as equal. According  to  the  report,
           lesbian and bisexual women are ostracized by  their  family  and
           society and some have been driven to suicide ... The report adds
           that  lesbian  and  bisexual  women  are  often  subject  to   a
           combination of homophobic violence, gender-based  violence,  and
           domestic ... According to the report, lesbian and bisexual women
           face the greatest risk of violence from their parents,  siblings
           and relatives, who attempt  to  "institutionalize  these  women,
           restrict them from leaving the home, withdraw economic and other
           necessary support, arrange unwanted marriages and express  other
           forms of physical aggression" ... The  report  also  notes  that
           these women are dependent on their families and  some  may  feel
           powerless in confronting violent threats by their family members
           or threats to report them to the police."

  38. The difficulties for transgender individuals are also noted:

           "Sources  report  that  it  is  difficult  to  amend   the   sex
           classification on official documents (US 8 Apr.  2011,  Sec.  6;
           WSG Jan. 2011, 5). According to sources, individuals must  first
           have their  sex  on  identity  documents  changed  before  going
           through sex-reassignment surgery (ILGA 10 Apr.  2011;  WSG  Jan.
           2011,  5).  The  WSG  shadow  report  states  that   a   medical
           practitioner "risks  his/her  license  if  he/she  performs  sex
           altering surgery on  a  client  whose  birth  certificate  notes
           his/her sex at birth" (ibid.). WSG adds  that  ...  transpersons
           have spoken  of  the  reluctance  of  employers  to  offer  them
           employment. In one case  a  man  had  been  dismissed  from  his
           employment after he  had  been  'discovered'  by  his  employer.
           ...According to WSG, there have been court cases  against  women
           accused  of  "'misrepresentation'"  and  "'impersonation'"   for
           "'disguising'"  themselves  as  men  and  cases  of   transwomen
           arrested for "misleading the public" ..."

   H. United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office

  39. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) identified Sri Lanka in its
      report on Human Rights in Countries of Concern for 2013 as one of 28
      countries of concern, based on circumstances in Sri Lanka in 2012.
      The entry for LGBT is brief:

           "Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights
           Homosexuality remains illegal under Sri Lankan law. The British
           High Commission supported lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
           rights activists in raising concerns over harassment."

   I. United Kingdom Home Office UKBA/UKVI

  40. The most recent full Sri Lanka Country of Origin Report  is  that  for
      2013, dealing with circumstances in 2012 in Sri  Lanka.   There  is  a
      later report which deals only with Tamil separatism. At section  19.01
      it deals with the circumstances of LGBT individuals in Sri Lanka.  The
      report   reflects   the   international   materials   concerning   the
      discrimination  experienced  by  gay  men,  lesbians  and  transgender
      individuals in Sri Lanka, with particular reference to the  risks  for
      lesbians and transgender individuals.  The international NGO  evidence
      relied upon dates back to 2010 and 2011.  More  recent  commentary  is
      included from the Gay Times Gay Guide, but the Guide does  not  appear
      to have been updated since  the  closing  down  of  CoJ  or  the  1995
      modification of the statutory prohibition in Article  365A,  extending
      it to lesbians by making the language gender-neutral.

           "There is a sizeable gay population in Sri Lanka but  many  gays
           and lesbians cannot come to terms with themselves due to  family
           pressures and behavioural expectations  imposed  by  Sri  Lankan
           culture. A gay  identity  does  not  make  much  sense  to  many
           homosexuals. Male homosexuality in any event is  illegal.  There
           is no gay scene in the western sense in Sri Lanka but there  are
           several gay groups who lobby for reform and provide support  and
           counseling to gays and  lesbians.  Many  of  these  groups  also
           organise occasional gay events such as parties and outings.  Sri
           Lanka has a lot to commend it but we would not recommend it as a
           specifically gay destination. ...Homosexual  acts  between  men,
           regardless of age, are prohibited  under  Section  365a  of  the
           Penal Code with a penalty of up to 10  years  imprisonment.  The
           law is not enforced and there have been no prosecutions  for  50
           years but in a largely Buddhist country homosexuality is seen as
           a sin. Local gay groups complain that the mere existence of  the
           law is enough for the police and anti-gay groups to  brand  gays
           and lesbians as "perverts" and lawbreakers.  They  argue  it  is
           discriminatory and stigmatises  gays  and  lesbians  leading  to
           abuse of gay people in their community. In 1996 The  Sri  Lankan
           gay group "Companions On A Journey" was established. During  its
           6  year  existence  [CoJ]  has  suffered  harassment   including
           assaults on its founders, death threats and the stoning  of  its
           offices. There is still rampant  homophobia  in  Sri  Lanka  for
           example the Sri Lankan Press Council ruled in favour of a  paper
           that published a letter saying convicted rapists should  be  let
           loose amongst a lesbian conference to give them "a taste of  the
           real thing"."

  41. The respondent's Operational Guidance Note on Sri Lanka  (OGN)  issued
      July 2014 references the UNHCR, FCO, and US State Department  Reports,
      as well as evidence from Gay Times and ILGA.  It set out  the  support
      given to Equal Ground by the British High Commission in Colombo, which
      on 18 May 2013 presented Ms Flamer-Caldera with a  cheque  to  support
      her  organisation,  to  recognise  the   International   Day   against
      Homophobia and Transphobia (IDAHO), as reported by Sri  Lanka's  Daily
      Financial Times.  The Guidance concludes that:

           "... Homosexuality is illegal in  Sri  Lanka  but  there  is  no
           evidence  of   systematic   state   persecution.   Opportunistic
           targeting, societal hostility and  discrimination  against  LGBT
           persons does exist and in individual cases may reach the Article
           3 threshold."

   J. Other materials and Press reports

  42. A  report  entitled  "Dance  Ponnaya,  Dance!  Police  Abuses  Against
      Transgender Sex Workers  in  Sri  Lanka"  by  Andrea  Nichols  of  the
      University of Missouri-St. Louis, St. Louis County,  provided  further
      evidence of difficulties for male-to-female transgender sex workers in
      Sri Lanka, based on 24 in-depth interviews and 3 focus  groups,  which
      indicated that transgender sex workers  experienced  victimization  by
      police simultaneously targeting their feminine gender  expression  and
      homosexuality. These abuses include verbal, physical, and sexual abuse
      as  well  as  inequality  in  the  police  response  to   both   their
      victimization and criminality

  43. A number of press reports from Sri Lanka and elsewhere are included in
      the bundle.  The earliest press report is an article from  the  Sydney
      Star Observer, Australia (a gay news source) entitled "Gay Rights  are
      Human Rights" published on 17 February 2005,  almost  ten  years  ago.
      Its contents are brief and self-explanatory.

  44. On 27 July 2009, the  Interpress  Service  News  Agency  published  an
      article entitled "Rights, Sri Lanka:  Gay  community  takes  heart  in
      Indian court ruling", in which the High Court of Delhi  found  section
      377 of the Indian Penal  Code  to  be  unconstitutional.  The  article
      reports the reaction of Ms Flamer-Caldera of Equal  Ground,  CoJ,  WSG
      and Sherman de Rose of CoJ, the first gay man to  declare  himself  as
      such in Sri Lanka:

           "However, Rosanna Flamer-Caldera, Executive  Director  of  Equal
           Ground, a nongovernmental organisation which  fights  for  human
           and political rights of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender,
           Intersex and Questioning (LGBTIQ) community  of  Sri  Lanka,  is
           cautious about the ruling. "While we are hugely thrilled by  the
           decision and it gives us a lot of  hope,  we  also  have  to  be
           cautious in moving forward," she said. In the past  six  months,
           Flamer-Caldera and her colleagues have received death threats by
           phone  and  emails  from   what   she   describes   as   'Muslim
           fundamentalists.' "We did  a  workshop  in  the  eastern  region
           (where there is a sizable  concentration  of  Muslims)  and  one
           'gentleman'  accused  us  of  trying   to   promote   homosexual
           behaviour. Since then we have had  some  threatening  calls  and
           emails," she said.

           Between 8 to 10% of Sri Lanka's 20 million people  are  believed
           to be gay, according to activists. De Rose, the first gay person
           to come out, said activists  were  planning  a  consultation  in
           coming weeks in the capital Colombo, bringing together  the  gay
           community  from  across  the  country  in  an  interaction  with
           stakeholders like judges,  parliamentarians,  religious  leaders
           and decision-makers. "We hope to attract  the  participation  of
           about 200 people from all over the country. Indian  experts  are
           also attending," he said, adding that they  plan  to  re-examine
           the Sri Lankan issue in the light of  the  Indian  judgment.  "I
           have found Sri Lankan leaders supportive of our rights  to  live
           the way we want but that is their individual view. That view  is
           not common on an organized scale," he said, noting that same-sex
           couples are always worried about public opinion and want to "run
           away abroad.

           A sexual rights activist from Women's Support Group  (WSG)  said
           they were overjoyed by the ruling  but  also  expressed  concern
           that there have been some appeals filed  against  the  judgment.
           "We need to wait and see what happens,"  she  said.  WSG,  along
           with CoJ and Equal Ground, is among the  more  prominent  groups
           fighting for the rights of LGBIT community.  There  were  others
           reasons for not being 'over-excited' over the ruling.  "Up  till
           1995, the subject of this law was only men.  However,  the  1995
           amendment to Sri Lanka's Penal Code made it 'gender-neutral' and
           now the Penal Code criminalizes both male and female  homosexual
           sexual activity," according to a  statement  on  WSG's  website.
           "That's why we need to be cautious  (in  trying  to  change  the
           laws," said the sexual  rights  activist.  Flamer-Caldera  says,
           "There have been discussions with civil society on how  to  move
           forward."

           While there is a higher level of tolerance and more awareness in
           Colombo for gay community's rights, there is still ignorance  of
           these issues at grassroots level. However De Rose believes there
           is much more acceptance  from  society  over  their  rights  now
           compared to when he launched the organization in 1995. ...

           The WSG website says LGBT people are subject  to  discrimination
           on many fronts. They face blackmail by others, face  threats  to
           their family, career, and their life while some have been thrown
           out of their homes and others have lost their jobs. It says  the
           legal system and the stigma associated with being 'different' in
           Sri Lankan society makes it difficult for members  of  the  LGBT
           community to come out of the closet. "Around you, there are many
           people who hide their sexual  and  gender  identity  from  those
           around them due to the fear of what may happen to them if  their
           identity is known," it said."

      The Indian decision was subsequently overturned by the Indian  Supreme
      Court (see MD (same-sex oriented males: risk) India CG [2014] UKUT  65
      (IAC)).

  45. On 5 July 2010, Lakbima News published an article by Ranga  Jayasuriya
      entitled "'We are all human', says gay rights activist", recording the
      views of Ms Flamer-Caldera, as expressed at a conference in June 2010,
      and to the reporter, as follows:

           "Two weeks back, during an annual gay pride celebration held  in
           Colombo, Rosanna Flamer-Caldera made a passionate plea for equal
           rights for the Sri Lankan gay and lesbian community. "...We  are
           not only hair dressers and drag queens,  we  are  also  doctors,
           journalists, artists,  lawyers,  accountants,  nurses....we  are
           everywhere and anywhere and we continue to strongly advocate  on
           behalf of all of us and mainly  the  mostly  invisible  Lesbian,
           Gay, Bisexual and Transgender community of Sri Lanka. ...We want
           to celebrate our lives, our loves and most of all - who we  are.
           We do not want to be in closets anymore. We shouldn't have to be
           in closets to begin with! Embrace your uniqueness. Embrace  your
           sexuality. Embrace diversity. Be proud of who you are,  whatever
           your sexual orientation may be. Closets are  for  clothes.  Step
           out. Be Proud."

           Not all the members of the Sri Lankan gay and lesbian  community
           have come out of their closets. But, those who dared to come out
           have organized themselves in self-help  groups,  which  campaign
           for human and sexual rights of the  LGBT  community.  They  help
           their members in distress, provide  counseling  and  legal  aid,
           conduct ballroom dancing sessions, screen movies  and  celebrate
           annual events of the calendar of the world wide LGBT  community.
           Going a step further, they also promote HIV  AIDS  awareness  in
           the wider social spectrum.

           Flamer-Caldera's plea for equal rights has, at last, caught  the
           attention of political powers.  Prime  Minister  D.M  Jayaratne,
           last week told a daily English newspaper that the government was
           prepared  for  a  dialogue  with  the  local  gay  and   lesbian
           community.  The  prime  minister  said  that  gay  and   lesbian
           activists should explain what they mean by equal rights. Flamer-
           Caldera says local activists have requested an appointment  with
           the prime minister. ...Flamer-Caldera says that  LGBT  activists
           want the government to expunge the section  of  the  penal  code
           which criminalizes homosexuality.

           "It is silly to label homosexuality as being a western  concept.
           It is in existence in the animal kingdom from  time  immemorial.
           It is, in fact, an archaic law which is  '  imported'  from  the
           west." Second, according to Flamer-Caldera, local LGBT activists
           urged that the constitutional guarantees  of  non-discrimination
           be extended to include gender identity and  sexual  orientation.
           "We want to be treated like other citizens. We are all human. We
           are all equal," she says.

           What about same sex marriages and civil unions? She says  it  is
           too far off. "We take a step at a time. Same sex  marriages  are
           not in our agenda now." That would stoke the fears of the  prime
           minister, who deemed same sex unions as incompatible with  local
           culture. ...In 2001, Sri Lanka's notorious Press Council ordered
           Sherman de Rose, an activist of the founding LGBT rights  group,
           Companion  on  a  Journey  to  pay  legal  fees  to  the  Island
           newspaper, turning down a petition against the publication of  a
           letter which advocated lesbian women to be  raped  by  convicted
           rapists to  'cure'  them.  Rejecting  the  petition,  the  Press
           Council held that lesbianism was, "an act of  sadism"  and  that
           homosexuality was an immoral and abnormal crime.

           That however had unexpected positive  fallout.  It  drew  public
           attention to the rights of  the  gay  community.  Flamer-Caldera
           says gays and lesbians don't ask for special rights. "We ask  to
           be treated like follow citizens. We asked to be accepted for who
           we are."  That, of course, isn't too much to ask for."

  46. On 21 September 2011,  Adaderana,  another  Sri  Lankan  news  source,
      reported an article published by the  Chinese  press  agency,  Xinhua,
      entitled "Sri Lanka faces increase in homosexuals":

           "Sri Lankan authorities on Wednesday said that there has been an
           increase in the number of homosexuals in the country despite its
           strong Buddhist culture and traditions. A  survey  conducted  by
           the Sri Lankan Health Authorities have revealed that  there  are
           over 30,000 homosexuals  and  over  40,000  prostitutes  in  the
           island amongst its estimated 20 million population.

           Out of these figures, more than 8,000 prostitutes are  found  in
           the capital Colombo where illegal brothels continue to  operate,
           Sri Lankan Medical Authorities said. Prostitution is illegal  in
           the island nation and has become a severe problem for the  local
           police who continue to carry out raids and arrests  on  secretly
           functioning brothels in many parts of the country. Homosexuality
           is also a taboo subject  in  Sri  Lanka  where  socially  it  is
           unaccepted and most often seen as an offence. According  to  Sri
           Lankan Medical Authorities, while the numbers for  homosexuality
           have increased, most homosexuals are found to be in  school  and
           university hostels.

           Most homosexuals are found in big cities in Sri Lanka and health
           authorities  have  decided  to  conduct  island  wide  awareness
           programmes  to  prevent  the  spread  of  sexually   transmitted
           diseases amongst such people.  Director  of  the  National  Aids
           Control Unit in Sri Lanka, Dr.  Nimal  Edirisingha  told  Xinhua
           that while these were the estimated figures of  homosexuals  and
           prostitutes  in  the  country,  the  numbers  could  be  higher.
           According  to  Dr.  Edirisingha,  there  are  also  1388  people
           affected with HIV/AIDS  in  the  country  and  this  figure  has
           remained the same for the past few years. (Xinhua)"

  47. On 2 February 2013, Ceylon Today's reporter Anukshi Jayasinha reported
      on the harm which can be caused in social media posts  in  an  article
      entitled  "When  words  do  more  than  hurt".   The   article   deals
      principally with racist hate speech in social media, while recognising
      that "[h]ate  speech  can  be  any  form  of  expression  regarded  as
      offensive to racial, ethnic and religious groups  and  other  discrete
      minorities or to women."  There is no other reference to  LGBT  issues
      or sexuality in the article.

  48. A number of articles are reproduced in translation  published  on  the
      Prathiwadhiya Blogspot in Sinhala , beginning on 1 July 2013  with  an
      article entitled, "Should the Norway ambassador's homosexual mania  be
      allowed in our country?" and continue on 19 August 2013 with "Here are
      the real false devotees", then on 24 August 2013, "Is this  Sri  Lanka
      or is it a colony of faggots?" and on 30 August 2013, "What could have
      been broken off by a tip of a finger needs the use of an  axe",  on  6
      September 2013, "Daily Mirror media  reports  support  homosexuality",
      and  finally,  on  28  September  2013,  "Residents  of  Annuradhapura
      district, are you aware of this?".  The contents of  these  posts  can
      properly be regarded as hate speech.  The  reach  of  this  particular
      blog is unclear.

  49. On 1 September 2013, The Nation carried  an  article  by  Kusumanjalee
      Thilakarathna  entitled  "A  society's  struggle  against   abandoning
      homosexuality", which dealt with the reaction to the controversy about
      the gay marriage which had taken place between a  male  child  and  an
      adult man:

           "Was it a new beginning for Sri  Lanka?  Does  this  hint  at  a
           degradation of social values? What will happen to the Sri Lankan
           culture? So many questions were raised  when  media  revealed  a
           homosexual marriage ceremony at Ratmalana last  week.  Sexuality
           and gender issues are still not a comfortable  topic  in  public
           discussions  in  Sri  Lanka.  In  fact  homosexuality  is  still
           considered a taboo. Not  speaking  about  homosexuality  is  not
           going  to  solve  the  issues.  Thinking  that  the  'issue'  of
           homosexuality will simply disappear if it is not talked about is
           wishful thinking. People are in doubt about the 'right attitude'
           they should have towards the LGBT (Lesbian, Gay, Bi  sexual  and
           Transgender) community. Some are  confused,  not  knowing  which
           side to take. Some try  to  rationalize  it  where  some  become
           homophobic.  ...


           Lawyer, Human Rights Activist Shiral Lakthilaka  said  that  Sri
           Lanka should also consider the human rights aspect of the issue.
           "When you speak about homosexuality in Sri  Lanka  you  have  to
           take three aspects into consideration; the human rights  aspect,
           religious aspect and  the  Victorian  mentality  among  the  Sri
           Lankans," Lakthilaka stressed.  "When  homosexuality  is  spoken
           about in  the  human  rights  perspective  it  falls  under  the
           category of minority rights and group rights. This is a  subject
           which should come into broader discussions. There  should  be  a
           platform where sexual minorities could speak of  their  issues,"
           he added. The religious position in Sri Lanka does not give  any
           leniency toward LGBT community. All religions in Sri Lanka  have
           generally perceived that homosexual behavior is  a  sinful  act.
           Christianity, Hinduism as well  as  Islamic  community  consider
           homosexuality as a sinful act. There are no explicit  rules  for
           lay persons prohibiting homosexual behavior  in  Buddhism.  Yet,
           since homosexuality is against social standards in the  country,
           it could be considered as sexual  misconduct  ...There  are  few
           organizations and movements offering help for the LGBT community
           and most of them are online support groups.  Since  the  country
           doesn't have a proper screening process for these support groups
           and organization, it is hard to trust which group  is  genuinely
           offering help and which groups have hidden motives  which  could
           cause more harm than good. Legalizing homosexuality  or  not  it
           would be better if the country could have  a  proper  method  to
           monitor these mushrooming support groups.


           Another group of people harbor the opinion that homosexuality is
           becoming a trend in society. Some say homosexuality is  only  an
           issue in Colombo. On one hand if homosexuals are  claiming  that
           they are not special, it  is  quite  confusing  why  homosexuals
           themselves are trying to show off their 'pride'.  On  the  other
           hand if  homosexuality  is  normal  and  cannot  be  changed  or
           'cured', is it ethical to condemn their sexual preference?

           Although the majority  of  the  Sri  Lankan  community  consider
           'homosexuality' as a special issue  where  solutions  should  be
           obtained, the real question is the danger innocent young  people
           face, due to the lack of awareness on sexual and  gender  issues
           including homosexuality. If they are not properly educated  they
           will seek information through unreliable sources."

  50. On 23 September 2013, Pink News carried an  article  entitled  "Former
      Commonwealth  head  of  human  rights  condemns  Sri  Lanka  over  gay
      harassment":

           "The former head of Human Rights at the Commonwealth,  Dr  Purna
           Sen, has condemned the Sri Lankan Government over the harassment
           of activists campaigning for LGBT rights. Speaking at the Labour
           Party Conference in Brighton,  Dr  Sen,  who  is  Chair  of  the
           Kaleidoscope Trust, said it was  "wholly  unacceptable  for  the
           country preparing to host Commonwealth leaders in  a  few  weeks
           time to try to silence  the  LGBT  community  and  human  rights
           defenders through threats and  intimidation."  The  Commonwealth
           Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) takes place in Sri Lanka  in
           November.

           "It is imperative that Sri Lanka as the CHOGM hosts must  adhere
           to the principles underlying the Commonwealth  and  respect  the
           right to active and safe  democratic  engagement  by  all  human
           rights defenders," Dr Sen added. "If  this  kind  of  harassment
           continues then both the  Secretary  General  and  the  Heads  of
           Government Meeting in Colombo must  be  prepared  to  speak  out
           publicly and condemn any infringement  on  the  rights  of  LGBT
           people  whether  in  Sri  Lanka  or   anywhere   else   in   the
           Commonwealth."

           She said: "The recently adopted Commonwealth Charter  states  it
           is an association 'devoted to improving the lives of all peoples
           of  the  Commonwealth'.  This  puts   an   obligation   on   the
           organisation to  act  against  this  sort  of  harassment."  The
           Kaleidoscope Trust,  based  in  London,  has  received  reliable
           reports that Sri Lankan  activists  have  been  threatened  with
           arrest and organisations have been warned they could  be  closed
           down if they continue to advocate for LGBT and human rights."

  51. Four reports from Gay Star News, an  international  news  website  for
      LGBTI reporting are included in  the  bundle.   The  first,  dated  31
      August 2013, is headed "Sri Lanka's 1st gay marriage ends  in  arrests
      for corruption":

           "Sri Lanka witnessed its first gay wedding this  month  followed
           by a state  crackdown  that  saw  the  bride  and  groom,  their
           relatives and other guests at the event in capital city  Colombo
           arrested, Sri Lankan media reported. Neth FM Balumgala, a  local
           radio station, said the wedding was held in the  capital  on  16
           August, observing all the  traditional  rituals,  including  the
           exchange of rings and vows. The young bride was a school student
           and his mother and  relatives  attended  the  event,  the  radio
           station said. Soon after the ceremony, officials from the  anti-
           corruption unit swooped down on the house, reportedly used as  a
           meeting place by the gay community, and arrested the bridal pair
           as well as bystanders. Police also seized videos and books  from
           the house. The radio station quoted neighbors as saying that the
           majority of people who used to frequent  the  house  were  young
           male students. A local  television  channel  also  reported  the
           incident though the mainstream media remained  silent.  ...There
           was no immediate  news  of  what  had  happened  to  the  people
           arrested.

           The local media is mostly anti-homosexuality, taking  pot  shots
           at gay parades and  gay  fashion  shows  organized  by  advocacy
           groups.  Earlier,  it  had  attributed  anti-gay  sentiments  to
           President Mahinda Rajapaksa over the appointment of Norway's new
           ambassador to Sri Lanka. She was reported to be  a  lesbian  and
           the media said Rajapaksa was determined that her  partner  would
           not be allowed in. He was reported as saying that  the  Buddhist
           nation  would  lose  its  identity  if   it   allowed   same-sex
           activities."

  52. The second report is dated  7  September  2013,  entitled  "Sri  Lanka
      begins systematic targeting of gays" and records what  happened  next.
      The child 'bride' was identified by the radio  station  and  vilified:
      he took refuge in a Buddhist temple and sought to become a monk.   The
      station then disclosed his novice name as well.  In October 2013,  the
      report states that a Buddhist monk was arrested for  allegedly  having
      sex with five underage boys.  In early  2013,  a  branch  of  the  Sri
      Lankan police made a public presentation stating that homosexuality is
      the leading cause of child abuse in Sri Lanka.

  53. The third report, "Human  rights  groups  report  damns  treatment  of
      LGBTIs across Commonwealth", published ahead of the Commonwealth Heads
      of Government Meeting (CHOGM) on 11  November  2013,  deals  with  the
      position of LGBT individuals across the  Commonwealth.   There  is  no
      specific reference to the position of LGBT individuals in Sri Lanka.

  54. The fourth report, "Sri Lanka gays forced underground as world leaders
      gather for summit" records that the CHOGM meeting refused  to  discuss
      LGBTI rights during the  summit.    A  proposed  meeting  to  be  held
      dealing with LGBTI rights across the Commonwealth  during  the  summit
      had been cancelled due to threats to gay rights leaders in Sri Lanka:

           "Sri Lankan gay activists have been threatened  and  ordered  to
           keep silent as Commonwealth leaders gather in the  country.  The
           LGBTI  campaigners  say  they  have  been  forced   underground,
           reflecting a wider crackdown  on  civil  society  ahead  of  the
           Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM)  from  tomorrow
           (15 November). Commonwealth leaders have refused to discuss gay,
           trans and intersex issues at the summit - despite the  fact  80%
           of member countries still  criminalize  homosexuality.  GSN  has
           learned Sri Lankan activists have  been  warned  to  stop  their
           activities ahead of CHOGM.

           Some individuals have been threatened and told they  may  be  in
           danger if they do not comply. ...The Sri Lankan LGBTI  activists
           don't want to reveal any more details  of  the  threats  against
           them, for fear of angering the government and putting themselves
           at more risk."

  55. ON 12 January 2014, Ceylon Today reported that the position in Colombo
      had improved after the CHOGM conference came to an end.   The  article
      by Ruwan Laknath Jayakody entitled "Colombo a hive of 'gay'  activity"
      listed the most popular cruising spots in Colombo,  referring  in  one
      place to gay sex as 'criminal transmission of HIV' and explained  that
      some of the identified places (not reproduced  here)  are  for  'white
      collar  tie-wielding  executives'  but  others  result   in   'alleged
      incidents of blackmail' or involve intravenous drug users.  :

           "Colombo's gay scene suffered  a  setback  when  the  government
           beefed up security ahead of the Commonwealth Heads of Government
           Meeting (CHOGM), forcing gay men out of some of their  favourite
           hangout places. Now with the security having been  scaled  down,
           they  are  back.  But,  doctors  have  raised  concern  over  an
           increased risk of Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD)  among  gay
           men. Societal prejudice and stigma have discouraged gay men from
           seeking medical attention. Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,  Transgender,
           Intersex and  Questioning  (LGBTIQ)  activities  are  relatively
           thriving in isolated parts of Colombo and also in  its  suburban
           outskirts. ...The list goes on with the other  popular  hangouts
           of  gay  men,  ...which  provide  the  only  sexual,   physical,
           emotional and economical relief for most MSMs  [men  having  sex
           with men]. In schools, hostels, hospitals and army barracks, gay
           sex is a mutually beneficial relationship. In prisons,  however,
           there is sometimes sexual violence of the non-consensual nature.

           Two national surveys into the homosexual activities of men  were
           conducted  recently,  neither   of   which   however,   included
           foreigners in the country. The first, which took one and a  half
           months to complete, was carried out with the assistance  of  the
           involved  communities.  The  research  was  conducted  in   four
           Districts, Colombo, Anuradhapura, Nuwara  Eliya  and  Batticaloa
           and the results were then extrapolated to the entire country. In
           2010, there were 35,000 MSMs in Sri  Lanka.  Based  on  hitherto
           unpublished data, in the most recent estimation, which took  one
           week to finish and was based on 'hot spots',  a  conclusion  was
           reached that there were 8,000 MSMs in the country. The  data  of
           the two size estimations cannot be compared as the methodologies
           vastly differed."

  56. Particular risks are identified for effeminate Nachchis and  for  male
      sex workers,  who  meet  their  clients  through  Facebook  apps,  the
      internet, chat sites, mobile phones, and  tourist  guidebooks  and  of
      course through 'hot spot' cruising. The report notes that there is  no
      state protection available for those who get into difficulty and  that
      long-term relationships between men are almost  unheard  of,  and  are
      secretive.  Marriages with opposite sex partners by MSMs have  a  very
      high failure rate.  HIV/AIDS is rising and male prostitutes  and  male
      sex workers are a high risk group for infection:

           "National  STD/AIDS  Control  Programme  Director   Dr.   Sisira
           Liyanage  added  "There  is  an  increasing  trend  among  MSMs,
           particularly in  the  last  quarter  of  this  year,  which  has
           registered HIV positive cases as 20% when earlier it was 10%. It
           may not be a question of good or bad or right or wrong but  MSMs
           are mentally and socially different people." While not all  MSMs
           are MSWs or male prostitutes, it is well documented that this is
           a high risk group, as far as contracting HIV and HIV  prevention
           is concerned, because of the risky behaviour they exhibit or are
           exposed to or are involved in.

           The term male prostitute or male sex worker is a convoluted one.
           It covers a broad range of  stigmatized  gender  identities  and
           discriminated  sexual  orientations,  diverse   characters   and
           economic practices, dominated  by  medieval  laws  and  maligned
           policies. While it is thought odious and loathsome, deviant  and
           perverted, it is also pilloried and abhorred in  equal  measure,
           and is capable of evoking revulsion and provoking silence. Some,
           in their ignorance, even consider it a disease, a curable one at
           that. Yet, it is a fetishized subject - a  literal  elephant  in
           the room. Entering the rough trade and taking  a  look  at  this
           Sadistic world, harassed by shadows and  sarees,  in  search  of
           those bonded by the love that dares not  speak  its  name.  H.H.
           Sarath  Kumara,  a  MSM  gets  the  final  word:  "Sexuality  is
           private."

