





R (on the application of Weldegaber) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (Dublin Returns - Italy) IJR [2015] UKUT 00070 (IAC)

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



             In the matter of an application for judicial review



                                   Before

                       Mr Justice McCloskey, President



                      The Queen (on the application of

                             Yosief Weldegaber)
                                  Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent






  1. Dublin cases  require  the  Respondent  to  undertake  a  thorough  and
     individuated examination of the  situation  and  circumstances  of  the
     person concerned.

  2. The European Court of Human Rights in Tarakhel v  Switzerland  [App.no.
     29217/12 (GC)] was not purporting  to  promulgate  a  general  rule  or
     principle  that  a  sending  state  is  required  to  secure   specific
     assurances from the destination state as to accommodation or the like.

  3. In light of  the  considerable  body  of  relevant  background  country
     information considered by the Respondent, it was open to  her  to  find
     that there was neither  systemic  deficiency  nor  serious  operational
     failure in the  conditions  prevailing  in  Italy  for  the  reception,
     processing and treatment of asylum seekers.


On the renewed application of the Applicant  for  permission  to  apply  for
judicial review, heard on 05 January 2015  and  following  consideration  of
all documents lodged and having heard the parties'  respective  counsel,  Ms
Harriet Short (instructed by Barnes, Harrild and  Dyer  Solicitors)  and  Ms
Amelia Walker (instructed by the Treasury Solicitor).



              1. This  is  a  Dublin  Regulation  case.   It  is  a  renewed
                 application for permission to apply for judicial review, in
                 the wake of the refusal decision on  the  papers  of  Upper
                 Tribunal Judge Freeman, dated 18 October 2014.  The renewal
                 application is stamped with the date of  28  October  2014.
                 The Respondent subsequently sought to remove the  Applicant
                 from the United Kingdom.  This was  prohibited  by  a  stay
                 order of  this  Tribunal,  dated  15  December  2014.   The
                 underlying decision of the Respondent  was  to  remove  the
                 Applicant to  Italy  for  the  purpose  of  processing  and
                 determining his asylum application.


              2. The Applicant is a national of Eritrea, aged 31 years.   In
                 common with many Dublin Regulation return to  Italy  cases,
                 which have been marked by landmark decisions, both domestic
                 and European, during the past year, the  present  case  has
                 something of a history.  It  suffices  to  record  that  an
                 earlier decision was voluntarily withdrawn  and  remade  by
                 the Respondent.  This  is  contained  in  the  Respondent's
                 letter dated 23 July 2014. This was  initially  the  target
                 decision.  Its effect was to reject  the  Applicant's  case
                 that his removal to Italy would infringe his  rights  under
                 Article 3 ECHR. It embodies the following  key  assessments
                 and conclusions:

                    a) The evidence on which the Applicant relies "does  not
                       even  arguably  approach  the  level  of  weight  and
                       significance  to   establish   a   case   that   [the
                       Respondent]  could  not  be  unaware  that   systemic
                       deficiencies or serious operational  difficulties  in
                       the asylum procedure in Italy amount  to  substantial
                       grounds for believing that the  asylum  seeker  would
                       face a real risk of being  subjected  to  inhuman  or
                       degrading treatment."


                    b) ".....  the evidence and claims advanced  by  you  do
                       not come close  to  rebutting  the  presumption  that
                       Italy  will  treat  [you]  in  compliance  with   the
                       requirements of the EU Charter, the Geneva Convention
                       and the ECHR".

                    c) Finally,  the  Applicant's  human  rights  claim  was
                       certified as clearly unfounded, per paragraph 5(4) of
                       Schedule 3 to the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
                       of Claimants) Act 2004.


              3. The initial target decision no longer exists in  isolation.
                 Rather, it now co-exists with a more recent decision of the
                 Respondent dated 02 January 2015.  Both  counsel  concurred
                 with  my  suggestion  that  this  should  be   treated   as
                 supplementing and merging with the initial  decision.  Both
                 decisions are now challenged  and  I  grant  permission  to
                 amend the Claim Form accordingly.


              4. The stimulus for the more recent decision of the Respondent
                 was  the  submission  of  further  representations  by  the
                 Applicant's solicitors.  It records  the  certification  of
                 the Applicant's case under Part 2  of  Schedule  3  to  the
                 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants)  Act  2004,
                 on 23 August  2011,  following  receipt  of  acceptance  of
                 responsibility by the Italian authorities under the  Dublin
                 Regulation.   The  materials  submitted  with  the  further
                 representations included a substantial  volume  of  reports
                 and kindred documents pertaining to asylum  procedures  and
                 reception conditions in Italy.  The decision maker accorded
                 very  little  weight   to   those   predating   2013   and,
                 correspondingly, particular attention was given to the more
                 recent materials.  It  was  concluded  that  the  materials
                 submitted did  not  suffice  to  displace  the  significant
                 evidential presumption that EU Member  States  will  comply
                 with their ECHR and other  international  law  obligations.
                 It was further concluded that the evidence provided did not
                 establish any systemic failings in  the  asylum  processing
                 and reception arrangements  and  conditions  prevailing  in
                 Italy.  Finally, it was concluded that no serious  risk  of
                 exposing the Applicant to treatment proscribed by Article 3
                 ECHR  in  the  event  of  a  forced  return  to  Italy  was
                 demonstrated.   This  is   my   condensed   digest   of   a
                 characteristically comprehensive letter.


              5. Pursuant to the decision in R  v  SSHD, ex  parte  Yogathas
                 [2002] 3 WLR 1276, the duty imposed  on  the  Secretary  of
                 State in making this species of certification  decision  is
                 to carefully examine the individual's case  and  supporting
                 evidence and to be reasonably and conscientiously satisfied
                 that the asserted  human  rights  violation  "must  clearly
                 fail", per Lord Bingham at [14].   Lord  Hope  devised  the
                 test at [34] in these terms:


                       "The question to which the Secretary of State has  to
                       address his mind .....  is whether the  claim  is  so
                       clearly without substance that  the  appeal  [to  the
                       FtT] would be bound to fail".


                 More prescriptive guidance to the correct approach for  the
                 decision maker is contained in the decision of the Court of
                 Appeal in R (L)  v  SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 25.  This contains
                 the following notable formulation:


                       "If on at least one legitimate view of the  facts  or
                       the law the claim may succeed, it will not be clearly
                       unfounded.  If that point is  reached,  the  decision
                       maker cannot conclude otherwise."


                 I  remind  myself  that  in  the  matter  of  certification
                 decisions and challenges the facts of the  claimant's  case
                 are  to  be  evaluated  at  their  reasonable  zenith:   EM
                 (Eritrea) [2014] UKSC 12, at [8].


              6. In a recent renewed permission  application,  a  return  to
                 Italy  case,  in  the  Administrative  Court,  NMA  v  SSHD
                 [CO/7110/2013], which  I  granted  permission  to  cite,  I
                 formulated the correct approach to a permission application
                 in these terms:


                       "[4]  .....  In  summary,  given  the  low  threshold
                            governing   the   present    application    for
                            permission, the test is whether it is  arguable
                            that there is a reasonable doubt as to  whether
                            the Claimant's substantive human  rights  claim
                            may succeed."


                 In granting permission to  apply  for  judicial  review,  I
                 highlighted that the standout feature of that challenge was
                 its  individuality,  composed  of  the  Claimant's  gender,
                 background, past experiences, psychological  condition  and
                 personal  vulnerabilities,   supported   by   medical   and
                 psychological    evidence:    see    [5].      Furthermore,
                 significantly,  various  pieces   of   "country"   evidence
                 relating to conditions prevailing in Italy  not  considered
                 in Tabrizagh [2014] EWHC 1914 (Admin) formed  part  of  the
                 claim. I further noted that the Supreme Court has held that
                 it is necessary to consider not only the general  situation
                 in the  country  of  proposed  destination  but  also  "the
                 Claimant's personal circumstances,  including  his  or  her
                 previous experience": EM (Eritrea) [2014] UKSC 12, at [70].




              7. The Applicant in this case is described as  a  national  of
                 Eritrea, now aged 31 years.  He asserts that he was  forced
                 to flee from Eritrea, where he was pursuing studies for the
                 priesthood, following  an  initial  raid  by  the  Eritrean
                 authorities  and  his  later  detention  by  the  Ethiopian
                 authorities,  ultimately  fleeing  to   Sudan.    Then   he
                 travelled to  Italy  and  onwards  to  Holland,  where  the
                 authorities returned him to Italy. He then travelled to the
                 United Kingdom, where  he  claimed  asylum.   He  has  been
                 present  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  March  2009.  The
                 Applicant's account describes two sojourns in  Italy,  both
                 in Rome and each of only a couple of  weeks  duration.   He
                 claims to have received no support or assistance  from  the
                 authorities.   Fundamentally  (he  asserts)   he   had   no
                 accommodation and no food.


           8.          As noted above, in resisting his  forced  return  to
                 Italy and advancing this  judicial  review  challenge,  the
                 Applicant has relied on a substantial quantity of  evidence
                 pertaining  to  conditions  in  Italy.   This  includes  in
                 particular the report of an Italian lawyer, Ms  Leo,  dated
                 March 2012. Its central theme is that the  Applicant  would
                 be at real risk of  receiving  no  accommodation,  care  or
                 assistance of any kind, being thereby assigned to "a  grave
                 situation of social marginality". This is  supplemented  by
                 sundry other materials  emanating  from  an  assortment  of
                 organisations including UNCHR, MSF and Human Rights Watch.

              9. As pleaded, the essential elements of this Applicant's case
                 are the following.  The letter of  decision  is  criticised
                 for its  formulaic  composition,  betraying  a  failure  to
                 properly consider the case made.  The  decision  maker  has
                 failed to engage with the evidence put forward. The  letter
                 erroneously states  that  the  Applicant  has  provided  no
                 evidence of his previous experiences in Italy. The decision
                 fails  to  demonstrate  any  proper   assessment   of   the
                 substantial   documentary   evidence   submitted   on   the
                 Applicant's behalf. The so-called "reconsideration" of  the
                 Applicant's case has been superficial and perfunctory.


             10.  As  presented,   however,   the   Applicant's   case   was
                 significantly different and considerably more focused  than
                 the written pleading.  Ms Shortt (of Counsel) developed  an
                 interesting argument, the  essence  whereof  was  that  the
                 decision in Tabrizagh must be re-examined, having regard to
                 the different treatment accorded by the ECtHR in Tarakhel v
                   Switzerland  [App  No  29217/12]  to  the  same  evidence
                 considered by both Courts.   Ms  Shortt  further  submitted
                 that having regard to what was  decided  in  Tarakhel,  the
                 impugned decisions of the Respondent are arguably in breach
                 of Article 3 ECHR on the sole ground of a failure to secure
                 a specific assurance that "CARA"  accommodation,  a  "named
                 bed" as Ms Shortt formulated it, will be available to  this
                 Applicant upon his return to Italy.  Replying on behalf  of
                 the Respondent, Ms  Walker  (of  Counsel),  in  an  equally
                 focused  submission,  emphasised  that  the   decision   in
                 Tarakhel is  highly  fact  sensitive,  is  not  of  general
                 application and, in particular, does  not  apply  to  adult
                 males suffering from  no  particular  vulnerabilities.   Ms
                 Shortt made clear in her  submissions  that  the  Applicant
                 does not rely on any personal vulnerability, to which I add
                 that there was no evidence to this effect.

             11. In Tarakhel, there is a  strong  emphasis  on  the  extreme
                 vulnerability of the  six  children  of  the  family,  aged
                 ranging from two to 15 years.  The  Court  considered  that
                 their particular needs were related to their age,  lack  of
                 independence, vulnerability and asylum seeker  status:  see
                 [99]  and  [115]  especially.  The  Court   rehearsed   the
                 available evidence relating to conditions in Italy.  Having
                 done so, it considered,  in  general  and  unparticularised
                 terms, that the removal of some asylum applicants to  Italy
                 will not be permissible:  see  [115].   It  reiterated  the
                 Article 3 ECHR threshold, namely  substantial  grounds  for
                 believing that the person concerned faces a  real  risk  of
                 being  subjected  to  torture  or  inhuman   or   degrading
                 treatment or punishment in the host country: see [94].   It
                 recalled the special vulnerability  theme  of  its  earlier
                 decision in MSS v Belgium and Greece (App.  No.  30696/09).
                 Based  on  its  assessment  of  the  specific   needs   and
                 vulnerabilities of  the  children,   one  of  the  dominant
                 themes of the judgment, the Court  concluded  that  it  was
                 incumbent upon the  sending  state  to  obtain  appropriate
                 information and assurances from  the  proposed  destination
                 state: see [19], [104] and [121].  What is required  is  "a
                 thorough and individualised examination of the situation of
                 the person concerned".


             12. The submissions of Ms Short  highlighted,  correctly,  that
                 one particular piece of evidence, namely a report  compiled
                 by the Swiss Refugee Council ("SRC"), features in both  the
                 Tabrizagh and Tarakhel  judgments.   In  Tarakhel,  see  in
                 particular [75], [92] - [94] and [99].  Laing J  considered
                 the SRC report, together with others,  in  the  context  of
                 examining the discrete  issue  of  the  numbers  of  asylum
                 seekers and international protection beneficiaries  seeking
                 accommodation in Italy.  In doing so, she noted, at [75]:

                       "The  SRC  Report  candidly  accepts  that  many  key
                       numbers are missing."

                 She further endorsed the observation  in  EM  (Eritrea)  at
                 first instance, [2012] EWHC 1799 (Admin), at [28], that  in
                 view of the rapid fluctuations on  the  ground  statistical
                 exercises aimed at establishing capacity versus demand  are
                 futile.  The Judge clearly found the UNCHR  2012  and  2013
                 reports more persuasive.  Following a  careful  assessment,
                 which included the exercise of juxtaposing the  SRC  report
                 with the UNCHR reports in particular, the  Judge  concluded
                 that the former failed to demonstrate systemic deficiencies
                 in  the  reception  conditions  in  Italy:  see  [99].   In
                 Tarakhel, the SRC report (under the different acronym "SFH-
                 OSAR") was one of many upon which  the  Applicants  relied:
                 see [57] and [81] - [83], together with [108] - [110].

             13. As regards  this  discrete  issue,  my  assessment  of  the
                 judgment of the ECtHR is that, in contrast with Laing J, it
                 did not undertake a detailed critique of  the  SRC  report.
                 Nor did it carry out the  comparative  evaluative  exercise
                 undertaken   in   Tabrizagh.     Notably,    it    recorded
                 specifically, in  [110],,  that  the  methods  employed  to
                 calculate   the   number   of   asylum   seekers    without
                 accommodation in Italy were a  matter  of  controversy.  It
                 made no comment on the undisguised deficiency recognised in
                 the report itself, highlighted in [75]  of  Tabrizagh.  The
                 Court specifically declined to descend into this particular
                 arena:


                       "Without entering into the debate as to the  accuracy
                       of the available figures .........."


                 The  Court  confined  itself  to  the   expressly   limited
                 assessment that the concern that a  significant  number  of
                 asylum seekers may not be provided  with  accommodation  or
                 may be accommodated in unsatisfactory conditions "cannot be
                 dismissed as unfounded": see  [115].   Notably,  the  Court
                 couched this in the terms of a "possibility".  Furthermore,
                 I consider that there is no ringing endorsement of the  SRC
                 report in the Court's  judgment.   Rather,  the  report  is
                 recited  in  neutral  terms.   Furthermore,  neither   this
                 report, nor others, persuaded the Court to  conclude  other
                 than that -


                      "....  the current situation in Italy can in  no  way
                      be compared to the situation in Greece at the time of
                      the MSS judgment ....


                      Hence, the approach in the present case cannot be the
                      same as in MSS"


                 All of  these  passages  in  the  judgment  repay  careful
           reading.


             14. In my view, the national Court in Tabrizagh and  the  ECtHR
                 in  Tarakhel  carried  out   different   exercises.    That
                 performed by the former was more intense, more penetrating.
                  That performed by the latter belonged to  a  higher,  more
                 general level.   I  can  find  nothing  in  the  Strasbourg
                 judgment which calls into question the  evaluation  of  the
                 SRC  report  by  the  Administrative  Court  in  Tabrizagh.
                 Bearing in mind the duty imposed by  section  2(1)  of  the
                 Human Rights Act 1998,  I  cannot  agree  with  Ms  Short's
                 submission that the decision in Tabrizagh is undermined  in
                 the discrete respect advanced.


             15. Accordingly, I reject the first limb of the argument.   The
                 essence of the second limb consisted of the  invocation  of
                 the conclusion in Tarakhel in  support  of  the  contention
                 that the impugned decisions are infected by  a  failure  to
                 secure from the Italian authorities  a  specific  guarantee
                 that the Applicant will be provided with a "named  bed"  in
                 one  of  the  CARA  reception  centres.   I   reject   this
                 contention.  The conclusion of the  ECtHR  in  Tarakhel  in
                 inextricably  bound  up  with  its  highly  fact  sensitive
                 context.  It cannot be plausibly argued  that the ECtHR was
                 purporting to promulgate a general rule or  principle  that
                 this kind of assurance must be secured in  every  case.   I
                 prefer the submissions of Ms Walker on this discrete issue.
                  Furthermore and in any  event,  taking  into  account  the
                 personal characteristics of this Applicant, I am unable  to
                 conclude that even if accommodation  were  not  immediately
                 available to him for a limited period this would suffice to
                  overcome the Article 3 threshold of a serious risk that he
                 would thereby be exposed to  proscribed,  that  is  to  say
                 inhuman  or  degrading,  treatment.    I   consider   that,
                 evidentially, the Applicant's case fails  to  displace  the
                 potent  presumption  that  Italy  will  comply   with   its
                 international  obligations.   There   is   no   sustainable
                 challenge to the assessment and assertions contained in the
                 second decision letter:


                       "[46] In regard to what your client can  expect  upon
                            arrival in Italy, the local authorities will be
                            made aware of  your  client's  planned  arrival
                            from the United Kingdom and  that  your  client
                            has never previously claimed asylum  in  Italy.
                            Therefore, once the authorities have  completed
                            their identity procedures and relevant  checks,
                            your client will be entered into a project  for
                            the reception and asylum claim procedure.  Your
                            client  will  be  guided  through  the   asylum
                            process .....


                             Your client will be entitled to  access  health
                            care whilst in Italy ..............


                       [57]  Council Directive 2003/9/EC of 27 January  2003
                            laying down minimum standards for the reception
                            of asylum seekers ............   provides  that
                            Member  States  shall  ensure  that   'material
                            reception   conditions'   are   available    to
                            applicants when they  make  their  applications
                            for asylum.  These must 'ensure a  standard  of
                            living adequate for the  health  of  applicants
                            and  capable  of  ensuring  their  subsistence'
                            ............


                       [58]  ..............  You have provided  no  evidence
                            to suggest that the presumption that Italy will
                            comply with  its  legal   obligations  in  this
                            regard is rebutted in this case."


                 For the reasons elaborated above, and having regard to  the
                 very focused nature of the Applicant's challenge, I  concur
                 with this assessment.  In particular, I conclude that  this
                 presumption is not displaced by a failure on  the  part  of
                 the United Kingdom authorities to secure the  assurance  of
                 accommodation  from  the  Italian  authorities   which   is
                 canvassed on behalf of the Applicant.


             16. Turning to the Applicant's pleaded case,  I  consider  that
                 his criticisms of the decision letters are  not  really  in
                 point.  In human rights cases, the focus of  the  Court  is
                 directed to the outcome of the decision making  process  in
                 question, rather than the process itself: Begum v Governors
                 of Denbigh High School [2006] UKHL  15  and  Misbehavin'  v
                 Belfast  City Council  [2007] UKHL 19.  Under the scheme of
                 the Human Rights Act 1998, the Court is the arbiter of  all
                 aspects of  an  asserted  breach  of  a  Convention  Right,
                 including proportionality: Huang v SSHD [2007 UKHL 11.

             17. For the reasons  elaborated  above,  I  conclude  that  the
                 Applicant has failed to establish an  arguable  case.   His
                 renewed application for permission to  apply  for  judicial
                 review is, therefore, dismissed.



                 Costs

             18. There  is  no  application  for  costs  on  behalf  of  the
                 Respondent and, in this respect, I  need  only  affirm  the
                 earlier order of UTJ Freeman.


                 Permission to Appeal

             19. There was no representation on behalf of the Applicant when
                 judgment was handed down. Any application for permission to
                 appeal will be made in writing,  on  notice  to  the  other
                 party, by 26 February 2015.





                     Signed: Bernard  McCloskey


                       The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                       President of the Upper Tribunal


           Dated:       12 February 2015








