
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                    IM (Sufficiency of protection) Malawi [2007] UKAIT 00071

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |                           |
|On 13 February 2007                             |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

      C M G Ockelton, Deputy President, Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr A Leventakis, ACS Solicitors
For the Respondent:         Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer

1) The only authoritative decision in the case of Bagdanavicius is  that  of
the House of Lords [2005] UKHL 38. Nevertheless Lord Brown's speech in  that
judgment left undisturbed the propositions set out by Auld LJ in  the  Court
of Appeal [2003] EWCA Civ 1605, which were themselves merely  a  summary  of
established principles of case law on sufficiency of protection.

2)As [55] (6) of Auld LJ's summary makes clear, the test set out in  Horvath
[2001] 1 AC 489 was intended to deal with  the ability of a state to  afford
protection to the generality of its citizens.

3)  In  stating  that  "[p]rotection  shall   be   regarded   as   generally
provided...",  the  wording  of  reg  4(2)  of  the  Persons  in   Need   of
International  Protection  Regulations  (the  Protection   Regulations)   SI
2525/2006 closely mirrors the test set out in Horvath.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is national of Malawi.  This  is  a  reconsideration  of  a
determination of Immigration Judge Hall notified following a  hearing  on  5
April 2006 dismissing his appeal against a decision dated 17  February  2006
refusing to grant asylum and a decision of 22 February 2006 to refuse  leave
to enter.

2. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was  a  computer  engineer
who ran a business based in  Blantyre,  Malawi  selling  general  electronic
merchandise. When  importing  goods  into  Malawi  he  paid  freight  charge
duties, surtax, excise and other  miscellaneous  charges.  On  19  September
2005 he received threatening  phone  calls  from  officials  of  the  Malawi
Revenue Authority (MRA)  alleging  that  there  were  discrepancies  in  his
importation paperwork. The appellant asked the MRA to contact  the  clearing
agencies  because  he  had  paid  all  the  duties.   However,  the  threats
continued and MRA officials visited his shop  saying  that  unless  he  made
further payments they would make difficulties for him. He was called to  the
MRA offices for an interview. Afterwards the  appellant  complained  to  the
Commissioner of the MRA, a man who had recently been appointed  by  the  new
President of Malawi. As a result of the appellant's complaints, a new  joint
MRA/Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB) task force was  set  up.  The  corrupt  MRA
officials who had been threatening the appellant were arrested as  a  result
of a sting operation which took place on 2  November  2005  when  he  handed
money to them when they came to his shop.  In November  2005,  approximately
five days after this operation, the  appellant  received  threatening  phone
calls. They warned that they were aware of the  movement  of  the  appellant
and his family and would harm them. The appellant  reported  the  matter  to
the ACB and the police. He also informed his lawyer.

3. On 6 December 2005 the appellant was called to  the  police  station.  It
was explained to him that an individual had turned himself in to the  police
with the story that he had been paid a large sum of money  by  the  National
Intelligence Bureau (NIB) to assassinate  him.   The  individual,  known  as
"Jayjay" had decided he did not want to go through with  it.  The  appellant
was subsequently informed by a junior police officer that his  circumstances
were "politically connected" and that the police would not be providing  any
protection to him.  The appellant continued to complain to the  police  that
he and his  family  were  in  danger,  but  still  received  no  protection.
Accordingly the appellant and his family decided to flee  Malawi,  departing
on 20 December 2005.   Since arrival in the  UK  he  has  learned  that  the
prosecution against the MRA officials has been dropped.

The Evidence
4. In support of his claim the appellant  produced  before  the  immigration
judge a number of documents. They included a number  of  newspaper  reports.
One was the Daily Times of  Friday  4  November  2005,  which  reported  the
arrest of three MRA officials  by  the  Anti  Corruption  Bureau  (ACB)  for
soliciting bribes from a "Blantyre based businessman" in a sting  operation.
A report from The Nation of the  same  date  contained  a  similar  account,
adding that the three corrupt officials "will be charged under  the  Corrupt
Practices Act".  The appellant also produced a certificate  of  registration
issued by the MRA showing that he traded as Abacus Systems at an address  in
Blantyre.  There was a letter from the  appellant  dated  12  December  2005
addressed to his lawyers in Malawi asking that they correspond with the  ACB
on his behalf  in  respect  of  the  MRA  corruption  threats.  This  letter
referred, inter alia, to the appellant being told  at  the  Blantyre  police
station on 6 December 2005 about the informant known  as  "Jayjay"  who  had
gone to the police stating he had been paid MK 30,000 by an NIB  officer  to
kill the appellant or cause harm and injury to his wife and  children,  with
a promise of MK 150,000 more on completion of the killing.

5. Other items of evidence adduced by the appellant before  the  immigration
judge included three which  were  date  stamped  by  the  Officer-in-Charge,
Blantyre Police Station.  The first was dated 16 December 2005.   It  stated
that the appellant had reported to them that from 10  November  2005  up  to
the present he had been receiving anonymous phone  calls  in  which  threats
were made to kill or badly injure him.  It continued:

         "Seeing this after reporting the matter to the  police  the  police
         carried out investigations in order to know and have  those  people
         but up to now nothing good has come out.


         However  enquiries  are  still  in  progress  to  track  down   the
         culprits."

6. There was also a statement by the  appellant  declared  before  the  same
Officer-in-Charge dated 18 December   2005  detailing  the  anonymous  phone
calls and threats he began to receive from  10  November  2005  and  related
events. It ended with the words "I am asking the police to help me  in  this
very serious matter".

7. The third document bearing the date stamp for  the  Officer-in-Charge  at
Blantyre Police Station was dated 25 April 2006, well  after  the  time  the
appellant had left Malawi and arrived in the UK.   This reiterated that  the
appellant had begun to receive anonymous phone calls making  threats  on  10
November 2006. It said  police  enquiries  through  telephone  networks  had
produced no results. Unlike the previous letter from the  Officer-in-Charge,
which had made no mention of the  hit man ("Jayjay") incident,  this  letter
set matters out as follows:

         "However while the enquiries was (sic) in progress, someone by  the
         name of Mr J.J. Sachilo, a businessman of Banque, Township  in  the
         City of Blantyre approached the police and told them  that  he  was
         hired by Mr Phiri and Mr Benga, both full particulars not known  to
         injure or kill the report and the Secretary of State giving K30,000
         living (sic) the balance of K120,000 which he was  promised  to  be
         given  after  the  work.  Seeing  the  police  carried   out   some
         investigations so that he can arrest the said culprit but up to now
         they are still at large.


         However the investigations are still in progress to track down  the
         culprit."

8. In his 5 April 2006 statement and elsewhere  the  appellant  stated  that
these documents from the police station did not  give  a  true  or  complete
picture. The police, he said, were still under the  control  of  the  United
Democratic  Front  (UDF)  and  the  previous  President.    They   pretended
impartiality "but very clearly refused  me  protection".   They  refused  to
post a guard  at  his  house  despite  clear  information  that  he  was  an
assassination target. They  refused  to  place  him  and  his  family  under
protective custody.  "They wanted me to be a sitting duck", he wrote.  Their
unwillingness to protect him  could  be  seen  from  the  indifference  they
showed in response to the information they received from the  hit  man.  The
latter had told them that the NIB had said they would drop burglary  charges
against him if he killed or injured  the  appellant.  Initially  the  police
said they were looking into the matter, "but when they realised the NIB  was
doing this under the orders of the old President they withdrew  all  support
and protection".   He considered that their subsequent letter  (dated  March
2006) saying that despite their  best  attempts  they  could  not  find  the
persons responsible, could not be taken at face value.


         "So you see the national authorities not only can  not  provide  me
         with protection but instead they  are  the  agents  of  persecution
         (those parts of the government belong to the old President) and the
         MRA who is DPP controlled has no authorities in these matters."

9. Another item of evidence was a statement from the appellant's  wife.  She
stated that the original MRA officials who had  attempted  to  extort  money
from the appellant had been put into those posts "in order  to  protect  the
interests of UDF".   Her husband, she stated, had been targeted  because  of
his open support  and  friendship  with  Kazuni  'Roger'  Kumwenda,  who  is
President of the National Solidarity Movement (NSM or NASOMA),  a  political
party which supported the country's current President (Bingu Wa  Mutharika),
who was facing great opposition from the United Democratic Front (UDF),  the
party of the former President Bakili Muluzi.

10. Her statement added that any business who openly supported a party  that
opposed the UDF faces serious harm. When her husband sought protection:

         "[N]o support of protection was given either to me or  my  husband,
         even though we were main witnesses in a very high  profile  matter.
         The Regional Police Headquarters simply told my husband  to  remain
         at home for a week until advised.  This was a very  difficult  time
         for me, as I had my little daughter and teenage son in school and I
         was heavily pregnant, and the anxiety was getting the best  of  me.
         We just decided to stop my daughter from attending school."

11. In regard to what she had heard about the hit man  who  had  gone  to  a
smaller police station, having decided not to go through with  his  contract
to kill  or  injure  them,  she  said  that  "when  these  revelations  were
transferred to the HQ, the investigation of  the  NIB  was  dropped".    She
added that:


         "... a junior Police officer in confidence informed my husband that
         this issue became politically connected because if my husband and I
         succeeded to stand as witnesses - the matter  would  implicate  the
         hierarchy of UDF, so our lives were in danger as the  Police  could
         not provide any protection,  and  their  excuse  was  that  it  was
         approaching the festive season and they were understaffed.


         It was then after that  my  husband  sent  an  official  letter  of
         complaint to the Police indirectly through the ACB on  12  December
         2005.  On 16 December 2005, we received a letter  from  the  Police
         that omitted any reference to anyone that was involved to kill  him
         - then my husband's lawyers demanded a  recorded  statement  and  a
         Police clearance report of my husband. Seeing that the Police could
         not offer any protection and the information had  reached  us  that
         the MRA officers were also released by Police."


12. The immigration  judge  found  the  appellant's  account  plausible  and
"backed up by compelling documentary evidence". He stated that  he  accepted
the factual basis of this claim "subject to what I set out below".

13. The immigration judge set out his qualifications to  acceptance  of  the
appellant's account at paragraph 35.  Bearing in  mind  that  the  appellant
had relied on a letter from the  police  saying  enquiries  were  "still  in
progress", the immigration judge stated  that  the  issue  was  whether  the
Malawi government  was  able  to  provide  him  with  sufficient  protection
against reprisals claimed to be targeted against him by  the  NIB.    Having
utilised the summary of principles relating to  protection  as  set  out  by
Auld LJ in Bagdanavicius  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1605,  he  concluded  that  the
appellant  should  be  seen  as  reasonably  likely  to  receive  sufficient
protection. He did not doubt, as he made clear in  paragraph  36,  that  the
threats against the appellant were politically motivated:

         "I accept, for the purposes of this determination, that  corruption
         has and does exist in Malawi  and  that  the  appellant's  previous
         political  activities  and  in  particular  those   supporting   Mr
         Kumwandas of NASOMA, will have marked the appellant as an  opponent
         of the UDF."


14. However, he specifically did not accept that the  evidence  produced  by
the appellant demonstrated that the police would be unwilling or  unable  to
protect him against such threats. The appellant, he said:


         "acted prematurely and seeks to claim asylum in the United  Kingdom
         in circumstances in which the effectiveness of  the  Malawi  police
         and or the agencies to provide the appellant  with  protection  was
         not tested. The appellant had provided no  evidence  of  his  claim
         that a burglar was engaged by the NIB to kill the appellant  beyond
         the reported statements of the  burglar  himself  which  cannot  be
         taken  by me to be reliable evidence  of the involvement of the NIB
         acting in a wholly criminal  and  illegal  manner.  Such  a  charge
         against a government law agency  is  a  serious  one  to  make  and
         requires cogent evidence to be produced in its support before I  am
         able to conclude that the claim is made out even to the  relatively
         low standard of a reasonable degree of  likelihood.  On  the  other
         hand it is clear to me that  due  process  of  law  does  exist  in
         Malawi.  The police  report  makes  that  clear.  The  corrupt  MRA
         officials were arrested and subjected to court proceedings. And the
         newspaper articles relied on by the appellant confirm that they are
         cracking down on corruption. It may well be that the MRA  officials
         have now been released but  such  release  could  result  from  the
         appellant's inability to give evidence because he  is  now  in  the
         United Kingdom ...


          There is an absence of evidence from the appellant as to  lack  of
         willingness of the Malawi police  services  to  continue  with  the
         investigations or why the MRA officials were released  by  the  ACB
         which gives rise to an incomplete set of facts  necessary  for  the
         appellant to  demonstrate  that  the  authorities  in  Malawi  were
         failing the appellant to the degree laid down in Bagdanavicius."


Grounds for Reconsideration
15.  The  appellant's  grounds  for  reconsideration,  as  amplified  by  Mr
Leventakis, were threefold. First it  was  submitted  that  the  immigration
judge had failed to take into  account  several  important  aspects  of  the
evidence relating to the willingness  and  ability  of  the  authorities  to
afford the appellant protection. He had failed to note that the  police  and
the NIB were under the control of the UDF and the former President and  were
therefore neither  willing  nor  able  to  afford  effective  protection  to
persons targeted by the NIB. He had also failed to  take  proper  cognisance
of the following: the  fact  that  the  police  had  refused  to  place  the
appellant and family in the witness protection programme  despite  the  fact
that they were being targeted and the trial of  the  corrupt  MRA  officials
was approaching; that it was elements within the NIB who  had  obtained  the
services of the would-be assassin; and the fact that  the  police  had  told
the appellant that they would  not  assist  him  because  "his  problem  was
political".  Secondly it  was  contended  that  the  immigration  judge  had
failed to bring to bear relevant principles of  case  law  relating  to  the
protection issue, in particular the principle ([55](6))  identified  by  the
Court of Appeal in Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ 1605 that  the  authorities
of a country could be expected to provide additional  protection  where  the
circumstances  "reasonably required it".  Pursuant  to  this  principle  the
immigration  judge's  approach  should  have  been  to   ask   whether   the
appellant's  circumstances  were  such  as   to   reasonably   require   the
authorities to afford him "additional protection" over and above that  given
to citizens generally. Had he asked this question the answer he  would  have
been obliged to give was that  the  appellant's  circumstances  did  require
additional protection. The final ground  criticised  the  immigration  judge
for relying (or relying unduly) on the fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
able to leave Malawi using his own passport.

16. In a memorandum sent to the parties on 13  November  2006  the  Tribunal
indicated it  wanted  the  parties'  submissions  on  (1)  whether,  as  the
appellant's representatives contended, the Court of Appeal's conclusions  in
Bagdanavicius survived the speeches of the House of Lords in the same  case:
[2005] UKHL 38; (2) the implications for the  issue  of  protection  of  the
Persons in Need  of  International  Protection  Regulations  (SI  2525/2006)
(hereafter "the Protection Regulations"), in particular reg 4.

17. Auld LJ's summary of conclusions in the  Court  of  Appeal  judgment  in
Bagdanavicius was set out at [54]-[55] in the following terms:

         "54. Summary of  conclusions  on  real  risk/sufficiency  of  state
         protection
            The common threshold of risk
         55.
            1) The threshold of risk is the  same  in  both  categories  of
            claim; the main reason for introducing section 65 to  the  1999
            Act was not to provide an alternative, lower threshold of  risk
            and/or a higher level of protection against such  risk  through
            the medium of human rights claims, but to widen  the  reach  of
            protection  regardless  of  the  motive  giving  rise  to   the
            persecution.
            Asylum claims
            2) An asylum seeker who claims to be in fear of persecution  is
            entitled to asylum if  he  can  show  a  well-founded  fear  of
            persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason  and  that  there
            would  be  insufficiency  of  state  protection  to  meet   it;
            Horvath[2001] 1 AC 489].
            3)  Fear  of  persecution  is  well-founded  if  there   is   a
            "reasonable degree of likelihood" that it will  materialise;  R
            v. SSHD, ex p. Sivakumaran [1988] AC  956,  per  Lord  Goff  at
            1000F-G;
            4) Sufficiency of state protection, whether from  state  agents
            or non-state actors, means a willingness  and  ability  on  the
            part of the receiving state to provide through its legal system
            a reasonable level of protection from  ill-treatment  of  which
            the claimant for asylum has a well-founded fear;  Osman  [v  UK
            (1999) 1 FLR 193], Horvath,  Dhima  [[2002]  EWHC  80  (Admin),
            [2002] Imm AR 394].
            5) The effectiveness of the system provided  is  to  be  judged
            normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent the
            form of  persecution  of  which  there  is  a  risk,  not  just
            punishment of it after the  event;  Horvath;  Banomova  [[2001]
            EWCA Civ 807]. McPherson[[2001] EWCA  Civ  1955]  and  Kinuthia
            [[2001] EWCA Civ 2100].
            6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection  in
            the receiving state, a claimant may still have  a  well-founded
            fear of persecution if he can show that its authorities know or
            ought to know of circumstances particular to  his  case  giving
            rise to his fear, but are unlikely to  provide  the  additional
            protection his  particular  circumstances  reasonably  require;
            Osman.
            Article 3 claims
            7) The same principles apply to claims in removal cases of risk
            of exposure to Article 3 ill-treatment in the receiving  state,
            and  are,  in  general,  unaffected  by  the  approach  of  the
            Strasbourg Court in Soering; which, on its facts, was, not only
            a state-agency case at the  highest  institutional  level,  but
            also an unusual and  exceptional  case  on  its  facts;  Dhima,
            Krepel [[2002] EWCA Civ 1265] and Ullah[[2004] UKHL 26].
            8) The basis of an article 3 entitlement in a removal  case  is
            that the claimant, if sent to the country in question, would be
            at risk there of Article 3 ill-treatment.
            9) In most, if not all, Article 3 cases  in  this  context  the
            concept of risk has the same or closely similar meaning to that
            in  the  Refugee  Convention  of  "a   well-founded   fear   of
            persecution", save that it is confined to a risk of  Article  3
            forms of ill-treatment and is not restricted  to  conduct  with
            any particular motivation or by reference to the conduct of the
            claimant; Dhima, Krepel; Chahal v UK (1996) 23 EHRR 413].
            10) The threshold of risk required to engage Article 3  depends
            on the circumstances of each case, including the  magnitude  of
            the risk, the nature and severity of the  ill-treatment  risked
            and whether the risk emanates from a state agency or  non-state
            actor; Horvath.
            11) In most, but not necessarily all,  cases  of  ill-treatment
            which, but for state protection, would engage Article 3, a risk
            of such ill-treatment will be more readily established in state-
            agency cases than  in  non-state  actor  cases  -  there  is  a
            spectrum of circumstances giving rise to such risk spanning the
            two categories, ranging from breach of a duty by the state of a
            negative duty not to  inflict  article  3  ill-treatment  to  a
            breach of a duty to take  positive  protective  action  against
            such ill-treatment by non-state actors; Svazas.
            12) An assessment of the threshold of risk appropriate  in  the
            circumstances to  engage  Article  3  necessarily  involves  an
            assessment of the sufficiency of state protection to  meet  the
            threat of which there is a such risk - one cannot be considered
            without the other whether or not the exercise  is  regarded  as
            "holistic" or to be conducted in  two  stages;  Dhima,  Krepel,
            Svazas[[2002] EWCA Civ 74].
            13) Sufficiency of state  protection  is  not  a  guarantee  of
            protection from Article 3 ill-treatment any more than it  is  a
            guarantee of protection from an otherwise well-founded fear  of
            persecution in asylum cases - nor, if and to  the  extent  that
            there is any difference, is it eradication or removal  of  risk
            of exposure  to  Article  3  ill-treatment;  Dhima;  McPherson;
            Krepel.
            14) Where the risk falls to be judged  by  the  sufficiency  of
            state protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according  to
            whether it would eradicate the real risk of the relevant  harm,
            but according to whether it is a reasonable  provision  in  the
            circumstances; Osman.
            15)  Notwithstanding  such  systemic   sufficiency   of   state
            protection in the receiving state, a claimant may still be able
            to establish an Article  3  claim  if  he  can  show  that  the
            authorities  there  know  or  ought  to  know   of   particular
            circumstances likely to expose him to risk of  Article  3  ill-
            treatment; Osman.
            16) The approach is the same whether the receiving  country  is
            or is not a party to the ECHR, but, in determining  whether  it
            would be contrary to Article 3  to  remove  a  person  to  that
            country, our courts should decide the factual issue as to  risk
            as if ECHR standards apply there - and the same applies to  the
            certification process under section 115(1) and/or  (2)  of  the
            2002 Act."
18. As regards issue (1), Mr Leventakis submitted  first  of  all  that  the
speeches of the House of Lords  in   Bagdanavicius  effectively  upheld  the
summary of basic principles set out by Auld LJ  in  the  Court  of  Appeal's
judgment.   Paragraph 30 of Lord Brown's speech appeared to confirm [55](1)-
(6) of Auld LJ's summary.   Even if it were  thought  that  the  opinion  of
Lord Brown superseded what was stated by   Auld  LJ  concerning  Article  3,
that still left intact [55](1)-(6) of Auld LJ's summary, which  dealt   with
protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention.   As  regards  issue  (2),   he
submitted that regulation 4 of  the  Protection  Regulations  reflected  the
existing UK case law on protection, including the summary set  out  by  Auld
LJ in Bagdanavicius.

19. Mr Blundell submitted that  we  should  regard  the  Court  of  Appeal's
judgment in Bagdanavicius as superseded in all  respects  by  the  House  of
Lords' judgment in the same case. The point set out by  Auld LJ  at  [55](6)
and heavily relied upon by the appellant's  representatives did not in  fact
reflect UK case law: there was no UK case law directly applying Osman  v  UK
(1998) 29 EHRR 245 to asylum-related appeals.

20. As to the appellant's particular case, Mr Leventakis contended  that  on
the evidence accepted by the immigration judge his circumstances  were  akin
to those analysed by the Court of Appeal in Svazas [2002] EWCA Civ 74.   The
appellant had contacted the authorities and the hit man should  be  seen  as
having been complicit with the authorities (at least to  begin  with).   The
mere fact that the hit man said he had been paid was  enough  to  show  that
the police should have afforded the appellant additional  protection.   Even
though the appellant's political party (NASOMA) was aligned  with  President
Binga wa Mutharika's political party (the Democratic People's Party  (DPP)),
the government was not a unified one and the former  head  of  security  was
still in control of the police and security forces.   The appellant was  due
to be a witness in a trial  resulting  from  his  exposure  of  the  corrupt
officials. The appellant  had  suffered  threats  against  himself  and  his
family. These threats had started shortly after he had exposed  the  corrupt
officials. He was still receiving threats in  late  October/early  November.
Indeed paragraph 6.5 records that the threats continued  until  16  December
2005.   Even if nothing happened to him in the last  two  months  before  he
left, that did not mean he was not in danger.

21. Mr Blundell submitted that this was not, as Mr Leventakis  suggested,  a
"state collusion" case. Rather it was a "rogue actor"  case.  There  was  no
evidence that a prosecution of the corrupt tax officials had gone  ahead  or
would go ahead. The  evidence  indicated  that  that  appellant  had  sought
police protection and that the police were investigating.

   Our Assessment

22. We find no merit in the first ground for reconsideration.


23. It was the immigration judge's  emphatic  finding  that  the  background
evidence before him did not bear out that  there  was  an  insufficiency  of
protection in Malawi or that the police would  be  unwilling  or  unable  to
protect the appellant against those who had threatened him. He  clearly  did
not accept that the police and the NIB were under the control  of  the  UDF.
We find that it was entirely reasonable of  the  immigration  judge  not  to
accept that the authorities lacked either willingness or ability to  protect
the appellant. At paragraph 32 the immigration judge pointed out:

         "32. The objective material relied on by the  appellant  is  poorly
         presented. There is no proper page numbering and there  appears  to
         be no accreditation of the various reports that are in the  bundle.
         The bundle commences with a copy of ten pages  taken  from  the  US
         Department of State Country Report on  Human  Rights  Practices  in
         Mali, situated on the northwest of the African continent as opposed
         to Malawi, the appellant's country of origin  which  is  of  course
         situated in the southeast of the continent. Then there are a series
         of pages taken from the Internet relating to Malawi and  apparently
         written by a number of different  authors  about  whom  I  have  no
         information. These articles  relate  to  the  relationship  between
         President Mutharika and  former  President  Muluzi  and  the  power
         struggle which is said to exist between them. There is reference to
         the rejection of the first  woman police chief. There is  a  report
         of suspension of the Malawi Parliament on  26 October   2005  after
         violent protests. There is reference to President Mutharika  facing
         a threat of impeachment. The appellant relies on these articles and
         publications to demonstrate that the campaign against corruption is
         in  danger  of  being  ineffective.  The  report  relating  to  the
         rejection of the woman police chief refers to court proceedings and
         which appointment was apparently rejected by parliament. It appears
         from the report that the process by which the nominee was  rejected
         passed through the democratic and judicial procedures as set out by
         the Constitution of Malawi.  The report relating to the  suspension
         of Malawi Parliament in October  2005  refers  to  the  speaker  of
         parliament suspending the sitting  because  of  violence  resulting
         from difficulties between President Mutharika and former  President
         Muluzi.  The Country of Origin Report of 2006 confirms that the UDF
         won a majority in  the  parliament  when  President  Mutharika  was
         elected.'


24. Whilst this summary  acknowledges that the balance  of  political  power
in  Malawi is a complex one , we  can  see  nothing  in  the  major  country
reports to  which it refers (the US State Department Report  8  March   2006
and the Home  Office  COI  Report  for  2006)  to  support  the  appellant's
contention that  the  immigration  judge  should  have  concluded  that  the
background evidence before him showed that the police or the  NIB  continued
to be controlled by the UDF, even now that President Binga wa Mutharika  had
come to power.


25. The appellant has sought to argue  that  the  immigration  judge  should
have recognised that UDF domination  of  the   NIB  was  borne  out  by  the
cutting from the  People's Daily Online dated 8 June  2005 stating that  the
President had decided to  shut down the NIB 'in  order  to  restructure  it'
following allegations that some intelligence officers  were  involved  in  a
failed attempt to assassinate him. However, in our view,  all  this  cutting
in fact shows is that the President had taken steps to restructure the  NIB:
nothing  has  been  adduced  to  show  that  his  steps  were  unsuccessful.
Furthermore, the US State Department Report of 8 March  2006  (submitted  by
the appellant) made no mention of UDF control in its analysis of the  police
and the security apparatus. Nor did the COI Report  for  2006:  see  Section
5.28 - 5.36, Section 6A and Section 6C.

26. Also noteworthy is that the broad picture contained  in  the  background
country materials before the immigration  judge  in  terms  of  the  general
human  rights  situation  in   Malawi   was   that   since   the   political
transformation into multi-party  politics  in  1994,  incidents  of  serious
human rights abuses in Malawi had decreased and  the  most  present  current
issues  were  poverty,  hunger  and  HIV/AIDS  rather  than   human   rights
violations by the government and law enforcement agencies. There was, it  is
true, said to be an enduring culture of corruption and a problem  of  scarce
resources  and  lack  of  institutional  capacity,  but  evidence  for   the
political domination of the police and the  NIB  by  the  UDF  was  entirely
lacking.

27. So far as  the  balance  of  power  between  the  political  parties  is
concerned  the bye-elections held in late 2005  which  resulted  in  victory
for the DPP, founded by President  Bingu Wa Mutharika, were seen as  a  vote
of confidence for the  President and a blow for the (UDF).

28. Accordingly we consider the immigration  judge  was  quite  entitled  to
find that the appellant's claims regarding the UDF  control  of  the  police
and the NIB were not borne out by the background evidence.

29. Turning  to  the  immigration  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
particular circumstances, we find that he was  quite  entitled  to  conclude
that the Malawi police were taking steps  to  protect  the  appellant  which
were sufficient to amount to effective protection.  Whilst  the  immigration
judge accepted that the appellant had been told by one  policeman  he  would
not be protected, he expressly did not accept that this indicated  that  the
police generally lacked the  will  or  ability  to  protect  him.  Thus  the
appellant's assertion that "the police" had told the  appellant  they  would
not  be  assist  him  because  "his  problems  were  political"  blurred  an
important distinction between an individual (junior)  policeman's  assertion
and the position of the Malawi police as  a  body.  Likewise,  although  the
immigration judge did accept that it was the appellant's  subjective  belief
that "there were elements within the NIB who had obtained  the  services  of
the would-be assassin" he plainly  did  not  accept  that  this  belief  was
objectively based. That in our view  was  a  reasonable  assessment  of  the
evidence before him. Thus, on the facts of this case, the immigration  judge
was quite entitled to reject  the  appellant's  contention  that  there  was
state complicity with those individuals who had targeted him.

30. What about the contention that the immigration judge should  have  found
that Malawi authorities had failed to protect the appellant since  they  had
not put him and his family in a witness protection programme? It  is  not  a
necessary condition for there to be effective protection within the  meaning
of the Refugee Convention that a state operates  a  formal  witness  support
programme.  In  certain   countries   the   problems   posed   by   criminal
organisations may be such that a witness support programme of some  kind  is
integral to  there  being  effective  protection.   However,  even  in  such
countries, for there to be a finding of  ineffective  protection,  it  would
have to be shown  that  there  was  a  systemic  failure  in  the  way  that
country's criminal justice system dealt with a category of persons  such  as
informer or whistleblowers. Thus, in the context of Jamaica, Scott-Baker  LJ
noted in Atkinson [2004] EWCA Civ 846  that:

         "22. In the present case, therefore, the question  is  whether  the
         state of Jamaica is both willing and  able  to  provide  reasonable
         protection to the appellant. The evidence does not raise  any  real
         doubt about willingness to provide such protection: the real  focus
         is on its ability to do so. The difficult question is where to draw
         the line that defines what an appropriate standard is.  It  is  not
         enough that some individuals will be failed by the state's criminal
         justice system, not enough that the state has not been effective in
         removing risk. There has in my judgment to be  a  systemic  failure
         that relates at the very least to a category of persons of whom the
         individual under consideration is one. In this case the focus is on
         informers or perceived informers or those who in some way  are  the
         target of the gangs or the dons who head them. In my view it is  no
         answer  that  a  state  is  doing  its  incompetent  best   if   it
         nevertheless falls below the appropriate standard. One has  to  ask
         whether the state is failing  to  perform  its  basic  function  of
         protecting its citizens. Does the writ of law run or not?"


31. In this case the background materials before the immigration  judge  did
not demonstrate that there was a systemic failure  of  state  protection  in
relation to informers or whistleblowers in Malawi and the very fact that  in
response to the appellant's reports the Malawi  government  set  up  a  task
force and went on pursuing inquiries against those who  had  threatened  him
and his family very much points to the contrary.

32. We turn to the appellant's second  ground,  which  maintained  that  the
immigration judge failed to apply the principles  set  out  by  Auld  LJ  in
Bagdanavicius, [55] (6) in particular. We find no such failure on  the  part
of the immigration judge. At paragraph 35  he  expressly  referred  to  this
principle, stating that a claimant may still be able to show a  well-founded
fear of persecution:

         "if he can show that [the system's] authorities know, or  ought  to
         know circumstances particular  to  his case giving rise to his fear
         but  are  unlikely   to  provide   the  additional  protection  his
         particular circumstances reasonably require".

33. In our view his subsequent evaluation at paragraphs 36-39 shows that  he
also applied this principle. The Malawi officials  who  had  threatened  the
appellant had been arrested and detained and, when these threats  continued,
the police had pursued further investigations. The  immigration  judge  also
took into account background evidence that  the  authorities  were  cracking
down on corruption. There was, he noted, "an absence of evidence ..." as  to
lack of willingness of the Malawi  police  services  to  continue  with  the
investigations".   He  considered  the  evidence  that  the  MRA   officials
concerned had since been released and decided that this was most  likely  to
have occurred as a result of the appellant  leaving  Malawi.  Mr  Leventakis
made mention at several points of the appellant's  view  that  the  NIB  was
still very much under the control of the former President's party.  However,
as we have seen, that was not borne out by the  evidence  which  was  before
the immigration judge.

34. The third ground for reconsideration took  issue  with  the  immigration
judge counting against the appellant that  he  left  Malawi  using  his  own
passport unhindered.  However, in the first place we do  not  consider  that
the immigration judge placed  any  great  reliance  on  the  fact  that  the
appellant was able to leave Malawi freely  and  without  interference  using
his own passport.  He mentions it only once early in paragraph 35  prior  to
going on to address what he  referred  to  as  the  "central  issue",  which
concerned the issue of whether the  Malawi  authorities  would  be  able  to
provide sufficient protection to him. Secondly,  we  do  not  see  that  the
immigration judge was wrong to treat it as a factor of some, albeit  limited
relevance, since it was evidence which tended to indicate that there was  no
state complicity with those threatening the appellant.

The status of Auld LJ's summary of case law at [55] of Bagdanavicius
35. In the light of our conclusion that  the  immigration  judge  was  quite
entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  show  that  the
authorities in Malawi were either unwilling or unable to protect him, it  is
not strictly necessary for us to determine  the  two  matters  on  which  we
sought  submissions.  However,  since  we  heard  submissions  on  them,  we
consider it desirable that we state our conclusions regarding them.


36. The first matter concerned the current status of the Court  of  Appeal's
judgment in Bagdanavicius [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1605.  It  is  true  that  Lord
Brown's speech does not expressly disapprove anything said in the  Court  of
Appeal's judgment.  He preferred to decide the question before the House  on
a  different  basis.   Equally,  however,  Lord  Brown's  speech  does   not
expressly approve anything said below.  So far as  precedent  is  concerned,
the position is straightforward: the  only  authoritative  decision  in  the
case of Bagdanavicius is that of the House of Lords.

37. Since  by the time the immigration judge  heard this  appeal  the  House
of Lords had also published its judgment (on 26 May 2005)  in  the  case  of
Bagdanavicius, [2005] UKHL 38, he should have noted this fact.

38. Nevertheless, we do not consider this gave rise to any  legal  error  on
his part, since the passages he drew on from the  judgment  of  Auld  LJ  in
Bagdanavicius were no more than a summary of  existing  principles  of  case
law. Lord Brown's speech in no way sought to oust those principles: it  only
sought to lay to rest one line of argument which  had  been  raised  against
them (Mr Nichol QC's submission that in order to avoid expulsion on  Article
3 grounds an appellant need establish only a real risk  of  harm  on  return
and not also  that  the  receiving  country  would  fail  to  discharge  the
positive obligation inherent in Article 3 to provide a reasonable  level  of
protection: see [11]-[13]).

39. It follows  that  the  corpus  of  established  principles  relating  to
sufficiency of protection under the Refugee Convention still  includes  that
conveniently summarised by  Auld LJ, including that set out at [55](6).   We
emphasise this particular subparagraph because  at  one  point  Mr  Blundell
appeared to submit to the contrary, venturing  to  say  that  there  was  no
support to be found in other authorities  for  [55](6).  Leaving  aside  the
fact that acceptance of [55](6) was  specifically  acknowledged  by  Counsel
for the Secretary of State in Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA 1605 (see [39]),  we
cannot agree with Mr Blundell's submission on  this  point.  We  acknowledge
that Auld LJ's analysis does not link  this  subparagraph  to  any  specific
cases. However, in our view, the reasoning underlying [55](6)  is  not  hard
to find in the cases which Auld LJ expressly drew on. In  Horvath  [2001]  1
AC 489 the House of Lords settled that the correct approach to the issue  of
sufficiency of protection was to consider whether  there  was  a  system  in
place which makes violent attacks by the persecutors  punishable  and  which
displays a reasonable willingness to enforce that law on  the  part  of  the
law enforcement agencies. At [60] Lord Clyde stated:

         "...There must be in place a system of domestic protection and  the
         machinery for the detection, prosecution and punishment of  actions
         contrary to the purposes which  the  Convention  requires  to  have
         protected. More importantly, there must be ability and a  readiness
         to operate that machinery. But precisely where the  line  is  drawn
         beyond that generality is necessarily a matter of the circumstances
         of each particular case". ....

40. Post-Horvath the courts and Tribunals soon faced the problem  of  having
to clarify whether the test  set  out  in  Horvath  was  intended  to  be  a
universal one, i.e. one intended to apply in every individual case,  or  was
rather a general one, intended only to cover  the  ability  of  a  state  to
afford protection to the generality of its citizens. Although not stated  in
this precise way, it seems to us that the answer given both by the  Tribunal
and the Court of Appeal was that the test was a general one.

41. In Kacaj v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2002]  EWCA  Civ
314, cited with approval in Dhima, the Immigration Appeal Tribunal said:

         "21. It may be said that it is no consolation to  an  applicant  to
         know that if he is killed or tortured, the police will  take  steps
         to try to bring  his  murders  or  assailants  to  justice.  He  is
         concerned with the risk that he may be killed or tortured  and,  if
         the authorities cannot provide effective protection to  avoid  that
         risk, there will be a breach of the Convention if he  is  returned.
         Practical rather than theoretical protection is needed. We see  the
         force of that contention, but in our view  it  fails  to  recognise
         that the existence of a system should carry with it  a  willingness
         to do as much  as  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  provide  that
         protection. In this way, the reality of the risk is removed.  Since
         the result will be similar, namely persecution or a violation of  a
         human right, it would be wrong to apply a different approach. We do
         not read Horvath ... as deciding that there will be  a  sufficiency
         of protection whenever the authorities in the receiving  State  are
         doing their best. If this best can be shown to be  ineffective,  it
         may be that the applicant will have established that  there  is  an
         inability to  provide  the  necessary  protection.  ..."  (emphasis
         added).
42. In Noune [2000] EWCA Civ  306  Schiemann  LJ  noted  at  [5]  that  "the
Tribunal in the case before it had approached the case by applying the  test
to be found in Horvath ..., a decision of this court  subsequently  affirmed
on appeal...."  In that decision, he noted,  Stuart-Smith  LJ  had  said  at
paragraph [22] that:
         "There must be in force in the country in question a  criminal  law
         which makes the violent attacks by the  persecutors  punishable  by
         sentences commensurate with the gravity of the crimes. The  victims
         as a class must not be exempt from the protection of the law. There
         must be a reasonable willingness by the law  enforcement  agencies,
         that is to say the police and the courts, to detect, prosecute  and
         punish offenders. It  must  be  remembered  that  inefficiency  and
         incompetence is not the same as unwillingness, unless it is extreme
         and widespread."
 43. At [28] Schiemann LJ continued:


         "However, there are a number of considerations in the present  case
         which,  giving  it  the  most  anxious  scrutiny  which   the   law
         requires..., make us  reluctant  to  affirm  the  decision  of  the
         Tribunal and agree that this appellant should be  sent  to  Algeria
         without more ado.
         1. The Tribunal had to decide this case before the decision of  the
         House of Lords in Horvath. As a study of  the  many  judgments  and
         speeches in that case shows, the law in relation to persecution  by
         non-state actors was unsettled and difficult to understand. It  may
         be that the Tribunal, applying the test formulated by  Stuart-Smith
         LJ which we have quoted (which was approved by Lord Clyde  but  not
         by the majority in the House of Lords), considered that  where  the
         law enforcement agencies are doing their best  and  are  not  being
         either generally  inefficient  or  incompetent  (as  that  word  is
         generally understood, implying lack of skill rather  than  lack  of
         effectiveness) this was enough to  disqualify  a  potential  victim
         from being a refugee. That is certainly a possible reading  of  the
         Lord Justice's words. If  that  was  the  reading  adopted  by  the
         Tribunal,  we  consider  that  it  erred  as  a  matter   of   law.
         Unfortunately, although wholly understandably,  the  acceptance  by
         the Tribunal of the test formulated by the appellant  before  it  -
         that there had to be  in  place  a  justice  system  that  provided
         reasonable  protection  in  practical  terms  -  does  not  clearly
         indicate whether it had indeed read Stuart-Smith LJ's words in  the
         manner indicated above.
         2. The crucial question before the Tribunal was whether there was a
         reasonable likelihood of her  being  persecuted  for  a  Convention
         reason if she were to be returned to Algeria  in  the  future.  The
         failure by the appellant in 1992 and 1995 to  do  more  by  way  of
         endeavouring to secure protection  from  the  police  or  the  Post
         Office who employed her is not as such relevant to  that  question.
         The Tribunal appears to have concentrated exclusively on  the  past
         rather than on the time of any return to Algeria by the  appellant.
         We observe that there was nothing before the  Tribunal  to  suggest
         either that the appellant would,  if  she  were  returned  by  this
         country, be welcomed back to her former job in the Post  Office  or
         that former Post Office  employees  were  likely  to  be  given  an
         enhanced measure of protection.
         3. The evidence before the Tribunal supported its view  that  there
         was not a total collapse of the state's protective machinery.  What
         there was was better than nothing. But this  does  not  answer  the
         question which the Tribunal had to answer,  namely,  whether  there
         was a reasonable likelihood that the Appellant would be  persecuted
         for a Convention reason. There seems to us to be a danger that  the
         Tribunal considered the total collapse of  the  state's  protective
         machinery to be a prerequisite for a successful  claim  to  refugee
         status. If it did adopt that view, it was in error."
44. Much the same point was made by Scott Baker LJ in Atkinson  at  [37]  in
relation to a subcategory of citizens of Jamaica, namely informers:
         "37. In my judgment there is force in Mr Drabble's criticism of the
         Secretary of State's certification and of the  immigration  judge's
         decision to uphold it. It is clear that  there  has  been  a  long-
         standing and endemic problem in Jamaica and the state  authorities'
         ability to overcome it. There is  no  doubt  about  willingness  to
         tackle the problem. It is another matter, however whether effective
         steps have been taken to  achieve  the  bare  minimum  required  to
         provide reasonable protection for informers and perceived informers
         who find themselves in situations such as the appellant."
45. Another way of putting  the  effect  of  the  above  authorities  is  as
follows. A state's protection has to be wide enough to  cover  the  ordinary
needs of its citizens for protection. Protection may still be  insufficient,
to prevent persecution in a particular case or in a  particular  subcategory
of cases,  if  an  individual's  (or  subcategory  of  person's)  needs  for
protection are out of the  ordinary  or  exceptional.  However,  recognition
that a person's (or subcategory of person's)  individual  circumstances  may
require "additional protection" has an important  limit.  As  emphasised  in
Horvath, protection is a practical standard. In Lord Clyde's words at  [60],
"no-one is entitled to an absolutely  guaranteed  immunity.  That  would  go
beyond any realistic practical expectation".

Regulation 4 of the Protection Regulations
46. That brings us to the  other  issue  on  which  we  sought  submissions,
relating to the implications for  case  law  of  reg  4  of  the  Protection
Regulations. Given  the  limited  response  we  received  from  the  parties
regarding this issue, we will confine ourselves to noting just  one  feature
of this regulation.

47. By virtue of a Practice Direction from the President of the  AIT  issued
on 9 October 2006, we are obliged to apply the measures  introduced  by  the
UK Government to implement the EU Council Directive  2004/83/EC  on  minimum
standards for the qualification and status of  third  country  nationals  or
stateless  persons  as  refugees  or   as   persons   who   otherwise   need
international protection and the  content  of  the  protection  granted,  OJ
L304/12 of 30.9.2004 (hereafter "the Directive")  to  all  pending  appeals,
of which this is one. So far  as  we  are  concerned  they  consist  in  the
Protection Regulations and the Immigration Rules (as amended by Cm 6918).

48. The Protection Regulations set out, inter alia, definitions of  acts  of
persecution (reg 5), actors of persecution  or  serious  harm  (reg  3)  and
actors of protection (reg 4).  Regulation 4 in its material parts provides:

     "1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a person eligible for
    humanitarian protection,    protection from persecution or serious harm
    can be provided by:
             (a) the State; or
             (b) any party or  organisation,  including  any  international
             organisation, controlling the State or a substantial  part  of
             the territory of the State.
    (2) Protection shall be regarded as generally provided when the  actors
    mentioned in paragraph 1(a) and (b) take reasonable  steps  to  prevent
    the persecution or suffering of serious harm by operating an  effective
    legal system for the detection,  prosecution  and  punishment  of  acts
    constituting persecution or serious harm, and the person  mentioned  in
    paragraph (1) has access to such protection.
    ...".


49. This wording is substantially the same as the text of Article 7  of  the
Directive  save that the wording of reg 4(2)  omits the phrase "inter  alia"
immediately before "by operating" (Article 7(2) states that  "Protection  is
generally provided when the actors mentioned in paragraph 1 take  reasonable
steps to prevent the persecution or suffering of serious harm,  inter  alia,
by operating an effective legal system for the  detection,  prosecution  and
punishment of  acts  constituting  persecution  or  serious  harm,  and  the
applicant has access to such protection").

50. The one feature of reg 4 which  we  consider  the  facts  of  this  case
highlight is that the wording of reg 4(2) reinforces the  same  point  which
we take to have been made by post-Horvath case  law.  The  wording  of  this
subparagraph is unmistakeably defeasible: "[p]rotection  shall  be  regarded
as generally provided ..." (emphasis added).  It  is  not  stated  that  the
taking of "reasonable steps to prevent the persecution ... by  operating  an
effective legal system ..." will amount to provision of adequate  protection
in every case, although it is said that it will in the generality of  cases.
 If there be any doubt that post-Horvath  case  law  sets  out  the  correct
legal test for protection, then what we can now say is that that  doubt  has
been dispelled by reg 4(2) whose wording closely mirrors that  of  the  test
set out in Horvath as we have construed it. Since 9 October 2006 it  is  reg
4, of course, which now contains the law which we have to apply.

51. For the above reasons we conclude that the  immigration  judge  did  not
materially err in law. Hence his decision to dismiss the appellant's  appeal
must stand.



   Signed                                Date
   Senior Immigration Judge Storey



