
KH (Reconsideration: process in Scotland) Iraq [2008] UKAIT 00079

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Glasgow                                                 Date of
Hearing: 11 September 2008



                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                        Immigration Judge M Price OBE

                                   Between

                                     KH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      THE Entry Clearance Officer, AMAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr E Mackay, Livingston Brown Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr D Matthew, Home Office Presenting Officer

A reconsideration application made in respect of  a  Scottish  appeal  in  a
form other than that prescribed by the Rules of  the  Court  of  Session  in
irregular, but it cannot be regarded as void ab  initio  because  the  Court
has power to dispense from the Rules.   The  Tribunal  does  not  have  that
dispensing power but can  regard  the  other  party  as  having  waived  the
irregularity when it has not acted promptly in objecting to  the  defect  of
form.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appealed to the Tribunal against  the
    decision of the respondent on 20 June 2007 refusing  her  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom as a spouse.   The  Immigration  Judge  allowed  the
    appeal.   The   respondent   sought   and   obtained   an   order   for
    reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. The application and the appeal were based  on  an  assertion  that  the
    appellant and the  sponsor  are  married.   The  sponsor  is  of  Iraqi
    background.  We understand he came to this country as a refugee.  He is
    now a naturalised British citizen.  He married a person to whom we will
    refer as his "first wife" in 2000.  It is said that he visited Iraq  in
    the summer of 2006 and his first  wife  was  ill.   In  March  2007  he
    returned to Iraq and was told that his first wife had died the previous
    November.  He was also told that members of his family had  not  wanted
    to tell him about his wife's death  in  case  it  upset  him.   He  was
    introduced to the appellant, who lived in  the  house  next  door,  and
    married her on 27 March.  The appellant's witness statement  refers  to
    previous applications by the appellant for entry clearance, but we know
    nothing more of those.  So far as the present application is concerned,
    one of the  grounds  for  refusal  was  that  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the sponsor's first wife was indeed dead  and  therefore
    that the marriage was valid.

 3. The Immigration Judge had evidence before her,  to  some  of  which  we
    shall refer shortly.  She regarded the sponsor as a  credible  witness.
    She found that the appellant  met  the  maintenance  and  accommodation
    requirements of the Rules, and that "the marriage was subsisting".  She
    made, however, no specific finding on  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    validity of the marriage.  Her determination allowing  the  appeal  was
    sent out on 20 February 2008.  The  respondent  sought  reconsideration
    and was granted it  on  the  ground  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    Immigration Judge had failed to address  a  key  issue,  that  is,  the
    validity of the marriage.  The order granting reconsideration was  sent
    out on 7 March 2008.

 4. At the hearing before us Mr Matthew said that he readily accepted  that
    the Immigration Judge had no obligation to  refer  to  every  piece  of
    evidence or to set out in detail every finding of fact  she  made.   He
    submitted, however, that she did need to show that she  had  considered
    properly the concerns raised by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the
    evidence relating to those  issues  before  making  a  finding  in  the
    appellant's  favour,  particularly  if  she  was  making  one   without
    referring specifically to the issue in question.

 5. When we asked for Mr Mackay's reply to those submissions, he  submitted
    that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to embark upon a reconsideration,
    because the application had not been made in the proper form.  He  drew
    our attention to the rules of the Court of Session and to  form  41.48,
    the form prescribed by  those  rules  for  making  an  application  for
    reconsideration, pointing out that it was clear that  the  respondent's
    application was not in that form.  Mr Mackay  accepted,  however,  that
    the requirements imposed by the Court of Session are  not  absolute  in
    that it can allow variation of the forms, and he accepted also that  he
    had done nothing to raise the issue prior to  Mr  Matthew's  completing
    his submissions on the substance of the reconsideration.

 6. We considered the matter.  The Court of Session's requirement  for  the
    use of specific forms is a requirement  which  is  not  to  be  treated
    lightly.  Further, the Court's power to dispense from the  requirements
    of its rules is a power which only the  Court  can  exercise.   On  the
    other hand, however, the existence of the dispensing power  shows  that
    the requirements are not absolute.  By not  raising  the  issue  either
    straight away, or by way of reply under r 30,  or  at  any  other  time
    prior  to  the  hearing  of  the  reconsideration,  or  even   at   the
    commencement of the reconsideration hearing itself, it  appears  to  us
    that the appellant, who has been represented by the same member of  the
    same firm of Solicitors throughout, has waived  his  right  to  require
    strict compliance with the  Rules.   In  the  circumstances  we  regard
    ourselves as having jurisdiction.

 7. Mr Mackay's submissions on the substance of  the  reconsideration  were
    that the Immigration Judge  had  considered  the  evidence  before  her
    before making her determination and that there was no reason  to  upset
    it.  For reasons we made clear at the hearing, we are unable to  accept
    that submission.

 8. There can be no doubt that  the  validity  of  the  marriage,  and,  in
    particular, the death of the sponsor's first wife, was an issue  raised
    by the Entry Clearance Officer in  the  notice  of  decision.   As  the
    application and the appeal were made on the basis of  the  validity  of
    the marriage, that was a matter that needed to  be  determined  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  The evidence supporting  the  appellant's  and  the
    sponsor's account of the position was the sponsor's account of his  own
    two marriages, the appellant's account of her marriage,  the  sponsor's
    account of what he had been told when he went  to  Iraq  in  2007,  and
    three documents, described as the  marriage  contracts  from  2000  and
    2007, and the death certificate of the  first  wife.   The  Immigration
    Judge regarded the sponsor as a credible witness, which means that  she
    regarded him as having indeed undergone marriage ceremonies in 2000 and
    2007, and as having been told  that  his  first  wife  had  died.   The
    finding of credibility adds nothing to the determination of  the  issue
    of whether his first wife was in fact dead at the time that he  married
    the appellant.

 9. The two  documents  described  as  marriage  contracts  and  the  death
    certificate were before the Immigration Judge, as they are  before  us,
    in photocopy form accompanied by translations.  Mr  Mackay  assured  us
    that the two marriage contracts had been translated by the same person.
     The contract dated 2000 records, in the translation, the making  of  a
    contract of marriage between the  sponsor  and  his  first  wife.   The
    translation  of  the  2007  document  indicates  that  it  records  the
    termination of a marriage between the appellant and the sponsor.   That
    is a remarkable feature  of  a  document  purporting  to  evidence  the
    marriage ceremony.  There may be some mistake in the  translation,  but
    we notice also that although in the English version both documents  are
    headed  identically  "marriage  contract",  that  phrase   appears   to
    translate an Arabic phrase which is not identical in the  two  original
    documents.  We asked Mr Mackay what explanation he  had  given  to  the
    Immigration  Judge  of  the  use  of  the  word  "terminated"  in   the
    translation of  the  2007  document.   He  told  us  that  he  had  not
    previously noticed that the 2007 document referred to  the  termination
    of the contract of marriage.  Turning now to the death certificate,  we
    asked Mr Mackay what the certificate gave as the date of death  of  the
    sponsor's first wife.  After considering the matter at some  length  he
    stated the obvious fact that the certificate gives no date of death for
    the sponsor's first wife: the space for the date of death has not  been
    completed.  We asked him if he  had  ever  before  seen  an  officially
    issued death certificate which did not give the date of the  deceased's
    death.  He told us he had not.  We asked as to  what  he  said  to  the
    Immigration Judge about that.  He told us that he  had  not  previously
    noticed that the certificate contained, neither in the original nor  in
    the translation, any date for the deceased's death.

10. Further examination of the death certificate appears to show that where
    the translation  gives  the  sponsor's  first  wife's  full  name,  the
    original appears to give only the first name of the deceased.   But  of
    course we may be wrong about that: we work from the translations.

11. Mr Mackay told us that if we thought there was a material error of law,
    there was no  other  evidence  bearing  on  the  question  whether  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date  of
    the decision.  He reminded us that the Immigration Judge had found  the
    sponsor to be a credible witness.   He asked us to assume that the 2007
    document was mistranslated.  He asked us also to assume that the  death
    certificate referred to the  sponsor's  first  wife  and  was  reliable
    evidence of her death.  He said that if the sponsor had been minded  to
    deceive the immigration authorities,  he  could  have  gone  about  the
    matter a great deal more easily.

12. As we have said, it appears to us that the Immigration  Judge  was,  in
    the circumstances  of  this  case,  obliged  to  consider  whether  the
    marriage between the appellant and the sponsor was valid.  The case has
    been put on the basis of a marriage, and it has not been suggested that
    the relevant marriage regime  is  anything  other  than  one  requiring
    monogamy.  The Immigration Judge's acceptance of the credibility of the
    sponsor does not, as we have said, assist at all in  the  determination
    of whether his first wife is dead.  We are sorry to say that we are not
    able to accept the submission that  the  Immigration  Judge  must  have
    considered the evidence relating to that issue.  Mr Mackay  (who  is  a
    solicitor) took, as we understand it, the position before  us  that  he
    had not previously read the one-page  documents  that  he  had  adduced
    before  the  Immigration  Judge.   We  regard  that  as  a   surprising
    performance of a solicitor's duty to a Court.  Be that as it may, it is
    apparent to us that the Immigration Judge cannot have read them either.
     Perhaps she simply accepted  what  Mr  Mackay  told  her  about  them.
    Anybody who read the documents in question would raise the questions we
    have raised, and  unless  there  were  satisfactory  answers  to  those
    questions would, we are confident, place no credence on  the  documents
    as evidence of a death and a subsequent marriage.

13. It follows that the  error  by  the  Immigration  Judge  was  material,
    because it cannot be said the she would  have  unarguably  allowed  the
    appeal  if  she  had  not  made  the  error.   We  must  substitute   a
    determination of our own.

14. We take into account the submission Mr Mackay made to us.   It  may  be
    true that other deceptions might have been possible: but  that  is  not
    the question.  The question is  whether  the  case  is  proved  on  the
    evidence adduced.  We do not for present purposes seek to go behind the
    Immigration Judge's assessment of the sponsor's evidence  as  credible,
    although it appears that he was responsible for producing the documents
    and their translations, and, if a new judgement were being  made  about
    his credibility it would be no doubt be necessary to take into  account
    the  difficulties  arising  from  those  documents.   Treating  him  as
    credible, however, merely means that he is to be regarded as  a  person
    who underwent a ceremony of marriage  with  his  next  door  neighbour,
    genuinely believing his first wife to have died  and  (apparently)  not
    being very interested in when she had died.

15.  Good faith and pious hopes do  not  render  a  marriage  valid.   This
    marriage is said to be rendered valid by the death of the  first  wife,
    and the evidence of that consists of the sponsor's account of  what  he
    was told by his  family  and  the  death  certificate,  which  has  the
    features  we  have  indicated.   We  regard  the  evidence  as   wholly
    insufficient to prove the death of  the  sponsor's  first  wife.   That
    being, as  we  have  said,  and  as  acknowledged  by  the  parties,  a
    requirement for the success of the  present  appeal,  we  substitute  a
    determination dismissing it.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

