



R (on the application of RN v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
(paragraph 245AAA) [2017] UKUT 00076(IAC)


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                 Heard on:  11 November 2016


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                  THE QUEEN
                         (on the application of RN)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                               - - - - - - - -

Mr T Buley, instructed by Spring Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr A Wagner, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

(i)  On a proper construction  of  paragraph  245AAA(a)(i)  of  HC  395,  an
    absence from the United Kingdom for a period of more than 180  days  in
    one of the relevant 12 month periods will entail a failure  to  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 245CD.

(ii) The term 'residence'  in  paragraph  245AAA(a)  is  to  be  equated  to
    presence.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE ALLEN:   I  have  made  an  anonymity  direction  in  respect  of  the
applicant.  Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
applicant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies to both the applicant  and  the  respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   This application for judicial review is brought with the permission  of
    McCloskey J and May J following an oral permission hearing on  21  July
    2016.  In her application the applicant challenges  the  lawfulness  of
    the respondent's decision of 13 January  2016  refusing  to  grant  her
    indefinite leave to remain, and the decision of 15 February 2016  which
    is an administrative review of the first decision.   There  is  also  a
    supplementary decision of 20 April 2016 which I shall have  to  address
    separately.

2.   There are three grounds of challenge  in  this  case.   The  ground  to
    which I will refer as  it  has  been  by  the  representatives  as  the
    construction ground  was  raised  as  a  consequence  of  a  successful
    application to amend the grounds to incorporate that point.  Permission
    to amend the grounds to include that matter was granted by  Mr  Justice
    McCloskey and Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb on 14 October 2016.   I  mention
    that because as a matter  of  convenience  the  original  two  grounds,
    grounds 1 and 2, have continued to be referred to under  those  numbers
    and I shall continue to refer to them in that way although  technically
    they are now grounds 2 and 3.

3.   The background history to this case is that the applicant  was  granted
    leave to enter on 12 January 2011 and duly entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 17 February of that year.  Her leave was originally for  two  years,
    to 12 January 2013 and was later extended to 12 January 2016.   At  the
    time  of  her  entry  and  up  until  13  December  2012  the  relevant
    Immigration Rule governing the acquisition of leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom after five years' lawful residence was paragraph  245CD.
    This Rule required a person to have spent a continuous period  of  five
    years lawfully in the United Kingdom and did not  specify  any  maximum
    period of absence.  The relevant policy at the time made it clear  that
    periods of absence abroad, including for holidays and  business  trips,
    would not break continuity: "provided that the  applicant  has  clearly
    continued to be based [in the United Kingdom]".

4.   A new Rule, paragraph 245AAA, was  inserted  into  the  Rules  from  13
    December 2012.  The relevant provisions of that Rule state as follows:

         "245AAA General requirements for indefinite leave to remain:

         For the purposes of references in this  Part  to  requirements  for
         indefinite leave to remain, except for those in  paragraphs  245BF,
         245DF and 245EF:

         (a)  'continuous period of five years lawfully in  the  UK'  means,
             [subject to paragraphs 245CE, 245GF and  245HF]  residence  in
             the United Kingdom for an unbroken period  with  valid  leave,
             and for these purposes a period shall  not  be  considered  to
             have been broken where:

             (i)  the applicant has been absent from the UK for a period of
                  180 days or less in any of  the  five  consecutive  twelve
                  month periods preceding the date of  the  application  for
                  leave to remain;

            ...".

5.   On  9  April  2015  a  new  policy  came  into  being  which  indicated
    circumstances in which discretion outside the Rules would be  exercised
    when continuous leave is broken in the case of "serious  or  compelling
    circumstances".  It will be necessary to say a little  more  about  the
    policy in due course.

6.   It is common ground that as regards the five one year periods that  are
    relevant for the purposes of this case, during the first  period,  from
    31 December 2010 to 30 December 2011, the applicant was absent from the
    United Kingdom for a total of 215 days.  During the second period, from
    31 December 2011 to 30 December 2012, she was absent  from  the  United
    Kingdom for a total of 284 days.  I need say no more  about  the  other
    three periods since none of them exceeded the 180 day  period  referred
    to at paragraph 245AAA(a)(i).

7.   The applicant applied for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant category on 30 December 2015.   She  made  clear  the
    periods of absence that I have set out above as well as the periods  of
    absence for the other three periods.  With  regard  to  the  period  of
    absence from 31 December 2010 to 30 December 2011, she said  that  this
    was because of,  first  legitimate  needs  to  travel  abroad  for  the
    purposes of her business exporting goods from  the  United  Kingdom  to
    Nigeria and relocating and reordering the focus of  her  business,  and
    secondly attending to her children's schooling at  boarding  school  in
    Nigeria.  With regard to the second period she said that this arose  at
    least in  part  from  the  circumstances  of  her  mother  having  been
    kidnapped in Nigeria on 4 March 2012 as a result of which  she  had  to
    spend additional time in Nigeria, inter alia providing support for  her
    father who was frail.  She provided a  police  report  in  relation  to
    this.  She also made it clear that some of  the  absences  during  that
    period were due to business.

8.   The respondent refused her application on the basis  that  as  she  had
    been absent from the United Kingdom for over 180 days in two out of the
    five years it was considered that she did not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 245CD with reference to  paragraph  245AAA  as  she  had  not
    completed a continuous period of five  years  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She went on to say that due to the total number and nature of
    the absences which were mainly for work, discretion could not be shown.
     That latter point was by reference to  the  provision  in  the  policy
    which tells the case worker  about  the  exceptional  circumstances  in
    which they can grant an applicant indefinite leave  to  remain  outside
    the Rules when their continuous leave is broken.  It is  said  that  in
    such circumstances the grant of indefinite leave to remain outside  the
    Rules may be considered if the applicant provides evidence to show  the
    excessive absence was due to serious or compelling reasons.  It is said
    that the applicant must provide evidence in the form of a letter  which
    sets out full details of  the  compelling  reason  in  the  absence  of
    supporting documents.  The guidance goes on  to  say  that  serious  or
    compelling reasons will vary but can include a serious illness  of  the
    applicant or a close relative, a  conflict,  a  natural  disaster,  for
    example volcanic eruption or tsunami.  The guidance then goes on to say
    that absence in more than 180 days  in  any  twelve  month  period  for
    employment or economic activity reasons are not considered exceptional.
     That latter point seems to tie in with the reason for  not  exercising
    discretion as set out in the decision letter.   There  was  however  no
    reference to the issue of the applicant's mother's kidnapping.

9.    This  was  however  addressed  in  the  administrative  review   which
    maintained the earlier decision.  As regards the  first  period  it  is
    said that it had been claimed that the trips  she  carried  out  during
    that period outside the United Kingdom were of compelling necessity  as
    they brought about the financial support required for her  upkeep.   It
    was said that this reason had been considered and it was not thought to
    be compelling enough to overturn the decision.  As regards the issue of
    her mother being the victim of a kidnap in Nigeria and  the  fact  that
    she as a consequence had to make frequent travel to Nigeria,  this  was
    considered and it was said that from her application she  had  provided
    no direct proof of this kidnap and as a result discretion could not  be
    exercised.

The Applicant's Submissions

The Construction Ground

10.  In  essence  Mr  Buley's  argument  under  this  heading  is  that  the
    respondent misconstrued paragraph 245AAA(a) and as  a  consequence  the
    decisions should be quashed.  He referred to a decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in BD [2010] UKUT 418 (IAC) where the Tribunal was required to
    construe the phrase "spent a continuous period of five  years  lawfully
    in the United Kingdom", which was required  by  paragraph  134  of  the
    Immigration Rules in order to obtain indefinite leave to  remain  as  a
    work permit holder.  The Tribunal noted that there was no  guidance  on
    the proper interpretation of paragraph 134(i).  The Tribunal  concluded
    that the paragraph was not meant to be taken literally since if it were
    so taken anyone who wanted to qualify for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    after five years would be unable to take even a day trip to  France  or
    visit his own country on family matters.   As  a  literal  construction
    made no  sense,  the  Rule  had  to  be  construed  sensibly.   It  was
    considered that it clearly imported a discretion and of relevance would
    be the reason for the absence and the strength of the person's ties  to
    the United Kingdom as shown in other ways.  On the particular facts  of
    the case the appellant's absences had  been  required  of  him  by  his
    employer, a British company, and he had at all times retained his  base
    in the United Kingdom where he  was  domiciled  for  tax  purposes  and
    appeared to have established a domicile of choice for  other  purposes.
    It was considered that he had clearly made this country his  home.   In
    those  circumstances  it  was  concluded  that  he  did  meet  all  the
    requirements of paragraph 134.

11.  Mr Buley went on to argue that where paragraph  245AAA(a)  referred  to
    "residence" in the United Kingdom it did not say that in fact it  meant
    "presence".  "Residence" was an ordinary word.  One was resident  in  a
    place if it was one's home.  Mr Buley referred to the decision  of  the
    House of Lords in R v London Borough of Barnet ex parte Shah  [1993]  2
    AC 309.  This case  was  concerned  with  the  meaning  of  the  phrase
    "ordinary  residence"  in  the  context  of  eligibility  for  a  local
    authority educational award.  Lord Scarman made the point at  page  340
    that ordinary residence is not a  term  of  art  in  English  law.   He
    referred to different contexts  in  which  it  was  employed  including
    income  tax,  family  law,  and  various  twentieth  century   statutes
    including the one with which that appeal was  concerned.   In  two  tax
    cases in 1928  the  House  of  Lords  had  considered  that  the  words
    "ordinary residence" involved seeking the natural ordinary  meaning  of
    the words.  Lord Scarman agreed with what had been said by Lord Denning
    MR in the Court of Appeal that the natural and ordinary meaning of  the
    words "ordinary residence" meant "that the person  must  be  habitually
    and normally resident here, apart from temporary or occasional absences
    of long or short duration".  He also said, at page 343:

         "Unless, therefore, it can be shown that the statutory framework or
         the legal context in which the words are used requires a  different
         meaning, I unhesitatingly subscribe to the  view  that  "ordinarily
         resident" refers to a  man's  abode  in  the  particular  place  or
         country which he has adopted voluntarily and for  settled  purposes
         as part of the regular order  of  his  life  for  the  time  being,
         whether of short or long duration."

    Mr Buley accepted of course that the  instant  case  was  not  strictly
    concerned with "ordinary" residence, but he argued that the presence of
    that additional qualification in that case did not alter the  relevance
    of the approach adopted by the House of Lords in Shah  to  the  present
    case.  He argued that the literal and legal meaning  of  residence  was
    not such as to require it to be equated with continual presence.

 12. Mr Buley argued further that the Rule, though it  said  that  a  period
    should not be considered to have been broken where  the  applicant  had
    been absent from the United Kingdom for a period of 180 days  or  less,
    did not mean and did not say, that a period would be considered to have
    been broken where there had been an absence for more than 180 days.  To
    interpret it in that way would cut across the definition  of  residence
    being defined as Mr Buley had  argued  it  should  be.   There  was  no
    frustration of the purposes of the Rules.  An example might be taken of
    a pilot who would be out of the country regularly through work  and  it
    would be very odd if such a  person  would  automatically  be  defeated
    under the Rules.  It could not be said that a period of absence of over
    180 days made compliance with the Rule  impossible.   That  could  have
    been done if drafted clearly enough but that was not the case.

13.  Mr Buley accepted that it  was  difficult  to  see  how  a  person  who
    through work was out of the country for the  entire  five  year  period
    could satisfy the requirements of the Rule despite being based  in  the
    United Kingdom for employment and tax and domicile purposes.  It was  a
    matter of an exercise of judgment as to where the line  was  drawn,  as
    could be seen from the decision in BD.  The question  was  whether  the
    person maintained their home in the United Kingdom.  A person would not
    be ordinarily resident just because they had leave to  remain  and  had
    their home in the United Kingdom.  They had to have a base and  use  it
    as their home.  It was the kind of exercise of judgment the authorities
    had to make all the time.  The fact that the current guidance  differed
    from what was argued by Mr Buley was by the way.  The Rule could not be
    construed by reference to the guidance.

14.  Mr Buley argued that if his view on construction was correct  then  the
    respondent  had  erred  in  law  since  she  had  not  considered   the
    circumstances of the case in the way which had been done by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in BD, which would entail taking a view on the evidence  as  a
    whole as to whether the applicant was resident or not.   That  had  not
    been done and hence there was an error of law.  All the respondent  had
    done was to take the fact that she was absent for more  than  180  days
    during each of the two first periods as being decisive.

Ground 1

15.  Mr Buley argued that the respondent erred by  failing  to  treat  as  a
    relevant circumstance for the entirety of the first and second periods,
    when the applicant was out of  the  United  Kingdom,  the  respondent's
    published  policy  which  indicated  that  certain  kinds  of  absence,
    including legitimate business absence, would not be treated as breaking
    continuity of residence.  He argued that this failed to give effect  to
    the applicant's legitimate expectation that the policy  then  in  force
    would apply to her case and failed to  recognise  that  the  compelling
    circumstances in such a case are not found merely in the fact that  the
    absences were pursuant to legitimate business  activity.   This  ground
    arose  in  respect  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  exercise  of   her
    discretion.   He  argued  that  the  policy  could   not   fetter   the
    respondent's discretion so as to consider only  compassionate  matters.
    She could therefore not exclude business absences.  The applicant would
    not have known during those first two years that going  a  little  over
    the 180 day  period  would  lead  to  her  failure  in  her  subsequent
    application.  Compassionate elements were not just a matter of business
    absences but also arose since at the time  when  she  thought  she  was
    working towards success under the five year Rule, the Rule had changed.



Ground 2

16.  Here it was  argued  on  behalf  of  the  applicant  that  the  refusal
    decision  failed  to  address  a  relevant  issue  altogether  and  was
    therefore flawed.  The second  letter  of  the  administrative  refusal
    dealt with the kidnap only on the basis that the applicant  had  failed
    to supply "direct proof".  On the applicant's behalf it was argued that
    this was wrong in that she had supplied direct proof both in  the  form
    of her own evidence and by providing a  police  report  concerning  the
    incident.  The fact that  the  report  did  no  more  than  record  the
    reporting of the incident  did  not  detract  from  the  fact  that  it
    amounted to direct proof.  In addition the evidence provided  had  been
    done in precisely the form  required  by  the  current  guidance  which
    required that evidence must be provided in the form of a letter setting
    out  full  details  of  the  compelling  reason  for  the  absence  and
    supporting documents.  It was  appropriate  to  require  no  more  than
    evidence which should be or was capable  of  being  believed.   In  the
    alternative  the  respondent  should  have  given  the  applicant   the
    opportunity to provide additional documents  insofar  as  the  original
    ones were considered to be inadequate,  in  line  with  the  evidential
    flexibility policy that had been extant at the time.

The Respondent's Submissions

17.   In  his  submissions  Mr  Wagner  argued  that  with  regard  to   the
    construction ground there was a clear  and  ordinary  meaning  apparent
    from the face of the Rules.  There was no need to make an equation with
    the term "ordinary residence" but it was simply necessary to  read  the
    Rules.  The decision in BD showed what the old Rules said and how  they
    had been dealt with in  that  situation.   There  was  no  guidance  or
    further definition in that case as opposed to  the  instant  case.   As
    there was no guidance concerning the meaning of the Rule  the  Tribunal
    had  to  make  its  own  interpretation  which  it  did  so,  perfectly
    reasonably, at paragraph 10.  Mr Wagner would have had no  argument  if
    the Rule had not been changed but the scheme of the Rule  had  changed.
    There had been no definition before but there was now a  definition  at
    paragraph 245CD(c)  and  paragraph  245AAA.   The  latter  required  an
    unbroken period with valid leave.  It was sensible for residence to  be
    given its ordinary meaning.  The provision of an unbroken  period  with
    valid leave was not in the original Rule but it  was  clear,  and  then
    there was a definition of what was meant by  "broken"  and  "unbroken".
    If the Rule had stopped  there  then  it  would  not  necessarily  take
    matters beyond what was decided in BD, but it went  on  to  provide  at
    subparagraph (a)(i) the provision about when a  period  should  not  be
    considered to have been broken, where the  applicant  had  been  absent
    from the United Kingdom for a period of 180 days or less in any of  the
    five consecutive twelve  month  periods.   This  was  a  very  specific
    provision, and was to do with presence.  For all the period  to  remain
    unbroken a person could not have been absent from  the  United  Kingdom
    for more than 180 days.  This tied that definition very specifically to
    a person's presence in the United  Kingdom  and  a  cut-off  point  was
    provided.  180 days was  the  critical  cut-off.   If  the  period  was
    greater than that then the person did not succeed.

18.  Mr Wagner argued that Mr  Buley's  attempt  to  define  the  term  went
    against the ordinary language.  It was a strained interpretation to say
    that if a person were absent for 180 days or less then the period would
    not have been broken whereas if it was more than 180 days then all  the
    factors set out in BD would have to be considered.   This  imported  an
    entirely different way of looking at the question of an unbroken period
    of residence as meaning there was no mention of that  anywhere  in  the
    scheme.  If that had been Parliament's intention it would have said so.
     It was very specific as to what  could  not  be  considered  a  broken
    period and that could not be clearer.  It was defined  as  presence  in
    the United Kingdom.  There was no conflict with what had  been  decided
    in BD.  It would have been absurd if the Rule had been given a  literal
    meaning there, and that was a reasonable conclusion.   With  regard  to
    the example of the pilot there would always be hard cases  where  there
    was a clear Rule and that could be such  a  case.   This  was  why  the
    policy retained a discretion outside the Rules and it could be that the
    pilot would come within that.  The definition was clear and it was  not
    necessary to go into the reasoning behind it.

19.  As regards the argument by analogy from Shah it was  argued  that  that
    was totally irrelevant mainly because the wording was different.   That
    case was concerned with "three  years'  ordinary  residence".   It  was
    clear that "ordinary residence" was not a term of art so it could  mean
    different things in different contexts.  The word "ordinary" was really
    the key.  "Residence" could mean a variety of things.   "Ordinary"  had
    some sort of temporal connotation and the position would be affected by
    absences.  It was key to note the first  two  lines  in  the  paragraph
    quoted at page 343 referring to cases where it could be shown that  the
    statutory framework or the legal context in which the words  were  used
    required a different meaning.  That was the case here, even if one were
    just looking at the term "residence".  It was clear what was  meant  by
    "broken" and hence it was the case that "unbroken" was clear also.   It
    followed very obviously from paragraph 245AAA(a)(i)  that  it  was  not
    necessary for it to be spelt out.  If the wider meaning  of  connection
    to the United Kingdom had it been intended then it would have said so.

20.  In sum therefore BD was irrelevant, and there was a definition  of  the
    Rules now and a reference  only  to  broken  and  unbroken  periods  of
    residence but that in effect defined continuous residence  as  presence
    in the United Kingdom.

21.  With regard to ground 1, this was governed by what   had  been  decided
    by the House of Lords in Odelola [2009] UKHL 25.  It was clear that the
    Rules would apply to the decision of the  respondent  made  until  such
    time as she promulgated different Rules after which  she  would  decide
    according to the new Rules.  There was no obligation on the  respondent
    to consider or apply old guidance when  new  guidance  had  later  been
    provided unless this was required by transitional provisions.

22.  With regard to ground 2, Mr Wagner noted that further  information  had
    been provided concerning the kidnap and  there  was  the  supplementary
    decision as a consequence.  This was dated 20 April 2016 and  addressed
    in particular the issue of the kidnap of  the  applicant's  mother  but
    also dealt with various points concerning  work-related  absences.   It
    was for the applicant to make out her claim.  The letter made it  clear
    that the kidnap period had  been  for  a  maximum  of  eight  days  and
    evidence concerning the health conditions of  the  applicant's  parents
    thereafter was considered at paragraph 7 of that letter.   Paragraph  9
    did not exclude business matters as  being  a  compelling  reason,  but
    asked where the evidence was.   In  any  event  the  policy  said  that
    business reasons would not be considered as exceptional, and  that  was
    reasonable.  As regards evidential flexibility, the applicant had  been
    given  the  opportunity  of  administrative  review   and   a   further
    opportunity as further documents had  been  considered  in  that  later
    letter.  There had been no unfair treatment.

Discussion

The Construction Ground

23.  In BD the Tribunal construed the  phrase  "continuous  period  of  five
    years' lawfully in the UK" which is of course the same phrase  as  that
    appearing at paragraph 245AAA(a).  Mr Buley made the point  in  passing
    that that is not exactly the phrase to be found in paragraph 245CD  but
    he did not seek to  attach  any  significance  to  it.   There  was  no
    definition in the phrase  in  the  version  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in BD, but we have now the  definition
    in paragraph 245AAA, as set out above.  Given that  we  now  have  that
    definition, I consider that limited assistance at best can  be  derived
    from BD.  To an extent though it may be said that  paragraph  245AAA(a)
    must take its colour from paragraph 245CD, which is in many respects  a
    parent provision, and that refers at (c) to the  requirement  that  the
    applicant must have spent a continuous period as specified in (d) which
    then takes one on to the definition in 245AAA(a).  That might  be  said
    to hint that what is in issue at least in part is  time  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom, in a particular category as set out  in  sub-paragraphs
    to 245CD(c).

24.  Mr Buley argued that the word  "residence"  has  to  be  taken  in  its
    ordinary meaning as being a person's home or base.  I do not think much
    if any assistance can be derived from Shah.  It was concerned with  the
    meaning of the term "ordinary  residence"  in  the  context,  as  noted
    above, of local education authority education  awards.   There  is  the
    obiter remark by Lord Warrington in Levene [1928] AC 217232, quoted  by
    Lord Scarman in Shah  that  if  ordinary  residence  had  any  definite
    meaning it meant according to the way in which a man's life was usually
    ordered.  Lord Scarman's agreement with what  had  been  said  by  Lord
    Denning MR as to the meaning of the phrase, at page 342 in Shah,  seems
    to me again to be a definition taking into account both  words  of  the
    phrase.

25.  In any event I think there is force in  the  argument  that  Mr  Wagner
    makes that the statutory framework or the legal context, as referred to
    by Lord Scarman at page 343 has to be  taken  into  account.   In  this
    regard I see force in the  point  made  by  Mr  Wagner  that  there  is
    significance in the definition of when a period shall not be considered
    to have been broken,  in  paragraph  245AAA(a)(i).   It  is  clearly  a
    reference to a period of absence from the United Kingdom the effect  of
    which is to state that if a person has not been in the  United  Kingdom
    for 180 days or less their period of residence will not  be  considered
    to have been broken.  If residence is not to be equated  with  presence
    then it is difficult to  see  what  the  point  of  the  provision  is.
    Residence cannot mean different things for different  purposes  in  the
    context of one Rule.  If the applicant can point to an absence  of  180
    days or less during the particular twelve month period then his  period
    of residence will not be regarded as being unbroken.  It  seems  to  me
    that one can only interpret the term "residence" in (a)  on  the  basis
    that it equates to presence for the  rest  of  the  provision  to  make
    sense.  As such accordingly I agree with Mr Wagner that  residence  for
    the purposes of the Rule must in effect be equated to  presence  to  be
    sensibly interpreted.  The Rule provides a  straightforward  and  clear
    solution to the problem created by  the  uncertainty  of  the  previous
    provision.  It was only necessary for the Tribunal in BD to go into the
    question of what was meant by continuous period of five years  lawfully
    in the United Kingdom because it had no further  definition  to  assist
    it.  We now have a  definition  however  and  in  my  view  the  proper
    interpretation of the term "residence" is as set out above.  One  would
    be left otherwise with the uncertainty as shown in the discussion  with
    Mr Buley about the person who seeks ILR and has a home and  pays  taxes
    in the United Kingdom but who for the whole of the five year period  is
    away from the United Kingdom for work reasons.  In my view the Rule  is
    designed to get around the uncertainties and the need for the  kind  of
    decision-making to which Mr Buley adverted.

26.  In many ways the point concerning  the  proper  interpretation  of  the
    implications of 245AAA(i) for a period of absence of more than 180 days
    follows from that.   Mr  Buley's  argument  is,  in  effect,  that  the
    respondent chose not to say in specific terms how a person who had been
    absent for more than 180 days should be regarded  but  that  it  was  a
    matter  for  interpretation  by  the  decision-maker  and  potentially,
    ultimately, the court.  But it seems to me to follow  ineluctably  from
    the statement that a period shall not be considered to have been broken
    when the applicant has been absent from the United Kingdom for a period
    of 180 days or less in any of the five periods, that a period  will  be
    considered to have been broken where there has been an absence for more
    than 180 days.  After all, the requirement,  going  back  to  paragraph
    245CD(c) is that the applicant must have spent a continuous  period  as
    specified in (d) lawfully in the United Kingdom and, though a person is
    given the generous exemption of a period of 180 days or less  in  which
    they may be absent from the United Kingdom, I think it must follow that
    that is as far as the exemption goes, and that a period of absence  for
    a lengthier period is one that  leads  to  disqualification  under  the
    Rule.

27.  It follows that the applicant's argument under the construction  ground
    fails.

Ground 1

28.  The short point made by Mr Wagner in relation to  this  is  that  as  a
    consequence of the decision in Odelola, the respondent is  not  obliged
    to consider or apply old guidance when new  guidance  has  subsequently
    been provided, unless this is required by transitional provisions.  The
    point is made in the detailed grounds of defence that if the  applicant
    were correct in her argument in this respect the respondent's officials
    would be required to have ongoing consideration  to  previous  guidance
    which had been in force for a number of years  prior  to  the  date  on
    which the decision is made, which  would  impermissibly  undermine  the
    certainly and predictability required for the operation of a  fair  and
    effective immigration system.   It  is  also  argued  that  to  require
    officials to have regard to archived guidance would  inevitably  result
    in a fettering of their discretion, at least in some cases and that  it
    might involve them departing  from  more  recent  published  policy  in
    giving consideration to and applying previous guidance.

29.  Mr Buley's point was in essence that it was not so much a  question  of
    requiring the respondent to apply old Rules or guidance but  rather  in
    the exercise of her discretion outside the Rules, to bear in mind  that
    there was an old Rule and that different  Rules  and  policies  applied
    during the two periods in question.

30.  I have set out above what the respondent said in  her  decision  letter
    about the exercise of discretion in this case.  I do not consider  that
    she was bound to take into account previous Rules  and  policies  which
    were in existence at the time of the  two  periods  in  question.   The
    respondent has chosen to  create  a  policy  in  which  in  exceptional
    circumstances  indefinite  leave  to  remain  can  be   granted   where
    continuous leave is broken.  In my  view  the  policy  is  a  perfectly
    rational one.  To allow for evidence showing that the excessive absence
    was due to serious or compelling reasons is  in  my  view  a  perfectly
    proper basis for the exercise  of  discretion  in  such  a  case.   The
    examples given of serious  or  compelling  reasons  are  helpful.   The
    respondent gave consideration to the reasons why the applicant had been
    out of the country for more than 180  days  in  the  first  period  for
    business reasons, and concluded that they did not amount to exceptional
    reasons.  That decision was properly open to her.  As a  consequence  I
    do not consider that ground 1 is made out.

Ground 2

31.  It must follow from what I have said above  that  this  application  is
    refused.   I  have  not  found  in  the  applicant's  favour   on   the
    construction ground, nor in relation to the first period  of  exceeding
    180 days.   I  have  found  that  the  respondent's  exercise  of  that
    discretion was lawful.

32.  It is the case that only one period of broken continuous  residence  in
    the five year period is enough for the application to be  unsuccessful.
    However, for the sake of completeness, it is right that I  address  the
    reasoning of the respondent in relation to the second period.  I do not
    consider that what was said in the April  2016  supplementary  decision
    can be taken into account.  As Mr Buley pointed out, the  challenge  is
    to the January and February decisions.  What was said in this regard in
    relation to the exercise of  discretion  was  in  my  view  inadequate.
    There was evidence of the kidnap, and I should say that I consider that
    kidnap of a parent would inevitably amount to a serious  or  compelling
    reason.  It may be that on fuller consideration  the  respondent  would
    have come out with the kind of points in the April 2016 letter  in  any
    event, but as matters stood at the dates of the decisions,  I  consider
    that the very limited reasoning given for not exercising discretion  in
    relation to the second period was inadequate.  There was  the  evidence
    of the  applicant  herself  and  there  was  the  police  report.   The
    respondent did not chose to point out  the  limitations  in  these  but
    dismissed them summarily and that in my view was a matter of inadequate
    reasoning.  I therefore consider that the  exercise  of  discretion  in
    relation to the second period was unlawful.

33.  However for the reasons given, I consider  that  the  application  must
    fail on the basis that the respondent's decision was a lawful one under
    the Rules and also that her exercise of discretion in  respect  to  the
    first period of exceeding 180 days outside the  United  Kingdom  was  a
    lawful exercise  of  her  discretion.   The  application  is  therefore
    dismissed.  I will hear the parties on costs and any ancillary  matters
    when the judgment is handed down.  ~~~~0~~~~








