
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

         LD (Article 14; same-sex relationships) Brazil [2006] UKIAT
                                    00075

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                              Date of Hearing:  4
July 2006
                                     Date of promulgation: 10 September 2006

                                   Before:

                      Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
                      Senior Immigration Judge Spencer

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms L Dubinsky, Counsel instructed Wilson & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer

Prior to the coming into force of the Civil Partnership  Act  2004,  it  was
not a breach of art 14 of the ECHR amounting to unlawful  discrimination  on
the ground of sexual orientation to refuse to grant leave to a person  in  a
same-sex  relationship  who  could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration Rules in circumstances where a party  to  a  marriage  would  be
granted leave under the Rules.  The  differential  treatment  was,  at  that
time, objectively justified. (N.B. Because of the provisions  of  the  Civil
Partnership Act 2004 this is an example of the  rare  case  where  leave  to
remain is an essential requirement for the development of family life  under
art 8.)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This is a reconsideration on the application of the Secretary of State
     of a decision of Immigration Judge Martineau  promulgated  on  2  June
     2005 who allowed the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
     Secretary of State taken on 4  April  2005  refusing  the  appellant's
     application to extend his  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
     outside the Immigration Rules.

  2. The appeal raises a difficult legal issue concerning  the  application
     of the prohibition against discrimination  found  in  art  14  of  the
     European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
     Freedoms 1950 ("the ECHR") where leave  to  remain  is  refused  to  a
     person in a same-sex relationship prior to the coming  into  force  of
     the Civil Partnership Act 2004.

Background

  3. The facts are not in dispute and can be stated briefly.  The appellant
     is a citizen of Brazil who was born on 24 August 1979  and  so  is  25
     years old.  He came to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  on  21  June
     1999.  Thereafter, he was granted leave to remain as a  student  on  a
     number of occasions to study English until 31st December  2002.    The
     appellant is gay and during this time he formed a relationship with  a
     male German citizen working in the UK.  They lived together and  on  3
     March 2003, the appellant was granted further leave to  remain  for  2
     years as his unmarried partner.    However, after a  year  or  so  the
     relationship broke down and they separated.  The appellant moved  into
     a house in London with friends.  Whilst there, he formed a  friendship
     with a male British citizen whom he had briefly met in Brazil in 2002.
      Over time their relationship developed and they became close.  In the
     summer of 2004, the appellant's partner moved  to  Brighton  and  this
     only  served  to  crystallise  for  them   the   strength   of   their
     relationship.  In January 2005 they began living together as a  couple
     in Brighton.

  4. On 2 March 2005 - the day before his leave ran  out  -  the  appellant
     applied for further leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  on
     the basis of  that  relationship.   It  was  not  contended  that  the
     appellant could satisfy the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 295D  of  HC
     395 permits the grant of leave to  remain  to  an  unmarried  partner,
     including one in a same-sex relationship, where the couple  have  been
     "living together in a relationship akin  to  marriage"  for  2  years.
     However, the  appellant  had  not  been  in  the  relationship  for  a
     sufficient period of time to meet that requirement.   In  effect,  the
     appellant  asked  the  Secretary  of  State  to  waive  the   2   year
     cohabitation provision in para 295D.  On 4 April 2005,  the  Secretary
     of State refused his application for leave to remain.   The  appellant
     appealed.  The immigration judge held  that  the  appellant's  removal
     would not be disproportionate and so would not  be  a  breach  of  his
     right to private and family life protected  by  art  8  of  the  ECHR.
     However, he allowed  the  appeal  because  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision was unlawful by virtue of art 14 (read with  art  8)  on  the
     ground that it discriminated against the appellant on the basis of his
     sexual  orientation.   The  immigration  judge  noted  that  had   the
     appellant been  heterosexual  and  married  he  would  not  have  been
     required to satisfy  the  cohabitation  period.   That  difference  in
     treatment could no longer be justified  given  the  change  in  social
     policy and the recognition  of  civil  partnerships  between  same-sex
     couples in the Civil Partnership Act 2004.  On the application of  the
     Secretary  of  State,  reconsideration  was  ordered   by   a   Senior
     Immigration Judge on 17 June 2005.

  5. One final matter should be noted.  At the time of the application,  it
     was not possible for the appellant and his partner to  register  their
     relationship under the Civil Partnership Act 2004 which  received  the
     Royal assent on 18 November 2004 but which did  not  come  into  force
     until 5 December 2005.  It was (and is) their intention to  do  so  as
     soon as they are permitted by the Secretary of State whose permission,
     we understand, has not been forthcoming  because  of  the  appellant's
     immigration status.

Adjournment application

  6. At the outset of the hearing, we  raised  the  issue  of  JM*  Liberia
     [2006] UKIAT 00009 in which the Tribunal  held  that  in  a  variation
     appeal under s 82(2)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
     2002 an appellant could not raise human rights grounds related to  his
     removal from the UK, namely he could not  rely  on  the  ground  in  s
     84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act.  Ms Dubinsky informed us that the  Court  of
     Appeal had given permission to appeal on this issue in JM on 2nd  May.
     She submitted that the appellant's human  rights  case  was  seriously
     disadvantaged by the decision in JM and it  would  be  appropriate  to
     await the Court of Appeal's decision.  The appellant's  case  was,  in
     part, that his removal from the UK would interfere with his  right  to
     private and family life under Art 8  and  would  be  disproportionate.
     She  asked  us  to  adjourn  the  case  pending  their  decision.   Ms
     Vidyadharan, who represented the Secretary of State, submitted that we
     were bound by the starred decision of JM and invited  us  to  continue
     with the hearing.

  7. We concluded that it was not appropriate to adjourn pending the  Court
     of Appeal's decision in JM.  We decided we  were  bound  by  JM  as  a
     starred determination of the Tribunal and should apply it.  That  does
     not  necessarily  mean,  as  Ms  Vidyadharan   submitted,   that   the
     reconsideration should succeed and the appeal  be  dismissed.   It  is
     open to the appellant to argue that his human rights were breached  by
     the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse  to  extend  his  leave
     without regard being had to the effect of any future removal, in other
     words he may rely on the ground in s 84(1)(e) of the  2002  Act  "that
     the decision is unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
     1998".  Whilst Ms Dubinsky understandably reserved her position on the
     JM issue (paras 15-17 of appellant's skeleton), the hearing before  us
     proceeded upon that basis.

The applicable law

  8. It is  convenient  at  this  point  to  set  out  the  relevant  legal
     provisions.


Immigration rules

  9. We begin with the Immigration Rules.   Paragraphs  295D-E  of  HC  395
     provide for the grant of leave to remain to unmarried  couples  for  a
     probationary period of 2 years.   Previously,  a  concession  operated
     outside the Rules for unmarried couples.  These paragraphs  came  into
     effect on 2 October 2000 and (with minor subsequent amendments) are in
     the following terms:

           "Requirements for leave to remain as the unmarried partner of  a
           person present and settled in the United Kingdom


           295D. The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
           remain as the unmarried partner of a person present and  settled
           in the United Kingdom are that:


           (i) the applicant has limited leave  to  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom which was given in accordance with any of the provisions
           of these Rules; and
           (ii) any previous marriage (or similar relationship)  by  either
           partner has permanently broken down; and
           (iii) the applicant is the unmarried partner of a person who  is
           present and settled in the United Kingdom; and
           (iv) the applicant has not remained in breach of the immigration
           laws; and
           (v)  the  parties  are  not   involved   in   a   consanguineous
           relationship with one another; and
           (vi) the parties have been living  together  in  a  relationship
           akin to marriage which has subsisted for two years or more; and
           (vii) the parties' relationship pre-dates any decision to deport
           the applicant, recommend him for deportation,  give  him  notice
           under  Section  6(2)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  or  give
           directions for his removal under section 10 of  the  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 1999; and
           (viii) there will be adequate accommodation for the parties  and
           any dependants without recourse to public funds in accommodation
           which they own or occupy exclusively; and
           (ix) the parties will be able to  maintain  themselves  and  any
           dependants adequately without recourse to public funds; and
           (x) the parties intend to live together permanently.


           Leave to remain as the unmarried partner of a person present and
           settled in the United Kingdom


           295E. Leave to remain as  the  unmarried  partner  of  a  person
           present and settled in the United Kingdom may be granted  for  a
           period of 2 years  in  the  first  instance  provided  that  the
           Secretary of State is satisfied that each of the requirements of
           paragraph 295D are met.


           Refusal of leave to remain as the unmarried partner of a  person
           present and settled in the United Kingdom


           295F. Leave to remain as  the  unmarried  partner  of  a  person
           present and settled in the United Kingdom is to  be  refused  if
           the Secretary of  State  is  not  satisfied  that  each  of  the
           requirements of paragraph 295D is met."

 10. At all relevant times  for  this  appeal,  paras  284-286  of  HC  395
     provided as follows for the extension of stay in the UK as a spouse:

           "Requirements for an extension of stay as the spouse of a person
           present and settled in the United Kingdom


           284. The requirements for an extension of stay as the spouse  of
           a person present and settled in the United Kingdom are that:


           (i) the applicant has limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom which was given in accordance  with  any  of  the
           provisions of these Rules, other than where as a result of  that
           leave he would not have been in  the  United  Kingdom  beyond  6
           months from the date on which he  was  admitted  to  the  United
           Kingdom on this occasion in accordance with these Rules,  unless
           the leave in question is limited leave to  enter  as  a  fianc�;
           and
           (ii) is married to a person present and settled  in  the  United
           Kingdom; and
           (iii) the parties to the marriage have met; and
           (iv) the applicant has not remained in breach of the immigration
           laws; and
           (v) the marriage has not taken place after a decision  has  been
           made to deport the applicant or  he  has  been  recommended  for
           deportation or been given  notice  under  Section  6(2)  of  the
           Immigration Act 1971; and
           (vi) each of the parties intends to live  permanently  with  the
           other as his or her spouse and the marriage is subsisting; and
           (vii) there will be adequate accommodation for the  parties  and
           any dependants without recourse to public funds in accommodation
           which they own or occupy exclusively; and
           (viii) the parties will be able to maintain themselves  and  any
           dependants adequately without recourse to public funds.


           Extension of stay as the spouse of a person present and  settled
           in the United Kingdom


           285. An extension of stay as the spouse of a person present  and
           settled in the United Kingdom may be granted for a period  of  2
           years in the first instance, provided the Secretary of State  is
           satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph 284 is met.




           Refusal of extension of stay as the spouse of a  person  present
           and settled in the United Kingdom


           286. An extension of stay as the spouse of a person present  and
           settled in the United Kingdom is to be refused if the  Secretary
           of State is not satisfied  that  each  of  the  requirements  of
           paragraph 284 is met. "

 11. On 5 December 2005, the Civil Partnership Act 2004  came  into  force.
     It is not necessary for us to set out in detail the  content  of  this
     legislation here.  Suffice to say it  enables  a  same-sex  couple  to
     enter into, and register, a civil partnership which, for  all  intents
     and  purposes,  is  legally  equivalent  to  a  marriage   between   a
     heterosexual couple.  It resulted in changes to the Immigration  Rules
     brought in by HC 582 from 5 December 2005  in  order  to  treat  civil
     partners in precisely the same way as the Rules treat spouses.   As  a
     consequence, paras 295D-E were amended to explicitly include "same-sex
     partners", although they  were  already  undoubtedly  covered  by  the
     phrase "unmarried partner".  More  significantly  in  effect  was  the
     amendments  to  paras  284-286  to  include  wording  to  cover  civil
     partnerships.    Thereafter,   registered   civil   partnerships   and
     marriages were indistinguishable for immigration purposes.  It is  the
     juxtaposition of the position of  heterosexual  and  same-sex  couples
     prior to the amendment of para 284 which is said by the  appellant  to
     have resulted in unlawful discrimination under art 14 (read  with  art
     8) of the ECHR  in  this  case.   We  now  turn  to  those  Convention
     provisions.

     ECHR

 12. Article 8 of the ECHR provides as follows:


                                 "Article 8
                Right to respect for private and family life


           1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
           life, his home and his correspondence.
           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others."


 13. And, art 14 is in the following terms:


                                 "Article 14
                        Prohibition of discrimination


           The enjoyment of the rights  and  freedoms  set  forth  in  this
           Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground
           such as sex, race,  colour,  language,  religion,  political  or
           other opinion, national or social  origin,  association  with  a
           national minority, property, birth or other status."

 14. The appellant's case is that the refusal to extend his leave to remain
     is a breach of art 14  (read  with  art  8)  on  the  ground  that  it
     unlawfully discriminates against  him  on  the  basis  of  his  sexual
     orientation.  Although para 295D of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides
     equally  for  leave  to  be  granted  to  unmarried  heterosexual  and
     homosexual couples after they have been in  a  "relationship  akin  to
     marriage" for 2 years, the Rules at the  relevant  time  discriminated
     against homosexual couples by only allowing couples who  were  married
     (and therefore by definition could not be homosexual)  to  be  granted
     leave to remain under para 284 of HC  395.   As  a  result,  para  284
     unlawfully privileged heterosexual couples over same-sex couples.  The
     appellant was entitled to be treated equally with heterosexual couples
     on a par with the requirements of para 284.    Apart  from  not  being
     "married", it was not suggested before us that the appellant could not
     satisfy the remaining substantive requirements of para 284.

Article 14

 15. Before turning  to  consider  the  specific  grounds  upon  which  the
     Secretary of State challenges the  immigration  judge's  decision,  it
     will be helpful to set out the approach to cases in which  art  14  is
     relied upon.

 16. First, it is established law that art  14  does  not  create  a  free-
     standing right of non-discrimination.  It is more limited than that in
     two principal respects.

 17. Article 14 is limited to discrimination  upon  one  of  the  "grounds"
     enumerated in art 14 itself "sex, race, colour" etc and,  importantly,
     "other status".  It was not  questioned  in  this  case  that  'sexual
     orientation' was a prohibited ground of discrimination  under  art  14
     (see, e.g. Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [2004] UKHL 30; [2004] 2  AC  557).



 18. Further, art 14 in its own terms only precludes discrimination in  the
     "enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in  this  Convention".
     This is not to say, indeed it is trite  law,  that  there  must  be  a
     breach of one of the substantive articles of the Convention  before  a
     breach of art 14 can be established.  That would  make  art  14  self-
     evidently otiose and is not required by the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
     (see, e.g. Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v UK (1985)  7  EHHR  471
     (breach of art 14 but not art  8)).   Instead,  the  Strasbourg  court
     requires that the facts fall within "the ambit" or "scope" of  one  of
     the Convention rights (see, e.g. Abdulaziz,  Cabales  and  Balkandali,
     above at para [71] and Botta v Italy (1998) 26 EHRR 241).   It is also
     said, alternatively, that  art  14  will  only  be  engaged  when  the
     claimant  can  show  that  the  effect  upon  him   of   the   alleged
     discrimination "constitutes one of the modalities" of the exercise  of
     the right guaranteed (see, Petrovic v Austria (1998) 33  EHRR  307  at
     para [28]).   It has been observed, almost by way  of  understatement,
     that these expressions are "not free from difficulty" (Ghaidan, above,
     per Lord Nicholls at para [10]) as can been seen from the exegesis  of
     the Strasbourg jurisprudence by the House of Lords in the recent  case
     of M v Secretary of  State  for  Work  and  Pensions  [2006]  UKHL  11
     (hereafter "M's case") - an important case  for  this  appeal  and  to
     which we shall return later.  That decision does, however, make  clear
     that the  "ambit"  question  in  art  8  case  may  create  particular
     difficulties because of its  "wider and much less well-defined  ambit"
     than many other rights protected by the ECHR (see, M, above  per  Lord
     Walker at para [61]).

 19. It was not suggested to us in this appeal that  the  decision  of  the
     Secretary of State did not fall within the "ambit" of the  appellant's
     art 8 right to respect for his private and family life.  It  does  not
     seem to us that (as yet) the appellant's relationship with his partner
     and any effect the Secretary of State's  decision  may  have  on  that
     falls within the  concept  of  "family  life"  under  art  8.   As  we
     understand the Strasbourg jurisprudence, the  Court  has  not  so  far
     included same-sex  relationships  within  that  aspect  of  the  right
     protected by art 8.  That much we consider is confirmed by  the  House
     of Lords' decision in M's case itself which focuses instead  upon  the
     "private life" aspect of art 8 when considering a case of  a  same-sex
     couple (but contrast Lord Mance at para [152]).  The  distinction  is,
     in truth, of little importance given that aspects of  the  appellant's
     "private life" may be affected by the decision.

 20. We are not here, of course, concerned  with  the  appellant's  removal
     from the UK - that is precluded by JM.  Instead, we are concerned with
     the appellant's lack of immigration status and the  implications  that
     may have for him.  For ourselves, we have considerable  doubt  whether
     an absence of immigration status can in itself fall within  the  ambit
     of an individual's art 8  right  to  respect  for  his  private  life.
     Outside of cases involving interference with an individual's "physical
     and moral integrity" - which is not in play in this case - it  is  the
     disruption to personal relationships, to personal development  and  to
     an individual's well-being which engages this aspect of  art  8  (see,
     e.g. Pretty v  UK  (2002)  35  EHRR  1  at  para  [61]).   It  is  the
     appellant's removal which would primarily threaten an interference  of
     that sort.  The mere absence of an immigration status will rarely,  in
     our view, have sufficient impact upon or connection to  the  protected
     aspects of a person's life to fall within the ambit of art 8.

 21. Ms Dubinsky, however,  referred  us  to  the  Strasbourg  decision  in
     Mendizabal v France (Application No 00051431/99) decided by the  Court
     on 17 January 2006 which, she submitted, held that status alone  could
     engage art 8.  Unfortunately, apart from a short summary, the decision
     is reported in French and we were unable to read it.  The Court  seems
     to have held that a 14 year delay in issuing a Spanish national living
     in France with a residence permit did violate art 8.  Looking  at  the
     summary, it does on the  face  of  it  provide  some  support  for  Ms
     Dubinsky's submission.

 22. We need not reach a  concluded  view  on  this  matter  since  we  are
     satisfied that on the facts of this case, the decision to  refuse  the
     appellant leave to remain  has  other  consequences  which  bring  the
     matter within the "ambit" of art 8 in  that  it  affects  his  private
     life.  Ms Dubinsky  relied  upon  a  number  of  consequences  to  the
     appellant in para 24 of her skeleton: (i) as a person without leave he
     would be ineligible for a Certificate of  Approval  to  enter  into  a
     civil partnership; (ii) he would  be  an  overstayer  and  liable  for
     criminal offences; (iii) he would lose his entitlement to  work  -  he
     currently works as a customer service agent at Heathrow Airport;  (iv)
     he would have a precarious immigration  status;  and  (v)  the  'clock
     would stop' for the purposes of naturalisation.  It seems to  us  that
     the consequences spelt out in (i), (iii) and, perhaps, (v) when  taken
     together broadly relate to the appellant's "private life"  in  respect
     of  his  personal  development  and  personal  relationships  and  the
     decision of the Secretary of State does, therefore,  fall  within  the
     "ambit" or scope of art 8 sufficient to engage art 14.

 23. Secondly, art 14 requires proof of less favourable treatment on one of
     the enumerated grounds which cannot be objectively and  reasonably  be
     justified by the State (see, e.g. R (Carson) v Secretary of State  for
     Work and Pensions [2005] UKHL 37).  The difference in  treatment  must
     pursue a legitimate aim and there must be a reasonable relationship of
     proportionality between the means employed and the aim  sought  to  be
     realised (see, Belgium Linguistics Case (No 2) (1968) 1 EHRR  252,  at
     paras [9] and [10]).  Differential treatment on the basis  of  certain
     characteristics,  for  example  race  and  gender,  will   rarely   be
     acceptable.  As a consequence, the courts will "carefully examine" any
     reasons proffered - which must be "very weighty"  (Schmidt  v  Germany
     (1994) 18 EHRR 513) - to justify differential treatment on  inherently
     'suspect' grounds, perhaps giving less weight to  the  legislative  or
     executive view of the public interest than would be the case if  other
     discriminatory grounds are in play (Carson, per Lord Hoffmann at paras
     [15]-[16]).  It is now uncontentious that discrimination on grounds of
     sexual orientation falls within this category (see, e.g.  Carson,  per
     Lord Hoffmann at para [17] and Lord Walker at para [55]; Ghaidan,  per
     Lord Nicholls at para [19]).  Again,  it  is  not  disputed  that  the
     appellant has been less  favourably  treated  because  of  his  sexual
     orientation because until 5 December 2005 the  immigration  rules,  in
     particular para 284 of HC 395 differentiated between  married  couples
     and same-sex couples.  Whether this distinction is  justified  is  the
     crucial issue and we shall  return  to  that  shortly  in  considering
     Ground (3) upon which reconsideration was ordered.

 24. In brief, therefore, to establish a breach of art 14 what  has  to  be
     shown is that the Secretary of State's decision: (i)  falls  with  the
     "ambit" of a substantive Convention right; (here that is satisfied  in
     respect of art 8); (ii) involves discrimination against the  appellant
     on  a  prohibited  ground  (here  again  that  is  satisfied  as   the
     differential treatment was on the ground of sexual  orientation);  and
     (iii) is not objectively justified (this is the  front-line  issue  in
     this appeal and is very much disputed).

 25. Having set out the proper approach to art 14, we turn now to  consider
     the immigration judge's reasons and the specific  grounds  upon  which
     reconsideration was ordered.

Immigration judge's decision

 26. The immigration judge's reasons for allowing the appeal are  given  in
     paras [21] - [23] of his determination:

           "Reasoning
           21. I summarise my relevant findings of fact, most of which  are
           not contentious, as follows:
           (1) The appellant has  been  living  with  [his  partner]  in  a
           relationship akin to marriage, after a significant acquaintance,
           since January this year.
           (2)  They intend to register this relationship as a  partnership
           under the CP Act within about a month of  its  planned  date  of
           commencement.  I infer from the hisotry of the relationship that
           if they had been able to register it as  a  partnership  by  the
           time the appellant made this application, they would  have  done
           so.
           (3)  Apart from the period of cohabitation required by  sub-rule
           (vi), all the requirements of r.295D of HC 395 are satisfied  in
           this case.
           (4)  Parliament has legislated to  align  registered  homosexual
           partnerships with  marriage  in  law,  and  it  is  the  British
           government's intention to assimilate the Immigration  Rules  for
           marriage and registered partnerships and to bring both  sets  of
           changes into force  this  December.   The  existing  Immigration
           Rules do not require a married couple to have cohabited for  two
           years or any particular period before a foreign  spouse  obtains
           leave to enter or remain as such.
           (5)  The appellant and [his partner] have  at  all  times  since
           February  this  year  at  latest  wished   to   register   their
           relationship under the Civil Partnerships Act  of  2004  with  a
           long-term mutual commitment.  Had it been open to them  in  law,
           they would have done so by the time of this refusal.


           22.  I further hold that:
           (1)   If  the  respondent's  refusal   stands,   there   is   an
           interference with the appellant's family and private lives.  The
           physical separation and expense attributable respectively to the
           appellant's  removal  and  their  occasional  reunion  would  be
           substantial; also there would be the appellant's loss of his job
           and the friendships that he has made here.
           (2)  Since it is the government's and Parliament's  policy  that
           people such as this couple should  be  able  to  register  their
           relationship under the CP  Act  and  live  together  in  Britain
           without  having  cohabited  for  two  years,   the   appellant's
           immediate  admission  for  the  purpose  of  continuing  such  a
           relationship is not a  thing  contrary  to  the  merits  of  any
           pressing social need, or repugnant to public  policy;  only  the
           bare formality of a rule that is accepted by the  government  to
           be out of date would be offended.
           (3)  While there is to be a delay for practical reasons  in  the
           commencement of this Act, apparently until December, there is no
           reason of policy for it.
           (4)  The differences in  current  British  family  law  and  the
           present Rules between the provisions for spouses and  those  for
           unmarried  partners  who  intend  to   live   in   a   long-term
           relationship, taken together, are an instance of  discrimination
           on the grounds of sex (because as partners of the same  sex  the
           appellant and [his partner] can not marry  or  otherwise  obtain
           legal recognition of their relationship) and of status  (because
           if they were  married  or  otherwise  in  a  legally  recognised
           partnership these two would not have to demonstrate any  minimum
           period of qualifying cohabitation).   In  view  of  my  findings
           about their relationship and common  intention  to  register  it
           under the new Act, it is these differences that have caused  the
           respondent to refuse this appellant's application in such a  way
           as to interfere with his family life.
           (5)  Accordingly this appellant's enjoyment of his rights  under
           Art. 8 to respect and freedom from interference with his  family
           life is not secured  without  discrimination  on  the  forbidden
           grounds of sex and status.  Rather it is those grounds that  are
           responsible for the respondent's interference in the appellant's
           family life.  As to para 4.3 of the Explanatory Statement, it is
           the Rules that are shown by the new Act and the DTI's  publicity
           to be discriminatory, not the respondent's application of them.
           (6)  Clearly the Convention attaches importance to the status of
           marriage, or there would  be  no  Art.  12.   However  now  that
           Parliament has passed the Civil Partnerships Act, and given  the
           DTI's statement of the government's policy towards people in the
           position of this couple, there can in  Strasbourg  terms  be  no
           legitimate   reason   or   objective   justification   for   the
           discrimination that I have found.
           (7)  I have relied on Art. 14, because if I had to  decide  this
           appeal only  by reference to the  current  Rules  and  law,  the
           appellant's decision to embark on a relationship when he did, as
           the law in force then was, and with the  benefit  of  the  leave
           that he then had, his case under Art. 8 alone would have failed.
            He would simply have been another person temporarily in Britain
           who had taken a  chance  and  formed  a  relationship  when  the
           current law and rules did not permit him to remain for its long-
           term fulfilment.  Separation for what would now be  little  more
           than  six  months  would   not   be   so   severe   as   to   be
           disproportionate.  It is Parliament's change of the law, and the
           government's intended means of carrying it through in subsidiary
           legislation,  that  show  the  existing  Rules  to  be   wrongly
           discriminatory.


           23.  If follows that  the  respondent's  decision  under  appeal
           infringes the appellant's right to  family  life  under  Art.  8
           taken with Art. 14 of the ECHR.  It was therefore unlawful under
           sec.6 of the Human Rights Act, and this appeal succeeds."

 27. The immigration judge's decision on the substantive application of art
     8 is no longer an aspect of this appeal.  We say no more about  it  as
     it was not argued before us as a result of JM, other than we  observe,
     in passing, that his conclusion in para  22(7)  of  his  determination
     seems  to  us  entirely  consistent  with  an   application   of   the
     "exceptionality" test in Huang v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 105.

Grounds for reconsideration

 28. Reconsideration was ordered on the grounds raised by the Secretary  of
     State.   The  grounds  are  expressed   somewhat   discursively.    We
     gratefully adopt Ms Dubinsky's summary of the grounds in her  skeleton
     argument which formed the basis of the oral argument  before  us:  (1)
     the immigration judge was wrong to find that the  appellant  succeeded
     under Art 14 even though he could not succeed under  Art  8;  (2)  the
     immigration judge was wrong to hold that para 295D was  discriminatory
     as it is equally applicable to  unmarried  heterosexual  and  same-sex
     couples; and (3) the immigration judge was wrong to  take  account  of
     legislation (Civil Partnership Act 2004) which was not yet  in  force.
     As will become clear it is Ground (3) which is central  to  this  case
     and was the focus of the oral argument before us.

Grounds (1) and (2)


 29. Ms Vidyadharan did not abandon these grounds at the  hearing  although
     we did not understand her to press them with any degree of conviction.
      She was right not to do so: there is nothing in them.

 30. As to Ground (1), it is said  that  the  immigration  judge  erred  in
     finding that the appellant succeeded under art 14 (read  with  art  8)
     even though he could not succeed under art 8 itself.  It remains to be
     decided whether he was correct to conclude that art 14 was breached at
     all but, as our analysis above shows, he was not in error to find such
     a breach merely because art 8 itself was not  breached.   Neither  did
     the immigration judge approach art 14 on the basis that it created  an
     independent right of non-discrimination which would also have been  an
     error.  Instead, he linked the discriminatory breach of  art  14  with
     art 8 and concluded at paras 22(5) and 23 of  his  determination  that
     the appeal should succeed.  It is  true  that  he  related  the  right
     engaged under art 8 to the appellant's "family  life"  when  it  would
     have  been  better  to  look  to  his  "private  life"  under  art  8.
     Nevertheless, that is quite immaterial to his conclusion.  This ground
     fails.

 31. As to Ground (2), this seems to suggest  that  the  appellant  claimed
     that para 295D was discriminatory and was, at least in part,  a  basis
     for the immigration judge's decision.  Of course, as we have seen that
     is not the appellant's case.  Paragraph 295D is not discriminatory: in
     its scope and application it is 'blind' to sexual orientation.  It  is
     the combined effect of that paragraph with para 284 (as it then stood)
     which is said to be discriminatory in favouring married (and therefore
     heterosexual) couples over other partnerships (and therefore  same-sex
     couples).  It is clear from his  determination  that  the  immigration
     judge did not misunderstand the appellant's argument and therefore did
     not reach his decision on a erroneous basis: see paras 3 and 21(4) and
     (5) of his determination.

 32. There is nothing in either of these grounds and  we  see  no  material
     error of law in the immigration judge's decision arising from them.

Ground (3)


 33. The tougher legal issue arises out of Ground (3).  On  behalf  of  the
     Secretary of State, Ms  Vidyadharan  submitted  that  the  immigration
     judge erred in law when he took account  of  the  legislative  changes
     (including changes to the immigration rules) that were  to  come  into
     effect on 5 December 2005 as a result of  the  Civil  Partnership  Act
     2004.  He was wrong  to  conclude  that  the  differentiation  between
     heterosexual (married couples) and  same-sex  couples  exemplified  in
     para 284 was not justified.  In effect, the Secretary  of  State  says
     that the immigration judge 'jumped the gun' and treated the law as  if
     it were in fact in force.  It was for  Parliament  to  cater  for  the
     equivalent of marriage for same-sex couples and they had done so  from
     5 December 2005.


 34. Ms Dubinsky provided us with a detailed and helpful skeleton  argument
     and a further note on Carson following the hearing.  She  referred  us
     to a number of Strasbourg and domestic authorities, for which  we  are
     grateful.   We are also grateful  for  her  clear  and  focussed  oral
     submissions.  We intend no discourtesy if we state the essence  of  Ms
     Dubinsky's detailed submissions in the following way.

 35. Ms Dubinsky submitted that it  was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
     justify the differential treatment and he had not done  so,  at  least
     until the hearing through the submission made on his behalf.  Further,
     she submitted that there was nothing inappropriate in the  immigration
     judge taking account of a  change  of  social  policy  in  determining
     whether the differential  treatment  was  justified.   She  relied  on
     passages in R v  SSHD  ex  parte  Arman  Ali  [2000]  INLR  89  and  R
     (Lekstaka) v IAT and SSHD [2005] EWHC 745 (Admin) in support  of  this
     submission (see paras 41 and 42 of the  appellant's  skeleton).    She
     relied upon the case of Ghaidan where, on the basis of  art  14  (read
     with art 8), the House of Lords held there was  no  fair  or  rational
     basis for treating homosexual partnerships  less  favourably  for  the
     purposes of succession  to  a  tenancy  on  the  death  of  a  tenant.
     Consequently, the relevant provisions of the Rent Act 1977 had  to  be
     read as applying to same-sex partners.  She submitted that  there  had
     been a change of  social  policy  and  it  was  not  perverse  of  the
     immigration judge to take that into account and to conclude  that  the
     differential treatment was not objectively justified.


     Context

 36. As Ms Dubinsky identified, the central issue we have to decide in this
     appeal is whether the immigration judge was correct in law to conclude
     that the differential treatment of the appellant on the basis  of  his
     sexual orientation was not objectively justified, particularly  having
     regard  to  the  shift  in  social  policy  evidenced  in  the   Civil
     Partnership Act 2004 and the changes that would follow for para 284 in
     HC 582.

 37. There is no doubt that social policy  on  same-sex  relationships  and
     their acceptance and status (if any) in society has evolved over time.
      The point is made by Lord Bingham in his speech in M's case  at  para
     [6]:

           "Historically, both the law and public  opinion  withheld  their
           sanction from a relationship between a man and a woman which was
           not sanctified by marriage or  at  least  regularised  by  civil
           ceremony, and  homosexual  relationships  were  criminalised  or
           condemned. When extra-marital heterosexual relationships  became
           more  generally  accepted  by  the  law  and   public   opinion,
           recognition of homosexual relationships (even of those no longer
           criminal) was still withheld. Even now there  remain  bodies  of
           opinion in this country (and much larger bodies  of  opinion  in
           some other countries) for whom such recognition is still a  step
           too far."


 38. As Lord Bingham then goes on to indicate, that has changed because  of
     the democratic majority enacting the Civil Partnership  Act  2004  and
     the consequent removal of the discriminatory features  of  the  social
     security and child support regimes with which he was concerned in that
     case.  Likewise in the  area  of  immigration,  the  Rules  have  been
     changed to equate same-sex and heterosexual couples with effect from 5
     December 2005.   To that extent, therefore, the issue in  this  appeal
     will have limited impact in the future.  Had the circumstances of  the
     appellant been brought forward 12 months in time, he would be able  to
     seek leave to remain for 2 years under para 284 (as it now is drafted)
     providing he registered a civil partnership with his same-sex  partner
     under the 2004 Act.

 39. Can it be said that because the immigration position  would  change  9
     months after his application that it was then  unjustified  to  refuse
     his application on the basis of the existing  immigration  rules?   We
     consider that it was not.  The important decision is M's case to which
     we have already made reference.  Somewhat surprisingly, the  case  was
     barely touched upon by Ms Dubinsky in her oral submissions  and  there
     is only a passing reference to it in para 45 of her skeleton  although
     it is dealt with in a little more detail in para 5 of her further note
     submitted after the hearing.

     M's case

 40. In M's case, the House of Lords was concerned with the  assessment  of
     child support to be paid  by  the  'absent  parent'  under  the  Child
     Support Act 1991 for the upkeep of a child following the breakdown  of
     a relationship.   The  calculation,  it  was  said,  operated  to  the
     detriment of an 'absent parent' who, following the  breakdown  of  the
     marriage, had formed a same-sex relationship.  This,  it  was  argued,
     was a breach of art 14 (read with art 8).   By  a  majority  (Baroness
     Hale dissenting), the House held that the effect  upon  the  applicant
     did not fall within the "ambit" of their art 8 right.  That is not  an
     issue which need concern  us  here.   What  is  important  is  that  a
     majority of the House also held that the differential treatment  of  a
     person in a same-sex relationship was justified at the  relevant  time
     in 2001-2002 even though social policy had now changed  by  virtue  of
     the Civil Partnership Act 2004.

 41. As we have seen, Lord Bingham (at para [6] of his speech) acknowledged
     that social policy could be the basis for differential treatment  and,
     despite a subsequent change in that social  policy,  legal  provisions
     would not necessarily be unjustified in  retrospect.   He  identified,
     what it would be fair to characterise, as the need  to  recognise  the
     gradual change that is often present in giving effect to agreed social
     change and  the  logistical  difficulties  that  may  be  involved  in
     implementing social change agreed in principle.  At para [6] he said:

           "Ms M's complaint of discrimination is in my view anachronistic.
           By that I mean that she is applying the standards  of  today  to
           criticise a regime which when it was established represented the
           accepted values of our society, which has now been brought to an
           end because it no longer does so but which could not,  with  the
           support of the public, have been brought to  an  end  very  much
           earlier ... If such a regime were to be established today, Ms M.
           could with good reason stigmatise the  regime  as  unjustifiably
           discriminatory.  But  it  is  unrealistic   to   stigmatise   as
           unjustifiably discriminatory a regime which, given the  size  of
           the overall task and the need to  recruit  the  support  of  the
           public, could scarcely have been reformed sooner."


 42. Lord Walker made a similar point  referring  in  the  process  to  the
     speech of Lord Hoffmann in  the  earlier  decision  of  R  (Hooper)  v
     Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2005] 1 WLR 1681.  At  paras
     [94] - [96] of his speech Lord Walker said this:


           "94. ... Lord Hoffmann said, in the course of discussing  Walden
           v Liechtenstein App No 33916/96,


                 "I  can  quite  understand  that  if  one  has  a  form  of
                 discrimination which was historically justified  but,  with
                 changes in society, has gradually lost its justification, a
                 period  of  consultation,  drafting  and  debate  must   be
                 included in the time which the legislature  may  reasonably
                 consider appropriate for making a change. Up to  the  point
                 at which that time is exceeded, there is no violation of  a
                 Convention right. But there is no suggestion in the  report
                 of Walden v Liechtenstein that the  discrimination  between
                 married couples was ever justified and I find  it  hard  to
                 see why there was no violation of Convention rights as long
                 as the old law remained in place."


           95. Both sides sought to draw some comfort  from  that  passage.
           Hooper recognised that until a date in 2001 (I need not go  into
           the significance of the precise date) the United Kingdom  social
           security law  had  favoured  widows  in  a  way  that  could  be
           justified as positive  discrimination.  No  right-minded  person
           would now suggest that discrimination  against  homosexuals  was
           ever justifiable, and so Lord Hoffmann's observations about  the
           need for consultation, drafting and debate are not (Ms  Monaghan
           submitted) in point. But that is to my mind a deeply unrealistic
           approach, and one that is at odds with the realistic approach of
           the ECHR in  cases  such  as  Estevez.  Although  discrimination
           against homosexuals could never have been justified, by  today's
           standards, the fact is that for centuries  a  homosexual  couple
           living together were (even if they  escaped  criminal  sanctions
           and social ostracism) regarded as quite different from a married
           couple, or a heterosexual unmarried  couple.  Profound  cultural
           changes do take time: as Sir Thomas  Bingham  MR  said  in  R  v
           Ministry of Defence Ex p Smith [1996] QB  517,  554:  "A  belief
           which represented unquestioned orthodoxy  in  year  X  may  have
           become questionable by year Y and unsustainable by year Z."


           96. In my opinion it was within the United Kingdom's  margin  of
           appreciation, down to the preparation, enactment and coming into
           force of the 2004 Act, whether to treat a same-sex  couple  (for
           social security purposes, and the allied purposes  of  the  1991
           Act) as a family unit or as two individuals."


 43. Lord Mance made much the same point at para [155]:

           "155. Justification exists where discrimination is  prima  facie
           unlawful, but there is a special reason legitimising it  -  e.g.
           where (as in probably in Petrovic itself)  men  and  women  were
           treated  differently  for  a  reason   for   which   there   was
           historically  rational   justification   but   which   has   now
           disappeared. In such a case Petrovic accepts, and Lord  Hoffmann
           in para 62 in Hooper agreed, reasonable time may be allowed  for
           legislative change - though it must not be exceeded as it was in
           relation to transsexuals (cf Goodwin)."


 44. The legislative history of the 2004 Act is summarised by Lord Mance in
     M's case at para [123]:

           "The legislative story goes back  at  least  to  late  2001.  In
           October 2001, Jane Griffiths' Relationships (Civil Registration)
           Bill was introduced in the House of Commons, in November 2001  a
           major  cross-departmental  review  of  the   policy   and   cost
           implications of a  civil  partnership  registration  scheme  was
           initiated, supported by the  Women  and  Equality  Unit  of  the
           Department of Trade and Industry. In January 2002 Lord Lester of
           Herne Hill introduced a Civil Partnerships Bill in the House  of
           Lords but withdrew it on 11 February 2002 to allow completion of
           the cross-departmental review. At the conclusion of the  review,
           in December 2002 it was announced that a strong  case  was  seen
           for a civil partnership scheme and  that  a  consultation  paper
           would be published in the summer of 2003, as it was on  30  June
           2003. There followed a three month  consultation  period,  which
           showed strong public support for  such  a  scheme.  In  the  DTI
           report "Responses to Civil Partnership" dated November 2003, the
           government undertook to introduce legislation as
           soon as parliamentary time allowed. The first draft of the Civil
           Partnership  Bill  was  dated  22  April   2004,   and   ensuing
           Parliamentary process led to  the  Civil  Partnership  Act  2004
           receiving the Royal assent on 18 November 2004. The  Act  is  an
           extremely  comprehensive  piece  of  legislation,  covering  not
           merely the creation and regulation of  civil  partnerships,  but
           many  other  subjects,   some-interrelated,   including   social
           security, pensions, tax credits and the present, with the aim of
           achieving equality of treatment between opposite sex  and  same-
           sex couples. The  implementation  of  the  legislation  required
           time, and took place just over a year later."

 45. In M's case, Lord Walker, in concluding  that  "Parliament  has  acted
     with reasonable promptness ... in the complex process  of  legislative
     change which has resulted in the 2004 Act", commented (at para [91]):

           "[the United Kingdom Government]  has  ...  been  engaged  in  a
           necessarily   time-consuming   process   of   deliberation   and
           consultation (initiated  by  the  consultation  document:  Civil
           Partnership, a framework for the legal recognition  of  same-sex
           couples published in June 2003) leading to the  preparation  and
           enactment of the 2004 Act. It is a massive piece of  legislation
           extending to 264 sections and  30  schedules.  It  received  the
           Royal Assent on 18 November 2004 and came into force, as already
           noted, on 5 December 2005. The delay in bringing it  into  force
           was necessary  in  order  to  make  far-reaching  administrative
           changes  including  the  adaptation  of  computer  systems,  the
           training of staff, and so on."


      Discussion

 46.  M's  case  makes  clear  that  changing  social  policy  on  same-sex
     relationships was a gradual process which culminated in the 2004  Act.
     Just as social acceptance took time,  so  did  legal  recognition.   A
     realist would have anticipated nothing else:  it was a struggle within
     society (and Parliament) eventually won by the forces  of  reason  who
     favoured respecting the dignity of all persons whatever  their  sexual
     orientation.  Although the  House  in  M's  case  was  concerned  with
     differential treatment of same-sex couples in  the  period  2001-2002,
     what they say cannot be artificially so restricted and  applies,  with
     equal force, to the relevant time in this appeal.  The House  explored
     the issue in the context of the  legislative  history  culminating  in
     2004.  We are in no doubt that the same conclusion would have  reached
     if the differential treatment had been brought forward  to  the  time-
     frame (2004-2005) relevant to this appeal.

 47. The benchmark set down  by  M's  case  is  that  the  legislative  and
     executive branches of government are entitled to a reasonable time  to
     enact social change of the kind required to give legal effect  to  the
     recognition of same-sex relationships.  But M's  case  is  not  simply
     concerned with enacting new law.  It is also about the  implementation
     of that law.  What is  said  in  M's  case  (and  in  Hooper  by  Lord
     Hoffmann) in relation to the tolerance to a reasonable period of  time
     to enact legislative  change  applies  equally  to  time  required  to
     implement  changes  particularly  where   they   involve   significant
     administrative changes in  existing  legal  and  other  processes  and
     practices.  Lord Walker in M's case specifically highlights the  point
     in the passage from his speech which we set out above (at  para  [91];
     see also Lord Mance at para [123] cited above).  It would, frankly, be
     unrealistic to think otherwise.

 48. The reality of  implementation  is  acknowledged  in  a  DTI  internet
     release dated 21  February  2005  (at  pp  41-42  of  the  appellant's
     original appeal bundle) where it is stated:

           "Implementation involves significant changes in many areas,  for
           example, in court rules, the registration  service  as  well  as
           training and guidance for employers.  These changes will be  put
           in place over the course of the year."

 49. The delay in bringing the 2004 Act into force  between  November  2004
     and December 2005  and  its  implementation  in  the  social  security
     context are precisely reflected in the immigration  context.   In  the
     instant case, social policy had changed  but  rational  implementation
     logistically  took  some  time.   It  might  be  suggested  that   the
     complexity of implementation is that much greater in  the  context  of
     M's case and social security than it is in immigration cases.  Why not
     simply amend para 284 or  treat  same-sex  couples  as  if  they  were
     married as soon as the 2004 Act was passed by Parliament?  This is, of
     course, the barely hidden argument for the appellant here.  The answer
     is simple: even if it would have been relatively easy  to  change  the
     immigration rules on what basis could it have been  done?   How  could
     the Secretary of State assess claims  by  same-sex  couples  to  stay?
     What could have been put in place as an alternative to "marriage"  and
     a "spousal relationship"?

 50. The plain and undeniable fact is that until the Civil Partnership  Act
     2004 came into force in December 2005 there was  no  equivalent  legal
     relationship to marriage for same-sex couples that could have  led  to
     them being treated the same as married couples under para 284.  It was
     only when civil partnership  came  into  existence  that  heterosexual
     couples and same-sex couples could be treated equivalently on a status
     basis.  Until then, the Rules could only recognise the  commitment  of
     unmarried couples (whether heterosexual or same-sex)  by  requiring  a
     period of cohabitation precisely in the way para 295D required 2 years
     for both.  Recognition of the commitment of a heterosexual  couple  by
     solemnising their relationship through marriage was not  available  to
     same-sex couples until the Civil Partnership Act 2004 came into  force
     in December 2005.  Thus, the argument for the appellant  collapses  to
     an argument that the 2004 Act should have been enacted and/or  brought
     into force earlier and certainly no later  than  March  2005  when  he
     applied for further leave to remain.  The argument is,  in  our  view,
     unsustainable given the need to implement  the  legislation  across  a
     wide range of administrative systems and social situations.

 51. It is said by Ms Dubinsky that the Secretary  of  State  has  not,  at
     least prior to the hearing before us, offered  any  justification  for
     the differential treatment of same-sex partnerships.  We  accept  that
     it is for him to justify as objectively and reasonably  necessary  the
     differential treatment.  In truth, however, the justification is self-
     evident: it is spelt out in M's case and the  DTI  document  dated  21
     February 2005 and which was part of the appellant's own appeal bundle.
      Social policy  on  the  recognition  of  same-sex  relationships  has
     undoubtedly changed but its implementation remained a real issue.  The
     precise timing was, in our view, a matter upon which the Secretary  of
     State (on behalf of the executive branch of government) is entitled to
     some leeway before the failure to make a  change  becomes  objectively
     unreasonable and unjustified.  So much follows from  the  speeches  in
     M's case.  Although that case was principally concerned with a  period
     in time (2001-2002) when the law had not been brought into  line  with
     changed (or changing) social mores, it is equally instructive  on  how
     we should approach the issue of implementation of the law once  it  is
     placed  on  the  statute  book.    We   see   nothing   excessive   or
     disproportionate in the period of a year  for  implementation,  and  a
     fortiori the 3 months until March 2005 when  the  appellant  made  his
     application for leave, given the  logistics  of  implementing  changes
     across a range of societal situations.

 52. It is the implementation aspect of this case which  distinguishes  it,
     and indeed M's case, from Ghaidan where the House of Lords applied s 3
     of the Human Rights Act to interpret the  relevant  provision  of  the
     Rent Act 1977 compatibly with the  ECHR  so  as  to  include  same-sex
     relationships.  It has never been suggested in this case, nor sensibly
     could it be for the reasons we  have  already  given,  that  para  284
     should  be  interpreted  to  include  same-sex   relationships.    The
     recognition of legislative and executive time  to  give  effect  to  a
     change in social policy simply did  not  arise  in  the  circumstances
     faced by the House of Lords in Ghaidan.  We consider that the approach
     of the House of Lords in M's case is more apposite here.

     Conclusion

 53. No right-thinking member of our society could today accept or tolerate
     discrimination on the ground of  sexual  orientation.   Discrimination
     laws and the 2004 Act reflect our repugnance and outright rejection of
     it: its wrongness is as strikingly clear as discrimination on  grounds
     of race  or  gender.    That  does  not  mean  that  all  must  change
     instantly.  We accept that the differential treatment in this case  is
     upon a "suspect" ground and that therefore any justifying reason  must
     be closely scrutinised.   For the  detailed  reasons  given,  we  have
     concluded that the differential  treatment  of  spouses  and  same-sex
     couples was, at the time, objectively justified. The immigration judge
     was wrong in law to take account of the legislative changes which  had
     not yet been implemented.  He was not entitled to reach  the  decision
     he did.  The appellant cannot establish that the Secretary of  State's
     decision to refuse him leave to remain on the basis  of  the  existing
     immigration rules was a breach of art 14 (read  with  art  8)  of  the
     ECHR.

Decision

 54. The immigration judge's decision cannot  stand  and  we  substitute  a
     decision dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.

 55. The appeal is dismissed.









                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                                             Date:
