
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                       Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2))
[2012] UKUT 79 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 January 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                         MR SHEIKAR AMITH ROY DAUHOO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Subramanian, legal representative, Lambeth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


Under the scheme set out in reg 8 (2) of the Immigration (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006, a person can succeed in establishing that he or  she
is an "extended family member"  in any one of four different ways,  each  of
which requires proving a relevant connection both prior to  arrival  in  the
UK and in the UK:

           i. prior dependency and present dependency


          ii. prior membership of a household and present membership  of  a
              household


         iii. prior dependency and present membership of a household;


          iv. prior membership of a household and present dependency.


11. It is not necessary, therefore, to show prior and present connection  in
the same capacity: i.e.  dependency-  dependency  or  household  membership-
household membership ((i) or (ii) above). A person may also qualify if  able
to show (iii) or (iv).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius.  He arrived in the UK on  a  six
months visit visa to his sister, Ms K Kupp, on 9 September  2004.   He  came
with his spouse, Ms K Dauhoo,  who  was  an  EEA  national.   He  received
subsequent grants of permission for leave to remain as a  student  until  31
May 2011.  On his own account his marriage broke down in April 2009  and  he
produced a decree absolute  dated  6  April  2010.   Since  his  arrival  he
claimed to have been living with and dependent upon  his  sister,  Ms  Kupp,
who was also an  EEA  national.   On  29  January  2011  he  applied  for  a
residence card on the basis that he was an extended  family  member  of  his
sister.  On 12 May 2011 the respondent refused that application stating:

         "There is no evidence to  show  that  you  were  resident  with  or
         dependent on your sister in another country  immediately  prior  to
         your arrival in the UK in 2004  nor have you supplied any  evidence
         that since you arrived in the UK you have  been  resident  with  or
         financially dependent on her".


2. The appellant appealed.  His case came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Aziz on 28 June 2011.  His evidence to the (FTT) was that  (1)  his  sister
had always been financially supporting him when he  was  in  Mauritius;  (2)
his sister had gone on supporting him financially since his arrival  in  the
UK in 2004, even paying for his ex-wife's studies in the UK;  and  that  (3)
after the breakdown of his marriage to Ms Dauhoo in mid-April 2009,  he  had
begun dating Ms A M Renwicz, a Polish national, and they have  continued  in
a subsisting (durable) relationship ever since, she moving in to  live  with
him at his sister's address in December 2009.  The appellant's evidence  was
supported  by  oral  evidence  from  his  sister  and  his  girlfriend,  his
girlfriend's sister as well as  a  close  friend  of  the  appellant,  Mr  S
Jukhoop.  The witnesses' accounts corroborated those of the appellant.

3. Despite finding the witnesses consistent, the judge found their  evidence
not credible in key respects.  He rejected the  appellant's  claim  to  have
been dependent on his sister either when he lived in Mauritius or  since  he
arrived in the UK.  As regards the appellant's  claim  to  have  been  in  a
durable relationship with  an  EEA  national  since  July/August  2009,  his
finding was:

         "Whilst I am prepared to accept that Ms A M Renwicz  lives  in  the
         same household as the appellant, I find that I am not persuaded  by
         the evidence that they are a cohabiting couple, let alone a  couple
         who have been cohabiting for two years".


4. He went on to dismiss the appellant's further claim that he was  entitled
to succeed in his appeal on Article 8 grounds.


5. The appellant was successful  in  obtaining  a  grant  of  permission  to
appeal.   The  kernel  of  the  grounds  accompanying  the  application  for
permission was that the FTT judge had wrongly assessed  the  evidence  about
the appellant's dependency on his sister whilst he was still  in  Mauritius;
that in relation to dependency both in Mauritius and in  the  UK  the  judge
had misapplied EU law on the meaning of dependency; and that as regards  the
appellant's  relationship  with  his  girlfriend,   the   judge   had   made
contradictory findings and had disregarded  relevant  documentary  evidence.
These points were amplified by Mr Subramanian in submissions.  Mr  Saunders,
for the respondent, urged that I find the judge had not erred in law.

6. In the course of these submissions I raised with the parties whether  the
judge's findings on the appellant's situation since arrival in the  UK  were
open to the criticism that he had failed to consider whether,  even  if  the
appellant could not prove dependency on his sister, he had proved (or  could
prove) membership of his sister's household.  Mr Saunders said the  judge's
finding did not dispute that the appellant was  a  member  of  his  sister's
household in the UK and that she was the head of  his  household  here.   He
further accepted that this sufficed to show that the appellant had  met  the
requirements of reg 8(2)(c) so far as his position in the UK is concerned.

Reg 8(2) extended family members

 7. In my judgment Mr Saunders was right so to  accept.   Regulation  8  as
amended by the Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment)  Regulations
2011 (in force from 2 June 2011) is headed  "Extended  family  members".  At
reg 8(2) it provides:

         "(2)   A person satisfies the condition in this  paragraph  if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and-

             (a)      the person is residing in a country  other  than  the
                  United Kingdom in which the EEA national also resides  and
                  is dependent upon the EEA national or is a member  of  his
                  household;

             (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
                  accompanying the EEA national to  the  United  Kingdom  or
                  wishes to join him there; or

             (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),  has
                  joined  the  EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom   and
                  continues to be dependent upon him or to be  a  member  of
                  his household."


8. Reg 8 also includes within the  definition  of  extended  family  members
relatives on serious health grounds  (reg  8(3));  dependent  relatives  who
meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules (reg 8(4)); and  partners  in
a durable relationship (reg 8(5)). But the focus here is  on  reg  8(2).  As
the Tribunal has emphasised in  a  number  of  cases,  e.g.  in  RK  (OFM  -
membership of household dependency) India [2010] UKUT 421 (IAC)  and  Moneke
(EEA  -  OFMs)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00341  (IAC)  (at  para  11(b)),  the
requirements of dependency and household  membership  as  found  within  reg
8(2)(a) and within reg 8(2)(c) are alternates;  they  are  not  conjunctive.
That is clear from the relevant  wording  of  each:  under  reg  8(2)(a)   a
person must show  he  is  "dependent  upon  or  is  a  member  of  [the  EEA
national's] household". Under reg 8(2)(c) a person must show  he  "continues
to be dependent upon...or to be a  member  of  his  household".  So  in  the
present case, even though rejecting that the  appellant  had  shown  present
dependency, the FTT judge should have accepted that he  had  satisfied  this
provision  by  virtue  of  having  shown  present  membership  of  the   EEA
principal's household.

9. However, it remains that in  order  to  qualify  as  an  extended  family
member/"other family member" under reg 8(2), a person who is in the UK  must
show that he meets the requirements of both reg 8(2)(a) and (c). He  has  to
show a relevant connection with the EEA principal both: (a) prior to  coming
to the UK (the essence of reg 8(2)(a))(the "prior" test); and (b) now he  is
here in the UK (the essence of reg 8(2)(c)) (the "present" test).

10. It may help to clarify these requirements in the  following  way.  Under
the reg 8(2) scheme, a person can succeed in establishing that he or she  is
an "extended family member"  in any one of  four  different  ways,  each  of
which requires proving a relevant connection both prior to  arrival  in  the
UK and in the UK:

           v. prior dependency and present dependency


          vi. prior membership of a household and present membership  of  a
              household


         vii. prior dependency and present membership of a household;


        viii. prior membership of a household and present dependency.


11. It is not necessary, therefore, to show prior and present connection  in
the same capacity: dependency- dependency or household  membership-household
membership, i.e. (i) or (ii) above. A person may also  qualify  if  able  to
show (iii) or (iv).

12. Although the above scheme is consistent with case law,  it  is  fair  to
consider one possible semantic objection to it. It might be  said  that  the
use of the present tense verb "continues" in  reg  8(2)(c)  denotes  that  a
person can only meet the requirement to show present dependency if  that  is
a "continued dependency" and, likewise, that a  person  can  only  meet  the
requirement to show present membership of an  EEA  national's  household  if
that is a  "continued  membership".  If  that  reading  were  correct,  then
permutations (iii) and (iv) above would be impermissible. However,  such  an
interpretation cannot be correct. Leaving aside that  if  the  drafters  had
intended the meaning of reg 8(2)(c) to be restricted in this way they  would
have said so, reg 8(2), being an attempt to  transpose  Article  3(2)(a)  of
Directive 2004/38/EC, must be construed purposively so as to  be  compatible
as far as is possible with that provision. Article 3 provides:

     "1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to  or
    reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a  national,
    and to their family members as defined in point  2  of  Article  2  who
    accompany or join them.
    2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement  and  residence  the
    persons concerned may have in their own right, the  host  Member  State
    shall, in accordance with its national  legislation,  facilitate  entry
    and residence for the following persons:


          (a) any other family members, irrespective of their  nationality,
          not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who,  in
          the country from which they have come, are dependants or  members
          of the household of the Union citizen having the primary right of
          residence, or where serious health grounds strictly  require  the
          personal care of the family members by the Union citizen;
          (b) the partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
          relationship, duly attested.


    The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination  of  the
    personal circumstances  and  shall  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or
    residence to these people."

13. It is immediately apparent that there  is  nothing  in  the  wording  of
Article 3(2)(a) that requires a person who, in the country from  which  they
have come, was a dependant or a member of the household of a  Union  citizen
to show they continue in the host Member state to be in precisely  the  same
category. Further, to read in such a requirement would be  contrary  to  the
stated underlying purpose of facilitating the residence of such persons.  It
would exclude, for example, a sibling who abroad had  been,  although  self-
sufficient, a member of the EEA principal's household but  who  now  wished,
with the financial support  of  the  EEA  principal,  to  undertake  studies
living separately. An elderly aunt who had been a dependent abroad  but  who
had now moved in to the EEA principal's household would be  excluded  simply
if, for example, she was recently left enough in a will to  make  her  self-
sufficient financially. My conclusion is  that  under  reg  8(2)  there  are
four, not two, possible ways in which a person can qualify  as  an  extended
family member.

14. However, even under the above fourfold schema,  the  appellant  in  this
case is still shut out.  For whilst he turns out to  have  established  that
he met the "present" requirement set out in reg 8(2)(c), by virtue of  being
a member of the EEA principal's household in the UK,  he  could  still  only
qualify as an extended family member if able to  show  a  "prior"   relevant
connection in his country of origin either in  the  form  of  dependency  or
membership of the EEA principal's household.

15. Mr Subramanian did not seek to argue that the appellant could show  that
in Mauritius he was  a  member  of  his  sister's  household.  Nor  did  the
evidence disclose any such feature.  He  did  maintain,  however,  that  the
judge should have found that the appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of
reg 8(2)(a) by virtue of dependency on his sister alone.   I  am  unable  to
accept that submission.

16. First of all, as regards the judge's assessment  of  the  appellant  and
his witnesses' evidence, I consider he gave  sound  reasons  for  concluding
that their claims were not credible. On the appellant's own account  he  had
studied mechanical engineering in Mauritius and had  also  done  work  as  a
mechanical engineer in Mauritius, which  was  a  skilled  job.  Although  he
claimed that his wage for this work was  low,  he  adduced  no  evidence  to
support that claim.  The appellant did not claim to have  had  any  physical
or mental problems. He was able-bodied.  In relation to the claim  that  his
sister (who then lived in  Germany)  had  financially  supported  him  since
school, the documentary evidence adduced to support it had very  significant
shortcomings.  There was only one money transfer  from  his  sister.   There
was also a letter from a Western Union branch in Germany which  avowed  that
the appellant's sister had been sending money to her  brother  in  Mauritius
from 1999 - 2004, but it was not on any official  letter  headed  paper  and
did  not  provide  any  particulars  in  support.   There  were   items   of
correspondence from  individuals  supporting  the  appellant's  claim  about
prior dependency, but the judge found they lacked substance, as  was  within
his scope to do. Accordingly I consider it was entirely open  to  the  judge
to find this body of  evidence,  which  contained  very  little  independent
documentary evidence, quite  insufficient  to  demonstrate  the  appellant's
claimed dependency in Mauritius.  It should  be  recalled  that  in  Ihemedu
(OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT  340  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  held
that:

     "If an applicant chooses not to apply from abroad for a family  permit
    under  reg  12  of  the  2006  Regulations,  thereby  denying  the   UK
    authorities an  opportunity  to  check  documentation  in  the  country
    concerned, he cannot expect any relaxation in the burden of proof  that
    applies to him when seeking to establish an EEA right."

17. Had the appellant sought to apply  from  Mauritius  for  an  EEA  family
permit under reg 12, it  is  envisaged  by  Article  10(2)(e)  of  Directive
2004/38/EC that he would need to produce  documents  certifying  dependency.
By having afforded the British post in Mauritius no opportunity  to  receive
and check documentation relating to dependency, and having chosen to  travel
to the UK instead (and eventually to apply from here), the  appellant  could
not expect  the  judge  to  overlook  a  lack  of  satisfactory  documentary
evidence just  because  he  was  able  to  produce  witness  statements  and
witnesses.

18. Accordingly, even accepting that the appellant had met the  requirements
of reg 8(2)(c), he had failed to meet those set out in reg 8(2)(a)  (and  so
could not show he was an extended family member).

The EEA claim based on durable relationship

19.Turning to Mr Subramanian's challenge to the FTT   judge's  treatment  of
the  appellant's  claim  to  qualify  by  virtue  of  being  in  a   durable
relationship with an EEA partner  under reg 8(5) (a separate subcategory  of
"extended family member"), again I discern no material error of law.  It  is
true that the judge had accepted that the appellant's partner now  lives  in
the same household as the appellant (para 72).  I would also agree  with  Mr
Subramanian that given that finding the judge was obliged  to  explain  more
fully  why  he  nevertheless  considered  they  were  not   in   a   durable
relationship, particularly since being in a durable  relationship  does  not
even necessarily entail cohabitation:  see   YB  (EEA  reg  17(4)  -  proper
approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062 and Rose (Automatic  deportation  -
Exception 3) Jamaica [2011] UKUT  276  (IAC)  (at  para  24).  However,  the
furthest that this line of challenge can take the appellant is to  establish
a prima facie case for considering the couple had  been  in  a  relationship
for a relatively short period  prior  to  the  date  of  hearing.   That  is
because the judge was quite adamant, and in my judgment  with  good  reason,
in  finding  the  couple's  claim  to  have  been  in  a  relationship  from
July/August 2009 to 24 May 2011 not credible.  The judge gave  a  number  of
reasons for this, relying in particular on the fact that the  appellant  had
made no mention of this relationship when he submitted his  application  for
a residence card in January 2011.   The  judge  considered  the  appellant's
attempt to explain this omission - in terms of his wanting to wait  for  the
outcome of the EEA application on the basis of  being  a  dependent  of  his
sister - and was quite entitled to reject it by pointing  out  that  at  the
time of the application the appellant, on  his  own  evidence,  had  already
been cohabiting with his partner for over a year and in a relationship  with
her since July/August 2009.  I note further that  even  in  the  grounds  of
appeal  lodged  in  May  2011  the  appellant  made  no  reference  to  this
relationship.  Mr Subramanian rightly points out the appellant's grounds  of
appeal do raise Article 8, but they do not particularise that claim  at  all
and can only have been taken by implication to refer, if to anyone,  to  the
appellant's ties with his sister. None of the supporting documents  referred
to the partner.

20. The grounds of appeal before  me  complain  that  the  judge  failed  to
consider the bank statement  of  the  appellant's  fianc�e  which  had  been
submitted in time for the hearing and which clearly showed the same  address
as that of the appellant, but the judge accepted that she was  in  a  common
household with the appellant. What the judge did not accept, and  what  this
statement did not show, was any evidence of  a  relationship  prior  to  May
2011.

21. Although Mr Subramanian did not raise the point, it is accepted  by  the
Tribunal in reported decisions that despite the reference in  UKBA  European
Casework Instructions to proof of a durable relationship requiring  evidence
that the relationship has  lasted  two  years,  the  concept  of  a  durable
relationship is a term of EU law and as such it  does  not  impose  a  fixed
time period: see  YB.   Having  said  that,  on  the  judge's  findings  the
relationship had only been shown to exist, if at all, very recently  and  on
the appellant's own evidence his partner was economically  self  sufficient.
Mr Subramanian sensibly did  not  seek  to  argue  that  the  appellant  was
entitled to succeed in showing that the relationship was durable if  only  a
very recent relationship could be established.  For the avoidance  of  doubt
I would add that on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  the  FTT  judge  a
durable relationship had not been established.

22. As regards Article 8, I consider  that  the  judge's  findings  of  fact
(which I have found to be unaffected by legal  error)  more  than  justified
him in concluding there was no violation.  The appellant, albeit  living  in
his sister's household, had not established financial dependency on  her  in
the UK, only membership of her household.  The appellant was in good  health
and his relationship with his sister, both being adults, was not  sufficient
to establish family life.  His relationship with Ms  A  M  Renwicz  was  too
recent to merit treating it as a  significant  (de  facto)  family  life  or
private life tie.  The appellant had only been granted  leave  to  enter  or
remain in the UK  for  temporary  purposes  (studies)  which  he  no  longer
pursued.  The appellant had spent the majority of his life in Mauritius  and
had also worked there as a mechanical engineer.  There was no  valid  reason
to suppose that on return to Mauritius he could not support himself and  any
dependants. All these were factors which the judge  considered  and  weighed
fairly in the balance.

23. For the above  reasons  I  conclude  that  although  the  judge  can  be
criticised in one or two respects, the  determination  did  not  contain  an
error of law and is not, therefore, to be set aside.

Signed                                             Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
