
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

         LP (LTTE area - Tamils - Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT
                                                                       00076

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 27 and 28 November 2006                    |                             |
|and on 12 April 2007                          |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MACKEY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MATHER
                                MRS E MORTON

                                   Between

                                     LP
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. MacKenzie, Counsel instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce & Partners Solicitors, London.
For the Respondent:    Miss J. Richards, Counsel instructed by the Treasury
                    Solicitor

(1) Tamils are not per se at risk  of  serious  harm  from  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities in  Colombo.   A  number  of  factors  may  increase  the  risk,
including but not limited to:   a previous record as a suspected  or  actual
LTTE member; a previous criminal record and/or outstanding  arrest  warrant;
bail jumping and/or escaping from custody; having  signed  a  confession  or
similar document; having been asked by the  security  forces  to  become  an
informer; the presence of scarring; return from London or  other  centre  of
LTTE fundraising; illegal departure from Sri Lanka; lack of an  ID  card  or
other documentation; having made an asylum claim  abroad;  having  relatives
in the LTTE. In every case, those factors and the weight to be  ascribed  to
them, individually and cumulatively, must be considered in the light of  the
facts of each case but they are not intended to be a check list.
(2) If a person is actively wanted by the police and/or named on  a  Watched
or Wanted list held at Colombo airport, they may be at risk of detention  at
the airport.
(3)  Otherwise,  the  majority  of  returning  failed  asylum  seekers   are
processed relatively quickly and with no  difficulty  beyond  some  possible
harassment.
(4)  Tamils  in  Colombo  are  at  increased  risk  of  being   stopped   at
checkpoints, in a cordon and search operation, or of being the subject of  a
raid on a Lodge where they are staying.  In general, the risk  again  is  no
more than harassment and  should  not  cause  any  lasting  difficulty,  but
Tamils who have recently returned to Sri Lanka  and  have  not  yet  renewed
their Sri Lankan identity documents will be subject  to  more  investigation
and the factors listed above may then come into play.
(5) Returning Tamils should be able to establish the fact  of  their  recent
return during the short period necessary for new identity  documents  to  be
procured.
(6) A person who cannot establish that he is at real risk of persecution  in
his home area is not a refugee; but his appeal may succeed under  article  3
of the ECHR, or he may be  entitled to humanitarian  protection  if  he  can
establish he would be at risk in the part of the country to  which  he  will
be returned.
(7) The weight to be given to expert evidence (individual  or  country)  and
country background evidence is dependent upon the quality of  the  raw  data
from which it is drawn and the quality of the  filtering  process  to  which
that data has been subjected.  Sources should be given whenever possible.
(8) The determinations about Sri Lanka listed in para 229  are  replaced  as
country guidance by  this  determination.   They  continue  to  be  reported
cases.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Contents
      (1)   Introduction and  conclusions  on  first  stage  reconsideration
         setting out the material error of law.

      (2)    The issues.
       (3)    The  appellant's  case,   including   consideration   of   the
         appellant's evidence, statements of witnesses P M, and Ms K C and
         the reports of Doctors M Seear and Kanagararatnam.

      (4)   The role of the expert witness and our conclusions  on  "expert"
         evidence in country guidance determinations.

      (5)    The respondent's background evidence.

      (6)    The appellant's background evidence.

      (7)   Submissions on the appellant's case and the background  evidence
         by Miss Richards for the respondent.

      (8)   Submissions on the appellant's case and the background  evidence
         by Mr MacKenzie for the appellant.

      (9)   General  conclusions  on  the  background  evidence  and  expert
         reports, as assessed, when set against the issues identified.

      (10)   Application of the general conclusions to the appellant's  case
    and decision.

      (11)  Conclusions on the continuing applicability  of  Sri  Lankan  CG
         cases and deletion of several.

      (12)   Summary of findings.

      (13)   Appendix of documents considered.


1.    Introduction and Conclusions on First  Stage  Reconsideration  Setting
    Out Material Error of Law

1.    This matter came before us as a second stage reconsideration  and  was
    identified  as  a  potential  country  guidance   determination.    The
    appellant is an ethnic Tamil from Jaffna in the  north  of  Sri  Lanka.
    Following problems and involvement of the appellant  and  other  family
    members in the LTTE and later problems with the Sri Lankan  authorities
    the appellant fled Sri Lanka via Colombo Airport on 29 December  1999.
    He arrived in this country on 5 January 2000 and  claimed  asylum  that
    day.  After an interview with the respondent in May 2000 he  was  given
    permission to work and did so.   In  late  2004  his  work  permit  was
    withdrawn.  He applied for it to be reinstated.  His asylum  claim  was
    refused in July 2005.  Detailed  reasons  were  given  in  the  refusal
    letter dated 11 July 2005.  That refusal letter did not challenge  the
    appellant's credibility.  The appellant then appealed to an Immigration
    Judge.   After  a  hearing  before  Immigration  Judge  E B Grant  on
    27 September 2005 she dismissed his appeal on both  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds, in a determination promulgated on 13 October 2005.  The
    appellant applied for reconsideration.  An  order  for  reconsideration
    was made by Senior Immigration Judge Gill  on  31 October  2005.   The
    matter then came before Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley on  23 April
    2006.  He  found  that  there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination for the reasons set out below.

2.    He said:-

         "Reasons for the Determination that there is an Error of Law in the
         Determination

         The Home Office Presenting Officer accepted  that  the  Immigration
         Judge did not appear to accept Dr Smith as an expert witness,  save
         only in relation to arms, as per the final sentence of paragraph 33
         of the determination.  The Home Office Presenting Officer suggested
         that in all  other  respects,  the  Immigration  Judge  rejects  Dr
         Smith's expertise and for that reason rejected his reports since it
         was un-sourced.  I find that in not making a clear  finding  as  to
         whether or not she did accept him to  be  an  expert  witness,  the
         Immigration Judge erred in law.  In any event, if the Judge did, as
         the respondent maintains, only accept his  expertise  in  one  area
         dealt with in his report, she should have clearly given her reasons
         for rejecting his claimed expertise in other areas  dealt  with  by
         him in his report.  Grounds one and two  of  the  application  were
         found to have been made out and in the circumstances it was thought
         by the representative to be unnecessary for me to go on to consider
         the remaining challenges to the determination."

3.    The matter was then  adjourned  for  a  second  stage  reconsideration
    before a senior panel of the Tribunal, both on the  issues  of  country
    expert witnesses, and the risks on return to this appellant as a  known
    LTTE supporter with scars, who was released on  bail  and  subsequently
    failed to report to sign on.

4.    We were  provided  with  a  main  respondent's  bundle,  supplementary
    respondent's bundle, 4 appellant's bundles (A, B and C and  D)  and  an
    appellant's bundle of authorities.  We were also given a note from  the
    appellant on existing Country Guidance ("CG") cases in  response  to  a
    request made to both parties.  Ms Richards addressed us orally on  this
    matter.  Skeleton arguments for both the appellant and respondent  were
    also submitted and on the second day of the hearing a BBC  News  Report
    "Tamil statehood 'is only option'", dated 27 November  2006.   A  full
    list of the country evidence, including the expert reports, is set  out
    in the appendix to this determination.

2.    The Issues

5.    Because of the problems identified in the grounds in  respect  of  the
    use or assessment of country expert witnesses at  preliminary  hearings
    and in skeleton arguments, the first issue considered  by  us  was  the
    role of country expert  witnesses,  particularly  in  country  guidance
    cases before the Tribunal.  The submissions of  both  parties  and  our
    conclusions are set out in Part (4) of this determination.

6.    The other issues identified by us are:

    (a)     General conclusions to be reached after full  consideration  of
        all the background evidence,  case  law  and  expert  witnesses  in
        relation to the twelve areas of potential risk,  either  separately
        or cumulatively, set out in paragraph 161.


    (b)      Based  on  our  conclusions  in  relation  to   those   risks,
        objectively (and to a limited extent only,  subjectively),  on  the
        facts as found, does that evidence indicate a well-founded fear  of
        persecution for one or more of the five Refugee Convention reasons,
        or is the appellant entitled to humanitarian protection within  the
        provisions of the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International
        Protection   (Qualification)   Regulations    (2006/2525)    and/or
        Immigration Rules (Paras 339C -  339Q)  and/or  would  there  be  a
        breach of either Article 3 or 8 of the European Convention on Human
        Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) 1950 if this appellant  were
        returned to Sri Lanka?

7.    In the hearing the issue of  the  current  apparent  impossibility  of
    returning this appellant to his former home district of Jaffna  because
    of the state of emergency in Sri Lanka was  discussed  and  submissions
    invited from the parties as to how  we  should  proceed..  Ms Richards
    conceded that it would not be possible  at  this  time  to  return  him
    directly to his home district of Jaffna and thus  this  claim  must  be
    assessed against the risks  to  him  on  return  to  Colombo,  that  is
    including risks at the airport. For the above reasons we have primarily
    assessed the risks to the appellant in  Colombo(including  the  airport
    risk) from the Sri Lankan authorities, although we  have  addressed  in
    passing the risks from LTTE operatives to the appellant in the  Colombo
    district, but not in other parts of Sri Lanka (including  the  original
    home district), because of the above concession of an impossibility  of
    return to Jaffna, at this time.   We also note no exclusion issues were
    raised before us.

3.    The Appellant's Case

8.    This matter proceeded on the basis that there was no challenge to  the
    appellant's credibility on past events and thus the  issues,  as  noted
    above, before us related to the well-foundedness of the  risks  to  the
    appellant if returned to Sri Lanka.

9.    The appellant  relied  on  a  statement,  contained  at  A1-8  of  the
    appellant's bundle A.  Immigration Judge Grant in her determination of
    13 October 2005 set out at paragraph 42 under the heading "My Findings
    of Credibility and Fact":

        "42.     The  appellant  was  not  cross-examined  by  Mr Beaumont
              because the  Home  Office  file  containing  details  of  the
              appellant's claim appears to have been mislaid  by  the  Home
              Office.  Consequently Mr Beaumont was unable to prepare  for
              the hearing before me in any  meaningful  way.   Nevertheless
              the refusal letter accepts the appellant may have  been  ill-
              treated whilst in detention.  No issue  was  taken  with  his
              claim to have been released by payment of a sum of  money  at
              court by his uncle and no issue was taken  with  the  claimed
              history with the LTTE.  The issues for me  to  determine  are
              whether in the light of this history there is any  real  risk
              of a breach of the  Refugee  Convention  on  return;  whether
              there is a risk of a breach of his protected human rights  on
              return, whether from the Sri Lankan authorities or  from  the
              LTTE from which he would not receive effective protection?"

10.   In summary his claim is that while living in an LTTE  controlled  area
    of Sri Lanka between 1995  and  1999  he  assisted  the  LTTE,  albeit
    unwillingly.  In October 1999 he moved to a government controlled  area
    of Sri Lanka in order  to  avoid  being  pressurised  into  undertaking
    military training with the LTTE.  He was suspected  of  supporting  the
    LTTE and was detained and tortured by  government  forces  in  November
    1999.  Under torture he admitted assisting the LTTE.  He was eventually
    released on bail by a court, in  Colombo,  with  his  uncle  acting  as
    surety.  He then continued to be of interest to the authorities and was
    pressurised by them into agreeing to become  an  informer  against  the
    LTTE.  In order to avoid this he fled the country and claimed asylum in
    the UK in January 2000.  Since that time he advises that his uncle, who
    stood bail for him, was detained, questioned and ill-treated in  August
    2001 on account of his association with the appellant.   The  appellant
    has documented scars resulting from torture.

11.   A medical report from  Dr Michael  Seear,  dated  10  September  2005
    records the background, physical examination, details of scarring,  and
    comments on the appellant's back  pain  and  other  restrictions.   The
    appellant reported to Dr Seear that during a period from October  1995
    to 1999 when he was forced to work with the LTTE he developed back pain
    as a result of digging  bunkers  and  his  hands  were  lacerated.   In
    November 1999 he was detained at the Vavuniya CID Camp for  about  five
    days.  During  that  time  he  stated  that  he  had  been  questioned,
    suffocated with a petrol soaked polythene bag,  hung  upside  down  and
    beaten, beaten with canes, sticks and plastic pipes filled  with  sand,
    and kicked in his back.  After that  five  days  of  detention  he  was
    transferred to the Kalutara Prison. There he was  harassed  by  Sinhala
    prisoners, who poured water on the sheets and bedding he  was  sleeping
    in, put sand in his food, and forced him to do cooking.  While there he
    was also beaten by the Sinhala prisoners and guards.  He was then taken
    to court and then released on bail of Rs 50,000, with a requirement to
    report weekly to W Police Station.  He received some treatment for his
    injuries at a private clinic in W.

12.   The physical examination  reported  by  Dr Seear  set  out  areas  of
    scarring.  These were: on his arm where he stated he  had  been  beaten
    with a stick with an object in it; on his chest, as a result of  blows,
    a group of small hyper-pigmented scars which were also stated to be the
    result of blows; highly pigmented scars on his feet caused  by  digging
    bunkers barefoot; on his knee, which was stated to be the result  of  a
    motorbike injury and on his right leg said to be the  result  of  being
    hung upside down and an appendectomy scar.  With the exception  of  the
    appendectomy, and the scar resulting from  a  motorbike  accident,  the
    doctor found the scarring consistent with  the  appellant's  claims  of
    torture and mal-treatment.

13.   Additionally the doctor noted the appellant had tender  areas  in  his
    back, back pain and restricted movement in his legs and hips.

14.    A  psychiatric  report,  dated  24  September  2005   by   Dr   Gunam
    Kanagaratnam, Consultant Psychiatrist, Kingston and Richmond  Assertive
    Outreach  Services  and  Psychiatric  Intensive  Care  Unit,  Tollworth
    Hospital, Surrey, diagnosed that:

         "On  account  of  Mr  P  mental  state  and  his  torture/traumatic
         experiences in Sri Lanka I am of the opinion that Mr P suffers from
         Post Traumatic Stress Disorder."

    An assessment of availability of treatment in Sri Lanka is also set out
    in the report.   Because  our  conclusions  in  this  matter  have  not
    extended to consideration of availability of psychiatric  treatment  in
    Sri  Lanka  for  persons  with  traumatic  disorders,  details  of  the
    treatment available as recorded by Dr Kanagaratnam are not set out.

15.   Statements in support of the appellant's claim were  included  in  the
    appellant's bundle from P M and Ms K C  (the  appellant's  bundle A,
    pages 9-30).  Neither of these witnesses gave oral evidence.

16.   Mr P M, a British citizen, stated that the appellant was related  to
    him, as his brother-in-law's nephew.   He  stated  that  he  had  given
    emotional support to the appellant since his  arrival  in  the  UK  and
    helped him financially until he started working.  The  appellant  lived
    with him.  He records the appellant became  depressed  and  his  mental
    health deteriorated  after  his  asylum  claim  was  turned  down.   He
    assisted him in arranging medical appointments and reminding him  about
    medication he should take.

17.   Ms K C states that she had arrived in the UK in August 2001 and  was
    recognised as a refugee, after an appeal to an  Immigration  Judge,  on
    7 September 2005.  She states that her father  was  a  friend  of  the
    appellant's father and confirmed that when the appellant and his family
    moved to C in July 1995, they stayed in a refugee camp and  her  family
    provided food and other essential items to the appellant's family  when
    they stayed in the refugee  camp.   She  stated  that  the  appellant's
    family moved away when the Sri Lankan forces started advancing  into  C
    and she did not see the appellant again until  he  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom.



4.    The Role of the Country Expert Witness

18.   The issue of the role  of  expert  witnesses  in  asylum  appeals  was
    raised by the respondent.  His position was summarised  in  a  position
    paper.  The points raised were as follows:-

        "2.      The Secretary of State hopes that  the  Tribunal  and  the
           Appellants will be assisted by an indication of the Secretary of
           State's position regarding the role of expert  reports  relating
           to country conditions in appeals before this Tribunal.

            3.   The Secretary of State will  submit  that  the  role  of  a
           'country  expert'  is  different  in  a  number  of  significant
           respects from that of most expert witnesses  in  ordinary  civil
           litigation.  In many areas of law the Court will be required  to
           assess expert evidence in a field where specialist knowledge  is
           required in order to interpret "raw data".  So  for  example,  a
           medical expert may be able to assist the Court  in  relation  to
           the significance of test results, or  by  explaining  diagnostic
           findings made on clinical examination of an  individual.   These
           are matters where the Court could not be expected  to  have  the
           specialist  knowledge  required  to  interpret  the   underlying
           information.  Even in these circumstances, an expert is required
           to consider all  material  facts,  including  those  that  might
           detract from his opinion.

            4.   The role of a 'country expert' in an appeal before the  AIT
           is rather different.  Here, the issue relates to conditions in a
           specified country or region.  It is unlikely that any specialist
           knowledge is required in order  to  interpret  the  information.
           Rather the role of a 'country expert'  is  to  assist  with  the
           provision of the 'raw data', in terms of providing comprehensive
           and balanced factual information  relating  to  the  issues  the
           Tribunal must resolve.  In this regard, it is important to  bear
           in mind that the AIT is a specialist tribunal, which itself  has
           a level of expertise.  Whilst the AIT may  be  assisted  by  the
           opinion of a 'country expert', it is important that the Tribunal
           is provided with the factual material upon which that opinion is
           based, in order to conduct its own assessment of the conclusions
           to be drawn from it.

            5.   The Secretary of State respectfully submits that it  is  of
           central importance to the fair conduct of proceedings  that  the
           Tribunal should be able to assess whether a  country  expert  is
           presenting  a  balanced  picture  and/or  is   exaggerating   or
           presenting a partial or inaccurate  account  of  the  underlying
           information.  In making that assessment,  the  Tribunal  may  be
           assisted by cross examination of the witness.  It  is  difficult
           (if not impossible) to conduct a proper  cross  examination  (or
           indeed  for  the  Tribunal  to  conduct  an  assessment  of  the
           evidence) without access to the underlying  information  (as  to
           the importance of considering the underlying  evidence  see  for
           example the assessment of the  expert  evidence  in  the  recent
           Sudan CG case (HGMO Sudan [2006] UKAIT 00062).

            6.   In particular, the Secretary of State will submit that:

                 (i)    Where  a  country  report  relies  upon  information
               contained  in  a  publicly  available  document,  it  should
               provide sufficient details to enable a copy of that document
               to be obtained;

                  (ii)   Where  the  author  of  the  report   relies   upon
               information contained in a document  that  is  not  publicly
               available, he should annexe a copy of any such  document  to
               the report (with redactions if necessary - see below);

                  (iii)  Where  the  author  of  the  report   relies   upon
               information  provided  orally,  it  is  important  that   he
               provides a full account of  what  was  said  (including  any
               notes of the conversation).  As well  as  providing  a  full
               account of the contents of any discussion, the author should
               identify the source of  the  information  (even  if  not  by
               name).  The Tribunal has power to take steps to protect  the
               identity of sensitive sources, and if  agreement  cannot  be
               reached as to the extent of the identification, the  parties
               can seek directions.

                       The Secretary of  State  considers  that  this  is  a
               matter of some importance, particularly in country  guidance
               cases: the Tribunal should endeavour to avoid the  situation
               where it bases findings on an incomplete account of  hearsay
               evidence from an unidentified primary source,  that  account
               having  been   provided   by   an   expert   witness   whose
               interpretation of the conversation may be  coloured  by  his
               own views.

            7.   With specific reference to the reports relied upon  by  the
           Appellants in the present appeals, the Secretary of State  would
           wish to cross examine Dr. Smith.  However, he is concerned that
           Dr. Smith's reports do not provide sufficient information as to
           the sources of the author's information to enable the  Secretary
           of State to conduct a meaningful cross examination, or to assist
           the Tribunal to make a proper assessment of  the  weight  to  be
           accorded to Dr. Smith's opinions.

            8.   The Secretary of State would therefore invite the  Tribunal
           to direct that the Appellants serve an indexed bundle containing
           the materials relied upon by Dr. Smith in compiling his reports,
           and indicating which sections of each document are relied  upon.
           The Secretary of State's position regarding Dr. Smith's reports
           may need to be  reviewed  in  the  light  of  any  such  further
           disclosure."


    In paragraph 5 of the paper there is reference to HGMO  (Relocation  to
    Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKIAT 00062, paragraphs 161 to 170.  The part
    of the decision relied  upon  has  not  been  affected  by  the  recent
    decision on that case by the Court of Appeal (AH & Ors  (Sudan)  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 297).


19.   Miss Richards developed her argument by going  to  English  Exporters
    (London) Limited v Eldonwall Limited [1973] 1 CH 415.  Megarry J had
    noted, in that case, the experts involved  were  both  fellows  of  the
    Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.   That,  she  argued,  showed
    that professional qualifications can be recognised. (We would add  that
    any expert with a professional qualification  also  needs  demonstrable
    expertise in an appropriate  part  of  his  or  her  discipline.)   She
    referred to the following passage, at page 421, having reminded us that
    Megarry J had  earlier  dealt  with  the  unsurprising  assertion  that
    experts may give factual evidence as well as expressing an opinion.  He
    then said:-

         "It seems to me quite another matter when it  is  asserted  that  a
         valuer may give factual evidence of transactions of which he has no
         direct knowledge, whether per se or whether in the guise of  giving
         reasons for his opinion as to value.  It is one thing to say, "From
         my general experience of recent transactions comparable  with  this
         one, I think the proper rent should be �x": it is another thing  to
         say, "Because I have been told by someone else  that  the  premises
         next door have an area of x square feet and were  recently  let  on
         such and such terms for �y a year, I say the rent of these premises
         should be �z a year".  What he has been  told  about  the  premises
         next door may be inaccurate or misleading as to the area, the rent,
         the terms and much else besides.  It makes it no  better  when  the
         witness expresses his confidence in the reliability of  his  source
         of information.  A transparently honest and careful witness  cannot
         make information reliable if, instead of speaking of  what  he  has
         seen and heard for himself, he is merely retailing what others have
         told him.  The other party to the litigation is entitled to have  a
         witness whom he can cross-examine on oath as to the reliability  of
         the facts deposed to, and not  merely  as  to  the  reliability  of
         information which was given to him not on  oath,  and  possibly  in
         circumstances tending to inaccuracies and slips.   Further,  it  is
         often difficult enough for the Courts to ascertain the  true  facts
         and  witnesses  giving   direct   evidence,   without   the   added
         complication of attempts to evaluate a witnesses'  opinion  of  the
         reliability, care  and  thoroughness  of  some  informant  who  has
         supplied the witness with the facts that he is seeking to recount."


20.   Although Miss Richards did not rely on it, it is  perhaps  helpful  to
    quote the next part of the judgment which went on to say:-

         "It therefore seems to me that details of  comparable  transactions
         upon which a valuer intends to rely in his evidence must,  if  they
         are to be put before the Court, be confined to those details  which
         have been, or will be, proved by admissible evidence, given  either
         by the valuer himself or in some other way.  I know of  no  special
         rule giving expert valuation witnesses  a  right  to  give  hearsay
         evidence of fact, and...  I can see no compelling reason of  policy
         why they should be able to do this."


21.   We of course recognise that in this Tribunal, in dealing  with  asylum
    and protection issues, the rules of evidence, applicable in most  other
    parts of the law, are not strictly applied, and we quote  this  passage
    not in relation to the hearsay point but only to  illustrate  the  need
    for caution in establishing the underlying facts upon which  an  expert
    opinion is based.  Caution is also needed  in  the  use  to  which  the
    English Exporters judgment is put.  Megarry J was writing his  judgment
    in 1973 and was sitting in a jurisdiction  in  which  hearsay  was,  in
    principle, inadmissible.  He was therefore concerned to prevent hearsay
    becoming admissible by being put through the mouth of an expert.  It is
    clear that, even in that jurisdiction that both as an exception to  the
    hearsay rule, and as part of the admissible evidence of an  expert  (to
    the extent  that  those  are  different)  the  position  has  moved  on
    considerably over the past 30 years.  At most, Megarry  J  was  stating
    that the valuer was entitled to rely on the  expertise  he  had  gained
    from all sources in expressing his opinion,  which  is  different  from
    allowing him to give evidence of the information he  had  gathered  and
    which  backed  up  the  expertise.   Refugee  and  Protection  law  has
    developed over the last 30-40 years and, for entirely logical  reasons,
    as noted, the rules of evidence that are applicable in other fields  of
    civil law are not applicable here.  Those reasons relate to the  unique
    nature in which claims arise and  the  serious  consequences  that  may
    occur if a wrong decision is reached.  They also relate to the inherent
    difficulty that can arise in assessing whether an appellant has a well-
    founded fear of persecution  (or  other  serious  harm)  on  return  to
    [usually]  his  home  country.   That  assessment  must  be   made   by
    considering the totality of the evidence, including  hearsay  evidence,
    from the appellant and  an  often  vast  array  of  other  sources,  of
    variable quality.  That much has been recognised in a number of  cases,
    including Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958 and Karanakaran [2001] ImmAR 271.

22.   Miss  Richards  asked  us  to  bear  in  mind  Megarry J's  judgment,
    especially with reference to Dr Smith.  She was not suggesting that his
    evidence was  inadmissible,  but  said  care  needed  to  be  taken  in
    assessing the weight to be put  upon  it,  because  only  some  of  his
    sources are identified, others are not.   She  argued  we  should  have
    regard to the fact there is little information about the  conversations
    which Mr Smith had with his sources.  She  said  we  do  not  know  the
    agenda of the people that he was speaking to, or the context  in  which
    the conversations took place.

23.   She then turned to  Slimani  (Content  of  Adjudicator  Determination)
    Algeria* [2001] UKIAT 00009,  a  decision  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal chaired by the President, Collins J.   At  paragraph  17  the
    Tribunal, dealing with expert country evidence, and said this:-

         "Often those opinions are in letters or statements and  the  writer
         is not called to give evidence or  be  cross-examined.   Some  such
         experts are highly respected...and at the very least their evidence
         can be said to have been given in good faith and  to  be  based  on
         reliable sources.  Others range from the  generally  reasonable  to
         the  unacceptable,  and  even  venal.   But  all  suffer  from  the
         difficulty that very rarely are they entirely  objective  in  their
         approach and the sources relied on are  frequently  (and  no  doubt
         sometimes with good reason) unidentified.  Many have fixed opinions
         about the regime in a particular country and would be  inclined  to
         accept anything which is detrimental to that  regime.   This  means
         that more often than not the expert in question, even if he has the
         credentials which qualify him in that role, will be acting more  as
         an advocate than an expert witness.   While  the  principles  which
         apply to expert witnesses called in  High  Court  actions  are  not
         directly applicable, they give  guidance  when  the  weight  to  be
         attached to such evidence is considered.  The  most  important  are
         the need for independent assistance to the Adjudicator or Tribunal,
         the prohibition against assuming the role of an  advocate  and  the
         need to specify the facts upon  which  an  opinion  is  based:  see
         National Justice Compania Naviera S.A. v. Prudential  Assurance  Co
         Limited ("the Ikarian Reefer") [1993] 2 Lloyds Rep.#68 at 81-82 per
         Cresswell, J."


24.   Miss Richards dealt with Markos [2002] UKIAT 08313 a short  decision
    of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal chaired  by  Mr T S Culver.   She
    mentioned this, in anticipation that the  appellant  would  be  relying
    upon it, because at paragraph 20 the Tribunal said:-


         "It is in the nature of an expert that he does not need to refer to
         sources.  He is the source.  It may add force  to  his  opinion  to
         refer to his sources and he is only an expert if he  satisfies  the
         Court he has sound basis for his opinions".


25.   Miss Richards did not believe that decision was particularly helpful.
     We agree and note it is not a citable decision.  She argued that if an
    expert had lived in a country, or seen matters for himself, there would
    arguably be no need for him to quote sources.  But, if it is  simply  a
    question of his having collated information, then he does need to refer
    to sources.

26.   She emphasised the importance of sources.  She said that the  function
    of an expert is twofold.  Firstly, to provide and analyse material  and
    to make it available to the Tribunal and, secondly,  to  see  that  the
    material is relevant to the  appellant's  case.   She  said  particular
    caution is needed in relation to that second task because otherwise the
    boundaries between the expert witness and the Tribunal are in danger of
    being blurred.  She emphasised that an expert's evidence  is  only  one
    piece of evidence and the Tribunal is not obliged to  accept  it.   She
    argued that in order to be able to ascertain what weight should be  put
    on it, it was essential that the material should be  verifiable  as  to
    the facts and it is important that the expert makes material  available
    to enable the opinion to be assessed.   Miss  Richards  summarised  her
    position by saying that she  did  not  suggest  that  country  guidance
    evidence such as that adduced in this case is inadmissible; but she did
    contrast the role and function of the country guidance expert  in  this
    Tribunal with expert witnesses in other jurisdictions.  She  emphasised
    that these experts did not belong to a profession  where  there  was  a
    qualification as a country expert, and that their role  was  simply  to
    put information and material before the Tribunal which it was then  the
    Tribunal's task to assess.


27.    For  the  appellant,  Mr  MacKenzie  argued  that  the   respondent's
    submissions about experts were simply wrong.  He argued that it is  not
    the expert's role solely to provide "raw data".  Nor  is  it  the  case
    that no specialist knowledge  is  required  to  interpret  the  country
    information.  In his  skeleton  argument,  he  said  that  the  experts
    provide not only factual information but opinions on those  facts.   He
    submitted that those opinions constitute evidence to which the Tribunal
    is bound to give appropriate weight.  He said that is clear  from  both
    the earlier jurisprudence, and  the  amended  AIT  practice  directions
    which were published in draft at the time of the hearing.   (They  have
    since been issued).  At paragraph 8(A) the practice directions say:-

         "8A      Expert evidence


         8A.1     A party who instructs an expert  must  provide  clear  and
              precise  instructions  to  the  expert,  together  with   all
              relevant information concerning the nature of the appellant's
              case, including  the  appellant's  immigration  history,  the
              reasons why the appellant's claim  or  application  has  been
              refused by the respondent and copies of any relevant previous
              reports prepared in respect of the appellant.


         8A.2     It is the duty of  an  expert  to  help  the  Tribunal  on
              matters within the expert's  own  expertise.   This  duty  is
              paramount and overrides any obligation  to  the  person  from
              whom the expert has received  instructions  or  by  whom  the
              expert is paid.


         8A.3     Expert evidence should be the independent product  of  the
              expert uninfluenced by the pressures of litigation.


         8A.4      An  expert  should  assist  the  Tribunal  by   providing
              objective, unbiased opinion on  matters  within  his  or  her
              expertise, and should not assume the role of an advocate.


         8A.5     An expert should consider all  material  facts,  including
              those which might detract from his or her opinion.


         8A.6     An expert should make it clear:-


              (a)      when a question or issue falls outside  his  or  her
                  expertise; and


              (b)      when the expert is not  able  to  reach  a  definite
                  opinion, for example because of insufficient  information.




         8A.7     If, after producing a report, an expert changes his or her
              view on any material matter, that change of  view  should  be
              communicated  to  the  parties  without   delay,   and   when
              appropriate to the Tribunal.


         8A.8     An expert's report should be addressed to the Tribunal and
              not  to  the  party  from  whom  the  expert   has   received
              instructions.


         8A.9     An expert's report must:-


              (a)      give details of the expert's qualifications;


              (b)      give details of any  literature  or  other  material
                  which the expert has relied on in making the report;


              (c)      contain a statement setting out the substance of all
                  facts and instructions  given  to  the  expert  which  are
                  material to the opinions expressed in the report  or  upon
                  which those opinions are based;


              (d)      make clear which of the facts stated in  report  are
                  within the expert's own knowledge;


              (e)      say who carried out any examination, measurement  or
                  other procedure which the expert has used for the  report,
                  give the qualifications of that person, and say whether or
                  not the procedure has been carried out under the  expert's
                  supervision;


              (f)      where there is a range of  opinion  on  the  matters
                  dealt with in the report -


                  (i)  summarise the range of opinion, so far as  reasonably
                     practicable, and


                  (ii)       give reasons for the expert's own opinion;


              (g)      contain a summary of the conclusions reached;


              (h)      if the expert is not able to give an opinion without
                  qualification, state the qualification; and


              (j)      contain a statement that the expert understands  his
                  or her duty to the Tribunal, and  has  complied  and  will
                  continue to comply with that duty.


         8A.10    An expert's report must be  verified  by  a  Statement  of
              Truth as  well  as  containing  the  statements  required  in
              paragraph 8A.9(h) and (j).


         8A.11    The form of the Statement of Truth is as follows:


                  'I confirm that insofar as the facts stated in  my  report
                  are within my own knowledge I have made clear  which  they
                  are and I believe them to be true, and that the opinions I
                  have expressed represent my true and complete professional
                  opinion'.


         8A.12    The instructions referred to in paragraph 8A.9(c) are  not
              protected by privilege but cross-examination of the expert on
              the contents of the instructions will not be  allowed  unless
              the Tribunal permits it (or unless the  party  who  gave  the
              instructions consents to it).  Before it gives permission the
              Tribunal must be satisfied that there are reasonable  grounds
              to consider that the statement in the report or the substance
              of the instructions is  inaccurate  or  incomplete.   If  the
              Tribunal is so satisfied, it will allow the cross-examination
              where it appears to be in the interests of justice to do so."

28.   He argued that in this jurisdiction "raw data"  effectively  needs  to
    be eye-witness evidence.  He said that, even  if  eye-witness  evidence
    was quoted, the Tribunal would need to know a lot about the witness  in
    the sense of his or her history, what records were kept and  where  the
    account came from.  The Tribunal would quickly become  overwhelmed  and
    therefore it is a legitimate function of  the  expert  to  subject  the
    evidence to a filter and make value judgments as to its relevance.   He
    argued that this was true not just of  a  country  expert  but  of  the
    Country of Origin Information Report ('COIR'), letters from the British
    High Commission (or an Embassy), and reports by, for  example,  Amnesty
    International and Human Rights Watch.  The respondent implies that  raw
    data is provided in the COIRs but,  he  argued,  on  the  contrary  the
    reports comprise data that has been sifted and selected.  The  COIR  is
    very far from raw data.  In many cases it is not  even  secondary  data
    and as presented in the COIR has often been through a double  filtering
    system.  That this is the case is apparent from the COIRs where, in the
    standard preface, it is said:-

        "i This Country of Origin Information Report (COI Report) has  been
           produced by Research, Development  and  Statistics  (RDS),  Home
           Office, for use by officials involved in the asylum/human rights
           determination process.  The Report provides  general  background
           information  about  the   issues   most   commonly   raised   in
           asylum/human rights claims made in the United Kingdom.  The main
           body  of  the  report  includes  information  available  up   to
           30 September 2006.  The 'latest news' section contains  further
           brief information on events and reports accessed from 1 October
           2006 to 30 October 2006.


        ii The Report is compiled wholly from material produced by  a  wide
           range of recognised external information sources  and  does  not
           contain any Home Office opinion or policy.  All  information  in
           the Report is attributed, throughout the text, to  the  original
           source material, which is made available to those working in the
           asylum/human rights determination process.


        iii      The Report aims to provide a brief summary of  the  source
           material identified, focusing  on  the  main  issues  raised  in
           asylum and human rights applications.  It is not intended to  be
           a  detailed  or  comprehensive  survey.   For  a  more  detailed
           account,  the  relevant  source  documents  should  be  examined
           directly."

    Mr Mackenzie also argued that the same is  true  of  the  British  High
    Commission letters in this case.  There, primary material was  analysed
    before the letters were written.  He said any criticism of Dr Smith  is
    equally applicable to the letters written by the High  Commission.   He
    said one important question is always "who is doing the filtering?"


29.   Whilst Mr MacKenzie reminded us that Section 3 of the  Civil  Evidence
    Act 1972 makes opinion evidence admissible in civil proceedings when  a
    witness is qualified to give expert evidence, that did not assist us as
    the provision is not applicable in this  jurisdiction.   He  said  that
    paragraph 8(A)4 of the  Practice  Direction  says  that  an  expert  is
    expected to assist the Tribunal by providing independent  evidence  and
    not in the role of advocate; that he or she must sign  a  statement  of
    truth;  and  needs  to  show   relevant   experience,   expertise   and
    independence in order to qualify to assist the Court.  He  argued  that
    it is not the case that an expert needs a formal qualification to be an
    expert.  He argued that the quotation from Markos,  to  which  we  have
    already referred, is a clear statement of principle that is correct.

30.   Mr MacKenzie relied on  several  authorities.   The  first  is  Zaraur
    01TH00078, a decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal chaired by  Mr
    Freeman.  Paragraph 22 of the decision says:-

         "...the material presented by the country expert must be verifiable
         as to the facts, and, so far as it consists in  opinions,  given  a
         proper basis in either verifiable fact or the country expert's  own
         relevant experience."


31.   He referred to re: B [1996] I FLR 667 where,  at  page  674  Butler-
    Sloss L J said, in the context of a family case:


         "...Judges are not  expected  to  suspend  judicial  belief  simply
         because the evidence is given by an expert.  An expert  is  not  in
         any special position and there is no presumption  or  belief  in  a
         doctor however distinguished he or she may  be.   It  is,  however,
         necessary for a Judge to give reasons for disagreeing with experts'
         conclusions or recommendations.  ...a Judge cannot  substitute  his
         views for the views of the experts without some evidence to support
         what it is he concludes."


      Mr MacKenzie  made  the  point  that  the  Family  Court,  like  this
    Tribunal, is also expert in  its  own  jurisdiction  and  therefore  it
    cannot be said that the experts in that jurisdiction are any  different
    from this.


32.   He then turned to  English  Exporters  (London)  Limited  v Eldonwall
    Limited.  He quoted Megarry J, at page 420:-


         "...He will  also  have  learned  much  from  many  other  sources,
         including much of which  he  could  give  no  first-hand  evidence.
         Textbooks, journals, reports of auctions and  other  dealings,  and
         information obtained form his  professional  brethren  and  others,
         some related to particular transactions and some more  general  and
         indefinite, will all have contributed their share."


33.   He also reminded us of the passage in which it is  said  that  experts
    can give factual evidence as well as expressing an  opinion.   He  said
    that everything goes into the pot, written sources, unwritten  sources,
    general background material.

34.   Mr MacKenzie went on to say again that it  is  inherent,  in  deciding
    what is relevant, that a filtering process needs to be applied  to  the
    evidence and that is why an expert is needed.  It is the expert's  duty
    to tell everything that is relevant, not everything that he knows.  The
    safeguard for a Tribunal is in the independence and  qualifications  of
    the expert.  He emphasised the importance of independence and  went  on
    to say that the COIR authors and the British High  Commission  are  not
    independent of the respondent and do not have a duty to the Court.   He
    argued that the value of the expert is in  his  expertise  and  is  not
    dependent upon agreement with other sources.  He argued  that  we  were
    being asked by the respondent to depart  from  previous  case  law  and
    Practice Directions, and to redefine the role of an expert.

35.   Mr MacKenzie asked the Tribunal to consider  who  can  be  trusted  to
    carry out the sorting exercise.  He made the point that in the case  of
    the evidence produced by the respondent it is not known who has carried
    out that exercise.  The respondent  usually  declines  to  produce  any
    expert evidence of his own.

36.   Nothing in argument has changed our view of the role of the expert  in
    this jurisdiction.  Whilst it is true that the rules of evidence do not
    apply in this jurisdiction,  as  they  do  in  the  civil  courts,  the
    Tribunal should be very slow to accept opinion evidence from  a  person
    who cannot demonstrate a sufficient expertise in the subject  on  which
    they are called to give evidence.  There is no formal qualification  to
    reliably identify someone as a person country expert.   The  expert  is
    usually a person who has,  for  whatever  reason,  taken  a  particular
    interest in a country and has the resources to gather information.   He
    may or may not be an academic.  He may or may  not  be  a  person  with
    first-hand knowledge of the country concerned.  It is the assessment of
    that information, and any opinions  arising  from  it  that  can  cause
    difficulty.  One problem is that it is rare to  have  either  competing
    experts' reports as in many civil cases or, as is increasingly the case
    in the civil courts, a jointly  instructed  expert.   Experts  in  this
    Tribunal are invariably instructed by appellants.

37.   As Collins J said in Slimani, experts can vary in their  independence
    and expertise to a very large degree.  Some are well known as reliable,
    others perhaps equally well known as unreliable.  In the centre  ground
    comes the majority.  It is the task of  the  Tribunal  to  decide  what
    evidence they accept and what weight they can  put  upon  the  evidence
    they receive.  We do not entirely agree with Miss Richard's analysis of
    the difference between an expert in this  jurisdiction  and  an  expert
    elsewhere.  She argued  that  experts  in  this  jurisdiction  are  the
    providers of raw data whereas those in the civil courts tend to be  the
    interpreters of such data.  In fact, in this jurisdiction, experts  are
    not merely the providers of raw data but they can be  the  interpreters
    of it as well.  Their interpretation, and any  opinion  based  on  that
    interpretation, can only be as good as the raw data itself.  By that we
    mean not only the quality of the data, but the selection or  filtering,
    of it.

38.   We agree with the concept of the expert as a filter  of  evidence.   A
    real problem arises in this jurisdiction  from  the  use  of  the  word
    "expert".  In this context an  "expert"  is  merely  a  witness  giving
    factual, hearsay and opinion evidence.  No witness is  prohibited  from
    doing that.  The question is not therefore  the  admissibility  of  the
    evidence (as it would be in the criminal  and  civil  courts)  but  the
    weight to be given to it.  The task for  us  is  therefore  to  decide,
    simply, how much weight is to be put  on  the  conclusions  and/or  the
    filtered evidence  that  is  put  before  us.   The  fact  that  it  is
    demonstrably wrong may help to assess it.  However, the fact that it is
    not demonstrably wrong does not engender reliance upon it,  whether  or
    not the person giving the evidence is, or claims  to  be  an  "expert".
    Additionally, in order to accept an expert as a competent and  reliable
    filter mechanism it is necessary  to  trust  the  expert  and  to  have
    confidence that he or she has filtered  the  evidence  objectively  and
    independently, not partially.  The extent to which that  trust  can  be
    established may depend on a number of factors including the  reputation
    of the expert, and any established track record.  It may also depend on
    the quality of the sources and whether there is a variety  of  sources.
    For example, a report on Sri Lanka that relied only  on  LTTE  sources,
    without countervailing evidence from sources that did not  support  the
    LTTE, would be likely to carry little weight.  The age  of  the  source
    material and the number of sources is also important.   An  expert  may
    not have any track record with the Tribunal, in which  case  particular
    care is needed in assessing the weight to be put on the  evidence,  and
    any opinion said to be derived from it.

39.   An expert who cites a source enables the parties'  opponent,  and  the
    Tribunal, to check the source in order to decide whether  it  has  been
    selectively quoted and, if so, whether the selections were  justifiable
    or partial.

40.   It seems to us that difficulty arises where an expert  says,  as  does
    Dr Smith, that his source is a particular individual with whom he  has
    had a conversation.  In this case some of his sources were, on the face
    of it, people who were well-positioned to give an informed  view.   The
    respondent argued that an expert should produce interview notes so that
    the quotations relied on can be checked and put in context.  It is  not
    our view that such interview notes can properly be required before  the
    expert evidence is considered, but if they are not  produced  that  may
    well result in less weight being put on that source because there is no
    possibility of testing it.  We agree with Miss Richards that where the
    source is a publicly available document, details to  enable  it  to  be
    identified and obtained should  be  provided.   However,  there  is  no
    requirement for a document which is not in  the  public  domain  to  be
    appended to the report but, if it is not, the weight that can be  given
    to the evidence, or any opinion based on  it,  may  be  very  seriously
    reduced, and sometimes possibly extinguished.

41.   That is particularly important in a case such as this.   Some  of  the
    evidence given by Dr Smith appeared to be simply wrong.  There  are  a
    number of places where he demonstrably  exaggerated  the  risk  to  the
    appellant.  For example, he said at paragraph 74 of his report that:

         "[The appellant] will automatically have been placed on one of  the
         two lists that are provided to immigration services at the  airport
         by the security forces".

    Yet on close examination it became apparent that there was no basis for
    saying that at all.  As a result doubt has to be cast upon  Dr Smith's
    ability to give expert opinion evidence  impartially  and  objectively.
    In such a case, it becomes very difficult to put weight on  un-sourced,
    unsupported assertions even if it is said that a particular person said
    a particular thing on a particular occasion.  Dr Smith  thus  has  not
    fully  demonstrated  that  he  has  provided  an  objectively  filtered
    impartial and independent view,  based  on  evidence.   The  amount  of
    reliance and weight that can be put upon his  other  assertions,  which
    have not been expressly sourced,  or  fully  quoted,  or  supported  by
    primary evidence is,  as  a  result,  limited.   In  paragraph  134  he
    referred to an asylum seeker who was returned by the United Kingdom and
    killed by agents of the Sri Lankan government but failed to mention the
    long gap between the return and the death.  There is, in  our  view  of
    the evidence, no apparent link.  At paragraph 132 there is reference to
    a returnee who committed suicide in the airport  detention  room  which
    did not mention that at the time he  was  returning  from  a  visit  to
    Madras.

42.   None of what we say  undermines  the  earlier  jurisprudence,  or  the
    Practice Directions.  It serves  to  underline  the  need  to  properly
    assess the expert, his or her qualifications  and  experience  to  give
    opinion evidence, and the extent to which  the  data  provided  can  be
    relied upon as independent, objective and reliable, and  to  have  been
    impartially sifted. We would also stress that  each  "expert"  must  of
    course only be assessed in respect of  the  report  submitted  in  each
    individual case. Thus even a generally reliable expert must  be  judged
    in the context of their individual reports. In simple terms an "expert"
    is only as good as her or his last report.

43.   The COIRs, which are regularly used by all parties, are not a  special
    case.  The evidence on which  they  rely  has  been  filtered,  but  is
    sourced.  They  should  be  treated  in  the  same  way  as  any  other
    background evidence.  That means they can be considered in the light of
    their reputation (and we bear in mind that they have in the  past  been
    criticised).   Under  the  provisions  of  S142  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  they  are  overseen  by  the  APCI
    (Advisory Panel on Country Information) but it is important to remember
    that that committee is there to oversee the process, and not to endorse
    the content of the reports.

44.   Material from NGOs, such as Amnesty  International  and  Human  Rights
    Watch among many others, can be selective and  also  depends,  to  some
    extent, for the weight that can be put upon them, on the reputation  of
    the source.  Immigration judges are aware that much of  the  background
    evidence which is adduced before them comes from sources with a special
    interest or a specific  agenda.   That  must  be  borne  in  mind  when
    assessing the weight to be put on any background evidence.

45.   As to evidence, such as the letters from the British High  Commission,
    it is true to say that High Commissions and Embassies come  within  the
    auspices of the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office.   That,  like  the
    respondent, is an arm of the executive.  In this case the  evidence  in
    the  letters  has  been  obtained  at  the  specific  request  of   the
    respondent.  Little is known about the  information-gathering  process,
    where the raw data came from, or  the  extent  to  which  it  has  been
    filtered.  It  is  also  unclear  whether  more  than  one  source  was
    consulted and, whether competing views were sought.  That all  goes  to
    how much weight can properly  be  put  on  the  evidence.   Immigration
    judges should be slow to find bad faith on  either  side,  even  though
    they must approach the evidence with an open and enquiring mind  as  to
    the appropriate weight to be put upon it. We comment further on the BHC
    material later in this decision.

5.    The Respondent's Background Evidence

      The UN Committee Against Torture

46.   The first of  these  noted  by  us  was  a  determination  of  the  UN
    Committee against Torture under Article 22 of  the  Convention  against
    Torture, ST (Sri Lankan National v.  the  Netherlands  -  23 November
    2001).

47.   We have viewed the seven page decision of the  CAT  and  found  it  of
    little value at this time.  The Committee reached the  conclusion  that
    the petitioner, a Sri Lankan Tamil, who was arrested and detained twice
    in October 2000 was found by the Committee not to have  been  suspected
    of involvement with the LTTE as he was only held on each  occasion  for
    one day and had not been a member of  the  LTTE.   The  Committee  also
    noticed that the petitioner had only worked for the LTTE some six years
    before his first arrest.  They went on to find that the petitioner  had
    not alleged any other circumstances, other than the presence  of  scars
    on his body, which would appear to make him vulnerable to risk of being
    tortured in the future.  For these reasons the Committee considered the
    petitioner had not provided substantial grounds for believing  that  he
    would be at risk of being tortured were he to be returned to Sri Lanka.
     The  determination  does  not  provide  any  significant  or  detailed
    analysis of risks on return to Sri Lanka and is of course  now  several
    years old.

    The Canadian Immigration Refugee Board (IRB) Search Report of 5  August
    2003

48.   The coverage of this report is stated to be:

         "Treatment of returnees and in particular the implementation of the
         Immigrants and Emigrants Act of 1988; whether Tamils  are  targeted
         under the Act".  (2002-2003)

    This report is over three  years  old.   At  the  outset,  states  that
    current information on the treatment of refugees who have  returned  to
    Sri  Lanka  was  scarce  among  the  sources  consulted  by   the   IRB
    Directorate.  The  report  provides  information  from  an  Immigration
    Official at the Canadian High Commission in Colombo that, to  the  best
    of their knowledge, allegations that returnees to Sri Lanka  (deportees
    and failed asylum seekers)  are  tortured  on  return  was  a  complete
    fabrication and that there was a well-established procedure for dealing
    with returnees, which had been discussed on several occasions with  the
    Ministry of the Interior of Sri Lanka.  The Official's report  goes  on
    to state:

         "Although standard procedure  is  for  deportees  to  be  generally
         referred to the airport  division  of  the  Criminal  Investigation
         Division (CID) for interview on return, in our experience there are
         no arbitrary detentions  without  due  process,  and  certainly  no
         torture.  Returnees who do not have impending  arrest  warrants  or
         active charges in Sri Lanka are simply  released...  .   The  Dutch
         have returned large numbers of failed asylum seekers on  a  special
         flight, no adverse results reported... .  We liaise regularly  with
         GOSL (the Government of Sri Lanka), authorities  on  removal  cases
         from Canada, and have  seen  no  evidence  of  extra-judicial  ill-
         treatment."

49.   The same report notes that a senior UNHCR official had stated that:

         "Some deportees are questioned for a short period and then  allowed
         to leave the airport; others are not questioned at all."   (23 May
         2003).


    The report also notes that the UNHCR  had  no  knowledge  of  returning
    Tamils having been singled out for adverse treatment, whereas prior  to
    the ceasefire agreement Tamil returnees were at times singled  out  for
    questioning upon return by investigative units such  as  the  CID,  but
    this was done under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) and not under
    the Immigrants and Emigrants Amendment Act.  At the time of the reports
    the state of emergency had lapsed and had  not  been  re-imposed.   The
    same report notes that the UK IND stated that  unless  rejected  asylum
    seekers were travelling on false documentation  it  was  unlikely  they
    would  be  prosecuted  on  return..."99%  of  cases   brought   against
    returnees...are discharged without charges being laid."

50.   The IRB report also notes  in  that  the  2003  Amnesty  International
    report it is stated that returnees to Sri Lanka may face problems  from
    the LTTE.  The LTTE had issued threats to some of  its  former  members
    who  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  and  were  living  in  Colombo  (Amnesty
    International Report 28 May 2003).

    Country of Origin Information Service (COIS), Home Office  UK,  Reports
of
    September 2005, 31 October 2006 and 8 Feb 2007

51.   We were provided with these three lengthy reports.  We  have  had  the
    opportunity to consider relevant parts of them.

52.   Firstly, in  the  general  background,  section  1.01,  we  noted  the
    estimated population of Sri Lanka in July 2006 was 20,220,240 and that:

         "The CIA World Fact-book also noted that since the outbreak of  the
         hostilities between the government and the armed Tamil  separatists
         in mid-1980s, several hundred thousand Tamil  civilians  have  fled
         the island and more than 200,000 Tamils have sought refuge  in  the
         west."

    In the section of the report relating to Tamils we noted, at  paragraph
    20.04, that it is reported from the latest census, 2005, in the Colombo
    district there were 247,739 Sri Lankan Tamils, and 24,821 Indian Tamils
    out of a total population of 2,251,247.  Sri Lankan Tamils accordingly
    make up over 10% of the population of Colombo.  We were referred  to  a
    historical review of Sri Lanka set out in paragraph 3  of  the  October
    2006 Report, in particular paragraphs 3.07 and 3.08.  These  paragraphs
    note that the height of the ethnic conflict between the  LTTE  and  the
    Sri Lankan government was in the period  1999-2000  and  the  ceasefire
    agreement was signed in February 2002 between the  government  and  the
    LTTE.  That ceasefire agreement committed the government of  Sri  Lanka
    and the LTTE to accept on site monitoring of the implementation of  the
    agreement by the Sri Lankan Monitoring Mission (SLMM).

53.   However, comments by the COIS on the recent developments were  brought
    to  our  attention  by  both  parties.   These  are  recorded   between
    paragraphs 4.01 and 4.26 of  the  October  2006  report.   The  general
    deterioration in the north and the east of the country is not  disputed
    by the respondent.  Full details are set out in  "Recent  Developments"
    section.  These obviously should be taken into account as background in
    the assessment of all Sri Lankan  determinations.   The  deteriorating
    situation is, at this time, changing day by day and indeed, as noted on
    the last day of the hearing, the most up to date COIR,  and  additional
    news material, some of it from the Sri Lankan government itself,  show
    actions taken by both the government and  the  LTTE  indicate  a  sharp
    deterioration in the confrontation.  This supports the claim  that  the
    "ceasefire" has virtually broken down.

54.   We were directed to the COIR (October 2006) section on  human  rights,
    paragraph 7.01 - 7.05, relevant quotations  from  "Human  Rights  Watch
    (HRW)  -  improving  civilian  protection  in  Sri  Lanka"  -  released
    19 September 2006, the US Department of State Report  2005  (US  State
    Department) released 8 March 2006, an Amnesty International Report  of
    February 2006 entitled "Sri Lanka - climate of fear in  the  east"  and
    the Human Rights Watch (HRW)- "World  Report  of  2006  on  Sri  Lanka"
    published in January 2006.  All of these are relevant  to  the  current
    situation and have been noted by us although not fully  recorded.   The
    US Department of State Report noted, at paragraph  7.02  of  the  COIR,
    fully sets out the human rights problems reported in  the  past  twelve
    months as:

         . "Unlawful killings by government agents.


         . High profile killings by unknown actors.


         . Politically motivated killings by  paramilitary  forces  in  the
           LTTE.


         . Disappearances.


         . Arbitrary arrest and detention.


         . Torture.


         . Poor prison conditions.


         . Denial of fair public trial.


         . Government corruption and lack of transparency.


         . Infringement of religious freedom.


         . Infringement of freedom of movement.


         . Discrimination against minorities."

55.   The other reports noted, or referred to, in  the  October  2006  COIR,
    refer to an escalation in the number of ceasefire  breaches  and  human
    rights abuses, particularly since  the  assassination  of  the  Foreign
    Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar, in August 2005.  That  same  report  also
    relevantly notes:-

         "Torture and mistreatment by police continued to  be  a  problem...
         the police continued to enjoy great impunity.  While some cases  of
         deaths in custody and torture have been  investigated,  no-one  has
         been prosecuted or punished as yet."

56.   The 8 February 2007 COIR, was provided by the respondent (along  with
    the Operational Guidance Note - Sri Lanka (9 March 2007  to  which  we
    refer later).  This February report is an update of  the  October  2006
    report.  It notes reports and incidents  published  or  accessed  since
    1 January 2007.  The  additional  reports  included  an  International
    Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) report on Sri Lanka dated 19 January
    2007, the annual "Freedom House" report released on 17 January 2007 and
    the Human Rights Watch (HRW) report of January 2007.   These  report  a
    number of significant incidents that took place in  January  reflecting
    significant levels of conflict between the  LTTE  and  the  Sri  Lankan
    government authorities.  For example the Sri Lankan Navy on 27 January
    sank three suspected Tamil Tiger vessels off Colombo's main harbour and
    a large explosion aboard one suggested it was  a  suicide  boat  packed
    with explosives.  There are reports of heavy fighting in  the  east  of
    the country and the UNHCR stated that for three weeks in  January  over
    20,000 people had fled fighting and harsh  conditions  in  eastern  Sri
    Lanka.  The UNHCR reported that at the beginning  of  2007  there  were
    465,000 displaced persons including  216,000  people  forced  to  leave
    their homes by the previous year's violence.

57.   In Colombo there are  reports  of  Tamil  youth  and  civilians  being
    arrested by the police in search  operations  following  the  attempted
    attack on  the  harbour  and  in  cordon  and  search  operations.   On
    24 January the Deputy Minister for Vocational Training stated that 400
    Tamils of Indian origin had been arrested by the security forces during
    the previous weeks, and 116 of those arrested  had  been  sent  to  the
    infamous military detention  camp  at  Boossa.   The  COIR  also  notes
    reports  from  "Tamil  Net",  including  one  dated  19 January  2007,
    recording that 40 civilians, the majority of them  Tamils,  were  taken
    for questioning in a  cordon  and  search  operation  carried  out  the
    previous night in Colombo City, and that it was reported that  many  of
    those detained had failed to prove their identity or their  reason  for
    staying in Colombo.

    Letters from British High Commission Colombo, Sri Lanka (BHC)

58.   We were provided with five letters from BHC going back over  the  past
    18 months.  The first of these was dated 26 September 2005 (page 40-42
    of the respondent's main bundle).  The letter set out  the  answers  to
    various questions  asked  of  the  BHC  by  COIS.   Under  the  section
    'Treatment of returnees" it notes that there have been very few  forced
    returns of Sri Lankans by the UK  Immigration  Service  and  therefore
    there is no direct experience on how they are treated.  There was  only
    one ongoing case.  The BHC reports that the International  Organisation
    of Migration (IOM) says that to  their  knowledge  most  returnees  are
    detained briefly and  then  released  to  their  families.   A  liaison
    officer contacted the Canadian, Australian and  German  missions  about
    their experiences.  All reports to the officer were stated as  similar,
    including the treatment of a charter plane from Germany with 40  failed
    asylum seekers on it.  The Sri Lankan CID reported that  those  40  had
    been processed "in a few hours".

59.   The letter also confirms that Sri Lankan Immigration Services and  CID
    are informed in advance of passenger's arrivals and:

         "The passenger is handed over to immigration who briefly  interview
         them and then hand them to CID.  In most cases a record is kept  by
         both of the  returnees'  arrival  and  they  are  then  allowed  to
         proceed.  Usually family are at the airport to meet them."

    It goes on to state:


        "In a few cases  CID  have  detained  people  where  there  was  an
        existing warrant for their arrest when they left  Sri  Lanka.   DII
        (Directive of Internal Intelligence) may also have an  interest  in
        these individuals and keep records on them.  There is no reason  to
        think that they have information regarding asylum claims in the  UK
        or elsewhere.  There does not appear to be any involvement  in  the
        process by the Sri Lankan army."

60.   On the issue of scarring the  letter  notes  that  this  is  extremely
    difficult to assess and that  no  detailed  reports  have  been  found,
    merely anecdotal evidence giving rise to suspicion.  The letter  claims
    that the key issue is not "what triggers suspicion but how suspects are
    treated."  It also notes that membership of the LTTE and  fund  raising
    for the organisation are no longer  criminal  offences  in  Sri  Lanka,
    (although they are in the UK), so this gives  the  authorities  limited
    powers to act.  It notes: "unarmed members of the LTTE are permitted to
    operate in government areas under the 2002 ceasefire  agreement."   The
    letter confirms the introduction of new anti-terror laws on 6 December
    2006, and notes although the government has stopped  short  of  banning
    the LTTE "rebels" it has tightened existing emergency  laws  which  had
    been dormant since the 2002 ceasefire.

61.    The  third  section  of  this  letter  deals   with   the   emergency
    regulations.  It notes that these were introduced on  13 August  2005,
    after the death of Foreign Minister Lakshman  Kadirgamar.   The  letter
    notes that the political party representing Tamils in  Colombo  reports
    serious harassment of Tamils and that  they  had  documented  over  500
    detentions  under  the  regulations  and   re-introduction   of   house
    registration (which is used to track the identity of individual members
    of houses), and which had been suspended since  2002.   It  also  notes
    that in the "chaos" after the assassination of Kadirgamar some  of  the
    police had gone too far and had detained "everybody they  could  find".
    However, the situation was said to be settling down and the regulations
    were  more  aimed  at  finding  killers,  not  suppressing   legitimate
    political activity.

62.   The second BHC letter, dated 4 April 2006 (set out between pages  228
    and 239 of the respondent's main bundle) is also addressed to the  COIS
    in response  to  enquiries  about  the  application  of  the  state  of
    emergency and violence in Sri Lanka.  It states no great change since a
    previous letter in February (2006) although violence and other  hostile
    incidents have continued to ease.  It notes that  87  people  had  been
    detained under the emergency regulations as at 13 February 2006.  From
    a discussion with the Human Rights Commission it was  understood  those
    87 people were the number still in detention, rather than a cumulative
    total.  An Annex was provided  giving  the  breakdown  of  numbers.   A
    UNICEF Report was annexed setting out  details  of  child  recruitment.
    The levels of violence were also reported in Annex  C  of  the  Report.
    Under the topic "Treatment of low-level operatives" the  letter  states
    that this was a difficult area with no  real  hard  evidence  available
    and:

         "Generally violence between the LTTE and rival paramilitary  groups
         has  followed  the  trends  in  the  graphs.   The  Karuna  faction
         officially announced a ceasefire, although some of the violence  in
         the east that took place after the Geneva  talks  appears  to  have
         been carried out by it".

63.   The third BHC letter, dated 24 August 2006, (set  out  in  pages 305
    and 307 of the respondent's main bundle), states that the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities have good IT systems to track arrivals  and  departures  at
    the main airport and are  able  to  track  in  most  cases  whether  an
    individual is in the country or not.  The  experience  of  the  BHC  in
    relation to returning failed asylum seekers and shared information with
    other missions, particularly Canada, and the IOM, is said to  be  quite
    clear.  It is stated:

         "As we have reported earlier the vast majority are questioned for a
         short period of time to establish identity and possibly on security
         issues  and  then  released.   Normally  only  when  there  is   an
         outstanding arrest warrant  are  individuals  detained  for  longer
         periods."

64.   The letter also records strong anecdotal evidence  of  scarring  being
    identified in the past  to  identify  suspects.   The  writer  notes  a
    conversation with the police and in the media specifically referring to
    physical examinations being used when suspects have undergone  military
    style training.  There is a reference to a UK member of  staff  at  the
    British High Commission, who was  present  at  the  processing  of  two
    recent returns at Colombo Airport in August 2006.  It is noted that  no
    such examinations took place on the two returnees and  that  they  were
    both ethnic Tamils from the north.  They were able to make their onward
    journeys without delay.  The observations, in their view, supported the
    claim from the government  ministries  that  the  practice  had  either
    ceased or was used less frequently:

         "At the very least it appears to only  take  place  when  there  is
         another reason to suspect the  individual  rather  than  a  routine
         measure for immigration returnees."

65.    It  also  notes  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  often   require
    households, predominantly Tamil, to register  all  residents  and  that
    those lists are used  in  cordon  and  search  operations  to  identify
    people:

         "Lists of failed asylum seekers could form part of  this,  although
         the areas covered by the cordon and search operations  (normally  a
         few blocks) would not yield very many.  A big push  took  place  in
         November  and  December  2005  which  was  said  to  culminate   in
         "Operation Stranger's Night II".  It also reports that in June here
         was public discussion about implementing police registration across
         the island as had been done in the past but  nothing  had  come  of
         that.  Cordon and search operations were stated to  still  continue
         in mainly Tamil  pockets  in  predominantly  Sinhalese  and  Muslim
         areas."


66.   The fourth BHC letter  gives a brief on the bail system in Sri  Lanka.
     It states:-

         "It is common  practice  to  be  released  on  bail  without  being
         charged.  Reporting conditions are  usually  issued  when  bail  is
         granted.  Anyone flouting reporting  conditions  is  liable  to  be
         served with a warrant for arrest.

         As far as we have been able to establish Immigration  Officers  are
         notified only  when  a  court  decides  to  impound  the  suspect's
         passport or an arrest warrant is issued.  This apart, there  is  no
         other mechanism to make sure Immigration Officers are aware of such
         instances.  The other method which is rare  and  case  specific  is
         that the NIB (National Investigation Bureau)  informing  (sic)  the
         Immigration Officers of individuals suspected of terrorist activity
         and those on the wanted list.


         Without court sanction the Immigration Officers  are  powerless  to
         put an individual in detention if they are otherwise satisfied they
         have the right to enter or live in Sri Lanka."

    The BHC material included a  copy  of  the  Sri  Lankan  Bail  Act  and
    relevant parts of the Criminal Procedure Code  relating  to  summonses,
    arrest warrants and other procedures.

67.   The fifth  BHC  letter  of  10.4.2007  was  provided  at  the  resumed
    hearing.   This  relates  to  the  implementation  of   the   emergency
    regulations.  The BHC view is that the information has been patchy  and
    the courts have remained willing to get  involved  in  some  individual
    cases of persons being arrested to force  their  release.   The  letter
    states that in some areas of the country the Regulations are being used
    to compel Tamil populations (of Colombo) to register residents and that
    there are checkpoints throughout the city; and the number  of  vehicles
    on the road has  reduced  during  the  quiet  hours.   It  reports  the
    government has used the Emergency Regulations to search the property of
    those who oppose the regime.  In respect of round-ups/cordon and search
    operations in Colombo the letter reports:

         "There seems to be a link between large  scale  cordon  and  search
         operations and the environment created by  the  ERs.   We  are  not
         aware of the total number of  arrests  -  many  of  whom  are  only
         detained briefly, but ICRC reports that about 900 people have  been
         registered as detained for longer periods since September 2006  and
         have been visited by them.

         Our assessment of the profile of the detainees is similar  to  that
         reported in the media.  They are overwhelmingly male, Tamil (either
         Sri Lankan or Hill Tamil) and generally young.  Most  are  detained
         because they are unable to produce ID, or  unable  to  explain  the
         reason for being in a particular area.  Migrant and casual  workers
         are therefore particularly vulnerable."

68.   The letter then comments on the Boossa Detention Centre  and  notes  a
    conversation with the senior officer of that centre on 10  April  2007.
    He reported that there were 110 people in security  detention.   Almost
    all were Tamils and the bulk were detained following cordon and  search
    operations.  He reported that the numbers had varied from  between  100
    and 150 over the last few months and there is a "quite heavy  churn  of
    detainees as investigations come up ...... or the courts order releases
    and new detainees arrive."  They had  no  independent  confirmation  on
    conditions but were not aware of any former detainees complaining about
    the conditions.  The  letter  also  refers  to  recent  information  on
    abduction/disappearances in Colombo, stating that the civil  monitoring
    committee reported 84 disappearances in  Colombo.   Of  these  80  were
    Tamil, 23 were business people and 61  appeared  to  be  for  political
    crimes.  The victims were  generally  male  and  political  actors  who
    tended to be young.  The letter also states:

         "There are three other hotspots of disappearance activity,  Jaffna,
         Vavuniya and Batticaloa.  A reliable NGO, who did not  wish  to  be
         named, thought that 584 people had disappeared in Jaffna  in  2006,
         and 165 in the first three months of this year.  A senior Tamil  MP
         thought that the country-wide figure was 900 since August 2006."

    Reports on Removal/Voluntary Departures to Sri Lanka from the UK,  2005
    and 2006

69.   These were provided to us by the respondent.  The latest  figures  are
    for the first two quarters of 2006.   They  state  that  185,  and  195
    respectively, principal asylum applicants, were removed, along with 120
    and 95 voluntary removals and 65, and 100 assisted  voluntary  returns.
    A copy of a letter from Liam Byrne MP, Minister of State  at  the  Home
    Office to Harry Cohen MP dated 17 November 2006 sets  out  details  of
    investigations carried out by the BHC in Colombo relating  to  a  Tamil
    failed asylum seeker who was reportedly killed on return on  20 August
    2006.  The letter refers to two cases the investigations had turned up.
     The first individual, JJ, was reported killed on 20 August 2006.  The
    enquiries revealed that he had been shot dead by an unidentified gunman
    while working in a shop which he owned.  The second individual, RS, was
    said to have been killed in his shop on 17 April  2006  although  that
    could not be confirmed.  The letter from the Minister  states  that  it
    was notable these incidents took place in the far north  and  the  east
    "where the security situation is precarious,  and  not  in  Colombo  to
    where all returns take place.  The letter concludes by stating:


         "I would also make clear that the circumstances of Mr J and Mr S's
         death, while tragic, occurred some  considerable  time  after  they
         departed the UK and were not related to their prior  asylum  claims
         or their subsequent returns."

      Operational Guidance Note of SSHD (OGN)

70.   The Home Office Operational Guidance Note Sri Lanka of  9 March  2007
    was made available at the resumed hearing.  We asked  the  parties  for
    comments on the weight that should be given to the Operational Guidance
    Notes from the Home Office.  Mr MacKenzie submitted that they  were  a
    published position of the respondent's own opinion and did not have the
    status of the COIR which he considered was the prime source of COI from
    the respondent.  Ms Richards said that the OGN status was nothing  more
    than general guidance to case workers.  Individual situations and cases
    could vary and the OGN should not be seen as equivalent in status to  a
    COIR.  She submitted however, that before the Tribunal it  could  be  a
    useful document and  the  basis  for  attaching  additional  weight  to
    country of origin evidence.  She referred to the recent Court of Appeal
    judgment in AH, IG and NM v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2007] EWCA Civ 297, at paragraph 55, and submitted that these could be
    treated as additional evidence from the  respondent,  obtained  through
    diplomatic and consular channels and  that  there  should  not  be  any
    penalty placed on the respondent through a  lack  of  "expert  reports"
    provided in support of statements  in  the  OGN.   We  agree  they  are
    certainly nothing more than these submissions and are the  Respondent's
    view(s) on issues only.

6.    The Appellant's Background evidence

    Dr Smith's Reports

71.   These are set out in bundle A,  pages  48 - 78  and  an  update,  in
    bundle C, pages 1   36.  We heard evidence from Dr Smith on 28 November
    2006.  He is an Associate Fellow,  Royal  Institute  for  International
    Affairs, Chatham House, London.  He states that until January  2005  he
    was the  Consultant  Director  and  formerly  Deputy  Director  at  the
    International Policy Institute, King's College, London where he  worked
    predominantly on security issues  in  South  Asia  over  the  past  two
    decades.  He states he has been appointed as a visiting Fellow  at  the
    Department of Politics, Bristol University, the Royal  United  Services
    Institute, London, the Centre for Research in Innovative Management  at
    the University of Brighton, and the Royal Institute  for  International
    Affairs.  He now works mainly as an independent researcher  undertaking
    academic  research,  consultancy  and  policy  research  projects.   He
    adopted his report and the update to it.  In his reports he states that
    based on his considerable knowledge of Sri Lankan politics and security
    issues he is frequently asked to advise on policy matters on Sri Lanka.
     He has advised the Foreign and Commonwealth Office,  the  BHC  in  Sri
    Lanka, the Ministry of Defence and  the  Department  for  International
    Development.  He has also been a technical advisor to the Government of
    Sri Lanka on the reconstruction of the armed forces and, in  May  2004,
    assisted the Metropolitan Police Service with a  study  on  Sri  Lankan
    Diaspora organised crime in the UK.  His next  major  research  in  Sri
    Lanka will be the survey of weapons  for  the  National  Commission  of
    Illegal Firearms (Sri Lanka) sponsored by the UN.   He  has  also  been
    asked to undertake work on decommissioning of weapons in Sri Lanka  for
    which he is seeking funding.  His most recent fact-finding visit to Sri
    Lanka was in September 2006 but was unavoidably cut short.   He  states
    that he has followed recent events extremely closely and a further fact-
    finding visit is planned in 2007.  His last full fact-finding visit was
    in May 2005 and he has been a frequent visitor to  Sri Lanka  and  had
    spent approximately 25% of his time in-country (i.e. in the  UK)  over
    the three years up to September 2005.  He states  that  his  report  is
    significantly based on  interviews  conducted  and  knowledge  acquired
    during visits.  In particular he notes that  much  of  the  information
    cannot  be  found  on  websites  or  newspapers,  or  even   commercial
    intelligence sources, as it is the outcome of field research  conducted
    over many years across Sri Lanka and not just Colombo.  He also  notes
    that he has completed many expert witness reports on South Asian asylum
    seekers, mainly Sri Lankans.  In the preliminary investigation of  his
    work on decommissioning of arms he had the opportunity to meet the LTTE
    leadership who had said that they would co-operate.  However, this  has
    not taken place as the situation had  recently  deteriorated.   At  the
    outset, before he was cross-examined by Ms Richards he was  asked  for
    comments on the BHC letter of 22 November 2006.   He  stated  that  he
    would  make  similar  comments  about  those  on  "wanted  lists".   He
    suggested that at the airport in Colombo computer facilities  had  been
    upgraded and that there may now be more direct links  between  the  CID
    and immigration enabling them to communicate between  their  databases.
    Dr Smith was then cross-examined.

72.   He stated that his areas of interest were in arms decommissioning  and
    investigation into organised crime.  However, his work had allowed  him
    to broaden his research into risks to asylum seekers on return.

73.   When asked about the reliability of conversations he had with  various
    officials in Sri Lanka and whether that information could be  verified
    he replied that generally that quotations and comments  in  his  report
    were based on interviews named individuals.  In some situations sources
    were not named to protect the security of the person involved.  Many of
    his  sources  were  senior  security  officials  and  he  trusted   the
    information that they gave him but he did  attempt  to  cross-reference
    where possible, as he recognised such officials could  have  their  own
    agenda.  He stated that he hoped he could detect this  by  obtaining  a
    range of information.  He considered that his methods were better  than
    those of the press or NGOs, including  websites  such  as  "Tamil  Net"
    which he considered was partial.  He was not suggesting  however,  that
    his research was necessarily better than that  of  NGOs  who  he  found
    excellent in the main.

74.   In reply to questions about a reluctance to hand  over  additional  or
    secondary material Dr Smith  stated  that  he  was  happy  to  provide
    secondary material but not to hand over "off the record" material as he
    could not see the need for this as all of his reports were based on his
    own research notes.


75.   The reports from Dr Smith are lengthy and detailed and  we  have  had
    the opportunity to read them in full and consider  the  submissions  in
    cross-examination that took place  in  relation  to  them.   While  the
    totality of the reports has been noted, we  have  concentrated  on  the
    core comments made by Dr Smith as they  related  to  the  main  issues
    before us which are  well  summarised  in  the  twelve  principal  risk
    factors  identified  in  the  skeleton  argument  put  forward  by  the
    appellant.  Our conclusions on each of these twelve issues are set  out
    later in part 9 of the decision

76.   In his 2005 report Dr Smith considered the assassination of  Lakshman
    Kadirgamar, the Sri Lankan Foreign Minister on 12 August 2005 to  be  a
    particularly relevant event.  He considered that the peace process  was
    "melting at the edges" while  it  had  been  widely  thought  that  the
    decision of the LTTE to sue for peace heralded a return  to  a  unified
    Nation State under the control of the central  government  in  Colombo,
    controlled by the Sinhalese majority, that had not happened.  The early
    pledge by Prabakharan to forgo  Eelam  (as  a  separate  State)  was  a
    political tactic in his view aimed at the international community.  The
    LTTE was never prepared to concede the substantial "uncleared" areas of
    the north and east it had under its control.  "Uncleared" we understand
    to be a Sri Lankan Government term for areas of the country  where  the
    LTTE had been cleared from control by the SLA.   Over  the  past  three
    years he considered the LTTE had increased its efforts to  construct  a
    State within a State.  As we understand  this  LTTE  would  set  up  an
    independent country within the island of Sri  Lanka.   Centred  on  the
    town of Killinochchi the LTTE is setting up its  own  taxation  system,
    civil  servant  training,  judiciary,  police,  health,  education  and
    welfare as well as the infrastructure to run a separate State.  It also
    became clear during the peace process that  peace  was  delivering  far
    more to the LTTE than it was obtaining in the latter stages of the war.
     Thus, despite the proclamation and acclaim that an  independent  State
    aim had been abandoned, the LTTE began to reflect growing confidence in
    its ability to obtain a greater measure of  independence.   A critical
    part of the LTTE strategy appeared to be to  engineer  a  situation  in
    which  post-tsunami  humanitarian  assistance  for  reconstruction  and
    development pledged in massive amounts by the  international  community
    would be handed over to its own administrative  capacity.   Eventually,
    fearing the empowerment of the LTTE, the Prime Minister, who  was  also
    engaged in a bitter political feud with the President herself, produced
    a blueprint for an  interim  self-governing  authority.   However,  the
    President suspended Parliament and forced a General Election which  was
    won by her party, the People's Alliance who, with the  support  of  the
    JVP (Marxist, who are hostile to  any  conciliatory  move  towards  the
    LTTE) formed a government.  Dr  Smith  stated  that  despite  literally
    thousands of minor violations the two sides have not joined  battle  in
    the form of a full-blown civil war and the situation therefore remained
    as "no war, no peace either".

77.   Other particular events noted by Dr Smith are the  "Karuna  Defection"
    in April 2004 where the LTTE was rocked by  the  defection  of  Colonel
    Karuna who had long been considered one of Prabhakaran's most loyal and
    trusted comrades in the east of Sri Lanka.  This significant split  in
    LTTE ranks caused the LTTE forces from the north to move to the east in
    search of Karuna supporters who were  quickly  defeated.   Karuna  then
    opted to disband his remaining  troops.   The  dynamics  of  the  post-
    Tsunami situation were also seen as relevant.  Dr Smith  suggests  that
    what is clear at this point is that there is no  hope  of  a  political
    peace dividend and that there has been  a  rapid  drop  in  support  by
    donors, who are  increasingly  robust  in  attempting  to  ensure  good
    governance must be shown as a prerequisite to aid.  Many  of  them  are
    stated to be considering leaving Sri Lanka.  He considers that at this
    juncture the most logical conclusion is to assume that the Tsunami  has
    not weakened the LTTE itself, but  more  its  political  and  financial
    support base.

78.    The LTTE  denied  involvement  in  the  assassination  of  Lakshman
    Kadirgamar, the Foreign Minister, in 2005.   However,  there  has  been
    little doubt in Colombo that this was the  work  of  the  LTTE.   As  a
    direct result the government introduced  a  state  of  emergency  hours
    after the assassination whereby it could deploy troops as  it  pleases,
    detain without charge anyone suspected  of  terrorist  activities,  and
    search and demolish buildings.  Dr Smith suggests  many  arrests  have
    already taken place under the emergency powers and that this may be the
    end of the peace process whilst not necessarily adding up  to  outright
    return to war, because both parties wish to maintain good relationships
    with the donor community.

79.   Dr Smith then gives a very detailed statement of  his  views  on  the
    predicament of the  appellant.   He  suggests  that  the  new  security
    measures will have implications on failed asylum seekers and that while
    they should be treated with greater  tolerance,  in  the  interests  of
    confidence building, he considers this can no longer be  expected.   In
    his view they may be more vulnerable than ever due  to  well-documented
    excesses by the Sri Lankan authorities.  He  contends  that  there  is
    widespread evidence that the Sri Lankan security forces, including the
    police, routinely fail to comply with international standards on  human
    rights in the course of their work and there is  a  systematic  use  of
    torture in Sri Lanka.  Beyond this he  considers  the  appellant  would
    have little opportunity of taking any complaint to a  higher  authority
    if he became the victim of harassment.  He refers to an interview  with
    the current Inspector General of Police who told him in  December  2004
    that he was facing "such corruption and ineptitude amongst  his  staff,
    ... so much that if anything is to succeed in policing, it  has  to  be
    supervised by himself and himself alone."  Dr Smith also  claimed  the
    Inspector General had commented recently  that  the  rule  of  law  has
    collapsed in Sri Lanka.

80.  Dr Smith's view on risks to the appellant is set out as:

         "The appellant's previous stated status as a recorded LTTE  suspect
         means that he  is  almost  certainly  to  be  of  interest  to  the
         authorities and, as such, he will axiomatically have been placed on
         one of the two lists that are provided to the immigration  services
         at the airport by the security forces.  The first is a 'stop list',
         which the National Intelligence  Bureau  provides  to  ensure  that
         those in which the authorities have an  interest  are  detained  on
         arrival.   The  second  is  a  'watch  list",  which   alerts   the
         authorities on the return of a person in which there is an interest
         and is used to trigger covert surveillance.  If the appellant is on
         one of these lists, he  will  be  extremely  vulnerable  on  return
         either to arrest at the airport or following his arrival."


81.    In  this  regard  Dr Smith  relied   on   an   interview   with   a
    Mr P B Abeykoon, Controller of the Department  for  Immigration  and
    Emigration, held in Colombo in May 2005.

82.   Dr Smith also considered that the consular staff of  the  Sri  Lankan
    High Commission in London were under instructions to pass on details of
    all deportees to the security forces in Colombo.

83.   In the situation  report  of  September  2006  and  opinion  given  in
    October 2006 Dr Smith considers that:

         "After four petulant and unsatisfactory years, Sri Lanka's unstable
         peace process has finally disintegrated.  At  this  juncture  there
         appears to be no  way  back  to  either  the  peace  talks  or  the
         ceasefire agreement (CFA).  The Government of  Sri  Lanka  and  the
         LTTE   have   now   joined   battle,   albeit   tangentially    and
         asymmetrically.  Over a thousand lives mostly civilian,  have  been
         lost over the nine month period since the start of  2006  ...  over
         200,000 people have been displaced.  Disappearances  in  the  north
         and the east are on the rise.  Suicide bombers have mounted attacks
         in and around Colombo and there are well-founded fears that more is
         to come."

84.   He suggests that although both sides must take responsibility for  the
    political impasse that preceded the  burgeoning  military  action  that
    followed, it was  the  LTTE  that  broke  loose  from  the  cease  fire
    agreement (CFA) in the closing weeks of 2005.  The LTTE is now  totally
    frustrated with the peace process and in his view acting to  prove  its
    military capabilities and acquire significant territorial gains  before
    contemplating a return to the peace talks.  Dr Smith notes that in the
    first half of 2006 around 1,000 lives  were  lost  in  conflict-related
    incidents and that although outbreaks of conflict  were  localised  and
    sporadic it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the peace process
    in Sri Lanka is now at an end.  He notes that the government have  made
    their intentions clear with the attacks in the Sampur district  and  in
    Elephant Pass.

85.   Between paragraphs 73 and 75 of the update opinion Dr Smith sets out
    his assessment of Sri Lanka in the following terms:

         "73.    It  is  clear  without  equivocation  that  Sri  Lanka  has
             returned to war.   It  may  be  a  'half  war',  primarily  an
             insurgency and it may not  develop  into  the  scale  of  past
             engagements but it  is  a  civil  war  nevertheless.   In  all
             likelihood, battle will be joined in fits and starts, with the
             LTTE  moving  its  point  of  engagement   from   Jaffna,   to
             Trincomalee, to Colombo and so on.  It will  follow  classical
             insurgency lines of engaging the GoSL forces at the  time  and
             place of the LTTE  choosing  and,  as  such,  can  in  theory,
             prolong the conflict for as long as it wishes.  Given that the
             options made available through the peace process were  clearly
             unacceptable to the LTTE  and  are  likely  to  be  even  more
             unacceptable whilst Rajapakse holds power,  recourse  to  war,
             'half' or otherwise, would seem to be the only option for  the
             LTTE.


         74.     This situation is likely to continue into  the  foreseeable
             future.  Neither side is now disposed towards peace, if indeed
             it ever was (with the benefit of hindsight).  Neither side can
             prevail over the other unless a  major  change  in  capability
             occurs to make the  contest  more  uneven.   Neither  side  is
             prepared to put forward options or adopt positions that  might
             lead  to  a  meaningful  peace  process.   The   international
             community appears to have lost a good deal of its  ability  to
             influence and cajole either side.   Sri Lanka  looks  set  to
             endure a long and costly civil war based upon attrition.


         75.     Apart  from  the  obvious  implications  for  the  civilian
             population domiciled in or near the theatre of  conflict,  the
             LTTE will doubtless ensure that the conflict brings  sustained
             discomfort and insecurity to the civilian  population  in  the
             south where possible, Colombo especially.  The fear of further
             LTTE infiltration and operations in the south  will  keep  the
             security forces on high alert,  as  indeed  they  are  at  the
             moment.  The security implications for  ordinary  citizens  in
             the south may not be too onerous - suicide bombers tend to  be
             extremely targeted  and  the  LTTE  will  continue  to  eschew
             operations that risk collateral damage.  However,  both  sides
             will  become  even  more  focussed  than  they  are   now   on
             individuals they consider a potential threat or security risk.
              This will inevitably raise the  level  of  vulnerability  for
             returned asylum  seekers  in  whom  the  security  forces  and
             associated paramilitary groups or the LTTE feel they  have  an
             adverse interest.  For example, the security forces will be on
             a higher state of alert to seek  out  returning  LTTE  cadres,
             fundraisers and sympathisers.   The  LTTE  will  heighten  its
             intelligence gathering operations in Colombo  to  ensure  that
             its networks are not infiltrated and that  operations  can  be
             carried out without compromise.  Both sides can be expected to
             be ruthless in the pursuit of their objectives."

86.   In reply to comments requested on whether the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    keep records of details of those LTTE suspects who have  been  arrested
    and detained, Dr Smith suggests (paragraph 118) that according to  on-
    the-record information provided by the then Inspector General of Police
    (Fernando) the Directorate of Internal Intelligence (DII)  maintains  a
    centralised database.  His view is that:

         "The quality of the database is, in his opinion, fairly good.   The
         records  go  back  10  -  15  years  and  the  database  is   being
         chronologically extended all  the  time.   It  is  my  opinion  the
         database that is available at the airport is derived,  or  possibly
         the same as, the centralised database maintained by the DII."

      Dr Smith also expresses the view based on a recent interview  with  a
    senior intelligence officer, off the record, that  once  details  of  a
    detainee have been entered into the database they remain there for life
    and that even if a detainee was released from a camp without charge the
    system would identify them on return.  He also notes at  paragraph  122
    that, based on  his  own  personal  observations,  the  airport  has  a
    completely  modernised  arrivals  section  and  electronic  checks   at
    immigration are very swift and efficient which suggest to him that  the
    security system has been updated.  As the appellant has been away  from
    Sri Lanka for six years he would be returned  on  an  emergency  travel
    document which would have to be  obtained  from  the  Sri  Lankan  High
    Commission in London.

87.   Dr Smith referred to the fate of some returned asylum seekers between
    paragraphs 131 and 135 of his report.  This includes a reference  to  a
    returnee who was detained at  Colombo  Airport  from  the  UK  and  had
    allegedly  committed  suicide  at  the  airport   detention   room   on
    10 September 2006.

88.   Finally at paragraph 137 Dr Smith claimed that  the  appellant  could
    conceivably be of adverse interest to the  LTTE  as  well  as  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities as although  they  were  unlikely  to  know  of  his
    return, it would almost certainly be the case that owners and  managers
    of Tamil lodges would provide details of their guests to the  LTTE,  as
    they would also do to the authorities.  Dr Smith stated:

         "During a recent interview with a lodge manager in  Puttah,  I  was
         told that the LTTE do not monitor the lodge guest lists in the same
         way as the police, CID, military intelligence, the army and so  on.
         On questioning as to why this is the case the lodge manager told me
         that the  LTTE  do  not  need  to  monitor  guest  lists  as  their
         intelligence capability is so  robust  even  in  Colombo  that  any
         stranger in the area will come to their immediate scrutiny."

    Dr Smith's Oral Evidence

89.   When cross-examined about his statement that many arrests had  already
    taken place under the emergency powers, Dr Smith said that he did  not
    have a numerical record but the sources were in his report.  He  agreed
    that most of them had  been  released  quickly  but  if  they  were  of
    interest they would be  detained  for  a  considerable  time.   He  was
    referred to the BHC letter of 13 February 2006 and  the  reference  to
    detentions - a number of cordon and search operations, particularly one
    called "Strangers Night II" where 1,000 people had been arrested,  most
    detained briefly but released after fingerprinting  and  photographing.
    He accepted this statement as correct.

90.   When asked about comments on scarring in paragraph  40  of  his  first
    report and the comment that Professor Goode concluded that scarring was
    an extremely  significant  issue  in  the  context  of  suspected  LTTE
    members, he stated that he had read Professor Goode's reports and  that
    this was an overall conclusion taken from Professor Goode's material.

91.   Also in relation to scarring he referred us to discussions he had  had
    with the Inspector of Police Fernando when he was accompanied by  a  UK
    Metropolitan Police Officer (in relation to Tamil  organised  crime  in
    the UK).  He had been told that inspection of  scarring  was  a  useful
    tool, particularly around the elbows and knees, for those who had  seen
    actual service.  He stated there had been discussion of  the  types  of
    scars and strip-searching being routine.

92.   In relation to comments that he considered it was  highly  likely  the
    appellant would be on an LTTE database, he said that it  was  his  view
    that the LTTE had its own database.  He had two  references  for  that,
    one from the Sri Lankan Intelligence Officer and the other on the basis
    of it being a fundraising tool for the LTTE.  He considered that if the
    appellant was of adverse interest to the LTTE he was likely  to  be  on
    the database and if he had been an informer then he would  be  of  real
    interest.

93.   When asked about the returnees mentioned in letters from the  BHC,  he
    said that he did not know specifically the people referred to.  It  was
    put to him that the appellant had left Sri Lanka in 1999 and there  was
    no record of a charge against him or a long detention.  He was asked to
    comment why there would be interest in him after some seven years.   He
    considered this was the case because the appellant had disappeared from
    the radar/records in Sri Lanka and therefore an interview on  his  past
    would be conducted.  He considered he would be released  within  24  to
    36 hours but the relevance of the appellant  having  jumped  bail  was
    important and thus if security at the  airport  were  doing  their  job
    properly, even after seven years, there would be real interest  in  the
    appellant and in particular, interest in what  he  had  been  doing  in
    London.  In the  "half  war"  situation  that  was  now  prevailing  he
    contended that information and intelligence by  the  security  services
    had to be seen at a broad level  and  they  would  be  endeavouring  to
    obtain information from those  who  had  been  overseas,  and  possibly
    involved in arms dealing.  This would be particularly relevant  in  the
    case of a returnee who was found to have absconded from bail.

94.   He stated that a key point in relation to the  database  was  that  it
    had recently been expanded backwards by some ten to fifteen  years  and
    in his view, now went back some twenty years.   On  this  reasoning  he
    considered that those who had family in LTTE-controlled areas would  be
    of interest.  It was also relevant in his view that the  appellant  had
    been guided through the airport on his departure by an agent  and  thus
    it was unsurprising he had not been arrested as he left.  Dr Smith  was
    not asked whether this showed that the avoidance of  official  interest
    is apparently easy.  He agreed,  in  relation  to  lists  held  at  the
    airport, that there was speculation in his comments as they were  based
    on his own personal experience, although he did observe that the  speed
    of entry appeared to be up to First World standards.

95.   He considered that in  Colombo  in  2006,  from  his  own  experience,
    security had been increased dramatically.  He agreed however,  that  he
    had not personally seen anyone detained.  He was then referred  to  the
    comments in his report about the suicide of someone returning from  the
    UK and how it appeared this person  had  in  fact  been  deported  from
    Madras having previously been in the UK.  He agreed on examination  the
    information in his report appeared to be wrong on this point.

96.   In re-examination, when referred to his report's lack of sourcing,  he
    stated his report had to be read as a whole  and  to  be  seen  as  one
    presented by an expert witness who  had  intelligence  information  and
    background on all issues.  In  the  round  he  considered  he  had  the
    ability to make such judgments on all issues.

    Roots and Dynamics of Tamil Organised Crime in London

97.   We were also provided with a joint report from Dr Smith and Detective
    Inspector Hibberd  (bundle C,  37-58).   This  was  not  of  direct
    application to  this  case  but  has  been  taken  into  account  where
    relevant.

    Professor Goode's Report (Bundle B, 1 - 62 and Bundle C, 37 -  58)  and
    Oral Evidence

98.   The two reports from Professor Anthony Goode are  firstly  the  report
    on the fact finding visit to Sri Lanka, 10 - 20 February 2006, which
    covers a range of issues including the background political  and  human
    rights situation, security at the international airport, the  emergency
    regulations, the significance of scarring, the  movement  of  refugees,
    the incidence of torture, release through bribery, the situation in the
    north and the east and the future of the  peace  process.   The  second
    report is dated 3 October 2006 and was prepared specifically  for  the
    appellant.  Professor Goode is a Professor of  Social  Anthropology  at
    the University of Edinburgh where he is currently Head of the School of
    Social and Political Studies.  He holds  Doctorates  in  Chemistry  and
    Social Anthropology.  One from the University of Edinburgh and one from
    Durham.  He lived from 1970 - 72 in Sri Lanka where  he  was  a  senior
    lecturer and he has since also lived for three years in Tamil Nadu  in
    South India.  He states that he makes regular visits to both  countries
    and is engaged in continuing teaching, writing and  research  on  South
    Asian society, history and culture, with particular  reference  to  the
    Tamils.  He made fact-finding visits to Sri Lanka in August 2003 and as
    noted, in February 2006.  Both visits were funded at his  own  expense.
    We assume that as they were not of relevance to  his  employment,  they
    were as part of his separate "business" which includes giving  evidence
    as an expert for appellants.  He states  that  he  has  now  written  a
    number of expert reports for asylum appeals involving Sri  Lankans  and
    has  participated  as  a  presenter  at  seminars  on  expert  evidence
    organised by the IARLJ and ILPA and at  the  Refugee  Study  Centre  in
    Oxford.

      Oral Evidence

99.   Professor Goode adopted both of  the  reports.   He  gave  some  brief
    comments at the outset on additional material since  the  reports  were
    written.  He noted in this regard the continuing breakdown of the peace
    talks, including a speech by the LTTE leader on 27 November 2006  (set
    out in a BBC news report), where the leader had  said  the  LTTE  would
    settle for nothing less than a separate State  and  the  ceasefire  was
    defunct.  Professor Goode stated that  while  this  appeared  to  be  a
    signal to a return to conflict, neither side will actually say this  as
    it would impact on the donor community and could lead to  the  loss  of
    aid money.  He considered that the Sri Lankan Government would continue
    to maintain that it wants a peaceful solution as it too recognises  the
    risks of losing donor aid.  However, at the same  time  the  government
    was effectively blockading the north and the LTTE and  Tamil  community
    saw themselves as under siege.  He agreed that  the  general  situation
    was a deteriorating   one and in the recent escalation 3,500  had  been
    killed.  The majority of these deaths were in the north  and  the  east
    where the conflict is widespread.  At the current  time  he  considered
    that the north and the east had to be distinguished.  In the east there
    was no separate alliance and both the government and the LTTE had moved
    in following the split in the LTTE  caused  by  the  Karuna  defection.
    Thus, in his  view,  the  security  situation  in  the  east  was  more
    frightening as it was difficult to know who was responsible for various
    actions.  In the north there was far more certainty in concluding  that
    the LTTE and the government were involved.

100.  From the specific report we have noted, particularly his  comments  on
    the twelve specific areas of risk we discuss in part 9.

101.  In relation to records held  by  the  security  forces  and  how  this
    information is stored, Professor Goode made some general comments based
    on the information which is available.  He considered that the evidence
    suggests that the Sri Lankan  Army  are  expected  to  pass  on  police
    information regarding all those  detained  by  them.   Returned  asylum
    seekers can generally be easily identified by  Sri  Lankan  immigration
    officials because of their temporary travel  documents  issued  by  the
    High Commission in London; one can presume, he said  that  these  alert
    the authorities in Sri Lanka when such documents are issued.   In  this
    situation the  background  of  returned  asylum  applicants,  including
    records of offences previously committed, prior detentions,  appearance
    on wanted lists etc are likely to be known by the authorities.  This is
    in accordance with the background evidence on record-keeping.  He noted
    the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs report of 30 September  1999  in
    this regard.  He considered that it did not follow that the police  had
    information on  every  case,  but  it  was  likely,  if  a  person  had
    previously been arrested or informed upon.  In his February 2006 report
    he noted that passports were being swiped electronically and  this  was
    confirmed  in  the  October  2005  Home  Office  Country  Report.    He
    considered  that  there  had  been  further  moves   to   enhance   the
    availability of suspects' records and that computerised records existed
    for Colombo and other parts of the country.  These computerised records
    were available at the airport and the information technology was  being
    improved and developed.  In this situation, he considered "If there  is
    a file on Mr P K, which appears highly likely given he was  detained,
    imprisoned,  taken  to  court  and  bailed  subject  to   a   reporting
    requirement,  that  such  evidence  will  be  available,  possibly   to
    immigration officers, but in any event to the CID."

102.  He stated that the Home Office Visit report of  March  2002  indicated
    that the army indeed maintained paper records which it communicated  to
    the police in the south.

103.  He mentioned regulation 20 of the Emergency Regulations currently  in
    force.  This regulation sets out that any public officer,  including  a
    member of the army, navy or air force, may search and detain or  arrest
    without warrant any person suspected of an offence under the  Emergency
    Regulations.  Those persons are to be handed over to a  police  station
    within  24  hours.   Beyond  this  he  noted  that  the  appellant  was
    fingerprinted on at least one occasion and there is centralised storing
    of fingerprint data, as discussed in his 2006 visit report.

104.  Professor Goode  was  unable  to  state  the  circumstances  in  which
    members of security forces would consult records, but  said  that  such
    records are kept and consultations took place in the context of  cordon
    and search operations, such as the large scale one conducted in Colombo
    in December 2005.  He appeared to have  no  direct  knowledge  of  such
    consultations however.

105.  His views as to the risk on return specifically to the  appellant  are
    set out in the report.  In this regard he noted the role of  confession
    evidence under the PTA and Emergency Regulations and  the  overwhelming
    evidence of continued and routine  use  of  torture  with  impunity  by
    security forces.  He  also  noted  the  continuing  risk  from  visible
    scarring.  In his opinion, the body of evidence indicated that  if  the
    appellant:

         "is detained  for  questioning  on  arrival,  it  would  seem  very
         probable because of the records likely to be held  concerning  him,
         and because  his  scarring  may  attract  adverse  attention,  ill-
         treatment, possibly amounting  to  torture,  is  highly  likely  to
         occur."


    He notes that the Prevention of Terrorism Act allows confessions to  be
    made to the police with no magistrate present and the burden  of  proof
    that these were obtained coercively lies with the defendant.  This,  in
    his view, has led to the widespread use of torture.  He also notes that
    PTA trials do not involve juries and depart  in  other  ways  from  the
    normal Sri Lankan court procedures.

106.  At paragraph 52 of  his  report  he  notes  interviews  he  held  with
    several attorneys in August 2003 and February 2006.  They confirm  that
    people held under the PTA were commonly held in custody for  very  long
    periods before being indicted and trials were very much delayed.

107.  Professor Goode  then  gives  a  number  of  references  from  various
    bodies, including the UN Committee Against Torture, Asian Human  Rights
    Commission, and Amnesty International which all referred to the use  of
    torture as a  routine  part  of  criminal  proceedings.   He  therefore
    concludes that torture appears to be endemic and not just  confined  to
    terrorist suspects.

108.  On the issue of scarring he notes that it has been an issue of  debate
    with the Home Office Visit report of 2001  accepting  obvious  scarring
    could draw attention and result in further enquiries and  detention  by
    the authorities.  Professor Goode's understanding is that scarring  per
    se does not lead to  detention,  but  visible  scarring  makes  further
    enquiries and the discovery that the person has "record", more  likely.
    After a review of material from the UNHCR, the  respondent's  COIR  and
    other material Professor Goode concludes that:

         "despite Home Office assertions to the contrary that, visible scars
         may indeed still play a part in  increasing  risk  on  return.   It
         seems clear that scarring is one factor  among  several  which  may
         serve to trigger adverse interest on the part of the authorities."

109.  On the issue of treatment on return, Professor Goode notes there is  a
    dearth of recent information regarding treatment by the security forces
    of returned failed asylum seekers at Colombo  Airport  and  thereafter.
    He notes two determinations of the Tribunal where persons  giving  such
    accounts were found to be credible.  He also relies on  a  report  from
    Dr Smith.

110.  On the issue of absconding  after  release  on  bail  Professor  Goode
    concludes that in his opinion, the evidence suggests that release under
    any circumstances cannot be taken as evidence of cessation  of  adverse
    interest.  Where a person is released on bail,  with  strict  reporting
    requirements, that seems to suggest  clear  continuation  of  interest.
    The fact that he absconded could only reinforce that view.

111.  In conclusion, like Dr Smith, he finds that:

         "It is clear that the two sides in the ethnic conflict are  at  war
         in all but name, and that the  security  situation  throughout  the
         country at present can only be described as desperate."

112.  In cross-examination Professor Goode clarified his views on  a  number
    of issues.  When asked whether he suggested  that  there  were  records
    kept of all detentions he stated his view was that it depended  on  the
    circumstances.  Some detentions were  extra-judicial  and  in  conflict
    situations.  However, evidence indicated record keeping  was  improving
    and particularly for a person who had jumped bail.

113.  When asked about evidence of what happened to  failed  asylum  seekers
    on return and comments by the BHC that such  returnees  are  held  very
    briefly, and why his  conclusions  did  not  appear  to  reflect  their
    evidence, Professor Goode stated that he was talking about detention at
    the airport and that it was more likely than not that records would  be
    held at the airport for a person with the profile of the appellant,  as
    he had been in the formal legal process and therefore was likely to  be
    on record.  He thus presumed that those absconding from bail  would  be
    recorded.

114.  In relation to confession evidence he noted that it was relevant  that
    Tamil defendants did not have access to documents   He  referred  to  a
    case he had dealt with where the court document was  in  Sinhalese  and
    the appellant had to pay to have it translated.

115.  On the issue of scarring he stated that he would go  no  further  than
    the evidence appeared to indicate, and that he was  being  cautious  in
    this area including his comment that strip-searching may no  longer  be
    routine or was less common.

    Dr Gunaratna's Report (Bundle C, 93 - 97)

116.  Dr Gunaratna presented written evidence only.  His  report  is  dated
    6 October  2006.   Dr Gunaratna  was  contacted  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors.  He states that he is a terrorism  and  insurgency  analyst
    with over twenty years of research.  Currently he serves as the Head of
    the International Centre for Political Violence and  Terrorism  at  the
    Nanyang  Technological  University  in  Singapore  and   one   of   his
    specialities is the conflict in Sri Lanka,  especially  the  LTTE.   He
    states he had previously worked at the University of  St  Andrews  from
    1996 to 2002.  For source material he states he relied heavily  on  his
    experience,  participating  closely  and  observing   developments   in
    Sri Lanka including visits to the country and indeed meeting the  LTTE
    leader, Prabhakaran.  Most  of  his  report,  while  directed  to  this
    specific appellant is set out in a rather generalised manner.   On  the
    issue of databases he comments:

         "In Sri Lanka such records of detention,  trial  and  even  medical
         records are not properly catalogued and stored.  Even if they were,
         they are difficult to obtain."

      However, he goes on to state that  like  most  government  operational
    agencies worldwide the Sri Lankan authorities store information on LTTE
    members, supporters and suspected members and supporters.  The CID  and
    Department of Military Intelligence are the main custodians and  users,
    as well as the police and military.  The airport has a watch  list  and
    an alert list managed by a number of agencies.  He states that although
    he has not been able to verify it, it is "very likely  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government will have a record of  Mr P K  for  two  reasons,  firstly
    because he has been arrested and secondly because he jumped bail."   He
    also considers it very likely the government's records will  state  the
    appellant is either a member or a supporter of the LTTE.

117.  He considers that on return, particularly  because  the  appellant  is
    scarred either from torture or battle, he will be  subjected  to  close
    scrutiny and suspicion as a terrorist.  He also notes that if the  LTTE
    finds out the appellant has collaborated with the security forces, once
    the government  releases  him,  he  would  be  detained  by  the  LTTE,
    tortured, interrogated and executed.

    The report of Dr Basil Fernando (bundle C, 98 - 101)

118.  Dr Fernando also presented a written report, which  is  unfortunately
    undated, but appears to have been sent on 6 October 2006.  Dr Fernando
    is an Attorney at Law in the Supreme Court in Sri Lanka and has  worked
    as a counsellor for refugees under the UNHCR programme  for  Vietnamese
    refugees in Hong Kong.  He states he has written several books on human
    rights issues in Asia, particularly in Sri Lanka, and for the past five
    years has been the co-ordinator of a prevention  of  torture  programme
    with a group of six Sri  Lankan  non-governmental  organisations.   His
    report is  of  a  generalised  nature  and  in  broad  terms  expresses
    agreement with the UN  High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights,  the  UN
    Special  Rapporteur   against   extra-judicial   killings   and   other
    international human rights organisations such as Amnesty International,
    Human Rights Watch, the International Commission of  Jurists  and  AHRC
    that report the situation in Sri Lanka is now one of grave violation of
    human rights and that no local mechanism exists to stop such  violence.
    He therefore rejects the views expressed in the letter from the BHC  of
    13 February 2006 that he was asked to comment upon.

    Dr Alan Keenan Report (Bundle C, 102 - 113)

119.   This  is  another  written  report.  It  is  dated  6 October  2006.
    Dr Keenan is stated to  be  South  Asia  Regional  Editor  and  Senior
    Analyst, International  Crisis  Group.   He  reports  on  a  number  of
    political killings, abductions and the failure of domestic remedies for
    human rights violations whether committed by the government,  the  LTTE
    or other armed groups.  He  also  notes  that  the  PTA  and  Emergency
    Regulations authorise a range of human rights violations in  their  own
    right and the fact that they allow coerced confessions as  evidence  in
    trial enables virtually endless detention and re detention of suspects
    without them being brought to trial:

         "The message that the system has sent to the police and to the army
         has been clear: one is  allowed  to  torture  and  detain  suspects
         without evidence for  as  long  as  one  likes  without  any  legal
         liability or chance of punishment.  Sri Lanka  is  now,  sadly  but
         predictably, reaping the harvest of  extra-judicial  violence  from
         both State and non-State actors - that such practices have sown."

    The Report of Dr Yolanda Foster (Bundle C, 114 - 125)

120.  This written report is from Dr Foster, an academic  researcher  whose
    specialist area is Sri Lanka.  She is stated to have regularly  visited
    Sri Lanka since 1995 and her last fact finding trip was  in  September
    2006.  This report is directly related to the appellant's case and  she
    was provided with the expert report of Dr Smith, the letters from  the
    BHC up to August 2006 and the report of Professor Goode.   Her  report
    describes the human rights situation in Sri Lanka as  extremely  grave.
    She sets out a commentary on the climate of  impunity,  disappearances,
    abductions and killings of Tamils in Colombo.  She also reports that in
    the current security environment most Tamils are treated as if they are
    suspects and that this applies not only in the north and the  east  but
    also in Colombo where search and  cordon  operations  targeting  Tamil-
    dominated suburbs take place.

121.  In reply to the specific written question as to whether  someone  like
    the appellant would be released on bail, and what were the consequences
    of  absconding  from  bail,  she  states  that  under   the   Emergency
    Regulations(ERs) LTTE  suspects  are  routinely  detained  under  these
    provisions and that while, under ordinary law, most people receive fair
    trials, the ERs allow arrest  without  warrant  and  lengthy  detention
    without charge.  A human rights lawyer she spoke  to  states  that  the
    appellant would be unlikely to receive release on bail having absconded
    in the past.  Dr Foster considered that it would be challenging for the
    appellant to find employment in Colombo as he would not have a  network
    of contacts and with the  current  suspicion  of  Tamils,  particularly
    someone like the appellant whose national identity card would  show  he
    was from Jaffna, his economic opportunities would be hard.  If he found
    shelter at a lodge he may become the target of  suspicion  as  security
    forces  have  recently  conducted  sweep  operations  in  the  capital,
    Colombo, targeting lodges in the belief that LTTE cadres may be  hiding
    there.  She states that the security forces  have  asked  three-wheeler
    drivers in the city as well as bus drivers to be alert  for  suspicious
    behaviour.  She gives an example of how a young Tamil travelling by bus
    was  detained  as  directions  written  on   his   hand   were   deemed
    "suspicious".

    Numerous COI Reports (Bundle B, 1 - 331)

122.  We have had the opportunity of considering specific  reports  we  were
    referred to in this bundle.  A number of these are support material for
    the other reports provided.

    UNHCR Position Paper, December 2006

123.  This report we considered of particular significance  as  it  came  to
    our attention after the first two days of hearing.  It was one  of  the
    prime  reasons  why  we  decided  it  was   necessary   to   reconvene.
    Consideration of this report is covered fully in  the  submissions  and
    our conclusions.

      US Department of State Report 2006

124.  The US Department of State "Country Reports on Human Rights  Practices
    2006: Sri Lanka" published 6 March 2007  was  also  included  in  the
    appellant's bundle D and again has  been  taken  into  account  in  the
    submissions and conclusions noted below.

    Canadian IRB Report, 22 December 2006

125.   This  report  was  also  submitted  with  the  appellant's  bundle D
    (pages 32 -  36).   It  covers  treatment  of  failed  asylum  seekers
    returning from Canada to Sri Lanka (2004 - 2006).   This  material  is
    also dealt with in the submissions and conclusions.

    The Hotham Mission Report.

126.  A Report from the Hotham Mission Asylum  seeker  Project  (ASP)  on  a
    field trip to  Sri Lanka,  October  2006  was  also  included  in  the
    appellant's bundle D (pages 57 -  59).   This  report  was  published
    15 November 2006.  The report states that the ASP has a long history of
    working with Sri Lankan asylum  seekers  of  all  backgrounds  and  has
    conducted considerable research into the humanitarian protection  needs
    of this group.  Following concerns,  the  Hotham  Mission  conducted  a
    field trip to Sri Lanka and to refugee camps in Tamil Nadu,  India  in
    October 2006 which aimed to evidence and prepare a report for community
    and government (of Australia)  on  regional  and  situational  concerns
    facing returnees on specific issues related to protection and security,
    governance and the peace process, welfare  and  humanitarian  concerns,
    and return and repatriation.  The group met with 35 groups in the field
    trip.  The trip was hosted by the National  Christian  Council  of  Sri
    Lanka and funded by the Lonely Planet  Foundation.   Again  submissions
    and our conclusions drawn from them are set out below.

127.  Also with the additional material provided at the resumed  hearing  on
    11 April 2007 and included in the appellant's bundle D  were  reports
    from Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, Reuters, the BBC, Tamil
    Net, and Associated Press.  These are set out in bundle D at pages 94 -
    145.  We have noted the material we were directed to in  these  reports
    and conducted a general overview of them.

7.    The Respondent's Submissions on the Appellant's Case and Evidence

128.  Ms Richards, in her skeleton argument on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    dated  13 November  2006,  covered  the  factual  background  of  the
    appellant, the role of country  experts,  a  review  of  the  case  law
    concerning Sri Lanka (this material has been noted by us and taken into
    account in the section of this decision where  we  review  the  current
    country guidance (CG) case list in its entirety), some Strasbourg  case
    law, and general submissions on the appellant's case.  We now  set  out
    briefly a  summary  of  those  submissions  and  the  oral  submissions
    presented to us by Ms Richards throughout the hearing of the case.

129.  In relation to the appellant himself Ms Richards  asked  us  to  note
    that the appellant had never been a member of the  LTTE  and  had  only
    undertaken activities for them reluctantly and under duress  at  a  low
    level in non-military, non-violent activities.  For this reason he  was
    in a similar position to  many  or  most  Tamils  from  LTTE-controlled
    areas.  She agreed  that  he  had  been  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities but this was for a relatively short period of  three  weeks
    and had been released on the payment of money  by  his  uncle  when  he
    agreed to assist the police by  providing  information.   He  was  then
    released on bail but was not charged with any offences.  She  submitted
    there was no  evidence  of  outstanding  arrest  warrants  or  charges.
    Beyond this there was no evidence of ongoing interest in the  appellant
    by the Sri Lankan authorities other than the questioning of his uncle,
    who had put up bail, in 2001.  She  noted  that  on  departure  he  had
    passed through several  checkpoints  and  underwent  personal  searches
    without difficulty.  All of these events had  taken  place  before  the
    ceasefire in 2002.  She asked us to note that  the  appellant  has  not
    been in Sri Lanka for seven years.

130.  The respondent acknowledged that during 2005 - 2007 the situation  in
    Sri Lanka has worsened with violent clashes between the  LTTE  and  the
    Sri Lankan Army and a number of civilian deaths and disappearances  and
    significant ceasefire violations.  Her  submission  was  however,  that
    most of these problems have been and continue to be concentrated in the
    north and east of Sri Lanka and  while  there  have  been  problems  in
    Colombo, particularly with suicide bombers and attacks on high  profile
    targets, the situation in Colombo could not be compared to the north of
    the country where this appellant  originated  from  but  would  not  be
    returned to.

131.  It was also acknowledged that since the assassination of  the  Foreign
    Minister in August 2005 there had been re-introduction of the  ERs  and
    these remained in force.  It  was  thus  accepted  that  an  individual
    detained by the Sri Lankan  authorities  and  seriously  suspected  of
    involvement in LTTE attacks or planned attacks  would  be  at  risk  of
    serious ill-treatment.  In her submission none of this led to a  person
    of the appellant's profile being likely to be at a real risk on return,
    or a conclusion that anyone who  had  previously  escaped  custody,  or
    breached reporting conditions or bail,  is  at  risk  of  serious  ill-
    treatment on return.

132.  From the background  evidence  she  asked  us  to  note  a  number  of
    factors.  The first of these was an IRB report "Treatment of Returnees"
    and  in  particular  the  implementation  of  amended  immigrants   and
    emigrants Act of 1998 (5 August 2003) which recorded:

         "Although standard procedure  is  for  deportees  to  be  routinely
         referred to the airport  division  of  the  Criminal  Investigation
         Division (CID) for interview on return, in our experience there are
         no arbitrary detentions without due process, certainly no  torture.
         Returnees who do not have pending arrest warrants or active charges
         in Sri Lanka are simply  released  ...  the  Dutch  have  returned
         numbers of failed asylum  seekers  on  a  special  flight  with  no
         adverse results ... we liaise regularly with  GOSL  authorities  on
         removal cases from Canada, and we see no evidence of extra-judicial
         ill-treatment."

      The same report, she noted, recorded a senior UNHCR official, at  that
    time, stating that some deportees were questioned for a  short  period,
    then allowed to leave the airport and others  were  not  questioned  at
    all.

133.   More  information  was  provided  in  the  BHC,  Colombo  letters  of
    26 September 2005, 13 February 2006, 4 April 2006, 24 August 2006 and
    10 April 2007.  From these she asked us to note that the IoM (para  48
    ante) on  in  September  2005  stated  that  to  their  knowledge  most
    returnees were detained briefly and then released to their families and
    that  the  Canadian,  Australian  and  German  Missions   had   similar
    experiences (in 2005).  In a few cases the CID  detained  people  where
    there was an existing warrant.  Cordon and search operations  had  been
    conducted in December 2005 (Strangers Night II) when about 1,000 people
    were arrested and briefly detained.  The Human  Rights  Commission  had
    summoned the Inspector General of Police to explain the purpose of that
    cordon and search operation.  As at February 2006, 87 persons had  been
    detained under the ERs.  An update of this information was provided  in
    the 10 April 2007 letter.

134.  The letter  of  24 August  2006  noted  that  the  vast  majority  of
    returnees were questioned for a  short  period  of  time  to  establish
    identity and check security issues but normally it was only when  there
    was an outstanding arrest that individuals  were  detained  for  longer
    periods.  It was also acknowledged that occasional  cordon  and  search
    operations still take place.

135.  Specifically she informed us that  some  750  enforced  and  voluntary
    returns to Sri Lanka from the UK took place between 1 April 2005  and
    30 June 2006 and that "it is likely that many will have had a  profile
    similar to that of the appellant, whose  case  is  not  unusual."   Her
    submission was that there was no evidence to suggest such returnees had
    experienced  difficulties  that  would  breach   either   the   Refugee
    Convention or the ECHR thresholds.  She also submitted that while those
    who face arrest warrants may attract the attention of the  authorities,
    the evidence did not support a conclusion that those who merely  failed
    to comply with reporting restrictions would be of equal interest.

136.  She then turned to the evidence  of  Dr Smith  and  Professor  Goode.
    This she submitted was being  largely  speculative  and  to  an  extent
    anecdotal, often unsupported by the main  Country  of  Origin  reports.
    She submitted that Dr Smith had not responded to points raised by  the
    respondent in his position statement that  had  been  filed  in  August
    2006.

137.  Her submission was that there was no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    presence of scars alone created a material risk of ill-treatment.   She
    suggested that the evidence from Dr Smith and Professor Goode should be
    compared with that of the UN Committee on Torture  (23  November  2001)
    and the letter from the BHC of 26 September 2005 that stated:

         "The  role  of  scarring  is  extremely  difficult  to  assess  ...
         anecdotal  evidence  is  that  it  can  play  a  part  in   rousing
         suspicion."

      A  later  letter  of  August  2006  suggested  that  consideration  of
    scarring did take place only when there was another reason  to  suspect
    an individual.  She submitted that findings in earlier  cases  such  as
    Jeyachandran [2002] UKIAT 01869 had correctly noted that "the fact that
    a person bears scars does not, by itself, engender an increased risk of
    suspicion of LTTE involvement, of arrest or detention longer than 48 -
     72 hours."

138.  She noted that Professor Goode (at paragraph 107 of his report)  noted
    that scarring was "one  factor  amongst  several  which  may  serve  to
    trigger  adverse  interest  on  the  part  of  the  authorities".   Her
    submission was that scarring is in the majority of  cases  unlikely  to
    play a material part or to give rise to a risk of ill-treatment in  the
    absence of other more weighty factors.

139.  In respect of the appellant's mental health she acknowledged that  for
    the purpose of this appeal there was no dispute over the  diagnosis  of
    post-traumatic stress  disorder  however,  there  was  nothing  in  the
    appellant's case that suggested on return there would be an  impact  on
    his mental health placing the UK in breach  of  its  obligations  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

140.  Ms Richards supported many of her submissions by  references  to  the
    COIS reports of October 2006 and February 2007.

141.  On the bail issue she asks us to note particularly the BHC  letter  of
    22 November 2006 which observed that it was common practice to release
    detainees on bail without being charged, as was the situation with this
    appellant.  She submitted that, contrary to the evidence  of  Professor
    Goode, this was common practice and that the appellant was  not  in  an
    exceptional situation and that it did not follow that  arrest  warrants
    were issued for appellants such as this one who had apparently  skipped
    bail.

142.  In reference to the letter to the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department by an MP relating to a  returnee  who  had  apparently  been
    killed on return, she submitted that there did not appear, on  enquiry,
    to be a  temporal  connection  between  the  two  events.   The  letter
    indicated a six year gap and that the returnee had been  killed  in  an
    incident in eastern Sri Lanka.  Her submission was that  there  was  no
    reason to draw adverse conclusions from this incident that  all  failed
    asylum seekers from the UK were at risk.

143.  Ms Richards helpfully reviewed the current case law, particularly the
    CG cases for us.  As noted later in this determination, apart from some
    unique, esoteric cases, we have concluded that all on the existing list
    of cases should be taken from the CG list and that  this  determination
    will form the basis of the current findings of the  Tribunal  on  risks
    from Sri Lankan authorities.  We deal with this in paragraphs  227  and
    228.  (A later CG determination will be needed to cover  the  situation
    on LTTE risks).

144.  We now note the submissions of Ms Richards  in  respect  of  the  two
    expert reports.  Firstly, she submitted that the risks to returnees  of
    suicide or death, had been  overstated  and  were  misleading  for  the
    reasons we have noted above.  The  comments  by  Dr Smith  that  strip
    searches were routine she submitted were not supported by the evidence.
     The only reliable reports on this issue that were available went  back
    to 1997 and were reports from the Medical Foundation about its clients.
     These did not give evidence of strip searching being routine.

145.  In respect of the Stop and Watch  lists  she  agreed  that  while  the
    sources indicated they existed, she did not agree with the  conclusions
    of Dr Smith that there would axiomatically be a real risk  of  persons
    such as the appellant being on such lists.  Her submission was that  on
    the evidence this was not a conclusion that could  be  firmly  reached.
    Thus, his evidence on this issue should be treated with  caution.   She
    submitted that as most of his  conclusions  had  been  reached  without
    recourse to underlying sources or evidence, we should adopt a  cautious
    approach to all of his conclusions.

146.  In respect of Professor Goode's reports she noted agreement  with  the
    conclusions in respect of problems in the north and  the  east  of  Sri
    Lanka but did not agree that the situation in Colombo was of  the  same
    nature as indicated by Professor Goode.  There was  also  agreement  by
    the respondent that round-ups were taking place in Colombo,  but  in  a
    manner that was set out in the BHC letters.   She  submitted  that  the
    reports of Professor Goode were better sourced than those of Dr Smith
    but many of his conclusions were not justified on the full analysis  of
    the background evidence provided.  She noted his  reference  to  Dutch,
    German and BHC material in respect of the  stop  and  watch  lists  but
    found it difficult  to  see  how  some  of  the  conclusions  had  been
    justified.  Whilst she agreed that it was right to bring  attention  to
    the new Emergency Regulations which continue to be enforced,  and  that
    information could be passed from various departments in Sri Lanka under
    these Regulations, this, of itself, did not show that  any  records  on
    this appellant were held, particularly given he had not  been  detained
    under the  latest  Regulations.   Conclusions  therefore  that  he  was
    extremely likely to be stopped and questioned by the CID,  and  sustain
    ill-treatment, did not concur with the  reports  of  the  BHC,  or  the
    Canadian Mission.  The examples given by Professor Goode  of  detainees
    in Colombo  were  not  comparable  to  the  appellant's  situation  and
    therefore did not assist in assessing risk to  him.   She  agreed  that
    there was a dearth of recent information in relation to  returnees  and
    in this situation the reports by the BHC  were  relevant  and  did  not
    appear to have been given weight by Professor Goode.  On the  issue  of
    bail she submitted that Professor Goode had based  his  findings  on  a
    presumption that the police were bound to take an adverse  interest  in
    persons, such as the appellant.  However, this  was  not  supported  by
    actual evidence before us of it happening to such people.

147.  In respect of the three  written  reports  she  submitted  that  these
    appeared to be improperly catalogued, or not at all, and that  most  of
    the material provided was anecdotal and  really  did  not  throw  great
    light on the core issues before us.

148.  We now turn to Ms Richards' submissions on the most  recent  material
    provided to us in the UNHCR report, the latest COIR and  OGN,  the  BHC
    letter of April 2007 and the other reports provided  by  the  appellant
    (set out in bundle D).  In respect of  the  UNHCR  Position  Paper  of
    December 2006  she  submitted  that  it  contained  a  number  of  very
    generalised statements and positions which may have  been  relevant  to
    the full  scope  of  "protection"  that  the  UNHCR  was  obligated  to
    undertake.  We should note that the full remit of the UNHCR is to cover
    a wide range of humanitarian issues that go beyond the specific  issues
    of real risks of persecution or serious maltreatment  that  are  before
    us.  The task therefore before the respondent and the ait was  not  the
    same as that of the UNHCR.

149.  Again the UNHCR noted that the security situation had deteriorated  in
    the north and the east and to a lesser extent  in  Colombo.   Thus  the
    comments in paragraph 14 of the  UNHCR  report  related  to  the  human
    rights  situation  for  Tamils  from  the  north  and  the  east.    To
    extrapolate that all Tamils faced widespread insecurity and are at risk
    of targeted violations of their human rights, harassment, intimidation,
    arrests, detentions, torture, abduction and killing  at  the  hands  of
    government forces was too wide a conclusion to reach, in her view,  and
    the comment was not sourced with references.  There was not  a  blanket
    risk to all Tamils and even the footnotes in the report did not suggest
    this.

150.  The comments in paragraph 20 that  checkpoints  had  been  re-instated
    making it particularly difficult for Tamils to  travel  in  government-
    controlled areas and in particular those born in LTTE-controlled areas,
    was not disputed.  However, as confirmed in footnote  37  from  the  US
    Department of State report, the treatment at these checkpoints was,  in
    her submission, harassment not persecution.  Again, in the comments  on
    Tamils from Colombo, set out from paragraph 23  of  the  UNHCR  report,
    which describes Tamils in Colombo  as  being  at  "heightened  risk  of
    security  checks,  arbitrary  personal  and  house-to-house   searches,
    harassment, restrictions on freedom of  movement  and  other  forms  of
    abuse", she submitted this again showed evidence of harassment,  rather
    than serious maltreatment.  Even the recording, at paragraph  24,  that
    under the Emergency Regulations registration of Tamils was taking place
    in Colombo,  to  enable  accurate  information  on  ethnicity  and  the
    location of all inhabitants, did not of itself indicate real  risks  of
    persecution/serious ill treatment.  She agreed, with paragraph 25, that
    there were targeted sections of the  community,  such  as  young  Tamil
    professionals  including  women,  businessmen,  political  figures  and
    activists with a pro-Tamil stance.  Again, she submitted this was not a
    situation that was relevant to this appellant as  the  targeted  groups
    did not include him.

151.  The comment, at paragraph 33, that certain profiles  in  Colombo  were
    at risk, she considered was unhelpful, as it did not state  what  those
    profiles were and failed to set out the distinction  between  risks  in
    the north and the east of  Sri  Lanka,  from  those  in  Colombo.   The
    comment she referred to was:

         "In Colombo, Tamils have been targeted  while  those  with  certain
         profiles are liable to suffer serious human rights  transgressions.
         Therefore, UNHCR recommends that all asylum claims  of  individuals
         from Sri Lanka be  examined  carefully  under  fair  and  efficient
         refugee status determination procedures."

152.  She then turned  to  the  comments  from  paragraph  34(iv)  "Internal
    Flight Alternative".  She said it was not submitted by  the  respondent
    that this appellant should travel to the north or east of Sri Lanka but
    that he could find safety in Colombo.  Effectively  therefore  we  were
    dealing with an internal flight or relocation issue for  this  specific
    appellant.  The comment by the UNHCR that individuals who flee targeted
    violence and human rights abuses by the LTTE had no realistic  internal
    flight alternative given the reach of the LTTE and  "the  inability  of
    the authorities to provide assured protection",  she  submitted  was  a
    view the UNHCR were entitled to hold, but was not one that  necessarily
    accorded with the  obligations  of  the  United  Kingdom  under  either
    Convention in respect of persons returned to Colombo.

153.  In  relation  to  paragraph  34(b)  about  Tamils  from  Colombo,  she
    submitted  that  round-ups  by  the  government  authorities  were  not
    persecution of themselves and the report indeed states that "individual
    acts of harassment do not in and of themselves constitute persecution".
     We agree this should be noted by us but also that this  statement  was
    followed by the additional comment:

         "Taken together they may cumulatively amount to a serious violation
         of human rights and therefore could be persecutory."

154.  Turning then to the US Department of State  report  (March  2007)  she
    again asked us to note that most of the incidents referred to  were  in
    the north and the east and related to disappearances  or  abduction  of
    high-profile targets.  She  stated  that  the  respondent  agreed  that
    torture did take place in Sri Lanka, however, this did  not  mean  that
    everyone in detention was at a real risk of torture.  Thus, while there
    was harassment at checkpoints and in short term detentions, this may be
    unpleasant and discriminatory it did not rise to  the  level  of  being
    persecutory.  She reiterated her submission that this  appellant  would
    not be liable to be arrested on a warrant on return and thus, while  he
    may be detained for short periods, he would soon be released  and  free
    to go.  Thus, even in Colombo where it was  acknowledged  from  the  US
    report that there were checkpoints and  registration  requirements  and
    the  erosion  of  civil  rights,  these  were  not  at  the  level   of
    persecution, in her submission.

155.  Ms Richards then took us to a  number  of  comments  and  conclusions
    within the Hotham report.  Findings and conclusions in this report  she
    submitted also were evidence of the general erosion of civil rights but
    not widespread evidence of persecution for those with a profile such as
    this appellant.  Again, she noted that the problem in this  report,  as
    with several others in respect of the "death in custody" case, was that
    this was another example of  reports  using  the  same  (in  this  case
    inapplicable)  reports  to  extrapolate  and  reach  possibly   desired
    conclusions.  She questioned the research  methodology  used  for  that
    reason.  A particular point she made in respect of  the  Hotham  report
    was that there was a failure to obtain accounts  from  returned  failed
    asylum seekers which, in her submission, was a substantive flaw in  the
    methodology, particularly given that this was an  organisation  devoted
    to the welfare of such persons.  Thus it would appear that  the  Hotham
    Mission would have been in a good position  to  contact  such  persons.
    Beyond this there were  no  interviews  with  political  or  government
    groups and accordingly, in her submission, the report must be seen as a
    partisan one with the serious limitations she had noted.  Additionally,
    many of the comments were related to what were  primarily  humanitarian
    issues, rather than specific issues of risks of persecution or  serious
    maltreatment that were before us.  In this situation  we  should  treat
    the report with  caution,  particularly  the  blanket  statements  made
    within it  which  were  often  based  on  unspecified  or  unidentified
    reports.  It did not provide  a  clear  picture  of  the  situation  in
    Colombo for persons who had actually returned recently.

156.  Ms Richards  then  turned  to  the  other  documentation  provided  in
    bundle D from pages 94 - 145.  She submitted that a number of  these
    were merely news reports and whilst of useful background, did not  show
    objective evidence of specific risks to persons such as this appellant.



157.  She asked us to note with caution the Tamil  Net  reports,  which  she
    noted was openly acknowledged as a pro-LTTE organisation and  was  thus
    not necessarily reliable.  The recent reports of  the  bombing  of  the
    airforce base near Colombo Airport she submitted  did  not  necessarily
    show an increased risk to Tamils at the airport.  It was  illogical  to
    extrapolate a risk to every Tamil who may  enter  the  airport  because
    this attack had been acknowledged to have been carried out by the LTTE.



158.  After finally covering some items in the latest COIS and  OGN  reports
    from the respondent and bringing to our attention  the  BHC  letter  of
    10 April 2007, she submitted that the position  of  the  Secretary  of
    State had not changed over the past few months since she made her first
    submissions in this case.  She agreed that there had been some  changes
    with an increase in the cordon and search operations but this  was  not
    tantamount to a great deterioration nor, in her  submission,  would  it
    place this appellant, or returnees  of  like  profile,  at  risk.   The
    evidence did not show, in this case, that a person, with no outstanding
    arrest warrant and only an outdated low level of support to  the  LTTE,
    would be ill-treated.  She  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  may  be
    interviewed on return at the airport but, the  evidence  indicated,  he
    would be soon released.  Beyond this while in Colombo he  could  be  at
    risk of cordon and search detention but  again  there  was  nothing  to
    indicate that beyond short detention and registration, a Tamil with his
    profile would be at a heightened risk.

159.  She acknowledged that there was no  dispute  by  the  respondent  that
    records were kept at the airport and that interviews were conducted  at
    the airport.  This was in accordance with the information  provided  by
    the BHC.  However, to state that this placed returnees,  such  as  this
    appellant, at a real risk of torture or other  inhuman  or  persecutory
    treatment was not justified on the evidence.

8.    The Appellant's Submissions on the Appellant's Case and Evidence

160.  Mr MacKenzie provided us with a skeleton  argument  dated  10 October
    2006 and a further skeleton argument dated  30 March  2007.   He  also
    addressed us orally both at the original and resumed hearings.

161.  Mr MacKenzie identified  the  twelve  principal  risk  factors  for  a
    person returned as a failed asylum seeker from the UK to Sri Lanka  who
    fears  persecution  or  serious  ill treatment  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  We list these twelve factors and  later  use  them  as  a
    helpful manner of setting out our country guidance findings.  The  risk
    factors identified are:

            "(i) Tamil ethnicity.

            (ii) Previous record as a suspected or  actual  LTTE  member  or
    supporter.

            (iii)      Previous criminal record  and/or  outstanding  arrest
    warrant.

            (iv) Bail jumping and/or escaping from custody.

            (v)  Having signed a confession or similar document.

            (vi) Having been asked by  the  security  forces  to  become  an
    informer.

            (vii)      The presence of scarring.

             (viii)      Returned  from  London  or  other  centre  of  LTTE
    activity or fund-raising.

            (ix) Illegal departure from Sri Lanka.

            (x)  Lack of ID card or other documentation.

            (xi) Having made an asylum claim abroad.

            (xii)      Having relatives in the LTTE."

162.  (In our conclusions below we have added to the first  risk  factor  of
    Tamil ethnicity, age and gender considerations.)

163. Mr MacKenzie submitted that these factors had  to  be  considered  both
   immediately on arrival at the airport and then  afterwards  if  and  when
   returnees try to re-establish themselves in Sri Lanka.  Clearly they must
   be considered on a case-by-case basis.  For this  specific  appellant  it
   was submitted he was manifestly at risk of persecution
    and/or  serious  ill-treatment  if  returned  because  on  the  accepted
   evidence, he is a Tamil who had  admitted  helping  the  LTTE,  has  been
   charged with offences connected with the LTTE, has scars consistent  with
   torture and has jumped bail after being pressurised to  become  a  police
   informer.  After addressing us on the role  of  country  experts  and  CG
   cases discussed elsewhere in this determination, Mr MacKenzie asked us to
   note that the consistent position of the Tribunal over the past years has
   been that the  ceasefire  removed  fears  of  persecution  on  return  to
   Sri Lanka, other than  "exceptional"  cases.   Those  exceptional  cases
   included individuals suspected of assisting the LTTE such as TJ (Risks  -
   return) Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT 01869 (also called Jeyachandran) and it
   has always been the case that persons suspected  of  assisting  the  LTTE
   were at risk, as was accepted by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Selvaratnam
   [2003] EWCA Civ 121.  The appellant however, now submits  that  the  risk
   categories that were then identified have now widened.  The deteriorating
   situation over the past twelve to eighteen months in Sri Lanka, since the
   introduction of the Emergency Regulations in August 2005  and  continuing
   major violations of the ceasefire, as noted  in  the  background  reports
   supplied, including the detailed analysis of Dr Smith showed that:

         "(i)     The  ceasefire  has  effectively  ended  with   both   the
             government and the LTTE in open fighting  and  many  insurgent
             attacks by the LTTE being reported,

         (ii)    the security forces remain in a high  state  of  alert  for
             possible actions by the LTTE,

         (iii)   there are regular and persistent  reports  of  torture  and
             mistreatment by the security forces, with apparent impunity,

            (iv) the LTTE  remains  active  in  persecuting  its  actual  or
    perceived opponents."

164.  Effectively, in his submission, the civil war has resumed in  all  but
    name.  This was noted by Dr Smith, paragraph 73, where he termed it as
    a "half war".

165.  Mr MacKenzie stated that it was not argued that the  fighting  per  se
    justified the grant of asylum to  the  appellant  or  others.   It  was
    rather the gross deterioration in the human rights, the ever-increasing
    vigilance on the part of the security forces and many other factors led
    to the heightened risk to Tamils, including the  use  of  torture  with
    impunity by the police and the Sri Lankan Army.

166.  Mr MacKenzie addressed us on the respondent's evidence.  He  submitted
    that it appeared to be common ground that: the appellant would come  to
    the attention of the authorities in Sri Lanka  on  return  and  may  be
    questioned; those seriously suspected of involvement in LTTE attacks or
    planned attacks were at risk of serious ill treatment; lists of failed
    asylum seekers could form part of the information available to security
    forces in round-ups of Tamils, and there was evidence that the security
    forces have used the presence of scars to identify LTTE connections  in
    the past (although the BHC letter of 24 August 2006 appears  to  imply
    this is no longer a problem).  He submitted that the respondent was not
    taking a view that there was insufficient evidence to show no  risk  of
    detention or ill-treatment, but merely that it would not  be  prolonged
    or serious or and at most would be harassment which did not rise to the
    level of  being  persecutory.   In  this  situation  he  submitted  the
    respondent had carefully  chosen  his  wording  but  the  Tribunal  was
    invited to conclude that as the respondent did  accept  some  level  of
    risk on the core issues, it was for us to conclude whether there was  a
    reality to those risks.

167.  He accepted that the reports provided by  the  respondent  may  be  of
    assistance by way of  general  background  where  matters  covered  are
    uncontentious but that they should  not  be  equated  with  the  expert
    reports.  The COIR does not identify the  authors  and  clearly  states
    that they are not intended to  be  detailed  or  comprehensive  nor  to
    provide full analysis of the evidence rather they just report  it.   In
    that respect he submitted they differ from the evidence provided by the
    appellant  and  the  experts.   The  Tribunal  should  therefore  place
    preferred weight on the latter.

168.  In respect of the reports from the Canadian IRB we  should  note  this
    was three or four year old research and thus out of date.  The material
    from the BHC, he submitted, had been provided unsourced  from  un-named
    officials.  In this situation there was no indication of the  level  of
    expertise, held by these authors, on Sri Lankan affairs, and there  was
    no primary sourcing.

169.  He submitted that  the  comments  made  in  the  BHC  letter  from  Mr
    Selvakumaran, Acting Chair of the Human Rights  Commission  ("HRC")  in
    Sri Lanka (BHC letter 13 February 2006) should be given little  weight
    given the problems that were faced by the HRC, which no longer  exists,
    and are referred to in the report by Mr Fernando, Professor Goode  and
    Dr Foster.

170.  On the issue of record keeping by the  security  forces  Mr  MacKenzie
    submitted that the Sri Lankan security forces should be seen as  being
    well organised to counter  threatening  insurgency  and  that  they  do
    maintain copies of records of those known or  suspected  to  have  been
    involved with the LTTE.  These records are available not  only  at  the
    airport but also to the security  forces  more  widely  throughout  the
    country.  The appellant who has suspected  LTTE  connections,  and  has
    been photographed and fingerprinted will, in his submission, inevitably
    be included in those records.  We were asked to note  the  comments  of
    Professor Goode (at paragraph 29 onwards) that there was ample evidence
    that security forces maintained a database of suspects.  He stated:

         "In the context of  a  bitter  ethnic  conflict  where  both  sides
         display   strong   totalitarian   tendencies,   and    given    the
         understandable and overriding concern with security, in  a  country
         which until recently had the highest level of suicide bomb  attacks
         of any country in the world, there  is  ample  reason  for  keeping
         official records regarding previous suspicions against individuals,
         even if those individuals escaped or were released" (paragraph 37).



      Mr MacKenzie noted that Dr Gunaratna also noted the  record  keeping
    and the COIS report of the Home Office delegation undertaken  in  March
    2002 stated that computerised records in the south of the country  were
    kept including computerised records at the airport.

171.  In this appellant's case the fact that he was released  on  bail  made
    it  "overwhelmingly  likely"  that  his  records  would  be   retained.
    Information on the position at Bandaranaike International  Airport  was
    recorded by Dr Smith (at paragraph 116) where he had stated:

         "The appellant's previous status as a recorded LTTE  suspect  means
         that, he [will] almost certainly be of interest to the  authorities
         and, as such he will axiomatically have been placed on one  of  the
         two lists that are provided to  the  immigration  services  at  the
         airport by the security forces.  The first is a 'Stop list',  which
         the National Intelligence Bureau provides to ensure that  those  in
         which the authorities have an interest  are  detained  on  arrival.
         The second is a 'Watch list', which alerts the authorities  to  the
         return of a person in which there is an interest  and  is  used  to
         trigger covert surveillance.  If the appellant is on one  of  those
         lists, he will be extremely vulnerable on return both to arrest  at
         the airport or following his arrival."

      Dr Gunaratna and the BHC letter of 24 August 2006 agreed that  there
    was an IT system at the airport and this is confirmed in the COIR.

172.  Mr MacKenzie submitted we should  note  the  letter  of  the  BHC  of
    26 September 2005 which suggests  that  most  returnees  are  detained
    briefly and the acceptance that people may be  questioned  on  security
    issues.   He  submitted  therefore  that  it  must  follow   that   any
    unsatisfactory answers or suspicion of LTTE membership will  give  rise
    to the risk of detention and/or ill-treatment; otherwise there would be
    no purpose in the detention and questioning.   The  contention  in  the
    24 August BHC letter that "normally only when there is an  outstanding
    arrest  warrant  are  individuals  detained  for  longer  periods"   he
    submitted showed that for those  with  an  outstanding  arrest  warrant
    there would be a real risk.  He submitted  it  was  inconceivable  that
    this appellant would not be wanted after jumping bail and that in  some
    cases, as apparently acknowledged by the BHC, the risk  extends  beyond
    those with outstanding warrants.

173.  Mr MacKenzie submitted that the risk of torture was so  widespread  in
    Sri Lanka that in any period of detention, for whatever purpose, there
    was a real risk that this  could  take  place.   We  were  referred  to
    Professor  Goode's  comments  at  paragraph  47   stating   there   was
    "overwhelming evidence of continued and routine  use  of  torture  with
    impunity by security  forces."   Dr  Smith  dealt  with  the  issue  at
    paragraph 91ff and it  was  also  noted  by  Mr  Fernando  and  earlier
    reports.  The COIS reports and US  Department  of  State  reports  also
    suggested the use of police torture being endemic  and  conducted  with
    impunity.

174.  On the  specific  risk  factors  we  have  noted  above  Mr  MacKenzie
    acknowledged that merely being a Tamil was  insufficient  to  ground  a
    claim for asylum but it was clearly a factor which would be taken  into
    account by the security forces.  Dr Smith had reported at paragraph 124
    that "90% of those detained at the airport are Tamil".  The BHC  letter
    of 13 February 2006 noted that most arrested,  in  the  December  2005
    round-ups, were Tamil.   Dr  Foster  also  noted  there  were  "already
    extensive police raids in poor and Tamil areas [of Colombo], which have
    been under close surveillance by the security agencies for  years"  and
    that controls and checkpoints directed at Tamils were  increasing.   Dr
    Foster had noted also: "Every Tamil is a suspect" and "If a person  has
    been outside [Sri Lanka] and the police check  his  documents  he  will
    automatically come under suspicion for supporting the Tamil cause".

175.  On the issue of risks from previous records as a suspected  or  actual
    LTTE member or supporter it was submitted that such a record would lead
    to serious risk of persecution or serious harm.  Dr Smith at paragraph
    121 and Dr Gunaratna had both noted this.  This risk was heightened at
    the present moment, the civil war effectively having re-started.   Thus
    it would be  extraordinary  if  persons  known  or  suspected  to  have
    connections with the LTTE were  not  of  the  utmost  interest  to  the
    authorities.  This was particularly  so  given  the  increase  in  LTTE
    attacks or planned attacks.  In respect of previous criminal records or
    outstanding arrest warrants, Mr MacKenzie submitted  that  all  parties
    appeared to agree that an outstanding arrest warrant was  an  extremely
    significant factor.  Turning  to  the  issue  of  bail-jumping,  and/or
    escaping  from  custody,  he  submitted  that  all  available   records
    concurred and showed that those who jumped bail would be at  risk.   He
    submitted that it was common sense that a person  who  had  disappeared
    while facing a trial would be at a grave risk of being re detained and
    tortured.  There was no basis for assuming that release on bail by  the
    courts  signalled  the  end  of  official  interest,  indeed  such   an
    assumption would be entirely illogical.   Professor  Goode  noted  this
    point as did Dr Smith at paragraph  121.   Professor  Goode  noted  at
    paragraph 43 "During round-ups the police and  army  look  particularly
    for persons who have been detained earlier but released by the  court".



176.  The issue of having signed  a  previous  confession  was  accepted  in
    Selvaratnam as a serious risk factor.  Mr MacKenzie  also  noted  that
    there was a common use of confession evidence as recorded by  Professor
    Goode at paragraph 47 and also noted by Dr Foster.  For those who have
    agreed with the security  forces  in  the  past  to  be  informers,  he
    submitted it was common sense that their refusal  to  co-operate  would
    show an assumption that they collaborated with the LTTE.

177.   On the issue of scarring Professor Goode had provided ample  evidence
    that individuals with scars were taken to be ex-combatants.   This  was
    also noted by Dr Smith at paragraph 80 in his  recording  of  comments
    made to him by the inspector general of police.  This was further noted
    at paragraph 83 of the report.   The  BHC  letter  of  24 August  2006
    accepted that there  was  evidence  that  individuals  may  fall  under
    suspicion if they have scars, however they stated that this appeared to
    be happening less frequently.  Mr MacKenzie  suggested  that  the  two
    examples provided did not prove the risk had evaporated given the other
    clear evidence of the practice and that it was illogical to assume that
    what had been seen as a reliable way of identifying LTTE suspects would
    be abandoned at a time when the risk from the LTTE is increasing  every
    day.

178.  It was submitted that returning from London  or  other  centres  where
    LTTE activity or fund-raising  took  place  was  a  significant  issue.
    Whilst he acknowledged that not every  person  returning  from  the  UK
    would be at risk on this ground, because  it  was  a  known  fact  that
    London was a major centre for Tamil fund raising, and the  Sri  Lankan
    High Commission in London are under instructions to pass details of all
    deportees to the security forces in Colombo, (according to Dr Smith at
    paragraph 124), he submitted that this must be seen  as  a  significant
    additional factor.

179.  Illegal departure from Sri Lanka again was  not  necessarily  a  basis
    for a fear of persecution,  or  really  serious  harm,  itself  but  an
    additional factor giving rise to the necessity for questioning.

180.  The lack of an ID card or other documentation, as noted  by  Dr Smith
    (at paragraphs 124 and 136) showed a difficulty for a returnee, as had
    been noted by Professor Goode:

            "Carrying a national identity card has become a must".

      In this appellant's case the original reason for his arrest  had  been
    his failure to have an ID card and this indicated that it  was  one  of
    the factors that authorities would assume thereby that he was with  the
    LTTE.

181.  Returning as a failed asylum seeker he submitted also  had  relevance,
    Dr Smith at paragraph 135 noted there was evidence that former  asylum
    seekers were singled out for particular attention.  The BHC  letter  of
    24 August 2006 accepted that lists of failed asylum seekers could form
    part of such operations directed at  Tamil  areas  of  Colombo.   Those
    having relatives in the LTTE had long been noted as  likely  to  be  at
    risk on the basis that the individual would either be an LTTE supporter
    as well or would be likely to give information useful to  the  security
    forces.

182.  Finally on the issue of internal  relocation  Mr  MacKenzie  submitted
    that it was widely accepted that individuals could not seek  safety  in
    the  LTTE-controlled  area  if  they  had  left  the  LTTE  (this   was
    acknowledged by both Dr Smith and  Dr Foster).   Thus,  even  if  the
    appellant avoided arrest on return or shortly thereafter,  there  would
    be nowhere in Sri Lanka where he could safely return.  State protection
    was virtually non-existent for those in fear of the security forces and
    there was virtually no investigation of human rights abuses carried out
    by State officials.

183.  In his further skeleton argument of 30 March 2007  Mr Mckenzie  gave
    his submissions on  the  current  situation.   He  submitted  that  the
    prognosis put forward by his submissions, and in particular  the  views
    expressed by Dr Smith, that the situation would continue to get worse,
    have sadly been amplified.  This was reflected in  the  BBC  report  of
    21 February 2007 (bundle D, 126) which reported a number of bomb blasts
    apparently committed by the LTTE during January 2007.  On 26 March 2007
    there had then been the unprecedented air attack on the  airforce  base
    adjacent to Bandaranaike Airport.  The deepening "civil war"  situation
    did not of  itself  justify  a  grant  of  asylum,  however,  the  more
    audacious  the  LTTE  attacks  became,  the  graver  the  human  rights
    situation was likely to be.  This was confirmed by  the  Department  of
    State report which stated:

         "The government's respect for the  human  rights  of  its  citizens
         declined due in part to the breakdown of the CFA".

184.  He submitted that the evidence of record keeping at  the  airport  had
    been  now  further  confirmed  by  the  Hotham  Mission  report.   This
    Australian NGO concluded that:

         "In relation to returning asylum seekers the [Sri Lankan monitoring
         mission] stated, 'if a person has had any affiliation in  the  past
         and returns they will face danger'.  This was mentioned in relation
         to both perceived connections with the LTTE,  thus  concerns  about
         being  targeted  by  the  police  and  armed   forces,   and   also
         affiliations to certain parties or individuals  which  may  make  a
         person a target of the LTTE."

         "The  team  were  told  by  multiple  sources  that  the   National
         Intelligence Bureau has records dating back ten years  and  earlier
         with a national computer database  being  used  for  the  past  two
         years.  People with previous incidents of arrest or questioning are
         likely to [be] arrested and under the state of emergency and  level
         of conflict may  face  further  human  rights  violations  such  as
         torture.  One group stated:  'They  will  know  people's  history'.
         Another stated, 'the NIB will have a record of past interrogations,
         and can cause further charges if [a person is] returned.'"


185.  He noted that the Hotham report was cited  in  the  COIR  of  February
    2007 and thus presumably was accepted as being a reliable source by the
    respondent (see the preface to the  COIR  report  paragraph  vi).   The
    Hotham report also noted that the IOM had stated that they  were  aware
    of returnees "not assisted  by  their  programme"  being  arrested  and
    harassed on or soon after arrival,  particularly  in  cases  where  the
    returnee no longer holds a national ID card."  He  submitted  this  was
    particularly significant because paragraph 32.10 of the COIR quotes the
    IOM as saying: "to their knowledge most returns  are  detained  briefly
    and then released to their families".  Thus, he submitted it seems that
    the information relates only to those returned under  the  auspices  of
    the IOM (and indeed the IOM could not necessarily be expected  to  know
    what happens to those not so returned), but the COIR fails to make this
    clear.

186.   He  submitted  that  the  security  situation  has  been  stepped  up
    significantly and this is reflected in the UNHCR Position Paper and the
    Hotham Mission report which states that in Colombo it is at its highest
    level of civil restriction since the late 80s including checkpoints not
    only in the outer suburbs but throughout the city, manned by both "STF,
    police, army, navy and airforce".

187.  In respect of the Canadian IRB report of February 2007, noted  in  the
    COIR at paragraph 32.13, there is a suggestion  that  the  SIS  in  Sri
    Lanka documents and interviews returnees and  also  a  suggestion  that
    those not subject to an outstanding arrest warrant  are  not  detained.
    He submitted that this information which  appeared  to  come  from  the
    Canadian High Commission did not make it clear the basis upon which the
    High Commission reached its view and thus the Tribunal should not  give
    this information  much  weight  as  it  stands  except  insofar  as  it
    coincides with other sources of information.

188.  The Hotham Mission Report, and the US Department of  State  report  of
    2006, in his submission, confirmed the continuing use of  torture  with
    impunity.  Turning to the categories of risk that he identified, and we
    noted above, he submitted that recent information  such  as  that  from
    Tamil Net (March 2007, bundle D, 133) showed ample evidence of  round-
    ups and arrests of Tamils who were "unable to explain  their  presence"
    in Colombo or other major towns.  The Tamil Net report stated that  600
    civilians had been detained,  allegedly  for  failing  to  prove  their
    identity and reasons for their stay in  Colombo.   Although  there  was
    said to be evidence of terrorist activity held against  some  of  them,
    and none seem to have been charged, the courts allowed  the  police  to
    move them all to a detention camp in the south.  The COIS  report  also
    notes several incidents of arrests of Tamils, particularly  those  from
    the north and the east or those without identity cards.

189.  Significantly he submitted that the Tamil Net report of 13 March 2007
    stated that the lodges (cheap hotels run by  the  Tamil  community)  in
    Colombo were subject to a scheme by the  Sri  Lankan  Defence  Ministry
    whereby they were monitored to strengthen  security  in  Colombo.   The
    report stated that there were plans to  order  the  closure  of  lodges
    which failed to provide basic facilities and to identify  those  lodges
    which were suspected of having close links  with  undesirable  persons.
    Under the second  phase  of  the  scheme,  lodges  assisting  terrorist
    activities would be acquired by the government and the persons  running
    the lodges would be prosecuted under the Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act
    for harbouring terrorists:

         "All lodges and boarding houses will  be  routinely  monitored  and
         checked by special police teams once a week, according to  the  new
         security plan."

190.  In  this  situation  Tamil  ethnicity  was  seen  as  an  increasingly
    important factor in his view, especially Tamils from the north and  the
    east who were unable to explain their presence in a certain area.

191.  The Hotham report, and the UNHCR  Position  Paper  of  December  2006,
    also gave further confirmation of the risks to those  with  a  previous
    record as a suspected or actual LTTE member or supporter.

192.  We were asked to note the contents of the new  Emergency  Regulations.
    Although these are widely drawn and purportedly  based  on  a  need  to
    fight international terrorism, in  his  submission,  they  are  clearly
    aimed at the LTTE, as can be seen from the Sri Lankan Government  press
    release of 6 December 2006 (bundle D, page 102).  The definition  at
    Regulation 20 is a very wide one "with the  object  of  threatening  or
    endangering the sovereignty or territorial integrity of the  Democratic
    Socialist Republic of Sri  Lanka".   This  he  submitted  was  a  clear
    reference to the aims of  the  LTTE.   Importantly,  he  submitted  the
    actions which constitute an  offence  are  extremely  widely  drawn  in
    Regulations 6 and 7, covering a wide range of non-violent  activities
    and expressions of opinion such as wearing a uniform, emblem or  symbol
    of a banned group, harbouring or assisting any member of such  a  group
    or to "promote, encourage, support, advise, assist, act on  behalf  of"
    such a group.  Under Regulation 8 it is an offence to offer material or
    financial support or assistance of any type.  The  appellant  therefore
    submits that this indicates the extent of the authorities' interest  in
    potential LTTE suspects and the argument by the respondent that only  a
    narrow group of people are at risk is untenable.

193.  Mr MacKenzie stated that for the avoidance of doubt it was not  being
    submitted that those suspected  of  carrying  out  LTTE  activities  or
    supporting the LTTE are necessarily at risk of  being  pursued  through
    the courts, although this is a possibility, but that, on the  evidence,
    anyone so  suspected  is  at  risk  of  serious  human  rights  abuses,
    including illegitimate detention, torture or even death.  The Emergency
    Regulations contain a statement of official intent and act as  a  green
    light for the security forces to behave as they will providing a veneer
    of legality for brutal treatment of people against  whom  there  is  no
    proof of having done anything wrong.  As an example he quoted the  COIR
    of February 2007, paragraph 8.38, which states that there  is  evidence
    of persons being abducted and tortured by armed groups  linked  to  the
    security forces.

194.  The Hotham report also comments, on risks to persons who  have  signed
    a confession or similar document.  It notes (bundle D, 57) the use  of
    enforced confessions in Sinhalese, regardless of whether they are Tamil-
    speaking or understand Sinhalese.  Such persons are "forced to sign the
    statement".  The Hotham report also (bundle D, 83) reports a fresh area
    of risk by quoting one group it interviewed as stating:

         "How a person has left  Sri  Lanka  will  impact  on  their  return
         experience - they could be charged under immigration law ... if  he
         is a Tamil chances are he will be immediately detained, suspected -
         (particularly) if he used fake documents or bribed - in  Sri  Lanka
         you can be charged for leaving the country on a fake passport."

      The Tamil Net  reports  and  Hotham  report  also  noted  an  apparent
    increase in the detention of persons who  were  unable  to  produce  ID
    cards or prove their identity and, he said, a disturbing issue was  the
    recently introduced requirement of the residence  permit  list.   These
    newly introduced registration requirements state that each member of  a
    household must be registered with the  police.   "Originally  this  was
    introduced and implemented for Tamils only but has now  been  made  the
    householders registration requirement for all citizens.  After speaking
    to many groups and individuals about this requirement,  it  would  seem
    that only Tamils and some Muslims are being forced to comply."

195.  The Hotham  report  also  noted  risks  arising  from  persons  having
    claimed asylum abroad.

196.  We were also asked us to note that in December 2006  the  Home  Office
    had decided, in the light of the deterioration in the situation in  Sri
    Lanka, to remove Sri Lanka from the list of designated countries where
    there would be non-suspensive asylum appeals.  The note of  6 December
    2006, stated that: "Each asylum and human  rights  claim  made  by  Sri
    Lankans will, as now, continue to be considered on its merits."

9.    Conclusions on the Background evidence, and expert  Reports  When  set
    against the issues identified


197.  In the assessment of country  of  origin  information  made  available
    including expert reports in the asylum context it is self-evident  that
    we should apply the maximum of objectivity  to  our  deliberations  and
    conclusions.  The expert reports, the information  from  the  BHC,  and
    much of the information contained in the country of origin  information
    we have considered, is, largely based on the analysis of well  informed
    opinions, personal observations, and  deductions  often  reached  after
    extensive  trawling  of  all  of  the   available   information.    The
    conclusions and deductions in such situations therefore have  a  strong
    element of subjectivity to them.  For this  reason  we  have  tried  to
    look, where possible, at the objective  figures  that  arise  from  the
    totality of the information before us.   In  the  assessment  of  risk,
    which is the ultimate task before us, the analysis of the figures  will
    act as a starting point give us the most objective result.  Against the
    objectivity of those figures, if reliable, we can then go on to  assess
    the many expert and  other  reports  we  were  presented  with.   These
    figures show:


         (a)      There are approximately 250,000 Sri Lankan Tamils  in  the
             Colombo district out of a total  population  of  2.25  million
             approximately.  Thus Sri Lankan Tamils make up over 10% of the
             population.


         (b)      200,000 Tamils are stated to have  sought  refuge  in  the
             West.


         (c)       From  the  respondent  we  were  advised  that  some  750
             (presumably predominantly Sri Lankan Tamils) Sri Lankans have
             made enforced or voluntary  returns  to  Sri  Lanka  over  the
             period 1 April 2005 - 30 June 2006.


         (d)      There were reports of two returnees  having  been  killed.
             (The situation regarding the circumstances of these are opaque
             at best from the evidence that came before us).


         (e)      BHC in its letter of 10 April 2007 speaks of a report  of
             84 disappearances in Colombo, 80 of these being Tamil.


    We realise that ascertaining an  accurate  mathematical  percentage  of
    risk of detention against the other figures  is  simply  not  possible.
    However, what these figures do demonstrate is that even  if  the  whole
    750 persons returned from UK are  added  to  the  Tamil  population  in
    Colombo, or are considered as part of the approximate 10% population of
    Sri Lankan Tamils,  the  number  of  disappearances  or  abductions  in
    Colombo (80) is a very small  percentage.   We  realise  there  may  be
    differences  in  timing  and  that  there  may   be   some   unreported
    disappearances, abductions or detentions.  Even so,  these  figures  do
    show that in analysing the reports from the experts a  strong  note  of
    caution  must  be  injected,  as  the  best  figures   available   show
    insignificant, or remote risk, percentages when set against  the  Tamil
    population of Colombo.  The figures certainly do not indicate a picture
    of anything  beyond  a  small  or  remote  level  of  detention  and/or
    maltreatment, risks for the generality of Sri Lankan Tamils in Colombo.
     We consider that this must be the starting point of our  consideration
    against which we can set the opinions of the expert and other reports."
     The statistics and the totality of  the  evidence  we  considered  all
    serve to emphasise that the specific profiles of individual  claimant's
    need to be considered and there is not a  situation  of  real  risk  to
    large swathes of the Tamil population in Colombo or to returning failed
    asylum seekers.

198.  We found Dr Smith's reports and  evidence  to  us  were  valuable  in
    giving a background on virtually all of the issues we were required  to
    cover, in particular setting the historical perspectives.  However,  on
    the core issues of  risks  on  return  of  persecution  and/or  serious
    maltreatment and whether such risks would rise to the  level  of  being
    real as opposed to remote, this report is merely part of  the  totality
    of the evidence we have  taken  into  account.   In  some  respects  we
    consider Dr Smith has made overstatements in his conclusions based  on
    the background evidence that was before him.  Conclusions that  in  his
    view  were  "axiomatic"  sometimes  appeared  to  us  to  be  primarily
    speculative.  In other areas he appeared to rely on selective pieces of
    evidence to reach his conclusions.  Apart  from  these  flaws  however,
    which clearly do have a tendency to taint other parts of the report, we
    found his written and oral evidence useful.

199.  Dr Smith and Professor Goode are of course not charged,  as  we  are,
    with the  task  of  reaching  determinations  in  respect  of  refugee,
    "humanitarian (or subsidiary) protection" and human rights claims where
    this country is, subject to our conclusions, bound  to  give  surrogate
    protection.  Our  conclusions  must  be  reached  on  well  established
    principles of international, regional (EU and ECHR) and domestic asylum
    and protection law.  Conclusions, opinions or implications  reached  by
    such experts must of course  come  from  a  different  perspective  and
    whilst they are useful and extremely informative  in  many  situations,
    they must all come together and  pass  through  the  assessment  filter
    which it is one of the tasks of this Tribunal to  apply.   Thus,  terms
    "real  risk",  "real  chance",  "reasonable  likelihood",   effectively
    connote the same level of risk , or standard of proof and  thus have  a
    specific and recognised legal meaning which may differ  when  the  same
    terms are used by lay persons or expert witnesses.  Expert witnesses in
    such situations should  not,  if  we  do  not  reach  conclusions  they
    consider are  in  accordance  with  their  reports,  feel  slighted  or
    diminished, as our  assessments  are  of  necessity  made  through  the
    application of  established  legal  principles  in  this  jurisdiction.
    Additionally, it goes without saying that no expert has any  particular
    interest in the success or failure of any individual's claim or appeal.



200.  Thus, Dr Smith's report whilst often good on factual analysis was  at
    times not of such great assistance where opinions were ventured.   With
    limited exceptions, his report did  reflect  a  situation  of  a  well-
    informed and reasonably balanced commentator who was able to filter out
    immaterial information.

201.  Professor Goode's report was of a similar  nature.   We  did  however,
    note that in respect of  the  security  at  the  airport  there  was  a
    variance of opinion between the evidence of Professor Goode and that of
    Dr Smith.  Whilst the variation is not a significantly serious one, it
    does reflect that when experts tend to rely on more subjective analysis
    (and  their  own  brief  experiences,  as  was  the  case  here)   then
    inconsistent conclusions can be reached on what,  in  a  case  such  as
    this, are important aspects of the assessment process.

202.  Professor Goode's fact-finding report of the visits 10 - 20 February
    2006 was again useful from a factual perspective but suffered from  the
    problems we have identified above in relation to the assessment of real
    risk and his reliance at  times  on  opinions  that  were  perhaps  too
    subjective and not balanced.  The second  report/opinion  of  Dr Smith
    made on 5 October 2006 was of assistance in giving us a fairly  up  to
    date assessment.  The Hotham report we found of some use to us however,
    it did suffer from a significant flaw in our view (as was submitted  by
    Ms Richards), namely that there had been a  failure  to  interview  the
    failed asylum seekers who had returned to Sri  Lanka.   It  notes  that
    there were fourteen  such  persons  found  by  them  but  there  is  no
    reference to their plight or predicament in the  report.   The  reports
    from the IRB, reporting the Canadian  High  Commission  comments,  also
    suffered from the same deficiency.

203.  The UNHCR report was very topical and up to date.  We agree  with  the
    general submission made by Ms Richards that the  protection  agenda  of
    the UNHCR is a wider  one  than  the  mere  assessment  of  refugee  or
    subsidiary protection status.  However, these reports are  prepared  by
    persons with direct experience of the core issues involved and thus  we
    accord them substantive weight in this case.

204.  The letters provided by the BHC from Colombo, in this case, appear  to
    be an innovation on  the  part  of  the  respondent  for  such  country
    guidance cases.  Whilst on the odd occasion there are reports  provided
    by High Commissions and  diplomatic  representatives  in  many  of  the
    countries where we have to assess risks for applicants on return,  this
    is perhaps one of the first times where a series of letters on  topical
    issues have been provided.  We note however, that  in  other  countries
    and for other situations, much of this material may in fact  be  passed
    to the COIR and is sourced and attributed.  However, we did  find  this
    new practice to be of particular use in the careful balancing  task  we
    have to undertake.  We would strongly  endorse  the  comments  made  by
    Buxton LJ in AH, IG & NM (Sudan) v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  297,  at
    paragraph 55, that while the onus of proof is clearly on the  applicant
    "it does mean that the content of primary evidence  going  towards  the
    wider situation in the country in question depends on what experts  are
    known to and ready to give evidence on behalf of, the applicants."   He
    then rightly states:

         "But it is the Secretary of State who is likely to  have  the  most
         comprehensive knowledge of the conditions in foreign countries, not
         least through diplomatic and consular channels,  and  if  decisions
         with enhanced status of country guidance cases are to be made about
         those countries it might seem  appropriate  for  the  Secretary  of
         State directly to contribute that knowledge."

205.  Mr MacKenzie challenged the weight that should be  given  to  BHC  or
    like information if is not sourced in a similar manner to that expected
    from expert witnesses and other reporting authorities.  Whilst this  on
    the face of it has some obvious validity, we consider that  the  advice
    and information provided in such  letters  must  be  given  significant
    weight as it is compiled by professional diplomats who we consider  are
    skilled and trained in the observation and acquisition of knowledge  in
    the countries where they  are  based.   Unless  there  are  significant
    reasons why such evidence is to be treated as biased or unreliable,  as
    appears to be the case with some of Dr Smith's  evidence,  we  do  not
    consider that omissions from sourcing should of  necessity  negate  the
    value of such reports.  Often they may arise from sources  that  cannot
    be disclosed and also often they will be well informed opinion based on
    lengthy experience and observation by the diplomatic post.   It  should
    also be noted that these are reports from a permanent  diplomatic  post
    and thus must be compared with the temporary or occasional procedure of
    a researcher.  Their opinions should be given equal value to that of  a
    well-informed,  balanced  country  expert  who  provides  sources   and
    evidence of his or her expertise.  Such BHC/diplomatic post reports  or
    information,  in  the  interests  of  balanced  determinations,  should
    therefore, in our view, be encouraged as much as the information coming
    from expert witnesses, with the  objective  of  obtaining  the  highest
    quality of country guidance determinations.

206.  We turn now to our conclusions on the various potential  risk  factors
    which have been helpfully identified by Mr MacKenzie  and  extensively
    commented upon by Ms Richards.

    Tamil Ethnicity

207.  This is clearly a relevant starting point in any Sri  Lankan  case  at
    the current time.  We remind ourselves of the objective figures we have
    noted above, and the need for caution when assessing risk in Sri Lanka,
    especially Colombo.  Coupled with that must be the knowledge  of  where
    applicants come from in Sri Lanka, where they have grown up, and their
    involvement (or lack of) with Tamil  organisations  whether  voluntary,
    involuntary  or  otherwise.   In  addition  it  is  also  necessary  to
    distinguish what are known as "Sri Lankan Tamils", that  is  those  who
    predominantly come from the areas  in  the  north  and  the  east,  and
    "Indian" or "Plantation" or "Hill" Tamils, who are more  widely  spread
    but were more recent immigrants  to  Sri Lanka  from  Tamil  Nadu  and
    southern India and originally were primarily involved as workers on tea
    plantations.  The background evidence shows different risk profiles for
    sub-groups of those with Tamil ethnicity.   We  have  also  noted  that
    considerations of age and perhaps gender should be taken into  account.
    The background evidence reflects that young male Tamils in  Sri Lanka,
    particularly in Colombo, are at a  relatively  higher  level  of  risk.
    This is unsurprising given that whilst there are  considerable  numbers
    of female operatives in the LTTE, the Sri Lankan authorities  would  be
    looking for young males as  being  the  most  likely  group  who  would
    undertake terrorist activities, or would have recently been fighting on
    behalf of the LTTE.

208.  We find from the totality of the evidence  presented  to  us  that  in
    Colombo the risks to young male Tamils have  increased  over  the  past
    twelve to eighteen months and previous country guidance in this  regard
    is now outdated.  We accept the background evidence that the cordon and
    search operations have increased and that in them young Tamil males are
    targeted, particularly if they do not have ID cards or other methods of
    identification.  While for forced returns of failed asylum seekers from
    UK there logically would be a presumption they will return  without  an
    ID card, we were not given evidence on this point in  this  case.   Nor
    did we have evidence of difficulties in obtaining replacements  if  the
    returnee's family is not  able  to  supply  the  original.   There  now
    appears to be more specific evidence of the "lodges" used by Tamils  in
    Colombo being targeted for adverse interest by the authorities  and  as
    places where searches are conducted.  Beyond this we would  agree  that
    there is a reasonable likelihood that such lodges would be  infiltrated
    by LTTE members, such  that  those  with  a  significant  profile,  for
    perhaps abandoning or escaping from the LTTE, may be at risk, not  only
    from the Sri Lankan authorities, but also from the LTTE,  when  staying
    in such lodges.  Having said that, we have no evidence as to the actual
    proportion  of  the  250,000  Tamils  in  Colombo  who  live,  or  stay
    temporarily, in the lodges.  They are cheap hotels and it is reasonable
    to suppose that a substantial proportion of the 250,000 do not live  in
    lodges.  If  so,  returnees  may  have  contacts  with  more  permanent
    addresses.  Nor do we have any evidence as to the number of active  (or
    'sleeping') LTTE members in Colombo.  In addition to  the  comments  in
    Dr Smith's report, we noted the BHC letter of 13 February 2006, which
    stated  that  round-ups  had  contributed  to  stereotyping  Tamils  as
    suspects and the report of Dr Foster which stated that  the  round-ups
    were extensive in poor and Tamil areas of Colombo.  The UNHCR report of
    December 2006 (paragraph 18) reports that young  Tamil  men  and  women
    continue to be at risk of forced recruitment by the LTTE, but  notably,
    in the north and east  of  the  country.   Clearly  however  with  this
    knowledge readily available, there is a higher propensity on  the  part
    of the Sri Lankan authorities to target young men and  women  from  the
    north and the east in a period of virtual civil war.

    Previous Record as a suspected or Actual LTTE Member or Supporter

209.  Dr Smith, at paragraph 121 of his second report, identified this as a
    risk element noting that the appellant in this case had  been  detained
    on suspicion of being  an  LTTE  member  and  then  released  on  bail.
    Dr Gunaratna went further to state that (at paragraph 5.2) it was very
    likely the Sri Lankan Government would have a record of the appellant,
    firstly because he had been arrested  and  jumped  bail,  and  secondly
    because Sri Lankan Government records would state he was a  member  or
    supporter of the LTTE.

210.  From our assessment of the background evidence, we find that it is  of
    vital importance, in the assessment of each Sri Lankan Tamil  case,  to
    establish  an  applicant's  profile,  and  the   credibility   of   his
    background, in some depth.   For  example  if  the  appellant  was  not
    credible as to his background from the north or the east, which left  a
    situation where he could be a Tamil from Colombo who had little  or  no
    involvement with the LTTE, there could be, based on the reality of  the
    assessment of his predicament, little risk  (or  almost  certainly  not
    risk at the level of engaging either Convention).

    Previous Criminal Record and/or Arrest Warrant

211.  Both parties appear to agree that returning  a  young  Tamil  with  an
    outstanding arrest warrant, validly found  in  the  facts,  will  be  a
    significant factor.  This does not alter the previous country  guidance
    determinations in cases such as Jeyachandran or  the  Court  of  Appeal
    case of  Selvaratanam.  Again  the  issue  will  be  to  establish  the
    credibility of the criminal record, or an arrest warrant, and decide is
    it reasonably  likely  to  exist  in  respect  of  the  applicant.   An
    outstanding arrest warrant, or previous criminal record,  is  thus,  in
    our view, a significant factor that needs to be taken into  account  in
    the assessment of the totality of the risk. However it does  not  mean,
    of itself, that the applicant has a well founded  fear  of  persecution
    (or other serious harm) on return to Sri Lanka for that reason alone.


    Bail Jumping and/or Escape from Custody


212.  The background information provided to us here  indicated  that  those
    who had jumped bail would be at a real risk of being detained either at
    the airport or if they later  come  in  contact  with  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  In Professor Goode's specific report on the appellant, at
    paragraph 106 and following, he deals with this  issue.   He  noted  in
    this case that the appellant was taken (in  Colombo)  and  subsequently
    released on formal bail.   He  notes  this  as  a  "relatively  unusual
    aspect" of the appellant's account. (We agree for reasons  we  set  out
    below.)  He stated that it appears to  be  far  more  common  practice,
    especially  outside  Colombo,  to  release  a  detainee   without   the
    requirement of a bail bond although generally through the payment of  a
    bribe, not least because it is only in very  rare  cases  the  detainee
    will ever have been produced in court.  He states that in any case  the
    available evidence does not support the contention that the  detainee's
    release of itself indicates the authorities have no continuing interest
    in him.  He considers that it cannot be concluded that release  without
    charge or without the payment of a bribe precludes subsequent detention
    and notes a report from the Swiss Refugee Council in that  regard.   He
    submits that the issue is one of logic that having detained persons  in
    Sri Lanka there  is  a  practice  of  routinely  re-arresting  and  re-
    detaining people on the  basis  of  obtaining  confession  evidence  by
    torture.  This  evidence  appears  to  be  supported  by  Dr Smith  at
    paragraph 121 and Dr Gunaratna.

213.  We noted in particular the comments made by Professor Goode  that  the
    appellant's account here is an unusual one.  It is unusual in  that  it
    has been shown that the appellant  was  granted  bail  by  a  court  in
    Colombo.  We agree with the logic that those  who  have  been  released
    after going to court and released  from  custody  on  formal  bail  are
    reasonably likely, on the evidence, to be  not  only  recorded  on  the
    police records as bail jumpers but obviously on the  court  records  as
    well.  Thus we would identify those  in  the  situation  such  as  this
    appellant who have been found to have been to  court  in  Colombo,  and
    subsequently released on formal bail, as having a  profile  that  could
    place them at a higher level of risk of being  identified  from  police
    computers at the airport.  Their treatment thereafter  will  of  course
    depend upon the basis that they were detained in the first  place.   It
    is important to note that we did not have before us any information  as
    to the treatment of bail jumpers from  the  ordinary  criminal  justice
    system, and there may be many of them, when  they  again  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities, be they Tamil or Singhalese.  We  had  no
    evidence  that  Tamil  bail  jumpers  are  treated   differently   from
    Singhalese ones.  Clearly punishment for jumping  bail  will  not  make
    someone a refugee.   As  we  have  said,  the  risk  of  detention  and
    maltreatment will depend on the profile of the individual applicant.

214.  The situation however, in respect of those who have not been to  court
    and may have been released after the payment  of  a  bribe  we  do  not
    consider falls into  the  same  category.   Much  will  depend  on  the
    evidence relating to the formality of the detention (or lack of it) and
    the manner in which the bribe was taken  and  the  credibility  of  the
    total story.  If the detention is an informal  one,  or  it  is  highly
    unlikely that the bribe or "bail" has been  officially  recorded,  then
    the risk level to the applicant is likely to be below that  of  a  real
    risk.  The respondent contends that a  detention  by  the  authorities,
    when there is a suspicion of bail jumping  or  escape  from  detention,
    would lead to harassment only, and not maltreatment rising to the level
    of persecution, or a breach of the humanitarian protection or Article 3
    thresholds.  While we would agree that there  may  well  be  situations
    where Tamils, with little or no profile related to the LTTE,  or  other
    "terrorist" groups, could be briefly detained and harassed, as no doubt
    happens in round ups in Colombo and elsewhere, we consider it illogical
    to assume that an escapee, from Sri Lankan government detention,  or  a
    bail  jumper  from  the  Sri Lankan  court  system,  would  be  merely
    "harassed"  given  the  climate  of  torture  with  impunity  that   is
    repeatedly confirmed as existent in the background  material  from  all
    sources.  We  consider,  (as  we  think  it  does  in  the  appellant's
    particular case), that the totality of the evidence may point to a real
    risk, in some cases, of persecution  or  really  serious  harm  when  a
    recorded escapee or bail jumper is discovered, on return to Sri  Lanka.



    Signing a Confession or similar Document

215.  We see no reason to depart from the established guidance  set  out  in
    Selvaratnam that this can be a  significant  risk  factor.   Confession
    evidence, credibly deduced, was noted by Professor Goode  at  paragraph
    47 of  his  specific  report  and  indeed  we  note  the  relevant  and
    significant comments of Dr Foster that many Tamils are released  after
    signing statements made in Sinhala that they often do  not  understand.
    It is again a factor that must be considered in  the  totality  of  the
    risk.

    Refusing requests by Security Force to Become an Informer

216.  We agree with the submissions of Mr MacKenzie in this regard that  if
    a person has been credibly found to have refused to co-operate with the
    security forces, after being  detained  for  membership,  or  perceived
    support of the LTTE, there is a higher risk that they will  be  assumed
    to be collaborators with the LTTE.  In this  regard  we  consider  that
    such evidence needs to be taken into account along with the totality of
    the evidence and it will not, in  every  case,  be  a  situation  where
    merely establishing that they have refused to be an informer,  will  be
    the basis for a valid claim for asylum on its own.

    Presence of Scarring

217.  The background evidence on the issue of scarring has  fluctuated.   Up
    until the time of the ceasefire it was generally accepted as  something
    which the Sri Lankan authorities noted and took into account  both  at
    the airport and on detention and in strip searches of  suspected  Tamil
    LTTE supporters.  Their perception that it may indicate training by the
    LTTE, or participation in active warfare, was self-evident, and  simply
    was "good" policing, as appeared  to  be  suggested  by  the  Inspector
    General of Police in his discussions with Dr Smith.  On the same  logic
    it was also valid to conclude that the impact of scarring  was  of  far
    less interest during the period 2002 - late 2005 while  the  ceasefire
    agreement was having some effective  impact.   The  evidence  that  was
    provided in this case, including  that  from  Dr Smith  following  his
    discussions with the Inspector General of Police (paragraph 80  of  his
    report), the BHC letter of 24 August 2006, and the COIR  all  indicate
    that scarring may again be relevant.  We agree  with  the  comments  in
    Dr Smith's report, that the issue of scarring was  considered  by  the
    police to be a very serious indicator of whether  a  Tamil  might  have
    been involved in the LTTE.  However, on the evidence now before  us  we
    consider  that  the  scarring  issue  should  be  one  that  only   has
    significance when there are other factors that would bring an applicant
    to  the  attention  of  the  authorities,  either  at  the  airport  or
    subsequently in Colombo, such as being wanted on an outstanding  arrest
    warrant or a lack of  identity.   We  therefore  agree  with  the  COIR
    remarks that it may be a  relevant,  but  not  an  overriding,  factor.
    Thus, whilst the presence of scarring may promote interest in  a  young
    Tamil under investigation by the Sri  Lankan  authorities,  we  do  not
    consider that,  merely  because  a  young  Tamil  has  scars,  he  will
    automatically be ill-treated in detention.

    Return from London or Other Centre of LTTE Activity or Fund-Raising

218.  We consider that this is a factor that will be  highly  case-specific.
    While it is valid to take into account  that  Dr Smith  and  Detective
    Inspector Hibberd assert that  London  is  a  centre  for  Tamil  fund-
    raising, (indeed it is  now  alleged/rumoured  that  the  LTTE  may  be
    involved in a "skimming" operation with credit cards  in  a  number  of
    petrol stations in the UK), we consider that this  would  be  a  factor
    that would  have  to  be  credibly  established,  by  reference  to  an
    appellant's evidence or perhaps that of a close  associate.   He  would
    need to show the extent to which the Sri Lankan Embassy in the  UK  was
    aware of his  activities  and  was  thus  likely  to  have  passed  the
    information on to Colombo when the  applicant  was  being  deported  or
    removed.

    Illegal Departure from Sri Lanka

219.  We agree that illegal departure does  not  of  necessity  establish  a
    well founded fear of persecution or serious harm on its own.   However,
    it does appear that there is some evidence in the Hotham report, in the
    evidence of Dr Smith, and the IRB that it may now, in  the  heightened
    level of insecurity in Sri Lanka, add to the profile.  Again, it  is  a
    factor that will be very much case-specific and  is  likely  to  become
    relevant as one factor in a plethora of  possible  factors  leading  to
    real risk of serious harm.

    Lack of ID Card or Other Documentation

220.  The evidence of Professor Goode was that carrying a national  identity
    card has become a must.  It would appear a reasonable inference that in
    the current situation, where a number of cordon and  search  activities
    take place in Colombo and elsewhere, that the lack  of  valid  identity
    could lead to a higher risk.  Obviously it would  need  to  be  coupled
    with other risk factors for those of Tamil ethnicity, but we view it as
    being a contributing factor.  An appellant would need to  show  why  he
    would be at continuing risk, and that he cannot reasonably be expected,
    or able, to acquire a new identity card.

    Having made an asylum claim abroad

221.  Again there was accepted evidence, including that from the  BHC,  that
    there are lists of failed asylum  seekers  which  could  form  part  of
    search operations in Tamil areas of Colombo.  It is again a  reasonable
    inference that the application  forms  for  replacement  passports  and
    travel documents may alert the Sri Lankan High Commission in London and
    that that information could be passed on.  We do not consider  this  to
    be an issue that alone would place any returning failed  asylum  seeker
    at a real risk of persecution or serious harm  on  return.   Again,  it
    would make but a contributing factor that  would  need  other,  perhaps
    more compelling, factors added to it before a real risk of  persecution
    or serious harm could be established.

    Having Relatives in the LTTE

222.  This factor we consider is again a highly logical one but again  needs
    to be taken into account along with the totality of other evidence  and
    the  profile  of  the  other  family  members.   On  its  own,  without
    established and credible evidence of the details of  the  other  family
    members and their known role or involvement with the LTTE, it  will  be
    of limited weight.

    Internal Flight and State Protection

223. The first question is any case  in  which  the  appellant  relies  upon
    asylum grounds is whether he (or she) has  established  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in his (or her) own home area.  If he (or  she)  is
    able to do so, the second question will be whether he (or she) will  be
    provided with a "sufficiency of protection" against that risk.  If not,
    the third question will apply, namely whether  internal  relocation  is
    possible to another part of the individual's country.

224. Consequently, assuming  that  a  Tamil  from  the  north  or  east  can
    establish that he has a well-founded fear of persecution, we  agree  as
    is the case with this appellant, that in the  current  "half  war",  or
    "virtual" civil war, it would not be possible for Tamils from the north
    or the east, who come from LTTE-controlled areas, to obtain any form of
    meaningful  protection  in  their  home  areas  from  the  Sri   Lankan
    Government. This was conceded by the Respondent  in  this  case.   Thus
    applicants from LTTE controlled  areas  are  placed  in  the  situation
    where, if they can establish a well founded  fear  of  persecution  (or
    real risk of serious harm) from the LTTE in the controlled areas,  they
    must then be assessed to ascertain if they can seek internal relocation
    to Colombo, or thereabouts. Their cases must be assessed in  accordance
    with the accepted internal relocation guidelines  as  now  set  out  in
    cases such as Januzi and AH (Sudan) and paragraph 339D of  the  amended
    Immigration Rules.

225.  If  the  individual  has  not  established  a  well-founded  fear   of
    persecution in his  own  area,  he  is  not  a  refugee.   He  is  able
    (notionally) to live in his own area, even if he cannot get there.   He
    is not entitled  to  the  surrogate  protection  of  the  international
    community because at home he would be safe.

226. Suppose, however, that his return to that area involves him in  a  risk
    of harm at the airport or other on the way?  That does not, as we  have
    said, make him a refugee.  But it may make his removal illegal,  either
    because it would breach Article 3  or  because  he  is  entitled  under
    paragraph 339C to humanitarian protection in the UK.





    Risk Profiles for Tamils

227.  Our assessment of the various risk factors above has highlighted  that
    each case must be determined on its own facts.  It may be that in  some
    credible cases one of these individual risk factors on  its  own   will
    establish a real risk of persecution or serious harm on return  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities for Sri Lankan Tamils  who  are  failed  asylum
    seekers from the United Kingdom.   For  those  with  a  lower  profile,
    assessed on one or a combination of the  risk  factors  we  have  noted
    however, such as  this  appellant,  their  specific  profiles  must  be
    assessed in each situation and set against the above non-exhaustive and
    non conclusive, set of risk factors and the volatile country situation.
     As can be  noted,  several  factors,  such  as  being  subject  to  an
    outstanding arrest warrant, or a proven bail jumper from a formal  bail
    hearing may establish a much higher level of propensity  to  risk  than
    various other factors.  In this  situation  therefore,  the  assessment
    exercise is a much larger and more detailed one than may have been  the
    situation up to 2002 and certainly during the period of the cease  fire
    agreement ("CFA").   The  current  worsening  situation  in  Sri  Lanka
    requires serious consideration of all of the above factors, a review of
    up to date country of origin information set against the very carefully
    assessed profile of the appellant.

10.   Application of the Objective findings  to  the  Appellant's  case  and
    Decision

228.  The appellant's credibility has been accepted.  In our  assessment  of
    the above risk factors, particularly noting the fact that he  has  been
    accepted as a bail-jumper from court-directed bail in Colombo and  that
    his failure to report has been followed up with his uncle (as  surety),
    we consider that on return to Colombo Airport he is at a real  risk  of
    being investigated.  That investigation by the Sri Lankan  authorities,
    we consider, based on the objective information we have analysed above,
    will lead on his particular circumstances, to  the  real  risk  of  him
    being seriously maltreated while in detention to the level that reaches
    persecution or really serious harm.  It is for  this  reason  that,  on
    reconsideration  after  finding  the  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge, we substitute our own  decision
    and allow the appellant's appeal.   We  do  not  allow  it  on  refugee
    grounds because he has not established that he is at risk in  his  home
    area.   (See  paragraph  223  ante).   We  consider  that  there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that records relating to him will be held  either
    on computer or other records at the airport because of  the  acceptance
    that his case has been before the courts and he was released on  formal
    bail.  We consider that his situation may have been very  different  if
    he had not been released from a formal court bail  and  then  absconded
    but had been a mere escapee from some form of  informal  detention  who
    had been released after the payment of a bribe.  Detailed  findings  on
    the full profile of the  appellant  concerned  were  essential  in  the
    assessment of  the  risk  on  return.   Because  we  consider,  in  the
    particular circumstances of the  appellant's  case,  he  is  reasonably
    likely to be detained at the airport and then at a real risk of serious
    harm thereafter whilst in detention it is not necessary for us to go on
    and consider whether there would be a real risk if he were somehow able
    to pass through the airport and remain in Colombo.


    His fear of the LTTE was only in respect of  being  forcibly  recruited
    whilst he was living in the north of the country.  In the circumstances
    we have not gone on to assess that risk.  We find however,  that  given
    his profile, as regards the LTTE,  then  if  he  were  able  to  locate
    himself in Colombo there is nothing in that profile that would  suggest
    a real risk to him of serious harm at the hands of the LTTE.


11.   Conclusions on the continuing applicability of Sri Lankan CG Cases

229.  country guidance cases that are no longer to  be  treated  as  country
    guidance but which remain as reported cases

      YP (Maintenance - detention records) Sri Lanka CG [2003] UKIAT 00145.

      JP (Maintenance - detention records) Sri Lanka CG [2003] UKIAT 00142.

      SV (Passport renewal) Sri Lanka CG [2003] UKIAT 00125.

      VK (Risk - release - escapes - LTTE) Sri Lanka CG [2003] UKIAT 00096,



      TK (Ceasefire - negotiations) Sri Lanka CG [2003] UKIAT 00026.

      VS (Risk - LTTE - escape) Sri Lanka CG [2003] UKIAT 00003.

      AE FE (PTSD - Internal relocation) Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT 05237.

      DA (Risk - return - reporting restrictions) Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT
    04729,

      IS (Risk - conviction - fine paid -  release)  Sri Lanka  CG  [2002]
    UKIAT 04230.

      TJ (Risk - returns) Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT 01869.

      CB (Detailed appraisal) Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT 01547.

      PT (Medical report - analysis) Sri Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT 01336.

230.  The following will retain country  guidance  status  but,  as  always,
    should be looked at in the context of the developing situation  and  in
    the light of any more up to date evidence.

      PT (Risk - bribery -  release)  Sri Lanka  CG  [2002]  UKIAT  03444.
    Although this case concerned the position in  mid-2002,  paragraphs  28
    and 29 of  the  determination  (which  deal  with  scarring)  are  not
    inconsistent with the evidence that was before  us  and  paragraphs  19
    to 27 (which deal with the issue of bribery) remain consistent with the
    evidence  we  have  heard,  the  submissions  made  and  contains  what
    continues to be a common sense approach to the issue of bribery-related
    releases.

      PS (LTTE - Internal flight - sufficiency of protection) Sri Lanka CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00297.  This case dealt with the risk  from  the  LTTE  in
    Colombo.  This is not an issue with which we have been engaged,  except
    in passing, and the issue will be reconsidered shortly.   The  decision
    contains some useful observations about risk from the LTTE  in  Colombo
    which must, of course, be considered in the light of  current  evidence
    and developing conditions, until such time  as  a  replacement  country
    guidance case is published.

12.   Summary of Conclusions

231.  The country guidance available in this determination relates  only  to
    the risk to returning Tamils and problems  which  they  may  experience
    with the Sri Lankan authorities.  It  deals  only  with  the  risks  in
    Colombo where they will be returned and does not, for  the  most  part,
    deal with risks from the LTTE and the question  of  protection  by  the
    authorities from such risks.  In section 11 we have listed the  Country
    Guidance cases that should no longer be followed as  country  guidance.
    None of the cases were wrongly  decided  but  have  been  overtaken  by
    events on the ground.  They remain as reported cases  because  in  some
    cases they have continuing relevance in a general way.  For example  SM
    contains observations, in paragraphs 31 and 36,  about  bribery-related
    releases that are consistent with available evidence  and  continue  to
    reflect common sense.

232.  It has been accepted during the course of this determination that  the
    general security situation in Sri Lanka has deteriorated following the
    effective breakdown of the ceasefire  and  the  increase  in  terrorist
    activity by the LTTE.  That has resulted in increased vigilance on  the
    part of the Sri Lankan authorities and with it  a  greater  scope  for
    human rights abuses and persecution.

233.  When assessing the risk to an individual it should be  borne  in  mind
    that much of the background material about Sri Lanka, and the increase
    in violent  activity,  relates  to  the  north  and  east.   There  are
    particular problems in the east because of the defection of the  Karuna
    faction from LTTE ranks.  This determination does not suggest  that  it
    would in every case be unsafe to expect a returning Tamil to return  to
    his or her home area in the north or the east.  Rather it looks at  the
    position in Colombo whether that be for a Tamil who was from Colombo in
    the first place, or a person who could relocate there.

234.  Tamils make up  over  10%  of  the  population  of  Colombo.   Despite
    evidence of some forms of discrimination, the evidence  does  not  show
    they face serious hardships merely  because  they  are  Tamils.   As  a
    result, other considerations apart and subject to individual assessment
    of each applicant's specific case, it cannot be argued that, even if he
    faces serious harm in his home area, as a  general  presumption  it  is
    unduly harsh to expect a Tamil to relocate to Colombo, or that it would
    be a breach of Article 3 to expect him or her to do so, or that  doing
    so would put him or her at real risk of serious harm entitling them  to
    humanitarian protection.

235.  As in most asylum cases the first, and  most  important  task  is  the
    assessment of the credibility of the appellant's claim.  In the  course
    of that assessment the Tribunal will have regard to the history of  the
    appellant including the part of Sri Lanka from which he comes and  his
    actual involvement, if any, with the LTTE.  Such involvement  can  vary
    between being a full-time fighting  member  to  the  informal  periodic
    supply of food.  Issues of exclusion may arise.  The  extent  to  which
    their involvement may be known by the Sri Lankan authorities  (or  the
    extent to which they perceive there  to  be  an  involvement)  will  be
    relevant.

236.  Other issues which require careful  evaluation  involve  the  previous
    attention  paid  to  the  appellant  by  the  Sri Lankan  authorities.
    Questions of whether the appellant has been previously detained and for
    how long will be significant, as will the reasons for the detention.  A
    short detention following a round-up may be of little  significance;  a
    longer detention as a result of a targeted operation will be much  more
    significant.  The question of release and how that came  about  may  be
    important.  It should be recognised that the procurement of bribes is a
    common occurrence in Sri Lanka and that the release following  payment
    of a bribe is not necessarily  evidence  of  any  continuing  interest.
    Care should be taken  to  distinguish  between  release  following  the
    payment of a bribe and release  following  the  grant  of  bail.   Care
    should be taken in the use of language here.  Release on payment  of  a
    bribe, and release on bail with a surety could be confused.  Both forms
    of release follow discussions about, and possibly  payment  of,  money.
    The evidence is that  the  police  in  Sri Lanka  do,  in  appropriate
    circumstances, grant bail.  In this particular case bail was granted by
    a court.  If the Tribunal is satisfied that the  appellant  has  jumped
    bail (and that would  include  failing  to  report  under  a  reporting
    condition), it is necessary to assess the reason  for  which  bail  was
    granted in the first  place.   Not  every  young,  male  Tamil  who  is
    arrested will have been so arrested because of sectarian activity.   As
    in any  other  society  a  proportion  will  have  committed,  or  been
    suspected  of  committing  more  mundane  criminal,  and  often  minor,
    offences.

237.  When assessing those who have relatives who are members of  the  LTTE,
    it is  not  only  important  to  consider  the  relationship,  and  the
    involvement of the relative but whether, and to what extent,  knowledge
    of the relative's activities are likely  to  have  been  known  to  the
    security forces.  This will vary depending on  the  relative's  profile
    and whether or not  he  or  she  has  been  previously  detained.   The
    question of how the authorities would know that an  individual  was  so
    related may also be of concern.

238.  During the course of the determination we have considered  a  list  of
    factors which may make a person's return to Sri Lanka a  matter  which
    would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of the Conventions.   As
    in previous country guidance cases, this list is not a checklist nor is
    it intended to be exhaustive.  The factors should  be  considered  both
    individually and cumulatively.  Reference should be made to the earlier
    parts of this determination where the factors are  considered  in  more
    detail but for ease of reference they are  set  out  here.   There  are
    twelve and they are not in any order of priority:-

            "(i) Tamil ethnicity.

            (ii) Previous record as a suspected or  actual  LTTE  member  or
    supporter.

            (iii)      Previous criminal record  and/or  outstanding  arrest
    warrant.

            (iv) Bail jumping and/or escaping from custody.

            (v)  Having signed a confession or similar document.

            (vi) Having been asked by  the  security  forces  to  become  an
    informer.

            (vii)      The presence of scarring.

             (viii)      Returned  from  London  or  other  centre  of  LTTE
    activity or fund-raising.

            (ix) Illegal departure from Sri Lanka.

            (x)  Lack of ID card or other documentation.

            (xi) Having made an asylum claim abroad.

            (xii)      Having relatives in the LTTE."

239.  When examining the risk factors it is  of  course  necessary  to  also
    consider the likelihood of an appellant being either apprehended at the
    airport or subsequently within Colombo.  We have  referred  earlier  to
    the Wanted and Watched lists held at the  airport  and  concluded  that
    those who are actively wanted by the police or who are on a watch  list
    for a significant offence may be at  risk  of  being  detained  at  the
    airport.  Otherwise the strong preponderance of the  evidence  is  that
    the  majority  of  returning  failed  asylum  seekers   are   processed
    relatively  quickly  and  with  no  difficulty  beyond  some   possible
    harassment.

240.  Within Colombo there is no doubt that Tamils are at  greater  risk  of
    being stopped at a checkpoint  or  detained  in  a  cordon  and  search
    operation or being  the  subject  of  a  raid  on  the  lodges  by  the
    authorities.  Those activities do not of themselves mean that a  Tamil,
    without more, would be at risk, but it does mean that on each  occasion
    there is an opportunity for his or her presence to be checked and  then
    one or more of the risk factors could come  into  play.   The  evidence
    seems to be that much of the difficulty for Tamils who  are  caught  in
    those operations arises from the fact they do  not  have  any  identity
    documents.  If an appellant asserts that he would be at risk  for  that
    reason, then he or she will need to show why it is  he  or  she  cannot
    obtain an identity document within a reasonable time  of  returning  to
    Sri Lanka.  They would not be expected to be carrying an identity card
    at the airport if they are being returned  on  temporary  documentation
    obtained in the United Kingdom.  For a short time, while new  documents
    are obtained a returnee should be able to establish  the  fact  of  his
    recent return, with little difficulty.

Conclusion

241.  The Immigration Judge having made an error  of  law  in  the  original
    determination of the  appellant's  appeal,  and  this  Tribunal  having
    reconsidered the appeal, the following decision is substituted:-

      The appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.
        The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.
        The appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection as a person in
        need of international protection.




Signed                                             Date:
Senior Immigration Judge Mather
Documents considered

Submitted by the Appellant

Expert reports:
Dr Smith's Report: 22 September 2005
Dr Smith's Supplementary Report: 5 October 2006
Professor A Good's Report: 3 October 2006
Dr Gunaratna - expert witness report: 6 October 2006
Report by Dr Yolande Foster: 8 October 2006
Dr Smith & Detective Inspector Hibberd's report on Tamil Organised Crime in
London: June 2004

Other materials:
UNHCR Position Paper (excerpts only): April 2004
UNHCR Position Paper: December 2006
Hotham Mission Field Trip Report: October 2006
Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board Report: 22 December 2006
Tamilnet web page 05 February 2007
Tamilnet web page 09 March 2007
Tamilnet web page 18 March 2007
Tamilnet web page 21 March 2007
Tamilnet web page 26 March 2007
Tamilnet web page 13 March 2007
BBC News web report 27 November 2006 "Tamil Statehood is only option"
Amnesty International Public Statement 1 December 2006
BBC News web Report: 6 December 2006
Sri Lankan Government Website article: 6 December 2006
Asian Human Rights Commission statement 2 February 2007
Yahoo News Canada web article: 6 March 2007
South Asia Intelligence Review web article:12 March 2007
Human Rights Watch Information Bulletin 13 March 2007
Christian Today web article: 22 March 2007
BBC News web report: 26 March 2007
US State Department Report: March 2007
Human Rights Watch Article: 29 March 2007

Submitted by the Respondent

Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board Report: 5 August 2003
Respondent's Figures on Removals & Returns to Sri Lanka: 2005 & 2006
Letter from the Minister of State to Harry Cohen MP:17 November 2006
COI Report on Sri Lanka: October 2006
COI Report Sri Lanka: February 2007
Operational Guidance Note Sri Lanka 9th March 2007
British High Commission Letter 26 September 2005
British High Commission Letter 13 Feb 2006
British High Commission Letter 4 April 2006
British High Commission Letter 24 August 2006
British High Commission Letter 22 November 2006 with Sri Lanka Bail Act
1997
British High Commission letter on emergency regulations: 10 April 2007

