
AW (Duties of Immigration Judge) Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00072

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Field House                                        Date of
Hearing: 3 June 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge McKee

                                   Between

                                     AW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           No appearance
For the Respondent:          Ms R. Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer

Immigration Judges have a duty to act fairly in  relation  to  both  parties
when reaching a decision  on  an  accurate  understanding  of  the  evidence
before them.  Although there may be  reason  to  criticise  Entry  Clearance
Officers, such criticism should not be offered except when it  applies,  and
does not entitle the Immigration  Judge  to  abandon  his  duty  to  make  a
decision on the evidence.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appealed to the Tribunal  against
    the decision of the respondent on 20 September 2007 refusing him  entry
    clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student.   Immigration  Judge
    Thorndike allowed the appeal in a determination sent out on 28 February
    2008.  The respondent sought and obtained an order for reconsideration.
     Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. Notice of the time and place of the reconsideration were  sent  to  the
    appellant and his representative, both in Pakistan.  The appellant  has
    no representative in  the  United  Kingdom.   At  the  time  and  place
    appointed for the hearing there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
    the appellant.  We exercised our discretion to proceed in his absence.

 3. The notice of refusal gives reasons for the refusal in six  paragraphs.
    The first three relate to the  appellant's  abilities  in  the  English
    language.  The respondent indicates that he is not satisfied  that  the
    appellant has sufficient knowledge of English to follow the  three-year
    diploma course for which his visa was sought.  There was no independent
    assessment of his ability in English available and no other substantial
    evidence of the appellant's abilities.  The  other  reasons  relate  to
    maintenance and accommodation: the respondent took the  view  that  the
    appellant had not shown that the person upon whom he was to depend  for
    his support during the course was closely related to him as he claimed,
    or that that person had sufficient funds to support  him,  or  that  he
    would use his funds for that purpose.

 4. The notice of appeal was received by the  British  High  Commission  in
    Islamabad  on  19  October  2007  and  by  the  Tribunal's  office   in
    Loughborough on 14 November 2007.  The respondent was directed to  file
    his bundle, including the application form, the  record  of  interview,
    and any other unpublished documents upon which he relied in  accordance
    with r 13 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005, by 14 December.  The respondent ignored that  direction.   It  is
    indeed within the knowledge of every member of this Tribunal that Entry
    Clearance Officers typically treat judicial directions, and regulations
    made by Parliament, with  utter  disdain.   On  19  December  2007  the
    respondent was reminded of the direction and the Rules  and  was  given
    until 13 February 2008 to comply.  It need  hardly  be  said  that  the
    respondent did not  comply.   On  26  February  the  Immigration  Judge
    determined the appeal, in accordance with the appellant's wish to  have
    the matter  determined  without  a  hearing.   In  the  course  of  the
    determination he wrote:

      "The difficulty in this case is that there is a  lack  of  documentary
        evidence.  It is clear that this has been caused by the respondent,
        for whatever reason.  The respondent has not sent  a  copy  of  the
        appellant's application form or of the  sponsor's  bank  statement.
        Although this puts the appellant at some  disadvantage,  I  am  not
        going to allow that to prejudice the appeal."

 5. Before we indicate the way in which  the  Immigration  Judge  made  his
    decision, we  should  identify  a  number  of  other  features  of  the
    determination.  The first is at para 7:

      "There is nothing to indicate in  the  papers  sent  to  me  that  the
        decision was reviewed, following receipt of  the  appeal.   I  find
        this to be very disturbing as any appellant  who  appeals  has  the
        right, in the name of justice, for the decision to be reviewed.   I
        presume the respondent had specific reasons for not  reviewing  the
        decision."

 6. As the Immigration Judge was at pains to point out, he did not have the
    respondent's bundle, and had no means of knowing whether the  assertion
    he made about the respondent's  conduct  was  right  or  not.   We  are
    unaware of any principle of  justice  which  gives  a  person  who  has
    entered a statutory appeal (but not, apparently, any  other  person)  a
    right to have a decision reviewed.  Then  at  para  9  the  Immigration
    Judge writes this:

            "I am aware that an immigration  judge  must  be  very  wary  of
        interfering with an  entry  clearance  officer's  finding  of  fact
        particularly where the entry clearance  officer  is  aware  of  the
        local conditions."

 7. That seems to us to be simply wrong.  No  doubt  the  decision  maker's
    knowledge of local conditions is entitled to respect, but the point  of
    an appeal is that the judge comes to the evidence  afresh.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision is the reason for the appeal, but  has  no
    other standing so far as the  appeal  is  concerned.   The  Immigration
    Judge is to decide, on the evidence,  whether  the  application  should
    have been granted rather than being refused.

 8. The third point relates the  material  before  the  Immigration  Judge.
    Despite the Immigration Judge's  observations  about  the  respondent's
    failure to submit the bundle, at para 8 he records as follows:

      "The documents before the  Tribunal  are  those  in  the  respondent's
        bundle."

 9. At para 13, he confirms that he has taken into account the respondent's
    explanatory statement (which, no  doubt,  would  have  accompanied  the
    bundle if it had been sent to him) as "evidence".  He notes that he has
    also  taken  into  account  "written  submission  and  other  documents
    received from the appellant", which, appears from para 15,  were  "sent
    directly to the Tribunal in Bradford".

10. This is entirely unsatisfactory.  Despite not having  the  respondent's
    bundle, the Immigration Judge purports, in two separate places, to take
    it  into  account.   Further,  he  proposes  to  take  the  explanatory
    statement into account as "evidence", although it could be little  more
    than submissions.  He gives no  indication  that  he  would  take  into
    account any other documents in the bundle.  So  far  as  the  documents
    sent "directly to the Tribunal" are concerned, we reserve  comment  for
    later in this determination.

11. On the basis of the material before him the Immigration  Judge  decided
    that, at the date of the decision, the appellant met  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  So far as the appellant's ability in English
    was concerned, the Immigration Judge noted that the appellant had taken
    the IELTS examination on 1 December 2007 and achieved a score  of  5.5.
    He wrote:

      "Taking the issue of English first, it is clear  that  the  appellant
        was prompted to take the IELTS examination following  the  comments
        and criticisms of the entry clearance officer.  Therefore, I do not
        regard that as new, post-decision, evidence.  It is clear that with
        a score of 5.5 the appellant is well able to follow the course."

12. Looking then at financial matters, the Immigration Judge  concluded  on
    the material before him that the sponsor "either owns, or works for, or
    works with, KASB Securities Limited".  He wrote that he was  "satisfied
    on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  sponsor  is  either   a
    professional stockbroker  or  is  very  active  in  the  stock  broking
    business".  He said he was happy to accept the sponsor's word as to his
    relationship to the appellant and his willingness to provide funds  for
    the appellant's studies.  Having resolved the disputed  issues  in  the
    appellant's favour, he accordingly allowed the appeal.

13. The grounds  for  reconsideration  challenge  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision on the grounds,  first,  that  passing  an  IELTS  test  on  1
    December 2007 is not of itself evidence of ability  at  any  particular
    level on the date of the decision, 20 September  2007;  secondly,  that
    the Immigration Judge erred  in  taking  into  account  documents  sent
    "direct to the Tribunal"  without  giving  the  respondent  or  anybody
    representing the respondent an opportunity to  examine  them  and  make
    submissions on them.

14. The second complaint raises an issue  which,  if  we  may  say  so,  is
    blindingly obvious.  Even  if  it  were  not  obvious,  the  matter  is
    governed by r 51(7) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules, which provides as follows:

      "Subject to section 108 of the 2002 Act [which is not material  here],
        the Tribunal must not take into account any evidence that  has  not
        been made available to all the parties."

15. We are surprised that even an Immigration Judge who is able to make the
    errors we have already identified in his determination did not  have  a
    sufficient concept of the principles of fairness to ensure that he made
    his decision on the basis of evidence available to all parties, even if
    he had been unaware of the rules of natural justice or of the Procedure
    Rules under which he was operating.  His decision to take into account,
    against the respondent, evidence which to his knowledge  the  appellant
    had sent directly to the Tribunal without involving the respondent,  is
    a clear error of law.  Whatever the content  of  the  evidence,  it  is
    material because it goes to the fairness of the proceedings.   A  party
    who loses  an  appeal  in  such  circumstances  as  this  can  have  no
    confidence in the independence of the judge.

16. In our view the  respondent's  objection  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    conclusion on the appellant's ability in English  is  also  well  made.
    The Immigration Judge assumes, apparently without any evidence, that it
    was the refusal that had caused the appellant to  take  the  test.   He
    also assumes, apparently without any  evidence,  that  the  appellant's
    English ability at the time he took  the  test  was  the  same  as  the
    appellant's English ability at the time of the refusal.  There  was  no
    basis for either of those assumptions, and on the material  before  the
    Immigration Judge it would have been equally likely that, following the
    refusal, the appellant had decided to take tuition in English in  order
    to enable him to achieve a 5.5 score in the IELTS by December.

17. For the reasons we have given, the Immigration Judge  materially  erred
    in law.

18. In making our own determination, we are assisted by the fact  that  the
    respondent did deign to send his bundle to the Tribunal about ten weeks
    late.  It is recorded as having arrived on 3 March  2008.   A  Tribunal
    more cynical than ourselves might wonder  whether it had been submitted
    only after the Immigration Judge's decision was made known (it was sent
    out on 28 February 2008) in order to support a reconsideration.

19. The documents available to us shed some light on  the  history  of  the
    appellant's knowledge of English.   He  obtained  95  marks  out  of  a
    possible 150 in compulsory English as a  secondary  school  student  in
    2004, but only 83 out of  200  in  compulsory  English  in  his  higher
    certificate in 2006.  In  2007  he  undertook  a  "special  foundation"
    course in English and  obtained  66%  in  the  examination.   There  is
    nothing before us showing the level at which a "special foundation"  is
    set, but a hint of the standard of English of the institution  offering
    it may be gathered from a note at the bottom  of  the  result  card  as
    follows:

      "This result is declared, errors and omissions, if any,  are  accepted
        as a notice only and  does  not  in  itself  confer  any  right  or
        privilege independently."

20. The appellant's student visa questionnaire  contains  some  information
    about his claim to proficiency in English.  The relevant  question,  on
    page 6 of the questionnaire, is answered as follows:

      "I got my whole education  from  best  English  medium  in  institutes
        throughout.  I always go good marks in English.  I  also  completed
        English language proficiency course NUML Islamabad.  My command  at
        English language is very good."

21. In the application form itself, the appellant writes as follows:

        "I am appearing for  IELTS  next  month.   I  have  also  completed
        English language course from NUML.  My medium of edu was also Eng."

22. As it  happens,  that  entry  confirms  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
    supposition was wrong.  The appellant intended to do an IELTS test when
    he made his application: the test was  not  prompted  by  the  refusal.
    Further, the appellant undertook, or certainly intended to undertake  a
    test in October.  We will not speculate why the certificate before  the
    Immigration Judge followed a test in December, but we  see  nothing  in
    the material before us (including that which was before the Immigration
    Judge) to show that the appellant had, at the  date  of  the  decision,
    achieved a sufficient level of proficiency in English to enable him  to
    follow a course in the United Kingdom  without  further  study  of  the
    language.

23. So far as concerns matters of finance,  it  is  perhaps  convenient  to
    begin with the material that was before  the  Immigration  Judge.   The
    grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  appellant's  "real  cousin...is
    maintaining a very sound and  constant  bank  account  and  owned  very
    precious moveable and immovable assets.  He  is  doing  stock  exchange
    business at Peshawar.  He is financially very sound and in  a  position
    to meet my educational expenditure abroad".  The grounds add  that  the
    appellant's  mother  will  also  provide  support.   The  grounds  were
    accompanied by a witness statement from the cousin, stating that he  is
    "doing  exchange  business  at  Peshawar/Karachi".   Neither   document
    mentions KASB Securities Limited.  There is a statement of  the  trades
    of KASB Securities Limited on isolated days November and December 2007.
     The statement does not mention the name  of  the  sponsor.   Any  link
    between the sponsor and the statement  must  be  regarded  as  entirely
    hypothetical  and  we  cannot  understand  the  basis  on   which   the
    Immigration Judge reached his conclusions,  given  that  there  was  no
    other material before him.  We have the advantage of being able to take
    into account the respondent's bundle as well.  It contains no financial
    evidence other than affidavits from  the  appellant's  cousin  and  his
    mother asserting the cousin's activity in  "stock  exchange  business".
    Again, there is nothing to link either the appellant's  cousin  or  his
    mother with a firm called KASB Securities, or to  lead  on  to  suppose
    that any wealth possessed by KASB Securities belongs to the  cousin  or
    is his to dispose of for the benefit of the appellant's education.   It
    is perfectly  clear  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

24. We regard this appeal with some concern because much of the Immigration
    Judge's  determination  was  wrong  in  law,  unfair,  or  clearly  not
    supported by the evidence.  His determination will  have  raised  quite
    unjustified hopes in the appellant's mind.  We, however, must determine
    the appeal on the evidence and it is on the evidence before us that  we
    substitute a determination dismissing it.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

