

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                                  |
|SS & ors (Ankara Agreement - no in-country right of appeal) Turkey  [2006] UKAIT |
|00074                                                                            |
|                                        |                                        |
|                                                                                 |
|                                                                                 |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                             |
|                                                                                 |
|Heard at  Field House on  22 May and 28  |Notice sent:                          |
|June 2006                                |29 September 2006                     |
|                                                                                 |
|                                                                                 |
|                                                                                 |
|                                                                                 |
|Before                                                                           |
|SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY                                                  |
|SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GRUBB                                                   |
|IMMIGRATION JUDGE AFAKO                                                          |
|Between                                                                          |
|                                                                                 |
|                                                                                 |
|                                                                                 |
|Appellants                                                                       |
|And                                                                              |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                                       |
|                                |        |                                      |
|                                |        |Respondent                            |


Representation:

For the first, second  and  fourth  appellants:  Mr  M  Chatwin,  Counsel,
instructed by Souleiman GA, Solicitors
For the respondent: Ms S Leatherland, Home Office Presenting Officer


(i)  failed  Turkish  asylum-seekers  who  seek  to  rely  on  "standstill"
provisions under the Ankara Agreement of 1963  by  virtue  of  engaging  in
business or being self-employed in the UK (even assuming they have received
an appealable immigration decision) do not  have  an  in-country  right  of
appeal under the legislative framework in place  on  1  January  1973  (the
relevant "standstill" provisions);

(ii) assuming they have received an appealable immigration decision,  those
who lodged their appeals since the coming into force of the  2002  Act  but
before 4 April 2005 do have an in-country right of appeal under  s.92(4)(a)
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended if they have
made an asylum or human rights claim to the Secretary of State  as  defined
in s.113(1) of that Act;

(iii) however, those who lodged or lodge their  appeals  since  the  coming
into force of the 2002 Act but on or after 4 April 2005 (as  did  all  four
appellants in this case), (even assuming they have received  an  appealable
immigration decision) cannot have an in-country right of appeal unless they
have earlier made an asylum and human rights  claim  to  the  Secretary  of
State when applying under the Ankara Agreement.




   NOTICE UNDER RULE 9, ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL (PROCEDURE)
                                 RULES 2005


1. This notice deals with the cases of four appellants,  all  nationals  of
Turkey.  Despite being failed asylum seekers, all claim that by  virtue  of
engaging in business or being self-employed in the United Kingdom they  are
entitled  to  rely  on  the  "standstill"  provisions  in   the   EC-Turkey
Association Agreement (September 12,  1963)  and  the  Additional  Protocol
(November 23, 1970). This is variously described in the submissions as  the
"EC Turkish Association Agreement" "the Turkish Association Agreement", the
Turkish  ECAA",  but  is  referred  to  hereafter  simply  as  "the  Ankara
Agreement".

2. The appeals raise an important point of general application  to  appeals
in cases concerned with provisions of  the  Ankara  Agreement  relating  to
persons engaged in business or who are self-employed, in particular whether
any appeal may be brought in-country.

 3. There were originally three other appellants. Their  appeals  had  been
listed together with the four which now concern us at Taylor  House  on  29
March 2006 before two members of the current panel. The  appeals  of  these
three other appellants no longer concern us as in each case  the  Secretary
of State had sent a letter to the Tribunal stating that the decision  under
appeal had been withdrawn and the Tribunal then served  notice  under  rule
17(3) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  (SI
2005/230) (hereafter "the 2005 Procedure Rules") recording  the  appeal  as
having been withdrawn.

4. The initial hearing at Taylor House before two members  of  the  current
panel was devoted to hearing argument on the issue  of  whether  the  seven
appellants had an in-country right of appeal. It was accepted that only  if
we found they did have an in-country right of appeal could their appeals be
considered substantively.  Both the Presenting Officer  appearing  on  that
occasion (Ms Pal) and the appellants' representative,  Mr  Chatwin,  argued
that there was an in-country right of appeal, but both accepted  that  this
was a matter of law properly to be  determined  by  the  Tribunal.  Shortly
after that hearing the parties were notified that there would be a  further
hearing of a selection of the seven cases. They were  also  told  that  the
panel's decision on the preliminary issue was that there is  an  in-country
right of appeal in each of the seven cases.  However, that decision,  being
on a preliminary issue, remains subject to  determination  by  the  present
panel of the cases concerned, which in any event are now reduced to four.

5. Shortly after the Taylor House  hearing, the  Tribunal's  attention  was
drawn to  a recent Administrative Court judgment by  Sullivan  J:  R(Mehmet
Parmak) [2006] EWHC 244 (Admin) dated 13 February 2006 deciding that  there
was no "in-country" right of appeal in respect of a national of Turkey  who
had arrived in the UK via Dover in August 1999 and  whose  application  for
asylum and subsequent appeals had been rejected but who had  then  made  an
application for leave to enter in July 2005 on  the  basis  of  the  Ankara
Agreement. As this had not been cited before the panel (despite Mr  Chatwin
being Counsel in Mehmet Parmak), the panel wrote inviting  the  parties  to
make submissions as to its relevance. The panel received  relatively  brief
replies, which we have taken into account in our subsequent analysis.

6. At the outset of the first day of hearing before us,  we  heard  further
submissions on whether there could be an  in-country  right  of  appeal  in
these cases and we specifically asked the parties  to  address  us  on  one
particular matter troubling us in light  of  the  fact  that  each  of  the
appeals before us had been lodged after 4 April 2005, when the  new  Asylum
and Immigration Tribunal came into being.  In the event we have changed our
view on the issue of whether there is an  in-country  right  of  appeal  in
cases like those before us.

7. Still on the procedural history of these appeals, we should also mention
that following a further memorandum sent to the parties on 16 May 2006  one
further case was added to the list of those we were to hear, but  that,  by
the time of our second day of hearing on 28  June  2006,  the  decision  in
respect of that person's case had been withdrawn and so his  case  too  was
the subject of a notice from the Tribunal recording the decision as  having
been withdrawn.

The appellants' immigration history

8. All four appellants arrived in the UK on various dates between  February
2000 and 2003 and claimed asylum at port. All were either granted temporary
admission or detained  and  subsequently  released  on  bail  or  temporary
release.  All were refused asylum. All lost their subsequent appeals  which
they had brought or argued on asylum and human rights grounds.  Some time -
in all four cases, some considerable time - after exhausting  their  appeal
rights, all made an application for leave to enter or remain on  the  basis
that they were either businessmen or self-employed  persons  who  stood  to
benefit from the Ankara Agreement.

9. Through his officials, the Secretary of State refused their applications
by letters (respectively dated 14 November  2005,  19  September  2005,  13
February 2006 and 13 January 2006).  None of the letters  setting  out  the
terms of the refusal describe the latter as  an  appealable  decision.  One
indeed specified that there could be  no  in-country  right  of  appeal  by
virtue of the fact that s.92 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
2002 (hereafter the "2002 Act") "did not apply".   However, in the case  of
the first appellant a "Notice of  Decision"  dated  14  November  2005  and
refusing him leave to enter  was  issued  and  signed  "on  behalf  of  the
Secretary of State".  It indicated that any appeal must be brought  out  of
country.  (What appears to be an identical notice dated 21 March  2006  was
also subsequently served on him.)  Subsequently, in respect of the  second,
third and fourth appellants the Secretary of  State  set  directions  on  9
March 2006, 8 March 2006 and 3 March 2006 respectively for their removal to
Turkey as illegal entrants/immigration offenders. (It is not  clear  to  us
why they were treated as illegal entrants/immigration offenders  since  all
were refused leave to enter at port; however,  this  is  not  a  matter  of
importance to the outcome of these appeals.)

10. In each case those acting for the appellants lodged a notice of  appeal
with the Tribunal against the decision to refuse the application under  the
Ankara Agreement.  There were initially issues as to the timeliness of  the
notices  of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal,  but  these  were  resolved  by  an
Immigration Judge in the appellants' favour and do not concern us here. The
grounds raised in those notices all relied  on  provisions  of  the  Ankara
Agreement. In all but the first appellant's case they also relied on  human
rights (Article 8 and Article 1 Protocol 1 of the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights).

11. In the second appellant's case the relevant parts of  the  letter  sent
with the grounds stated as follows:

      "In accordance  with  s.84,  the  appellant  seeks  to  rely  on  the
      following grounds:


         - that removal would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
           Rights Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  his  Convention
           rights;
         - that the decision is not  in  accordance  with  the  immigration
           rules (HC509);
         - that the decision is not otherwise in accordance  with  the  law
           (Community law, as given effect under the terms of  the  Turkish
           ECAA).


                 Briefly, the reasons for those grounds ...are:


         -  the appellant has established a private life (Article 8 ECHR) in
           the United Kingdom by virtue of his business interests, and  has
           property  the  enjoyment  of  which  would  be  interfered  with
           (Article 1, Protocol 1);


         -  the terms of HC509 paragraphs 30 to 32 are met in his case;


         -   the appellant has  a  right  to  an  effective  remedy  against
           refusal, under Community law because this is an application  the
           entitlement to which arises by  virtue  of  the  EC  Association
           Agreement."

12. There was a letter drafted in very  similar  terms  in  the  third  and
fourth appellants' cases.

The Ankara Agreement

13. The Ankara Agreement has been the subject of a recent reported decision
of the Tribunal: OY (Ankara Agreement; standstill clause; worker's  family)
Turkey [2006] UKAIT 00028. However, since that decision's  principal  focus
concerned Turkish workers, not Turkish nationals relying  on  establishment
in the form of business or self-employed activities, we need  to  highlight
provisions of this Agreement affecting the latter category.

14. Article 2(1) of the Agreement states that the aim of the treaty  is  to
promote the continuous and balanced strengthening  of  trade  and  economic
relations between the contracting parties. In relation to the  work  force,
this includes the progressive securing of freedom of movement for  workers.
Workers' rights are dealt with in Article 12. Article  13  deals  with  the
abolition of restrictions on freedom of  establishment.  Article  14  deals
with the freedom to provide services. Collectively these provisions seek to
improve the standard of living of the Turkish  people  and  facilitate  the
accession of Turkey to the Community at a later date (fourth recital in the
preamble and Article 28).

15. Article 1 of the Protocol states that  it  lays  down  the  conditions,
arrangements  and  timetables  for  implementing  the  transitional   stage
referred to in Article 4 of the Agreement. The Protocol includes Title  II,
headed "Movement of Persons and Services",  chapter  I  of  which  concerns
"Workers" and Chapter II of which covers "Rights of establishment, services
and transport". Article 36 of the Protocol, which is in Chapter I, states:
         - "Freedom of movement for workers between Member  States  of  the
           Community and Turkey shall be secured by progressive  stages  in
           accordance with the principles set out  in  Article  12  of  the
           Agreement of Association between the end of the twelfth and  the
           twenty-second year after the entry into force of that Agreement.
         - The Council of Association [a joint EC-Turkey body] shall decide
           on the rules necessary to that end."
16. Article 41 of the Protocol comes in Chapter II. As we have seen,  it  is
headed "Rights of establishment, services and transport" and it provides:
      "1. The Contracting Parties shall  refrain  from  introducing  between
      themselves any new restrictions on the freedom  of  establishment  and
      the freedom to provide services.
      2. The Council of Association shall, in accordance with the principles
      set out in Articles  13  and  14  of  the  Agreement  of  Association,
      determine the timetable and rules for the progressive abolition by the
      Contracting Parties, between themselves, of restrictions on freedom of
      establishment and on freedom to provide services.
      3. The Council of Association shall, when determining  such  timetable
      and rules for the various  classes  of  activity,  take  into  account
      corresponding measures already  adopted  by  the  Community  in  these
      fields and also the  special  economic  and  social  circumstances  of
      Turkey. Priority shall be given  to  activities  making  a  particular
      contribution to the development of production and trade."
17. It is noteworthy that the Council of Association has never  adopted  any
measures under Article 41(2) of the Protocol. By contrast, in the  field  of
workers (as opposed to  those  wishing  to  establish  businesses),  various
formal decisions have been made by the Council to secure rights  of  freedom
of movement for Turkish nationals within the Member States.

18. In  C-37/98 Savas [2000] ECR 1-2927 the European Court  of  Justice  was
concerned with the interpretation of Article 13  of  the  Ankara  Agreement,
which provides:
      "The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles 52 and 56  and
      Article 58 of the Treaty establishing the Community for the purpose of
      abolishing restrictions on freedom of establishment between them."
19. The Court concluded that Article 13 is no more capable than  is  Article
41(2) of the Additional Protocol, also referred to by  the  national  court,
of  directly  governing  the  legal  position  of  individuals  and   cannot
therefore have direct effect.

20. The Court, however, took a  different  view  of  the  direct  effect  of
Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol, saying:
      "46. As its very wording shows, this  provision  lays  down,  clearly,
      precisely and unconditionally,  an  unequivocal  'standstill'  clause,
      prohibiting the contracting parties from introducing new  restrictions
      on the freedom of establishment as from the date of entry  into  force
      of the Additional Protocol.
      ...
      54.  It follows from the considerations set forth above  that  Article
      41(1) of the Additional Protocol lays down a precise and unconditional
      principle that is sufficiently operational to be applied by a national
      court and  therefore  capable  of  governing  the  legal  position  of
      individuals. The direct effect which must  therefore  be  accorded  to
      that provision implies that the individuals to which it  applies  have
      the right to rely on it before the courts of Member States.
      ...
      69. It should also be noted that the 'standstill'  clause  in  Article
      41(1) of  the  Additional  Protocol  precludes  a  Member  State  from
      adopting any new measure having the object or  effect  of  making  the
      establishment, and, as  a  corollary,  the  residences  of  a  Turkish
      national in its territory subject to stricter  conditions  than  those
      which applied at the time when the Additional  Protocol  entered  into
      force with regard to the Member State concerned.
      It is therefore for the national court, which alone  has  jurisdiction
      to interpret its own domestic law, to determine whether  the  domestic
      rules applied to Mr Savas by the competent authorities have the effect
      of worsening his position in comparison  with  the  rules  which  were
      applicable in the United Kingdom on the date on which  the  Additional
      Protocol entered into force in relation to that Member State."
21. Accordingly, the  Court  held  that  Article  41(1)  of  the  Additional
Protocol has direct effect in Member States:
      "Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol is not in itself capable  of
      conferring upon a Turkish national a right of establishment and, as  a
      corollary, a right of residence in the Member State in whose territory
      he has remained and carried on business activities as a  self-employed
      person in breach of the domestic immigration law.
      However, Article  41(1)  of  the  Additional  Protocol  prohibits  the
      introduction  of  new  national  restrictions  on   the   freedom   of
      establishment and right of residence of Turkish nationals as from  the
      date on which that protocol entered into  force  in  the  host  Member
      State. It is for the national court to interpret domestic law for  the
      purposes of determining whether the rules applied to the applicant  in
      the main  proceedings  are  less  favourable  than  those  which  were
      applicable at the time  when  the  Additional  Protocol  entered  into
      force."
22. The implications of the ECJ's decision in Savas were considered  by  the
Court of Appeal in R (Tum and Dari)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2004] EWCA Civ 788; [2004] CMLR 48,  1131.  The  claimants  were
Turkish nationals. Like the appellants with whom we are concerned, they  had
sought asylum  and  had  been  granted  temporary  admission.  Their  asylum
applications were unsuccessful. They faced removal  to  Germany  and  France
respectively. Whilst here on temporary admission,  Mr  Dari  had  started  a
business. Mr Tum was said to  be  in  the  process  of  starting  one.  Both
applied for leave to enter under the Agreement. They  did  not  comply  with
the  current  immigration  rules  (HC395),  as,   apart   from   any   other
considerations, they did not  have  prior  entry  clearance.  The  claimants
argued nevertheless that their applications should have been  considered  by
the Secretary of State under the Immigration Rules  (HC509)  which  were  in
force on 1st January 1973 and which (so they said)  did  not  require  prior
entry clearance in every case.

23. With reference to the ECJ's judgment in Savas, Lord Woolf CJ  stated  in
paragraphs [21] to [23] in their relevant parts:
      "21... it is submitted by Mr Saini [on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
      State] that those who have  attempted  to  obtain  admission  to  this
      country as asylum seekers but who have had their asylum claim rejected
      cannot rely  upon  the  provisions  of  Art.41(1)  of  the  Additional
      Protocol.
      22.  Davis  J  [at  the  Administrative  Court  stage]  rejected  that
      argument, and so  do  I.  There  is  nothing  in  Art.41  (1)  of  the
      Additional Protocol itself to support that argument. Furthermore, when
      the judgment in Savas is properly understood as falling into two clear
      parts, then it seems to me that the  judgment  strongly  supports  the
      contention  of  the  respondents.  The  fact  that  the   'standstill'
      provisions are to apply to a person whatever his status so far as  his
      right to remain in this country or his right to enter this country are
      concerned, is covered by the 'standstill' provisions.
      23. The one exception that I would make to that clear position is with
      regard to a person who achieves entry to this country by  the  use  of
      fraud. It has long been the situation that those who  enter  by  fraud
      cannot benefit from the point of view  of  immigration  status  by  so
      doing..."
24.  Earlier at paragraph [16] Lord Woolf had noted that:

       "Claims for asylum may be bona fide  claims,  albeit  that  they  are
      unsuccessful"

25. We understand from Sullivan  J's  discussion  of  this  case  in  Mehmet
Parmak that the Secretary of State petitioned the House of Lords  for  leave
to appeal against the Court of Appeal's judgment in Tum  and  Dari  and  the
House of Lords has referred various questions to the ECJ. Pending  a  ruling
on those questions, the Secretary of  State  has  adopted  the  approach  of
considering applications from persons in the claimants' position under  both
the current Immigration Rules and the rules as they applied in 1973.

The current immigration rules

26. The current Immigration Rules,  HC395  as  amended,  deal  with  persons
seeking to enter or  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  businessman,  self-employed
person, investor, writer, composer or artist in Part 6  at  paragraphs  200-
245. Paragraph 4 states that these rules came into effect on 1 October  1994
and:

      "will apply to all decisions taken on or after that date save that any
      application made before 1 October 1994 for entry clearance,  leave  to
      enter or remain or variation of leave to enter or remain  [other  than
      an application for leave by a person seeking asylum,] shall be decided
      under the provisions of HC 251, as amended, if  these  Rules  had  not
      been made."

The 1973 immigration rules

27. The relevant Immigration Rules on  1  January  1973  were  contained  in
HC509 and HC510. The former dealt with control on  entry,  the  latter  with
control after entry. Paragraph 30 of HC509 states:
      "30.  Passengers who have obtained entry clearance for the purpose  of
          establishing  themselves  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  business,
          whether a new or existing business,  should  be  admitted  for  a
          period not exceeding 12 months with a condition restricting their
          freedom to take employment. Passengers who are unable to  present
          such a clearance but nevertheless  seem  likely  to  be  able  to
          satisfy the requirements of one of the next 2  paragraphs  should
          be admitted for a period of  not  more  than  2  months,  with  a
          prohibition on employment, and advised to present their  case  to
          the Home Office."
28. Paragraphs 31 and 32 of HC509 set out the  various  requirements  if  an
applicant is joining an established business: that he  bring  money  of  his
own; that he be able to bear his share of liabilities etc; that  if  wishing
to establish a business on his own account he can show he will  be  bringing
sufficient funds to  establish  the  business  and  that  the  business  can
realistically  be  expected  to  support  him  and  any  dependants  without
recourse to employment, for which a work permit is required.

29. In HC510 (which deal with control after-entry)  the  relevant  paragraph
is paragraph 21 which states:
      "People admitted  as  visitors  may  apply  for  the  consent  of  the
      Secretary of State to  their  establishing  themselves  here  for  the
      purpose of setting up in business, whether on their own account or  as
      partners in a new or existing business. Any such application is to  be
      considered on merits. Permission will depend on a number  of  factors,
      including evidence that the applicant will be devoting assets  of  his
      own to the business, proportional to his interest in it, that he  will
      be able to bear his share of any liabilities the business  may  incur,
      and that his share of its profits will be sufficient  to  support  him
      and any dependants. The applicant's part  in  the  business  must  not
      amount to disguised employment, and it must be clear that he will  not
      have to supplement his business activities by employment for  which  a
      work permit is required.  Where  the  applicant  intends  to  join  an
      existing business, audited accounts should be  produced  to  establish
      its financial position, together with a written statement of the terms
      on which he is to enter into it; evidence should  be  sought  that  he
      will be actively concerned with  its  running  and  that  there  is  a
      genuine need for his services and investment. Where the application is
      granted the applicant's stay may be extended for a period of up to  12
      months, on a condition restricting his freedom to take  employment.  A
      person admitted as a businessman in the first instance may be  granted
      an appropriate extension of stay if the conditions set out  above  are
      still satisfied at the end of the period for  which  he  was  admitted
      initially. "
30. The way  in  which  the  respondent  approaches  Turkish  applicants  by
considering their applications under both new and old immigration rules   is
well illustrated by the particulars of the cases before us, to which we  now
turn.
The appellants

Appellant 1
31. We do not have many details of this appellant's history, except that he
entered the UK on 7 February 2001, but it is said by  Mr  Chatwin  that  he
made an asylum application at port and was granted temporary admission  and
that, when this was refused, his subsequent appeal attempts all failed.  At
some later point in time he applied for leave to enter or remain under  the
Ankara Agreement on the basis of his fried chicken business.  A  notice  of
decision refusing him leave to enter was served on 14 November 2005    that
refusal being confirmed on review on 22 December 2005. The  refusal  letter
made reference to paragraph 205 of HC395 as amended and paragraphs 30,  31,
and 32 of HC509. The appellant appealed on 14 March 2006.  His  grounds  of
appeal relate solely to the Ankara Agreement. What appears to be a   notice
of decision identical to that served on 14 November 2005 but dated 21 March
2006 was also subsequently served on the first appellant.


Appellant 2
32. The second appellant arrived in the UK on 28 April 2003, claimed asylum
at the port and was granted temporary admission. We have not been shown any
details but Mr Chatwin confirmed that his asylum claim  had  been  rejected
and his appeal had been unsuccessful.   On 18 May 2005 he applied for leave
to enter as a self-employed businessperson (chef) under HC509 by virtue  of
the terms of the Ankara Agreement. On  19  September  2005  the  respondent
refused his application  under  paragraph  205  of  HC395  as  amended  and
paragraphs 30, 31 and 32 of HC509. On 9 March 2006  the  respondent  issued
notice  of   directions   to   remove   the   appellant   as   an   illegal
entrant/immigration  offender.   On  15  March  the   appellant   appealed,
contending that he had an in-country right of appeal. The  grounds  raised,
inter alia, human rights.

Appellant 3
33. The third appellant arrived on 2 April 2001. Again we lack details, but
Mr Chatwin was able to confirm that he had claimed asylum at port  and  had
been granted temporary admission. His asylum application was  rejected  and
he failed in his subsequent attempts to appeal on asylum and  human  rights
grounds.   On 28 April 2005 he applied under the  Ankara  Agreement.  In  a
letter of 13 February 2006 the respondent refused his application for leave
to remain under paragraph 208 with reference to 206(i) of HC395 as amended.
Reference was also made, on a "without prejudice" basis,  to  paragraphs  4
[setting out "General considerations"] and 21 of HC510. He was issued  with
a notice of removal directions as an illegal  entrant/immigration  offender
on 8 March 2006.  He appealed on 17 March 2006 raising, inter  alia,  human
rights grounds.

Appellant 4
34. The fourth appellant arrived in the UK on 3 February 2000.  He  claimed
asylum at port,  he  was  granted  temporary  admission.  When  his  asylum
application was refused, his subsequent  appeal  was  unsuccessful.  On  30
September 2004 his solicitors applied for "an extension of stay" in the  UK
under the Ankara Agreement.  On 17 February 2006 he was served with  notice
of directions to remove him as an illegal entrant/immigration offender.  On
27 February 2006 the respondent refused his application based on the Ankara
Agreement under paragraph 205 of HC395 as amended and paragraphs 30, 31 and
32 of HC509. His appeal, lodged on 14 March 2006, raised, inter alia, human
rights grounds.

The appealable decision issue

35. At the adjourned hearing,  a  further  issue  arose.    The  respondent
submitted that  in  none  of  the  cases  had  an  appealable  "immigration
decision" been made which could give rise to an appeal.

36. First, it was said by the respondent that the "refusal letters" did not
constitute "immigration decisions" within s. 82 of the 2002 Act.   In  each
case, on the basis of the Ankara Agreement, the appellant sought  leave  to
enter as all had claimed asylum at port and  had  been  granted  'temporary
admission' at some point.  The refusal  letters  refer  explicitly  to  the
applications and purport to refuse those  applications.   Consequently,  we
are content to assume that the letters  are  what  they  purport  to  be  -
decisions to refuse leave to enter and thus fall within s. 82(2)(a) of  the
2002 Act.

37. Secondly, it was said that a service of a notice of decision under  the
Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 (SI 2003/658) was a prerequisite  to
a valid appeal.  Only the first appellant had been  served  with  a  notice
refusing the leave sought.  There could be no appeals,  therefore,  in  the
cases of the other appellants. In response Mr Chatwin  submitted  that  the
letters themselves constitute the appealable  "immigration  decision".   He
submitted that, having taken the decision, the decision-maker is  under  an
obligation, if it is an appealable immigration decision, to comply with the
requirements of service of a notice of that decision.  It is not,  however,
a necessary requirement for a valid appeal.  An appellant who  is  notified
of a decision through a refusal letter may, if he wishes, lodge  an  appeal
and waive any requirement for the  decision-maker  to  serve  a  notice  of
decision.  That, he says,  is  what  the  appellants  have  done  in  these
appeals.  Although, the matter is not free from doubt, we  accept  for  the
purposes of these appeals that the requirements of the Notices  Regulations
may be waived in their entirety by proper service of a notice of appeal.

38. Thirdly, it was said on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
notice of decision served on the first appellant and each  of  the  refusal
letters (if amounting to an immigration decision) were invalid as they  had
been signed "on behalf of the Secretary of State" when only an  immigration
officer could lawfully make a decision to grant or refuse leave to enter.

39. Section 4 of the Immigration Act 1971 states so far as relevant:

      "The power under this Act to give or refuse leave to enter the United
      Kingdom shall be exercised by immigration officers, and the power  to
      give leave to remain in the United Kingdom,  or  to  vary  any  leave
      under section 3(3)(a) (whether as regards  duration  or  conditions),
      shall be exercised by the Secretary of State; and,  unless  otherwise
      allowed by or under this Act, those  powers  shall  be  exercised  by
      notice in writing given to  the  person  affected,  except  that  the
      powers under section 3(3)(a) may be exercised generally in respect of
      any class of persons by order made by statutory instrument."


40.  It was accepted by the parties that s. 4 vested the power to  give  or
refuse leave to enter the UK in immigration officers and not the  Secretary
of State.  Despite Mr Chatwin's submission to the  contrary,  it  is  clear
that these decisions were not signed by an  immigration  officer.   At  the
hearing, we drew the parties' attention to s. 3A  of  the  1971  Act  which
modifies the position and in s. 3A(7) provides that:

      "The Secretary  of  State  may,  in  such  circumstances  as  may  be
      prescribed in an order made by him, give or refuse leave to enter the
      United Kingdom."

41. In pursuance of that, the Immigration (Leave to Enter) Order  2001  (SI
2001/2590) empowers the Secretary of State to give or refuse leave to enter
in certain circumstances.  The relevant  provisions  are  to  be  found  in
Article 2:
      "2.  - (1) Where this article applies to a person, the Secretary of
      State may give or refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom.

          (2) This article applies to a person who seeks leave to enter the
      United Kingdom and who -
           (a) has made a claim for asylum; or

           (b) has made a claim that it would be contrary to the United
           Kingdom's obligations under the Human Rights Convention for him
           to be removed from, or required to leave, the United Kingdom.

          (3) This article also applies to a person  who  seeks  leave  to
      enter the United Kingdom for a purpose not covered by the immigration
      rules or otherwise on the grounds that those rules should be departed
      from in his case.

          (4) In deciding whether to  give  or  refuse  leave  under  this
      article the Secretary of State may take into account  any  additional
      grounds which a person has for seeking  leave  to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom.

          (5) The power to give or refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom
      under this article shall be exercised by notice  in  writing  to  the
      person affected or in such manner as is permitted."

42.  Neither  party  placed  direct   reliance   upon   the   2001   Order.
Specifically, it was not contended that article 2(2) applied  here  on  the
basis that the appellants had made an asylum or human rights claim.  In the
absence of argument, it would be wrong for us to reach a concluded view the
scope of the 2001 Order.   However, it does seem to us  that  article  2(3)
may well apply in these appeals. By virtue of the standstill clause in  the
Ankara Agreement the appellants are entitled  to  have  their  applications
assessed on a basis no more onerous than the criteria in HC  509  and  510.
Consequently, the Secretary of State is being asked, and  is  required,  to
consider the appellants' applications  by  departing  from  the  applicable
immigration rules, namely paragraphs 200-210 of  HC  395  which  deal  with
applications for  leave  to  enter  on  the  basis  of  self-employment  or
business.

43. The submissions we heard have left us in no doubt that difficult  legal
issues arise in Ankara Agreement cases  in  determining  whether  typically
there will exist an immigration decision which can give rise to  an  appeal
to the Tribunal.  In the absence of  full  argument,  we  have  reached  no
concluded view.  In the result, it is not necessary for us to  resolve  the
arguments as we have decided that, in any event, none of  these  appellants
could have a valid in-country right of  appeal  against  such  a  decision.
Thus, for the purposes of this determination, we are content to  assume  in
the appellants' favour that the 2001 Order applied and that  the  Secretary
of State, or his official acting on his behalf by virtue of  the  "Carltona
principle" (Carltona Ltd v Commissioner of Works [1943] 2 All ER  560)  was
entitled to make the decision to refuse leave to enter in respect  of  each
of the appellants.

44. We turn then to consider whether, on  the  assumption  that  appealable
immigration decisions have been made, these appeals are properly brought in-
country.


In-country right of appeal

The applicable legal framework

45. Much of the applicable legal framework is set out by  the  Tribunal  in
the reported case, SA (in-country  appeal;  human  rights;  other  grounds)
Bangladesh [2005] UKAIT 00178. At paragraph [6] it stated that "Part  5  of
the 2002 Act governs appeals to the AIT. For these purposes  the  important
provisions are to be found  in  sections  82,  84  and  92."  The  Tribunal
explained the logical framework provided by Parliament in  Part  5  of  the
2002 Act in the following terms (at para [14]):
      "... Sections 82, 84  and  92  of  the  Act  address  discrete  issues
      governing  appeals  to  the  AIT:  (1)  defining  what  decisions  are
      appealable (s  82);  (2)  stating  the  grounds  upon  which  such  an
      immigration decision may  be  challenged  (s  84);  and  (3)  defining
      whether or not that appeal may be brought whilst the individual is  in
      the UK (s 92). Each section has a distinct role in  governing  appeals
      to the AIT. The sections must, of course,  be  read  cumulatively  but
      they function separately."
46. At paragraph [7] the Tribunal stated:
      "We begin with section 82(1) which states:
             "(1) Where an immigration decision is  made  in  respect  of  a
             person he may appeal to the Tribunal."
      Subsection (2), paragraphs (a)-(k)  then  sets  out  the  "immigration
      decisions" which may be appealed to the AIT. (Although not relevant to
      this appeal, there is also the so-called 'upgrade  appeal'  on  asylum
      grounds only in section 83 and appeals against EEA  decisions  falling
      within the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2000,  SI
      2000/2326  [now,  since  30  April  2006,  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006, SI 2006/1003]).
      Section 84 sets out a number of grounds - (a) to (g) - upon  which  an
      appeal against an immigration decision falling within section 82  must
      be brought. So far as relevant to this appeal, section 84(1) provides:


             "(1) An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
             decision must be brought  on  one  or  more  of  the  following
             grounds - ...
            e)  that the decision is otherwise not in accordance  with  the
               law; ...
            g)  that removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  in
               consequence of the immigration  decision  would  breach  the
               United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or
               would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
               1998 as being incompatible with the  appellant's  Convention
               rights. ...".
      What sections 82 and 84 do not  indicate  is  whether  an  appellant's
      appeal may be brought whilst he is in the UK  or  only  after  he  has
      left. That issue is determined by section 92... which, so far as it is
      relevant to this appeal, provides as follows:
        92. Appeal from within United Kingdom: general
              1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he is  in
                 the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to  which
                 this section applies.
              2) This section applies to an appeal  against  an  immigration
                 decision of a kind specified in  section  82(2)  (c),  (d),
                 (e), (f) and (j)....
               (4) This section  also  applies  to  an  appeal  against  an
                 immigration decision if the appellant -
                 (a)  has made an asylum claim, or human rights claim, while
                 in the United Kingdom, or
                 (b)  is an EEA national or a member of the family of an EEA
                 national and makes a claim to the Secretary of  State  that
                 the decision breaches  the  appellant's  rights  under  the
                 Community Treaties in respect of entry to or  residence  in
                 the United Kingdom."
47. The Tribunal in SA saw the way in which s.92 comes into play  as  being
thus:

      "11. The wording of section 92 is  plain:  a  person  may  not  appeal
      against an "immigration decision" under the 2002  Act  whilst  in  the
      United Kingdom unless section 92 applies.  By virtue of section  92(2)
      certain immigration decisions are always appealable from within the UK
      (subject to certification on a 'clearly unfounded' basis under section
      94).   These are decisions: to refuse a certificate of entitlement, to
      refuse  to  extend  leave,  to  curtail  existing  leave,  to   revoke
      indefinite leave to remain and to make a deportation order (s82(2)(c),
      (d), (e), (f) and (j) respectively).  Other decisions  falling  within
      section 82(2) may only be appealed from within the UK if the appellant
      has made an 'asylum claim' or  'human  rights  claim'  as  defined  in
      section 113 (s92(4)(a)), or where he makes a claim relying on  his  EU
      rights as an EEA  national  or  family  member  (s92(4)(b)).   Removal
      decisions against illegal entrants and overstayers or  their  families
      fall within this latter category of decisions. "

48. Having set out the applicable  legal  framework,  we  need  to  consider
existing judicial guidance on the in-country right of appeal issue.
49. In the Court of Appeal decision in Tum and Dari, as we  have  seen,  the
applicants had argued that if  considered  under  the  law  and  immigration
rules as they stood on 1 January 1973,  they  had  an  in-country  right  of
appeal. The Court of Appeal did not decide  that  point.  Its  judgment  was
confined to deciding that, except in  cases  of  fraud,  even  nationals  of
Turkey who have no lawful basis for their presence in the UK, stand to  have
any application they make under  the  Ankara  Agreement  considered  on  the
basis of the "standstill" clause contained in that treaty,  so  that  it  is
considered under national law provisions in force on 1 January  1973.  (Lord
Woolf made clear at paragraphs [16] that  fraud  could  not  be  established
simply because a person had made a claim for asylum that  was  unsuccessful:
"[c]laims for  asylum  may  be  bona  fide  claims,  albeit  that  they  are
unsuccessful". We say no more here about the "fraud exception"  as  none  of
the appeals before us turn on this point, but see:  R(Taskale)  v  Secretary
of State for  the  Home  Department  [2006]  EWHC  712  (Admin),  R(Aksu)  v
Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2006]  EWHC  1382  (Admin)  ,
R(Ilyas Semsek) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2006]  EWHC
1486 (Admin), R(Aysel Aslan) [2006] EWHC 1855 (Admin)  and  R(Ali  Aslan)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWHC 1877 (Admin).
50. However, in Mehmet Parmak the  in-country  right  of  appeal  issue  was
addressed directly. Sullivan J held that,  even applying (on  Tum  and  Dari
principles) the "standstill" provisions  to nationals of Turkey who came  to
the UK in order to claim asylum, i.e. by considering them under the body  of
immigration law and rules as it stood on 1 January 1973, such persons  would
not have an in-country right of appeal. This  is  how  he  disposed  of  the
matter in paragraphs [14]-[16]:
      "14.  The position in 1973
      In the claimant's  skeleton  argument  it  was  conceded  that,  under
      domestic legislation as it  stood  in  1973  (and  setting  aside  any
      argument based on  Community  law),  while  a  claimant  on  temporary
      admission who was refused leave to enter would have  had  a  right  of
      appeal under Section 13(1) of the Immigration Act 1971  by  virtue  of
      subsection 13(3):
      (1)"... a person shall not be entitled to appeal against a refusal  of
      leave to enter so long as he is in the United Kingdom, unless  he  was
      refused leave at a port of entry and at a time when he held a  current
      entry clearance or was a person named in a current work permit."
      Thus, it is common ground that in 1973 the claimant, who did not  have
      current entry clearance and was not a person named in a  current  work
      permit, would have  had  an  out-of-country  right  of  appeal  to  an
      adjudicator against the refusal of leave to enter".
51. In paragraph [24] Sullivan J concluded that he was "satisfied  that  the
claimant is not entitled to an in-country right of appeal by virtue  of  the
operation of the standstill agreement". We agree.
52. We should  perhaps  add  that  later  on  in  his  judgment  Sullivan  J
recognised that the immigration rules in force on January  1973  did  allow,
in at least one place, for persons to be "admitted" to the UK without  entry
clearance: he cited, inter alia, paragraph 30 of HC509. We have  cited  this
earlier, but for convenience do so again here:
      "30. Passengers who have obtained entry clearance for the  purpose  of
          establishing  themselves  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  business,
          whether a new or existing business,  should  be  admitted  for  a
          period not exceeding 12 months with a condition restricting their
          freedom to take employment. Passengers who are unable to  present
          such a clearance but nevertheless  seem  likely  to  be  able  to
          satisfy the requirements of one of the next 2  paragraphs  should
          be admitted for a period of  not  more  than  2  months,  with  a
          prohibition on employment, and advised to present their  case  to
          the Home Office.(emphasis added)."
53. The requirements of the next two paragraphs, paragraphs 31  and  32,  as
already noted, specify, inter alia: that  if  an  applicant  is  joining  an
established business he  bring money of his own and  be  able  to  bear  his
share of liabilities etc. They further  specify  that  if  an  applicant  if
wishing to establish a business on his own account he must be able  to  show
he will be bringing sufficient funds to establish the business and that  the
business can realistically be expected to support  him  and  any  dependants
without recourse to employment, for which a work permit is required.
54. However, as Sullivan J pointed out, the  fact  that  under  HC509  there
could be persons able to be admitted without entry clearance was  of  purely
academic interest in the context of the type of appeal before him, since:
      "31. ... it is common ground that the claimant did not seek  to  enter
          this country in order to set up a business. He entered plainly to
          be a refugee.  He  was  granted  temporary  admission.  When  his
          refugee  claim  failed,  and  whilst  he  was  still  temporarily
          admitted to this country but had not been given leave  to  enter,
          he sought leave to enter upon the basis of the Agreement. In 1973
          an applicant in such a position would have had an  out-of-country
          right of appeal but not a right to an in-country appeal."
55. For the very same reasons none of  the  appellants  in  the  cases  with
which we are concerned can benefit from any 1973  provisions  waiving  entry
clearance as a requirement: they too are all persons  who  entered  claiming
to be refugees; they too did not seek to enter the UK in order to set  up  a
business or be self-employed, nor had they been admitted as visitors.
56. En route to concluding that Mehmet Parmak could not have  an  in-country
right of appeal, Sullivan J  addressed  a  further  argument  raised  by  Mr
Chatwin which was that, by analogy with the ECJ's approach to the rights  of
workers under Article 12 of the Agreement (which  is  in  similar  terms  to
Article 13), procedural safeguards should be conferred  upon  the  claimant:
Mr Chatwin had prayed in aid  the  ECJ  case  of  C-136/03  Dorr  and  Unal.
Whilst prepared  to  accept  by  reference  to  this  case  that  procedural
safeguards  could  "piggyback"  on  an  individual's   substantive   rights,
Sullivan J concluded that this did not help Mr  Mehmet  Parmak  because  the
only directly effective right conferred by the Ankara Agreement  on  Turkish
business or self-employed persons was that they were entitled to  rely  upon
the standstill clause in Art 41(1) of the Additional Protocol. In  our  view
Sullivan J's reasoning here is also sufficient to dispose of the  ground  of
appeal raised in the appeals of the  second,  third  and  fourth  appellants
before us, that they have  a  right  to  an  effective  remedy  against  the
refusals under Community law.
57. However, in the course  of  dealing  with  this  additional  submission,
Sullivan J stated at paragraph [22]:
      "Thus, his position must be no worse than it would have been under the
      rules which were applicable on 1st January 1973; see paragraph  70  of
      the ECJ's judgment in Savas and paragraphs 20 to 22 of  the  Court  of
      Appeal's judgment in Tum and Dari. If he would not have been  entitled
      to an in-country right of appeal  under  the  immigration  legislation
      then in force, there is no reason why he should be entitled to such  a
      right in 2006." (emphasis added).
58. Of course, Sullivan J was only referring  to  the  "standstill  clause"-
based argument that the Ankara Agreement conferred, by its  effect,  an  in-
country right of appeal under the rules which were applicable  in  1973.  He
was not faced with the arguments raised before  us.  It  seems  to  us  that
whether  there  is  an  in-country  right  of  appeal  under   the   current
legislative framework of the 2002 Act is an entirely  separate  matter  from
whether there was one in 1973. It is not a matter, in our  view,  which  can
be properly resolved without analysing the  current  legislative  framework,
in the light of the arguments which have been advanced before  us.  This  is
what we now proceed to do.
The issue of whether the appellants  have  an  in-country  right  of  appeal
under current legislation
59. For the appellants in this case to have an in-country  right  of  appeal
they must show three things.
60. First, their appeal must be in respect of  an  immigration  decision  as
defined in s.82 of the 2002 Act.
61. Second,   it  must  be  either  an  immigration  decision  of  the  kind
specified in s.92(2); or it must involve an appeal  against  an  immigration
decision in which the appellant can come within s.92(4) by showing  that  he
has:
      "(a) made an asylum claim, or a  human  rights  claim,  while  in  the
      United Kingdom, or
      (b) is an EEA national or a member of the family of  an  EEA  national
      and makes a claim to the Secretary of State that the decision breaches
      the appellant's rights under the  Community  Treaties  in  respect  of
      entry or residence in of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom".


62. Third, by virtue of the definition  of  an  "asylum  claim"  and  "human
rights claim" given in s.113(1) of the 2002 Act,  they  have  to  show  that
their claim is one  "made...to  the  Secretary  of  State...".  Section  113
(Interpretation)  contains the following definition of  "asylum  claim"  and
"human rights claim":
      "In this Part (Part 5), unless a contrary intention appears-
           "asylum claim" means a claim made by a person to  the  Secretary
           of State at a place designated by the Secretary of State that to
           remove the person from  or  require  him  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under  the
           Refugee Convention, ...
           "human rights claim" means a claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
           Secretary of State at a place designated  by  the  Secretary  of
           State that to remove the person from or require him to leave the
           United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
           Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authorities not to  act  contrary
           to Convention) as being incompatible with his Convention rights,
           ...".
Section 82(1)
63. As regards the first requirement,  as  we  indicated  earlier,  for  the
purposes of  these  appeals  we  are  prepared  to  assume  that  there  are
appealable decisions in each of the four appeals before us.
Section 92(2)
64. We turn thus to the first limb of the second requirement.  Plainly  too,
none of the decisions involved were ones which came within the scope  of  s.
92(2). That is to say, none involved  an  immigration  decision  of  a  kind
specified in s. 82(2)(c), (e), (f) and (j).
Section 92(4)(b)
65. If the second requirement is to be met, therefore, it will  have  to  be
shown that the appellants can benefit from s.92(4)(a)  or  (b).  Mr  Chatwin
further accepted that none of the appellants in this case could rely  on  s.
94(4)b), as none were EEA nationals or members  of  the  family  of  an  EEA
national. Since the Ankara Agreement was struck precisely because  nationals
of Turkey were not EEA nationals but were  (and  remain),  rather,  would-be
EEA nationals, that may seem  obvious  enough.  We  mention  this,  however,
because in written submissions prior to the  hearing  those  instructing  Mr
Chatwin had sought to rely on an unreported determination by an  Immigration
Judge sitting at Hatton Cross (Mr C N Lane) on Appeal No. IA/00061/2006,  in
which he appeared to decide that a national of Turkey in a similar  position
to these  appellants  had  an  in-country  right  of  appeal  by  virtue  of
s.92(4)(b). Since no attempt had been  made  to  comply  with  AIT  Practice
Directions dealing with citation of unreported  cases,  we  would  not  have
considered this case anyway, but for completeness  we  record  that  in  our
view it overlooks that Turkish nationals are not EEA nationals.
66. Our conclusion on this matter takes into account the  possible  argument
which could be brought relying on s.109 of the 2002  Act  and  the  relevant
regulations made under s.109(1), namely  the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
2006 SI/1003 (hereafter the "2006 Regulations"). Granted, s.109 of the  2002
Act  states  that  regulations  may  provide  for  an  appeal   against   an
immigration decision taken in respect of a person who has or claims to  have
a right under any of  the  Community  Treaties.  But  the  2006  Regulations
(which also apply to past decisions) do not provide for such  an  appeal  in
respect of Turkish nationals under  the  Ankara  Agreement  (Nor  did  their
predecessor, the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2000). Such  persons  do  not
come  within  the  personal  scope  of  these  Regulations.   Regulation  26
confines appeal rights against "an EEA decision" to persons claiming  to  be
an EEA national or the  family  member  or  relative  of  an  EEA  national.
Regulation 2  defines  "EEA  decision"  to  mean  "a  decision  under  these
Regulations  ..."  (emphasis  added).  The  2006  Regulations   cover   only
Community (now Union) legislation regarding free  movement  of  persons  and
implement Directive 2004/38/EC, which is concerned solely  with  the  rights
of citizens of the Union (together with nationals of an "EEA State",  namely
Norway, Iceland, Lichenstein and Switzerland: see Regulation  2)  and  their
family members to move and reside freely within the territory of the  Member
States. Furthermore,  s.84(1)(d)  of  the  2002  Act  confines  reliance  on
breaches  of  Community  Treaties  (as  a  ground  of  appeal   against   an
immigration decision) to appellants who are "an EEA national or a member  of
the family of an EEA national".
Section 92(4)(a)
67. That brings us to the appellants' last  basis  for  meeting  the  second
requirement we  have  identified,  namely  showing  they  can  benefit  from
s.92(4)(a).
68. Mr Chatwin sought to argue that the appellants  could  bring  themselves
within s.94(4)(a) by virtue of the fact that each of them had made  a  human
rights claim.  The  human  rights  claim  he  identified  was  an  allegedly
disproportionate interference with each appellant's  right  to  respect  for
private life and right to enjoy  possessions.  These  rights  were  said  to
encompass, or be  encompassed  by,  the  fact  firstly  that  they  were  in
business or were self-employed and so were engaged in activities which  came
within the concept of "private life" under Art  8  (he  cited  the  European
Court of Human Rights judgment in Niemietz v Germany  (1992)  16  EHRR  97);
and secondly by the fact that each had property within the meaning of Art  1
of Protocol No. 1 of the ECHR.
69. Mr Chatwin conceded that the appellants in this  case  could  not  bring
themselves within s.94(4)(a) purely because they had made asylum  and  human
rights claims (so identified)  in  the  context  of  their  (much)  earlier,
unsuccessful, asylum appeals, all of  which  had  been  finally  determined.
His submissions were confined to arguing that the appellants  had  satisfied
s.92(4)(a) by having made a human rights claim at the time of  making  their
applications under the Ankara Agreement or, if not then, at  the  time  when
they gave notice of appeal.
The applications - did they contain a human rights claim?
70. Mr Chatwin first submitted  then  that  we  should  identify  the  human
rights claim under s.92(4)(a) as  being  contained  in  essence  within  the
application that each appellant had made  under  the  Ankara  Agreement.  He
acknowledged that none of their applications made any reference  to  Article
8 or Article 1 of Protocol  1  or  indeed  to  any  ECHR  article  by  name.
Nevertheless, he argued, we should consider that human  rights  claims  were
implicit or impliedly present in all of the applications  simply  by  virtue
of the fact that they made reference to the applicant being in  business  or
in self-employment and having  monies,  funds  or  property  and  thus  fell
within the ambit of "the right to respect for private life" under Article  8
and the right to possessions under Article 1 Protocol 1.
71. In our view it is simply not possible to read any  of  the  applications
in this way. None sought to rely on any rights  other  than  those  said  to
arise under the Ankara  Agreement's  "standstill"  provisions.  All  sought,
thereby, to rely expressly on United Kingdom  immigration  rules  applicable
as at 1 January 1973.  If Mr Chatwin's reading were right, it  is  difficult
to see how the s.92(4)(a) reference to "human rights claim" would not  cover
any claim or application made under the immigration rules or under  EU  law.
There would be no meaningful distinction between a "human rights claim"  and
any other type of claim. We bear in mind also  that  the  structure  of  the
2002 Act clearly contemplates that if  a  person  wishes  to  make  a  human
rights claim, he should say so. Certainly there is a need  for  a  purposive
construction  of  the  notion  of  a  human  rights  claim,  but  in   these
applications  there  was  nothing  which  suggested  that   the   appellants
considered that the decision in question was unlawful or  incompatible  with
their human rights under the Human Rights Act  1998  or  that  the  concerns
they had fell within the ambit of their human rights. At best  Mr  Chatwin's
argument would only establish that the appellants identified matters  within
the subject-matter of the  concept of "private life" or "possessions" ,  not
that they identified any alleged violation of the same by reference to  lack
of respect or interference or disproportionate interference.
Human rights claims - were they validly made at the time  of  giving  notice
of appeal?
72. Mr Chatwin's second main submission was that human rights  claims  under
s.92(4)(a) had in any event been raised by the appellants in the grounds  of
appeal. He acknowledged that the first reference of  any  kind  to  a  human
rights claim based on "establishment" aspects of the right  to  respect  for
private life and the right to possessions was made in a letter  accompanying
the grounds of appeal lodged by the  second,  third  and  fourth  appellants
against the refusal of their applications relying on the  Ankara  Agreement.
That, he said, was sufficient to bring all but the  first  appellant  within
the scope of s.92(4)(a). For there to have been a human rights claim  within
the meaning of s.92(4)(a), he submitted, the only prerequisite  was  that  a
human rights question had been raised at any time prior to  the  hearing  of
the appeal or at least by the time of receipt of notice of appeal:  a  human
rights claim did not, he said, need to be  made  prior  to  the  immigration
decision.
73. In our view this line of  argument  has  some  unsatisfactory  features.
Firstly it appears to conflate the concept of a human rights claim with  the
concept of a human rights  ground.  It  also  clouds  the  apparent  logical
distinction made in Part 5 of the 2002 Act between s.92 (whose  function  is
solely to determine whether there is an in-country right of  appeal  against
the s.82 decision) and s.84 (which is solely concerned with the grounds  the
appellant may rely upon  in  any  type  of  appeal,  in-country  or  out-of-
country). Furthermore, the logical sequence embodied for the  most  part  in
Part 5 of the Act appears to be: (1) claim,  (2)  immigration  decision  and
(3) appeal/grounds of appeal: see  ss.83,  83(1)(a),  94(2),  96  (and  also
paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules (HC395 as amended)).
74. However, whilst we think that the drafters of the 2002 Act intended  for
the most part to employ the logical sequence we have just described,  we  do
not think they fully completed the job.  Here it is  important  to  bear  in
mind first of all  that  the  previous  legislation,  in  the  form  of  the
Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, did provide by s.65  that  a  person  could
make a "human rights allegation" and that that was something which could  be
made after the decision in the form of an additional statement  of  grounds:
see ss.74, 75 of the 1999 Act. Under this Act a  human  rights  claim  could
take the form of a human rights allegation.
75. We can find nothing in the 2002 Act that expressly says that  it  is  no
longer possible  for a human rights claim to be made  post-decision  in  the
form of human rights grounds of appeal.
76. Regard must also be had to s.120 of  the  2002  Act.  Although  this  is
concerned  with  the  requirement  to  state  additional  grounds   for   an
application, it clearly contemplates  that  where  an  immigration  decision
within the meaning of s.82 has already been taken, the  Secretary  of  State
or an immigration officer may by notice  in  writing  require  a  person  to
state additional grounds. Subsection (3) states that:
       "A statement under subsection (2) need not repeat reasons or  grounds
      set out in- (a) the application mentioned in subsection (1)(a), or (b)
      an  application  to  which  the  immigration  decision  mentioned   in
      subsection (1)(b) relates."
77. This wording suggests that  there  is  a  degree  of  interchangeability
about the concepts of claiming/applying and stating  grounds,  since  it  is
contemplated here that grounds can be  stated  either  at  the  application/
claim stage or at a post-decision stage.
78.  Then  there  is  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
Claimants, etc.) Act 2004. Subsection (1)  states:
      "In determining whether to believe a statement made by or on behalf of
      a person who makes an asylum claim or a human rights claim, a deciding
      authority shall take account, as damaging the claimant's  credibility,
      of any behaviour to which this section applies."
79. Subsection (5) states:
      "This section also applies to failure  by  the  claimant  to  make  an
      asylum claim or  human  rights  claim  before  being  notified  of  an
      immigration decision,  unless  the  claim  relies  wholly  on  matters
      arising after the notification" (emphasis added).
80. It is difficult to see how subsection(5) would have  application  in  an
AIT appeal if an asylum or human rights claim could only be made before  the
person was notified of an immigration decision.
81. There is  also  the  contents  of  paragraph  5(7)  of  the  Immigration
(Notices)  Regulations  2003.  Although  this  arguably   deals   with   the
situation of what is to happen where a notice of decision  is  served  which
need not comply with requirements, inter alia,  to  advise  of  a  right  of
appeal, it nevertheless, allows, at least in respect of  a  particular  sub-
set of immigration decisions, for a claim to be made post-decision.
82. To adopt the view that in all cases a claim had to be made prior to  the
decision would also conflict with existing case law. As was pointed  out  in
the additional written submission made by  the  appellants'  representatives
in response to our concerns about the relevance of the Mehmet  Parmak  case,
the  recent  starred  AIT  determination,  JM  (Rule  62(7);  human   rights
unarguable) Liberia* [2006] UKAIT 00009 states at para [33] that:

      "The human rights position is different.  The Appellant does not claim
      to have a status:  he simply claims that he should not be removed.  It
      is important to appreciate that, in  any  case  in  which  this  issue
      arises and to which the  transitional  appeal  provisions  apply,  the
      Appellant is a person who, by asserting human rights  grounds  in  his
      notice of appeal or one-stop notice to the  Secretary  of  State,  has
      made a "human rights claim" within the meaning of s113 (1)  and  hence
      also s92 (4) of the 2002 Act.  He thus  has  an  in-country  right  of
      appeal against the decision to issue removal  directions  against  him
      under s10 of the 1999 Act as an overstayer if such a removal  decision
      is ever made.... For all these reasons,  if  there  are  human  rights
      issues to be raised, they should be raised at the moment when  removal
      is threatened, not simply at the moment when it becomes  theoretically
      possible. "
83. This case (which was of course a transitional case) does confirm that  a
human rights claim could in principle be raised in a notice of appeal.  What
was being considered in JM was whether a human rights claim which  had  been
made in the course of an appeal against a decision refusing  to  vary  leave
could be raised in subsequent proceedings (involving  a  removal  decision).
We need say no more about this, since the historic claim  argument  was  not
relied on by Mr Chatwin in any of the appeals before us.
84. We conclude that (subject to a further requirement we shall come  to  in
a moment) a claim can qualify as an  asylum  or  human  rights  claim  under
s.113 even though made post-decision even if not made until  (but  no  later
than) the time of the lodging of the notice (and grounds) of appeal. We  say
no later than because although a human rights  claim  may  be  made  to  the
Secretary of State at any time, including after  the  decision,  that  claim
can have no effect on the validity of  an  existing  appeal.  An  appeal  is
either valid or invalid at the point in time when the notice  of  appeal  is
served, or it is not. No subsequent human rights claim can affect that.
The significance of the changes introduced with effect  from  4  April  2005
for the making of an asylum and human rights claim
85. The further requirement, which we have referred  to  above  as  a  third
requirement, is  that  the   asylum  or  human  rights  claim  must  be  one
"made...to  the  Secretary  of  State"  (emphasis   added).   Plainly   this
requirement is an integral part of the s.113 definition.
86. Of course, prior  to  4  April  2005  it  was  possible  (on  the  above
analysis)  to make an asylum or human rights  claim  at  the  same  time  as
lodging an appeal, since, up to that time an appeal to an  adjudicator  made
in-country was effected by service of a notice of appeal on  the   Secretary
of State. In  this  way  any  claim  contained  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
automatically went to the Secretary of State.
87. However, that all changed as from 4 April 2005, with  the  creation  of
the AIT. Thereafter, notice of appeal is not served  on  the  Secretary  of
State. Rule 6 of  the  2005  Procedure  Rules  (headed  "Giving  notice  of
appeal") specifies that:
      "6.-(1) An appeal to the Tribunal may only  be  instituted  by  giving
      notice of appeal against a relevant decision in accordance with  these
      Rules.
           (2) Subject to paragraphs (3) and (4), notice of appeal  must  be
      given by filing it with the Tribunal in accordance with  rule  55(1)."
      (emphasis added)
88. It might be suggested that  these changes were not intended  to  prevent
an in-country asylum or human rights claim from being made to the  Secretary
of State in the notice  of  appeal.  However,  even  if  that  was  not  the
intention, that plainly must be the effect of these  changes.  Further,  the
drafting of the 2005 Procedure Rules shows that specific thought  was  given
to the implications of these changes for the giving  of  notice  of  appeal.
Paragraphs (2)-(6) of rule 6 state:
      "(2) Subject to paragraphs (3) and (4), notice of appeal must be given
      by filing it with the Tribunal in accordance with rule 55(1).
      (3) A person who is in detention under the Immigration Acts  may  give
      notice of appeal either -
           (a) in accordance with paragraph (2); or
           (b) by serving it on the person having custody of him.
      (4) A person who is outside the United Kingdom and  wishes  to  appeal
      against a decision of an entry clearance officer may  give  notice  of
      appeal either -
           (a) in accordance with paragraph (2); or
            (b) by serving it on the entry clearance officer.
      (5). Where a notice of appeal is served on a custodian under paragraph
      3(b), that person must -
           (a) endorse on the notice the date that it is served on him; and
            (b) forward it to the Tribunal within 2 days.
      (6) Where a notice of appeal is served on an entry  clearance  officer
      under paragraph (4) (b), the officer must -
           (a) endorse on the notice the date that it is served on him;
           (b)  forward  it  to  the  Tribunal  as   soon   as   reasonably
           practicable, and in any event within 10 days; and
           (c) if it is practicable to do  so  within  the  time  limit  in
           subparagraph (b), send to the Tribunal with the notice of appeal
           a copy of the documents listed in rule 13(1). "
89. It can be seen that paragraphs (4)-(6) identify two specific  exceptions
where it is still valid for service to be on  somebody  else:  on  an  Entry
Clearance Officer in the case of out of country appeals  (paragraph  (4)(b))
or on a "custodian" in cases of persons who are  detained  (paragraph  (5)).
In neither case is the government official the Secretary of State.
90. It can thus be seen that whether a person has  an  in-country  right  of
appeal (at least when he has only made his human rights claim at  the  stage
of lodging his appeal) will depend crucially on whether the claim  was  made
before or after 4 April 2005. Those who made their human rights claim  prior
to 4 April 2005 -and who received an appealable decision in  proper  form  -
can have an in-country right of appeal. Those who made  their  human  rights
claim on or after 4 April 2005 cannot have an  in-country  right  of  appeal
even assuming they have received an appealable decision in proper form.
91. Focussing for a moment on the former category, we are bound to say  that
we have reservations about the specific  consequences.  This  interpretation
entails acceptance that up until 4 April 2005 Turkish failed  asylum-seekers
were able to raise at the last-minute - and  well  after  their  asylum  and
asylum-related human rights appeals had  been  finally  determined  -  human
rights claims in the form of grounds of appeal  in  respect  of  a  decision
refusing them under the Ankara Agreement. Whilst that seems to us  a  wholly
unintended consequence of the 2002 Act, we have applied the law as it  seems
to us to be.
92. It needs to be said that the situation we have described, whereby the  4
April 2005 changes prevented asylum  and  human  rights  claims  from  being
validly made if only raised in the grounds of appeal, will  not  last.  Once
s.12 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 comes  into  force,
then there will be a different definition   of  "asylum  claim"  and  "human
rights claim". Section 12 states:
      "(1) Section 113(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002...shall be amended as follows.
       (2) For the definition of "asylum claim" substitute -
             ""asylum claim" -
           (a) means a claim made by a person that to remove  him  from  or
           require him to leave the United  Kingdom  or  would  breach  the
           United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention, but
           (b) does not include a claim which, having regard  to  a  former
           claim, falls to be disregarded for the purposes of this Part  in
           accordance with the immigration rules,".
      (3) For the definition of "human rights claim" substitute -
       ""human rights claim"-
           (a) means a claim made by a person that to remove  him  from  or
           require him to leave the United Kingdom would be unlawful  under
           section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 ...(public authority  not
           to act contrary to the Convention) as  being  incompatible  with
           his Convention rights, but
           (b) does not include a claim which, having regard  to  a  former
           claim, falls to be disregarded for the purposes of this Part  in
           accordance with immigration rules,"."
93. This modified definition of "asylum  claim"  and  "human  rights"  claim
(when brought into force) will remove the current need for such  claims,  to
be valid, to be made to the Secretary of State. Depending  on  consequential
provisions made under this Act, the current bar on post 4 April 2005  asylum
and human rights claims being validly made in the form of grounds of  appeal
may prove short-lived.
Application of our reasoning to the appellants' human rights claims

94. The first appellant never lodged a human  rights  claim,  even  at  the
notice of appeal stage. The human rights claims lodged by the second, third
and fourth appellants were all made (in the  form  of  grounds  of  appeal)
after 4 April 2005. The dates were 15 March 2006,  17  March  2006  and  14
March 2006 respectively. Accordingly none complied with the requirement  of
s.113 of the 2002 Act that they be made "to the Secretary of  State".  Even
though in the nature of the appeals process the contents  of  their  claims
became subsequently known to the Secretary of State (on  receipt  from  the
Tribunal of the grounds of appeal), that could not convert them into claims
to the Secretary of State since the form in which they thus came to him was
solely that of grounds of appeal in relation to an appeal which had already
been made to the Tribunal.

Conclusion on whether there is an in-country right of appeal

95. Our conclusions on the  main issue  raised  by  these  appeals  are  as
follows:

      (i)  failed Turkish asylum-seekers who seek to rely  on  "standstill"
      provisions under the Ankara Agreement of 1963 by virtue  of  engaging
      in business or being self-employed in the UK (even assuming they have
      received an appealable immigration  decision)  do  not  have  an  in-
      country right of appeal under the legislative framework in place on 1
      January 1973 (the relevant "standstill" provisions);


      (ii) assuming they have received an appealable immigration  decision,
      those who lodged their appeals since the coming  into  force  of  the
      2002 Act but before 4 April 2005  do  have  an  in-country  right  of
      appeal under s.92(4)(a) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002 as amended if they have made an asylum or human rights claim
      to the Secretary of State as defined in s.113(1) of that Act;


      (iii) however, those who lodged or  lodge  their  appeals  since  the
      coming into force of the 2002 Act but on or after 4  April  2005  (as
      did all four appellants in  this  case),  (even  assuming  they  have
      received an appealable  immigration  decision)  cannot  have  an  in-
      country right of appeal unless they have earlier made an  asylum  and
      human rights claim to the Secretary of State when applying under  the
      Ankara Agreement.

96.   For  the  last-mentioned  reason  alone,  in  the  case  of  all  four
appellants, there are no valid appeals before the Tribunal.




      Signed:


        DR H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)


               Approved for electronic distribution
