

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

 SM (Entry clearance application in Jordan - proportionality) Iraq CG [2007]
                                                                 UKAIT 00077



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 12 June 2007                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       senior Immigration Judge ALLEN
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K A Smith, instructed by Harrison, Bundy and Co
For the Respondent:    Ms J Donnelly, Home Office Presenting Officer

Further evidence since  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  SA  (Entry  clearance
application  in  Jordan  -  proportionality)  Iraq  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00011
concerning the procedures  and  general  difficulties  facing  an  Iraqi  in
returning to Iraq and travelling to Jordan to make an application for  entry
clearance does not lead to a conclusion  different  from  that  in  SA  that
generally it is not disproportionate to  a  legitimate  aim  within  Article
8(2) to require an Iraqi to return and apply in that way.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He claims to  have  come  to  the
    United Kingdom in May 2002.  He appealed to an Adjudicator against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 5 January 2004 to remove  him  as  an
    illegal entrant.  The Adjudicator dismissed his appeal.  The particular
    issue that has assumed prominence in this case  is  Article 8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention, and therefore it is appropriate that we  focus
    on what was said about that.

2.   The appellant married  his  wife,  Marie,  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    12 December 2003.  She said it would not be possible for her to go  to
    Iraq as she does not know  the  language  and  the  culture  and  as  a
    Christian she would be discriminated against.   The  Adjudicator  noted
    that if the appellant was returned to Iraq he would not be able to make
    an application from there to return to the  United  Kingdom  but  would
    have to go to Jordan.  He had shown his ability to make his way all the
    way from Iraq to the United Kingdom, and the Adjudicator had  no  doubt
    that  he  also  had  the  wherewithal  to  make  his  way  to   Jordan,
    particularly since he would not be  returned  to  Iraq  without  proper
    documentation.

3.   The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal, and permission was granted on 31 July  2004.   The  Tribunal
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   It  noted  background   evidence
    concerning the feasibility of entry clearance applications  being  made
    by Iraqis from Jordan, and concluded that there was no error of law  in
    the Adjudicator's determination.  Subsequently a Vice-President of  the
    Tribunal refused permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal.   That
    application was renewed to the Court itself, and permission was granted
    by Buxton LJ on 10 July 2005.  In an order dated 6 October 2005 it was
    ordered that the decision of the Tribunal be quashed and the appeal  be
    remitted to this Tribunal for consideration.

4.   The hearing before us took placed on 12 June  2007.   Ms K A Smith,
    instructed by Harrison, Bundy  and  Co.,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Ms J Donnelly appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

5.   The representatives were in agreement that there was an  error  of  law
    in   the   Adjudicator's   determination   in   the    assessment    of
    proportionality, and the IAT had erred in upholding his finding.   This
    was essentially on the basis as set out in the grant of  permission  by
    Buxton LJ that the IAT had not addressed the issue that the burden was
    on the respondent to show that return to Iraq would be a  proportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights and the  respondent
    had adduced no evidence to support that contention.  The hearing before
    us therefore proceeded on the basis that there was an error of  law  in
    the Adjudicator's determination and we could thus  consider  up-to-date
    evidence.

6.   Ms Smith referred to the decision of this Tribunal in SA  [2006]  Iraq
    UKAIT 00011, where it had been held that it was not  a  breach  of  an
    Iraqi appellant's Article 8 rights to expect  him  to  make  an  entry
    clearance application from Jordan to come back to the  United  Kingdom.
    She argued that it  was  clear  from  what  had  been  said  in  SA  in
    particular at paragraphs 6, 22 and 35  that  the  Tribunal  had  based
    itself on the test in Article 8 cases as set out by the Court of Appeal
    in Huang [2006] QB1 of truly exceptional circumstances, which  had  now
    been shown in the decision of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Huang [2007]
    UKHL 11 to be flawed.  Therefore the proportionality assessment by the
    Tribunal in SA was flawed.

7.   With regard to the evidence before  the  Tribunal  in  that  case,  she
    argued that the burden was on the Secretary of State to show  it  would
    be reasonably practicable  for  the  appellant  to  be  able  within  a
    reasonably expedient time to make an  entry  clearance  application  in
    Jordan.  Two letters from the British Embassy had been relied on in  SA
    which could be found in the Home Office bundle at pages  352  and  353.
    There it could be seen that  S Series  passports  were  acceptable  to
    corroborate ID and were very easy to  obtain.   The  position  now  was
    however, that S Series passports were not acceptable either for  entry
    into Jordan or  for  an  entry  clearance  application  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  With regard to the former, Ms Smith  referred  to  paragraph
    34.02 of the Country of Origin Information Report and  with  regard  to
    the latter, to the documentation to be found at page 2 of  Ms Smith's
    latest bundle.  Page 3 also addressed the difficulties of obtaining  a
    passport.  She also referred us to what was said in the  administrative
    court's decision in Asad [2007] ewhc 286 (Admin).  There, there was an
    explanation of the rationale for no longer accepting S Series passports
    as they were  too  easy  to  obtain.   Comments  could  be  seen  there
    concerning the availability of the new G Series passports  which  were
    only issued by the Baghdad authorities.  With regard to what  was  said
    at paragraph 9, page 11 of the bundle, this was also not a case  where
    there were special circumstances.

8.   It seemed that this was now rather different from  the  situation  when
    SA was decided.   A  returning  individual  would  have  to  obtain  ID
    documents, and Ms Smith was told the appellant did not have any, and in
    any event the BBC report to which she had referred, at page 3  of  her
    bundle, suggested that the person would need new documents which  would
    take time.  They would then need to get a passport in Baghdad and  then
    travel to Jordan and apply for entry clearance.  From  page 1  of  her
    bundle it could be seen with regard to this point  that  several  weeks
    advance booking was required to be made.  SA was premised on the  basis
    that entry clearance applications in Jordan would  be  done  relatively
    expediently.  That could not be shown by the Home Office as of  today's
    date.

9.   In her submissions Ms Donnelly said that all the evidence  that  could
    be found was before the Tribunal.  She referred to paragraph  30.17  of
    the COIR which indicated that ID documentation was widely available  in
    Iraq.  Problems would be more likely to come when the appellant had  to
    apply for a passport, as there was no evidence of any  way  other  than
    applying in Baghdad, but she argued that passports  were  being  issued
    and were available to Iraqis who applied for them.  Once the  appellant
    obtained a passport there was the issue of getting the entry  clearance
    from  Amman.   The  visa  service  there  was  fully  functioning   and
    appointments were booked up several weeks in advance and this was  not,
    she argued, a significant delay.  It could be seen from page 4 of  the
    appellant's bundle that it  might  take  something  in  the  region  of
    40 days waiting to get a passport in Baghdad.  There would be a wait of
    several weeks  in  Amman.   There  was  a  general  statement  that  in
    settlement cases visas could be obtained within fourteen weeks and that
    was general for all posts.  Potentially  the  delay  might  be  in  the
    region of six months or so.  It could take as  long  on  an  in-country
    application in the United Kingdom but there was  no  specific  evidence
    about other out-of-country applications.

10.  By way of reply Ms Smith referred to paragraph 30.17 of the COIR which
    had been referred to by Ms Donnelly concerning documents being  easily
    available, but also referred us  to  paragraph  30.22  which  mentioned
    issues of further investigation for people who did not have ID already,
    so the period could be lengthy.  She argued that six  months  would  be
    the period if all went according to  plan  but  it  was  likely  to  be
    somewhat longer than that, bearing in mind the influx of people and the
    chaos in Iraq.  She argued that in-country applications  were  not  the
    appropriate comparator as the interference with the  Article 8  rights
    went on all the time during the  person's  time  of  absence  from  the
    United Kingdom  and  therefore  out-of-country  applications  were  the
    appropriate comparator.

11.  We reserved our determination.

12.  We proceed on  the  basis  that  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    Adjudicator's determination as set out above and that therefore we  can
    go on to  consider  the  up-to-date  evidence.   The  existing  country
    guidance in this regard is to be found in the Tribunal's  determination
    in SA, to which we have referred above.  There had been  earlier  cases
    in MN [2004] UKIAT 00316, and HC [2004] UKIAT 00154 where the IAT had
    held that the possibility of danger involved in travelling from Baghdad
    to Iran did not establish a reasonable  likelihood  that  an  appellant
    could not make the journey without  adverse  consequences  such  as  to
    amount to a violation of his human rights.  Subsequent to  that  in  KJ
    [2005] UKIAT 00066 it was concluded, primarily on the basis of a letter
    from the UNHCR written in January 2005, that the evidence  showed  that
    it could not be said to be proportionate to require a person to  return
    to Iraq to apply for entry clearance for a neighbouring country because
    of the dangers in travelling by road or flying to another country.

13.  In SA the Tribunal had further evidence  before  it,  in  particular  a
    letter dated 20 March 2005 from the British Embassy  in  Amman.   This
    said that road travel between Baghdad and Amman,  Damascus  and  Beirut
    remained uninterrupted and the most common  way  of  travel  for  Iraqi
    nationals.  Royal Jordanian and Syrian Airways flew regular services in
    to Baghdad and Gulf Airways also operated regularly into Dubai.  Those
    travelling from northern Iraq would usually travel across Syria as  the
    fastest and most convenient route down to Amman.   It  was  easier  for
    Iraqi nationals holding UK travel documents to enter Syria than Jordan.
     It was believed that other airlines were  considering  opening  routes
    into Baghdad and Basra in the future.

14.  There was a further letter of 16 June 2005 from the British Embassy in
    Amman which reported that applications  for  entry  clearance  did  not
    involve a lengthy process and in fact the Embassy  offered  a  same-day
    service for all applications and usually aimed to make  a  decision  on
    the day.  At the end  of  the  letter  there  were  references  to  the
    relative ease of travel from Baghdad to Amman.  The Tribunal also  bore
    in mind evidence in the form of travel advice from the US Department of
    State and from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and  a  report  from
    the Refugee Council.  The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  picture  was
    different from that before the Tribunal in  KJ,  and  that  there  were
    different ways in which an  appellant  could  reach  Amman,  noting  at
    paragraph 33 the fact there had been over  3,000  applications  between
    April and October 2004 and between October 2004 and  March  2005  also,
    and concluded that it was not satisfied that the circumstances involved
    in the entry clearance application were such as to make the requirement
    to make an application from abroad disproportionate.

15.  The evidence now before us is clearly different,  as  was  set  out  by
    Ms Smith.  It can be seen from the BBC News report at page 3  of  her
    bundle that the S Series passports  are  rejected  by  most  countries
    because they can easily be faked, and the position in this  regard  was
    set out in more detail in Asad to which Ms Smith referred us.

16.  It is clear that with effect from 1 September 2006 the United  Kingdom
    Government no longer accepts  the  S Series  Iraqi  passport  for  the
    purpose of making UK entry clearance applications, and it can  be  seen
    from paragraph 34.02 of the COIR of 30 April 2007 that in order for an
    Iraqi to enter Jordan they must hold the new G generation passport and
    prove that they have sufficient funds to support  themselves.   In  the
    BBC News report it is said that there is only  one  office  in  Baghdad
    which is responsible for issuing the G Series passports but  before  a
    person can even get into the queue to apply they have  to  get  new  ID
    papers and a passport application form.  It was said by Goldring J  in
    Asad at paragraph 4 that the G Series passport is  only  available  in
    Baghdad and the risk to the claimant  of  going  to  Baghdad  is  self-
    evident.  It can be seen from paragraph 30.17 of the COIR that the main
    identification documents needed for any kind of  interaction  with  the
    authorities to access entitlements are "widely common" and,  it  seems,
    reasonably available, though they have to be obtained in person  rather
    than by post.  However, we note the point to which Ms Smith  drew  our
    attention, at paragraph 30.22 of the COIR from a  UNHCR  assessment  of
    August  2006  that,  though  returnees   still   carrying   old   Iraqi
    documentation are able to renew documents  easily,  for  those  without
    these documents, further investigation into records must be carried out
    to prove entitlement.  It is said, and we see no reason  to  disbelieve
    it, that the appellant has not  retained  his  old  documentation,  and
    therefore he would be subject to that further delay.

17.  An Iraqi returned to Iraq who wished to apply for  entry  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom from Jordan would be likely to  be  required  to  go
    first to his home area in order to obtain fresh ID  documentation.   He
    would then have to go to Baghdad in order  to  apply  for  a  G Series
    passport.  There is evidence that one person, referred to at page 4 of
    the bundle from the same BBC report, was facing a waiting time of  more
    than 40 days.  There is also reference to being able  to  overcome  the
    long waiting list during the issuing process by paying a bribe,  though
    we do not assume the general availability of that option.   Thereafter,
    assuming he had succeeded in getting the ID documentation, the passport
    application form and then the passport, he  would  have  to  travel  to
    Jordan, having in  advance  presumably  made  his  application  for  an
    appointment since that has to be done several weeks in advance.  It  is
    relevant at this point to refer to the  Operational  Guidance  Note  on
    Iraq of 12 February 2007 with which Ms Donnelly has provided us.  There
    is reference at paragraph 6.2  to  the  risks  involved  in  travelling
    between Amman and Baghdad including insurgent attacks, vehicle ambushes
    carried out by armed groups  and  road  checkpoints  set  up  by  armed
    groups.  It is said that the main routes leading  out  of  Baghdad  are
    highly insecure, however, ordinary Iraqis  generally  use  roads  on  a
    daily  basis.   Road  travel  between   Baghdad   and   Amman   remains
    uninterrupted,  and  is  the  most  common  way  of  travel  for  Iraqi
    nationals.  Royal Jordanian and Syrian  Airways  fly  regular  services
    into Baghdad.  It is said that  those  travelling  from  northern  Iraq
    would normally travel  across  into  Syria  as  the  fastest  and  most
    convenient route down to Amman.

18.  In general we do not consider despite the  changes  which  have  taken
    place since SA that it would be a disproportionate interference in  the
    right to family life of an Iraqi to  require  him  to  go  through  the
    process we have described above, though we accept  that  there  may  be
    particular  individual  circumstances  which   militate   against   the
    proportionality of removal.  These will need to be addressed on a case-
    by-case basis.


19.  The Appellant, who is from Kirkuk, would have to go there in order  to
    obtain fresh ID documentation, and then go to Baghdad and therefore  to
    Jordan, in accordance with the  procedures  set  out  in  paragraph  17
    above.  He has no in-country right to make a marriage application under
    the Immigration Rules and therefore his appeal has to be assessed under
    the terms of Article 8.  The correct approach in making this assessment
    is the five stage process described by the House  of  Lords  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.

         "17. In a case where removal is resisted in reliance on article 8,
             these questions are likely to be:




             (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
                  authority with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to
                  respect for his private or (as the  case  may  be)  family
                  life?


             (2)      If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                  such gravity as potentially to  engage  the  operation  of
                  article 8?


             (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


             (4)      If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                  society in the  interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for  the
                  prevention of disorder or crime,  for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and
                  freedoms of others?


             (5)      If so, is  such  interference  proportionate  to  the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

20.  No issues have been taken before us concerning the first  four  stages.
    Thus we conclude that (1) the removal  of  the  Appellant  will  be  an
    interference with the Appellant's family life in this  case,  since  it
    is, we think, accepted that his wife cannot be expected to go with  him
    to Iraq even on a temporary basis  whilst  he  seeks  entry  clearance.
    That interference could  (2)  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of  Article 8.   However  (3)  the
    interference is in accordance with the law and (4) is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society  in  the  interests  of  national  security,  public
    safety, or the economic well-being of the country, for  the  prevention
    of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,  or  for
    the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.  The  Respondent's
    policy of maintaining a firm  and  consistent  immigration  policy,  to
    which his decision in this case relates,  engages  a  number  of  these
    separate headings.  The issue between the parties therefore relates  to
    whether (5) the interference is proportionate to the legitimate  public
    end sought to be achieved.


21.  We have to consider this question in the light of the  evidence  as  a
    whole and whether, as it was put in paragraph 20 of the House of  Lords
    judgment in Huang, in circumstances where the life of a  family  cannot
    reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, the refusal of leave to
    enter or remain, taking full account of all considerations weighing  in
    favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  Appellant  in
    the  manner  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a  breach  of   the
    fundamental right protected by Article 8.


22.   The  Appellant  and  his  wife  were  married  when  the  Appellant's
    immigration status was uncertain; indeed just a couple of weeks  before
    the Appellant's asylum application was refused by the  Respondent.   We
    have also had regard to the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  Mahmood
    [2001] Imm AR 229, cautioning  against  permitting  queue  jumping  in
    marriage applications.


23.  In the light of the evidence as a whole and notwithstanding Ms Smith's
    helpful submissions, we do not consider that the limited extent of  any
    increase in personal risk to the Appellant in  Iraq  arising  from  the
    adoption of the new procedure for obtaining a "G"  type  passport,  and
    the  additional  overall  length  of  time  involved  in   making   the
    application for entry clearance, is sufficient, taken together and with
    all other factors, to constitute a disproportionate  interference  with
    his right to family life in this case.


24.  The appeal is therefore dismissed.







Signed                                  Date

Senior Immigration Judge Allen
