


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
           WK (Article 8 - expulsion cases - review of case-law) Palestinian
                                              Territories [2006] UKAIT 00070

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |DDetermination Ppromulgated|
|On 4 April 2006                                 |23 August 2006             |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE  HODGE, PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR Immigration Judge STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE  PERKINS


                                   Between


                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Ms E Mendoza, Counsel, instructed by Ben Hoare
Bell Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


In view of the growing number of cases dealing  with  Article  8  post-Ullah
[2004] UKHL 26 and post-Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, it is useful to summarise  in
the one place the main propositions which have now been established:

       a)  Lord Bingham's approach  in  Razgar  applies  to  all  Article  8
          expulsion cases. Subject to it being necessary first to  establish
          that there is an existing private or family life  (or  both),  his
          five questions should  serve  as  a  framework  for  deciding  all
          Article 8 expulsion cases.
      (b)  If an appellant cannot show that interference with his  right  to
          respect for private and family life will have consequences of such
          gravity as to engage  Article  8,  his  case  must  fail  at  this
          (question two) stage. Being able to demonstrate grave consequences
           is also  a necessary but not a  sufficient  condition  for  being
          able  to  show,  in  answer  to  Lord  Bingham's  fifth   question
          concerning proportionality,  that  the  circumstances  are  "truly
          exceptional" (Buxton LJ, ZT [31], SN [17], [19]).
      (c)    The threshold in Art 8 expulsion cases is high and is  properly
          summarised   as   requiring   circumstances   which   are   "truly
          exceptional".
      (d)     The "small minority" of cases whose  circumstances  are  truly
          exceptional are properly to be left for identification on  a  case
          by case basis, albeit such identification must always be  informed
          by an awareness of the stringency of the "truly exceptional" test.
      (e)     All expulsion cases are primarily  "foreign"'  cases  and  the
          high threshold of "truly  exceptional"  applies  even  where  such
          cases have significant "domestic" aspects or elements (Buxton  LJ,
          SN [2005] EWCA Civ 1683).
      (f)     "Health cases" encompass both physical and mental health cases
          and both types of cases can sometimes require consideration  under
          Article 8 as well as under Article 3 (and Article 2).
      (g)     Health cases under Article 8 normally require  specific  focus
          on the effect health problems have on  the  appellant's  right  to
          respect for private life and in particular on whether there  would
          be a breach of his physical and moral integrity.
      (h)  In considering whether an appellant in a  health  case  can  show
          "truly  exceptional"  circumstances  one  particularly   important
          consideration will  be  whether  he  was  already  suffering  from
          physical and/or mental illness before coming to the UK or during a
          time, if any, when he was in the UK with valid leave.
      (i)    Suicide cases can engage an appellant's rights  under  Articles
          2, 3 and 8 of the Convention), but they are not to be  seen  as  a
          wholly separate category (Baroness Hale, Razgar [64]).
      (j)     So far as suicide cases which seek to rely on  Article  8  are
          concerned, the principles are still primarily those set out by the
          European Court of Human Rights in Bensaid v UK (2001) 33  EHRR  10
          and the facts in Bensaid afford a particularly important yardstick
          in assessing  whether  the  circumstances  of  a  case  are  truly
          exceptional.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant claims to be a Palestinian. His mother is Lebanese. His
       father is Palestinian. He is thirty-two.  He arrived in the UK on  28
       August 1998 and applied for asylum. His application was refused on 12
       May 2000. He appealed. His appeal against that refusal was  dismissed
       by the Adjudicator, Mr D J B Trotter, on 23 September 2003.   Because
       that appeal related to a decision made prior to 2  October  2000,  Mr
       Trotter was not able to consider the appeal on human rights  grounds.
       The appellant submitted a human rights application  on  11  September
       2003.  On  8  November  2004  a  decision  was  made  to  refuse  his
       application for leave to enter on the grounds that removal would  not
       place the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under the Human
       Rights Act 1998. His subsequent appeal  against  this  decision  came
       before an Adjudicator, Mrs N.A. Baird, on 14  February  2005.     She
       dismissed the appeal on Article 3 grounds but allowed it on Article 8
       grounds. The respondent applied for permission to appeal.  By  virtue
       of transitional provisions made  under  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
       (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, this application took effect
       as one for an order for reconsideration. This was made.

    2. The appellant's personal history is complicated. He was born  in  the
       Lebanon. He moved to the United Arab Emirates when he was aged six or
       seven.  When he  was  aged  seventeen  he  became  mentally  ill.  At
       paragraphs 7  and  8  the  Adjudicator,  Mrs  Baird,  summarised  the
       appellant's subsequent history, drawing on the  account  given  in  a
       medical report prepared on 1 October 2004 by Dr  K  G  Shoilekova,  a
       Consultant Psychiatrist with County Durham and Darlington NHS.

           "7.... He remembers not sleeping very well, being argumentative,
           shouting at his parents and reading a great deal about religion.
            He claimed that  there  were  six  to  eight  gods  in  England
           compared to    twenty  in  Arabia.   He  then  believed  he  had
           authority from God and was superior  to  other  people.  He  was
           first admitted to a psychiatric hospital at the age  of  17  and
           was  diagnosed  with  paranoid  schizophrenia.  He  was  further
           admitted six or  eight  times.  The  information  given  by  the
           appellant was not consistent. He was treated with typical  anti-
           psychotic medication and mood stabilisers. Later  the  diagnosis
           varied  from  schizoaffective  disorder  to  bipolar   affective
           disorder.


           8. After his arrival in the UK, the appellant  initially  stayed
           with relatives in Glasgow, and some time  at  the  beginning  of
           2000 his mental condition deteriorated and he  was  admitted  to
           the Southern General Hospital in Glasgow at the end of  February
           2000 under the care of Dr Caplin,  Consultant  Psychiatrist.  At
           one point he become "disinhibited"  and  was  transferred  to  a
           psychiatric intensive care unit at Leverndale Hospital where  he
           was aggressive towards a member of staff and  apparently  bit  a
           staff member. He was detained under section 26 of  the  Scottish
           Mental Health Act and  was  treated  with  injections  of  anti-
           psychotic medication. He was discharged in  July  2000  but  re-
           admitted at the beginning of September that year because he  had
           bitten the girlfriend of  his  flatmate.  He  was  treated  with
           various drugs and then discharged, but soon afterwards  was  re-
           admitted on a formal basis to  Leverndale where he was diagnosed
           with schizoaffective disorder and mania with psychotic features.
           He was in intensive care. He  was  having  grandiose  illusions,
           claiming he had been chosen by God.   He also felt he was  Jesus
           and  it  is  mentioned  that  he  was  responding  to   auditory
           hallucinations at that time. He  was  discharged  and  moved  to
           Darlington, and has been  in  the  care  of  County  Durham  and
           Darlington Priority Services NHS Trust since July 2001.


           9. When he first attended in  Darlington, he was complaining  of
           feeling low in mood, tiredness and of having thoughts  of  self-
           harm.  He  said  he  had  stopped  taking  his  mood  stabiliser
           medication as he was worried about possible sexual  dysfunction.
           He was found to be  depressed  and  started  on  anti-depressant
           medication. Following on this he failed to keep his appointments
           with his doctor and almost fully disengaged from services.


           10.    Sometime at the end of December 2001/beginning of January
           2002 he was admitted to the Pierremont Unit as his behaviour had
           become increasingly inadequate and openly inappropriate. He  was
           taken to the Accident and Emergency Department in a  mute  state
           following an attempt to cover the windows of his house and  burn
           his property. He shared some ideas that he had  risen  from  the
           dead and had a belief that people were watching him through  the
           television.   During his admission  he  continued  to  be  quite
           agitated, inadequate  in  behaviour  and  at  one  point  openly
           violent. He was making threatening gestures to the staff, taking
           off his clothing and crawling on the  floor  screaming.  He  was
           placed in intensive care on Section 3 of the Mental  Health  Act
           because of his behaviour, which included kissing a  fellow  male
           patient and engaging in  inappropriate    sexual  talk.  He  was
           shouting at the top of his voice and claiming he was God. He was
           also  thought  to  be  responding  to  auditory  hallucinations,
           believing that he was influenced by telepathy and that  patients
           and staff members were going to harm  him.   Sometime  in  April
           2000 he appealed against his detention under section  3  of  the
           Mental Health Act, but was not successful and was not discharged
           from this section.


           11.  His  condition  gradually  started  to  improve   and   his
           medication was adjusted. He was discharged at the end of  summer
           2002, but again  was  not  compliant  with  his  medication  and
           stopped attending for his depot injections. When  Dr  Shoilekova
           saw him for the first  time,  he  described  him  as  hypomanic,
           talkative, hyperactive, labile in mood and high in self  esteem.
           The doctor said he was left with the impression, which proved to
           be correct, that he was not at all compliant with medication and
           was not keeping his outpatient appointments  regularly.  He  was
           admitted at the beginning of March 2003 but  discharged  himself
           against medical advice three days later, and  failed  to  attend
           out-patient appointments.  This led to another new admission  on
           24 April 2003 under Section 3 of the Mental Health Act.  He  was
           found by the police shouting and was chanting in the middle of a
           very  busy  road.  He  was  aggressive  on  admission,  and  was
           initially admitted to Carmel Ward, an intensive care psychiatric
           unit at the Pierremont.  There is a description of his behaviour
           during this period which includes the appellant  saying  he  had
           been receiving the word of prophets and was the only  person  in
           the whole universe to receive such prophecies. He was completely
           lacking in any insight into his mental condition.


           12. His treatment is described. His condition gradually improved
           and at the beginning of August 2003 he  was  transferred  to  an
           open psychiatric ward at the Pierremont, during  which  time  he
           admitted to smoking cannabis and drinking alcohol on  the  ward.
           His [sectioning] was rescinded on 23 September 2003 because  his
           condition improved, but he remained on the ward as  an  informal
           patient, and was eventually discharged on 10 December 2003.  His
           diagnosis  on  discharge  was  Bipolar  Affective  Disorder  and
           Psychotic Mania.


           13. After discharge he was reviewed on a monthly basis initially
           and kept most of his appointments but did not  comply  with  his
           medication.  He  asked  for  his  treatment  to  be  changed  to
           something he  had  been  getting  in  Lebanon  and  the  doctors
           complied with his request because they felt that was the  lesser
           evil. He received one injection but never  turned  up  when  the
           next one was due.  He said he would rather have oral medication.
           He was given a prescription of tablets, but again failed to take
           them. He was not taking his mood stabilisers. His non-compliance
           with medication raised  the  concerns  of  the  team  about  the
           possibility of a relapse and this led to referral of his care to
           the Assertive Outreach Team.   Unfortunately, at the time of the
           report, this service was on hold due to  a  shortage  of  staff.
           Notwithstanding this, the appellant's condition appeared to have
           improved.  Dr Shoilekova said  the  appellant  was  planning  to
           attend a computer  course  at  MIND.    He  currently  lives  in
           supported accommodation. He said the prognosis, even in the best
           possible scenario, namely if he is consistently  complying  with
           medication, remains guarded given the  duration  of  his  mental
           illness and the frequency and severity of relapses."


    3. The Adjudicator, Mrs Baird, noted that  the  directions  accompanying
       the respondent's 8 November 2004 refusal letter were for  removal  to
       Palestine, not Lebanon or the UAE.    She  had  before  her  a  large
       number of documents,  including  the  appellant's  responses  to  the
       respondent's refusal letter and several  psychiatric  reports.  There
       was a report dated 22 August 2000  from  Dr  Richard  Caplin  of  the
       Department of Psychiatry at the Southern General Hospital in Glasgow.
         This was supplemented by a letter dated 12 September 2001.    There
       was a report dated 5  June  2002  from  a  Dr  M.P.  Singh,  a  locum
       Consultant Psychiatrist in County Durham. There were two reports from
       the Consultant Psychiatrist with County Durham and Darlington NHS, Dr
       Leslie Burton. He appears to have taken over from Dr  Singh.     Then
       there were two reports from Dr Shoilekova, one dated  29  July  2003,
       the other which we have already mentioned, dated 1 October 2004.

    4. Mrs Baird also heard oral testimony from the appellant who, as before
       us, was represented by Ms Mendoza.

    5. Having considered the  evidence  in  the  round  she  concluded  that
       despite there having been an improvement in his  condition  over  the
       past year, he was  "still very ill indeed" and there was a "very high
       risk of a relapse".  She contrasted the fact that in the  UK  he  was
       "under constant care of a high standard" with the situation he  would
       face if removed to the Occupied Territories:-

             "47.  The  removal  directions  are  set   to   the   Occupied
             Territories because the appellant claims to be a  Palestinian.
             He has never lived there and has no one here. There  is  scant
             evidence on the availability of medical care but it seems that
             access to care is difficult and one report says that  all  the
             consultants work in Jerusalem and it is not easy to get papers
             to  go  there.   Existing  anti-discrimination  laws  do   not
             prohibit discrimination based on disability  and  such  people
             experience difficulties in the area of employment and housing.


             48. The security situation in the Occupied Territories is well
             documented.  There  are  still  serious  problems.  There  are
             reports of curfews and closures. There are reports of killings
             by suicide bombers, the destruction  of  homes,  human  rights
             abuses and poverty. It does appear to present difficulties for
             people who are vulnerable."

    6. Whilst she did not consider that the appellant's situation if removed
       to the Occupied Territories would  meet  the  stringent  requirements
       identified by the Court of Appeal in N as being necessary in order to
       satisfy Article 3 criteria, she did think it would make his removal a
       disproportionate interference with his private life and his right  to
       physical and moral integrity.


    7. For that reason she decided to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

   Grounds of appeal/reconsideration
    8. The respondent's grounds of reconsideration, which  solely  concerned
       Article  8,  were  concise.   First,  it  was  submitted   that   the
       Adjudicator at paragraph 52 had relied on mere speculation about  the
       lack of available healthcare in  the  Occupied  Territories  and  had
       effectively treated the burden of proof as being on the  Home  Office
       rather than on the appellant  to  show  that  medical  services  were
       unavailable. Secondly, it was  contended  that  the  Adjudicator  had
       misapplied the correct legal tests as set out in Bensaid v UK  (2001)
       33 EHRR 10 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and that, if she had applied the
       correct legal tests, she would have reached a different conclusion.

    9. We should note that further evidence submitted for the hearing before
       us made reference to the fact that two months after  the  Adjudicator
       promulgated her determination on 23 March  2005,  the  appellant  was
       again detained under the Mental Health Act.  On 27 May  2005  he  was
       admitted to Cedar Wood and was not  discharged  until  some  time  in
       January 2006.  However, as Ms  Mendoza  acknowledged,  this  was  not
       evidence we could consider when deciding  whether  her  determination
       disclosed a material error of law: R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
       [2005] INLR 633, CA [90].

   10. Turning to the respondent's first ground of reconsideration,  we  are
       not persuaded that the Adjudicator fell into error in her approach to
       the evidence concerning the lack of available  medical  treatment  in
       the  Occupied  Territories.    The  respondent  relied  on  what  the
       Adjudicator said at paragraph 52 (we italicise the relevant sentences
       or parts thereof):

             "52. The appellant suffers from serious mental  illness  which
             has been kept under control in the UK by the treatment he  has
             had here.   I have no evidence that such  treatment  would  be
             available in the Occupied Territories.  I doubt that any  such
             treatment would be available, given the objective evidence. If
             there is treatment it is likely to be very  much  inferior  to
             the treatment he is getting  here.  I  think  there  would  be
             potentially serious damage to his mental health if  he  cannot
             access treatment. The problem is that this appellant does  not
             suffer from a physical illness but from a  mental  one.  As  I
             have already said, one of his doctors  said  that  he  has  no
             concept of his illness. His behaviour,  when  he  is  ill,  is
             awful. He would be living in an Arab country with  a  tendency
             to think of himself as supreme God and to criticise  Islam.  I
             have some sympathy with the submissions of Ms Mendoza that  he
             could get himself shot. It seems that  he  is  fine  then  the
             symptoms appear and his behaviour is uncontrollable. He has  a
             tendency not to take his medication. I suspect the  medication
             he takes may not be available  to  him.    No  one  has  given
             opinion on how a change of lifestyle would affect him but this
             would not just be a change of lifestyle. He would be going  to
             live in what is effectively a war zone where terrifying things
             happen every day. He would have no  support,  no  job  and  no
             family.  He may have no access to medical care at all. I  felt
             that he would not be able to cope with all of this. If he were
             to suffer a relapse like those described above and  is  unable
             to get appropriate treatment I think he would be  at  risk  of
             physical harm because of his behaviour and I think there would
             be a flagrant denial  of  his  right  to  physical  and  moral
             integrity."

   11. Some criticism can and should be made of the Adjudicator's  uncertain
       phraseology  here  ("I  doubt",  "I  suspect"),   but   reading   the
       determination as a whole  we  think  it  is  sufficiently  clear  she
       considered  it  unlikely  the  appellant  would  receive  appropriate
       medical treatment for his  condition  in  the  Occupied  Territories.
       She was not seeking to say that there were no medical  facilities  in
       the Occupied  Territories,  only  that  the  type  of  treatment  the
       appellant needed and was receiving in the UK would not be  available.
       That she was not substituting speculation for evidence  can  be  seen
       from her close reliance on the background evidence  when  making  her
       assessment.  Earlier in paragraph  47,  with  clear  reference  to  a
       report in the bundle, she had noted that:

               'There is scant evidence on the availability of medical care
               [in the  Occupied Territories]  but  it  seems  to  me  that
               access to care is difficult and one report says that all the
               consultants work in Jerusalem and it  is  not  easy  to  get
               papers there ...'


   12. Nor do we think that the Adjudicator reversed the burden of proof  as
       regards the availability of relevant medical treatment.  At paragraph
       40 she had reminded herself, correctly, that the burden  was  on  the
       appellant to establish that returning him to the Occupied Territories
       would expose him to a real risk of a  breach  of  his  human  rights.
       Nowhere did she say anything to suggest that she considered  that  it
       was for the respondent to prove that relevant medical treatment would
       be available.

   13. We turn, therefore, to the second ground  of  reconsideration,  which
       alleged that the Adjudicator had applied the  wrong  legal  tests  in
       deciding that there had been a breach of Article 8.    In  amplifying
       this ground Mr Gulvin  highlighted  two  points  in  particular.  The
       Adjudicator had failed to  deal  properly  with  the  proportionality
       issue, he said, this being evident from her failure  to  conduct  any
       kind of balancing exercise. She had also failed, he said, to show she
       had attached significant weight to the imperative  interests  of  the
       state in the maintenance of effective immigration control.


   14. In response to a request from us that the parties seek to comment  on
       the current state of case law to  be  applied  in  Article  8  health
       cases, Mr Gulvin contended that we should  approach  matters  on  the
       basis that cases of physical illness  fell  to  be  considered  under
       Article 3 whereas cases of mental illness, such as this one, fell  to
       be considered under Article 8. However, that did not mean that it was
       any easier for an appellant with mental health  problems  to  succeed
       under Article 8, since that required showing removal  would  cause  a
       flagrant denial of his Article 8 right and a balancing  exercise  was
       required in which the interests of the state normally  prevailed.  Ms
       Mendoza did  not  seek  to  comment  on  the  physical/mental  health
       distinction, nor did she seek to disagree with the  view  that  under
       Article  8  the  threshold  was  a  high  one.  However,   considered
       cumulatively,  she  argued,  the   appellant's   circumstances   were
       reasonably regarded by the Adjudicator as truly  exceptional  and  so
       her decision was not legally  erroneous  and  the  panel  should  not
       interfere with her decision.

   15. We pause here to  note  that  at  the  date  of  hearing  before  the
       Adjudicator (14 February 2005) the House  of  Lords  had  issued  its
       judgment in the case of Razgar UKHL 27 (17 June 2004), but had yet to
       decide the case of N [2005] UKHL 31 [2005] INLR 388,  (5  May  2005),
       and the Court of Appeal had yet to give further guidance on Article 8
       criteria in the case of Huang [2005] EWCA Civ 105, [2005] INLR 247 (1
       March 2005). Nevertheless, since these cases determine points of law,
       it is right that we ask ourselves whether the Adjudicator's  approach
       to Article 8 adequately reflected  the  clarification  they  provide.
       For similar reasons we have to pay due regard  to  further  decisions
       having a bearing on the Article 8 issues we have to examine.

   The current state of case law on Article 8 in expulsion or removal cases

   16. This case was listed before a panel chaired by the President  with  a
       view to clarifying the scope of Article 8 in health cases which  have
       failed under Article 3, but this task requires that we draw carefully
       on the growing body of cases on Article 8.

   17. Such a task confronts an immediate difficulty.

   18. In broad terms the House of Lords in Ullah  [2004]  UKHL  26,  [2004]
       INLR 381 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27,  [2004]  INLR  349  endorsed  the
       approach to Article 8 taken by the IAT immediately after commencement
       of the Human Rights Act 1998 in cases such as Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT
       702 [2003] Imm AR 1 and Nhundu and Chiwera  01/TH/0613.  However,  we
       are now approaching the situation where the number of judgments post-
       Ullah and post-Razgar has become a cause of  possible  confusion,  by
       virtue of the fact that not all  expressly  cross-refer  or  seek  to
       build on each other or provide an overview. The proper functioning of
       the AIT requires us to  apply  the  law  as  clearly  and  simply  as
       possible. Of necessity case law on  Art  8  must  remain  open-ended,
       since the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR)  is  a  "living
       instrument". But just as the Court in Strasbourg in its jurisprudence
       on Art 8 expulsion cases constantly seeks to consolidate and build on
       its previous case law, so must national courts  and  tribunals.  What
       follows, therefore, aims to set down in one place a  summary  of  the
       main propositions that have been developed in Ullah  and  Razgar  and
       subsequent cases, in particular Huang [2005] INLR 247, Akaeke  [2005]
       EWCA Civ 947, [2005] INLR 575, J [2005] EWCA Civ 629,  Ernest  Festus
       Betts [2005] EWCA Civ 828, KK [2005] EWCA Civ 1082, Sadri Alihajdaraj
       [2005] EWCA Civ 1084,   R(Rodriguez-Torres)  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1328,
       Tural Boran [2005] EWCA Civ 1141, ZT [2005] EWCA Civ 1421, SN  [2005]
       EWCA Civ 1683, Janosevic [2005] EWCA Civ 1711, Miao [2006]  EWCA  Civ
       75, Krasniqi [2006] EWCA Civ 391, Tozlukaya [2006] EWCA Civ  379  and
       R(on the application of (1) Karas (2) Miladinovic  and  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2006] EWHC  747  (Admin),  R  (on  the
       application of Jojo Mimi Katshunga) v Secretary of State for the Home
       Department [2006] EWHC 1208 (Admin). At the tribunal level  the  most
       important cases since Ullah and Razgar  have  been  BK  [2005]  UKIAT
       00001,  MB  (Huang-Proportionality-Bulletins)  Croatia  [2005]  UKIAT
       00092, CW (Deportation-Huang-Proportionality)  Jamaica  [2005]  UKIAT
       00110 and Sun Myung Moon [2005] UKIAT 00112, although  we  have  also
       had regard  to  IK  (Suicide/mental  stability:  legal  requirements)
       Turkey [2005] UKIAT 00049, RG  (Suicide-Risk-Razgar  considered)  Sri
       Lanka [2005] UKIAT 00072, MK (Mental Illness  -  Articles  3  and  8)
       Pakistan [2005] UKIAT 00075, JS (Suicide risks-Articles 3 and 8)  Sri
       Lanka [2005] UKIAT 00083, AA (Algeria-Mental health)  Algeria  [2005]
       UKIAT 000084,  MG (Assessing interference with private  life)  Serbia
       and Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00113, GS (Article 8-public interest  not
       a fixity)  Serbia  and  Montenegro  [2005]  UKAIT  00121,  MA(DP3/96,
       interpretation) Algeria [2005] UKAIT 00127, LH (Truly  exceptional  -
       Ekinci applied) Jamaica [2006] UKAIT 00019 and FN (Article 8-removal-
       viable options) Eritrea [2006] UKAIT 00044.


   (a)  Lord  Bingham's  approach  in  Razgar  applies  to  all  Article  8
   expulsion cases. Subject to it being necessary first to  establish  that
   there is an  existing  private  or  family  life  (or  both),  his  five
   questions should serve  as  a  framework  for  deciding  all  Article  8
   expulsion cases.

   19. Lord  Bingham  in  Razgar  [17]  identified  a  number  of  questions
       adjudicators (now immigration judges) have to ask,  step-by-step,  in
       cases where removal  is  resisted  in  reliance  on  Article  8.  His
       questions only arise, of course, if an appellant has first been  able
       to establish that he has  a  protected  right  under  Article  8,  to
       private or family life (or both) as the case may  be.  His  questions
       are:


         (1) Will the proposed removal be interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life.


          (2) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Art 8?


         (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


          (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
         in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
         or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedom of others?


         (5) If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?

   (b) If an appellant cannot show that  interference  with  his  right  to
   respect for private and family  life  will  have  consequences  of  such
   gravity as to engage Article 8, his case must  fail  at  this  (question
   two) stage. Being able to demonstrate grave  consequences   is  also   a
   necessary but not a sufficient condition for  being  able  to  show,  in
   answer to  Lord Bingham's  fifth  question  concerning  proportionality,
   that the circumstances are "truly exceptional" (Buxton LJ, ZT  [31],  SN
   [17], [19]).

   20. It should be noted that the above approach applies to  all  expulsion
       cases in which Article 8 is raised.  For Article 8 even to be engaged
       in an expulsion case, it must be shown, in response to Lord Bingham's
       second question, that the interference will have  grave  consequences
       (Razgar [17]). It was pointed out by the Tribunal  in  MG  (Assessing
       interference with private life) Serbia and  Montenegro  [2005]  UKAIT
       00113 that in many cases errors of law occur because  judicial  fact-
       finders miss out the second of Lord Bingham's five questions.  Having
       found that a person enjoys a private or family  life  in  the  United
       Kingdom they move straight on to Lord Bingham's fifth  question.  Yet
       in many cases and particularly where private life alone is at  issue,
       the second question, if properly addressed, will result in a negative
       answer. (We would not, however, affirm the suggestion in MG that if a
       case fails at the question 2 stage this obviates the need to  address
       proportionality. That may be apt  in  certain  cases,  but  generally
       speaking, it will be important to know, in case of further challenge,
       what answer the judicial fact-finder would have given to question  5,
       even if the answer to question 2 had been a negative one.)


   21. It is suggested by Buxton LJ in ZT [31-32] and  in  SN  ([15],  [17])
       that the requirement set out by Lord Bingham in his  second  question
       amounts to a "flagrancy"  requirement,  i.e.  a  requirement  that  a
       person be able to show that the interference would cause a  "flagrant
       denial" of the right to respect for private and family life. However,
       this suggestion did not form part of the ratio of that  judgment  and
       it seems to us  that  it  sets  the  bar  too  high.  Lord  Bingham's
       formulation in Razgar certainly makes clear that, for Article 8 to be
       engaged in an expulsion case of any kind, the  interference  must  be
       shown to have grave consequences. However, it does not  require  that
       the consequences must be so grave as to nullify or totally negate  or
       obliterate the right. As is made clear by their  lordships  in  Ullah
       (reiterating the principles established in Razgar and  approving  the
       Tribunal's conclusion on  this  point  in  Devaseelan),  a  flagrancy
       requirement only arises in  an  expulsion  case  involving  qualified
       rights such as Articles 8 (and 9), where the  basis  for  claiming  a
       breach of that qualified right concerns an  extra-territorial  threat
       to it, i.e.  a threat caused to the enjoyment of  the  right  in  the
       territory of the receiving or destination state. It was held in Ullah
       that a flagrant violation requirement arises only  "where  the  right
       will be completely denied or nullified in  the  destination  country"
       (emphasis added) (Lord Bingham [24], [9],  Lord  Carswell  [69]).  In
       most (in-country) Article 8 cases, however, analysis of the  severity
       of the consequences resulting from the interference  (Lord  Bingham's
       question 2) involves examination  of  the  alleged  disruption  of  a
       person's private and family life relationships in the United Kingdom.
       Sometimes it may also involve examination of  an  alleged  threat  to
       that person's ability  to  enjoy  private  and  family  life  in  the
       receiving state. If both aspects are involved then the  case  is  (in
       Lord Bingham's words in Ullah [18]) of  "a  hybrid  nature".  A  case
       being of a hybrid nature does not mean that  it  is  subject  to  two
       different legal tests: the legal test in every type of case is one of
       "grave consequences". But being able  to  show  "grave  consequences"
       will be harder where the claim turns on a threat to enjoyment of  the
       right to respect  for  private  or  family  life  (or  both)  in  the
       territory of the destination state. Conversely, it is a settled  part
       of UK jurisprudence on Article 8 expulsion cases that the stronger  a
       person's private and family life ties  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
       easier it will be for Lord Bingham's question 2  (concerning  whether
       there is an interference having grave consequences) to be answered in
       the affirmative.


   22. Yet to be fully explored is to what extent the nature of interference
       in a protected right  under  Article  8(1)  depends  on  whether  the
       subject matter is private life, family life or a mixture of the  two.
       However, this much can be said: although Strasbourg jurisprudence  on
       Article  8  accepts  that  both  family   life   and   private   life
       relationships (or connections) formed in the sending state can create
       strong ties, it also considers it easier for a person  to  show  that
       grave  consequences  would  ensue  from  disruption  of  family  life
       relationships than from disruption of private life relationships.  It
       must also be borne in mind that the right guaranteed in Article  8(1)
       is a right to respect for "private and family life..."  and  that  in
       many cases there will be an element of combination, so  that  account
       has to be taken of both "private life" and "family life" aspects of a
       person's situation (Nhundu and Chiwera 01/TH/0613, [26]).


   23. Only in respect, therefore, of  aspects  of  a  claim  based  on  the
       alleged interference with the right to respect for private and family
       life in the territory of the destination country will it be right  to
       require that the claimant show that interference of that  kind  would
       have consequences so grave as to amount to a flagrant denial of  that
       right.

   24. Once Article 8 is found to be engaged (second question) and  assuming
       questions 3 and 4 are also answered in the affirmative, an assessment
       must be made of proportionality.

   (c) The threshold in Article 8 expulsion cases is high and  is  properly
   summarised as requiring circumstances which are "truly exceptional".


   25. For a person to succeed in reliance on Article  8  the  threshold  is
       high (Lord Bingham, Razgar [9]). Although Article 8  can  be  engaged
       even when a case fails under Article 3, "decisions taken pursuant  to
       the lawful operation of immigration control will be proportionate  in
       all save a small minority of cases identifiable on  a  case  by  case
       basis" (Razgar [20]). The range  of  circumstances  is  "very  narrow
       indeed"  and  it  will  not  be   enough   that   circumstances   are
       compassionate (CW, [35], [42]). Cases which fall into  this  category
       must  be  ones  where  only   "the   most   compelling   humanitarian
       considerations" are to be found (Baroness Hale, Razgar  [59];  Buxton
       LJ, SN [19]) or where the circumstances are "truly exceptional" (Laws
       LJ,  Huang,  [60]).  Both  of  these   formulations   are   practical
       applications of Lord Bingham's generalisation about  proportionality.
       That  the  "truly  exceptional  circumstances"  test  is   a   proper
       reflection of the approach taken in Razgar is also evident  from  the
       way matters were  put  by  Lord  Bingham  at  para  [20]  of  Razgar:
       "Decisions taken pursuant to  the  lawful  operation  of  immigration
       control will be  proportionate  in  all  save  a  small  minority  of
       exceptional cases..." (emphasis added); see also Lord Carswell [72].

   26. Whilst the grave consequences requirement most  obviously  arises  in
       relation to Lord Bingham's second question in Razgar [17], it applies
       to all aspects of a case where there is to be  expulsion  to  another
       country. Put another way, grave consequences is the only  test  under
       Lord Bingham's second question, whereas under  Lord  Bingham's  fifth
       question it is  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  condition  for
       establishing that an expulsion decision is disproportionate by virtue
       of being "truly exceptional". Lord Bingham's fifth question  is  thus
       one which cannot be answered in the  appellant's  favour  unless  the
       circumstances are established as "truly exceptional" (Buxton  LJ,  ZT
       [31], SN [17], [19]).

   27. Although the speeches  in  Razgar  do  not  employ  the  term  "truly
       exceptional" (emphasis added) they make  clear,  by  the  stipulation
       that the number of cases in which it can  be  said  that  it  is  not
       proportionate  for  the  state  to  remove  a  foreign  national   is
       "limited", that the circumstances in  contemplation  must  be  "truly
       exceptional".

   28. The formulations to be found in Razgar and  more  recently  in  Huang
       represent a development from earlier case law, Mahmood [2001] INLR  1
       in particular.  That is not to say, however, that Lord Phillips  MR's
       more particularised summary in Mahmood (later reconfirmed  in  Ekinci
       [2003] EWCA Civ 765) of factors to be taken into  account  in  family
       life cases is no longer instructive. In Mahmood both Lord Phillips MR
       [61] and Laws LJ viewed the  post-removal  option  of  applying  from
       abroad for entry clearance as normally making an  expulsion  decision
       proportionate unless  exceptional circumstances can be  shown.  Simon
       Brown LJ in Ekinci likewise emphasised  the  need  for  there  to  be
       exceptional circumstances. Thus, so long as it is borne in mind  that
       in deciding whether a decision is disproportionate the  threshold  is
       high and that circumstances must be truly exceptional,  the  guidance
       given  in  Mahmood  and  Ekinci  remains  relevant  (for   a   recent
       application of this approach by the AIT, see LH (Truly exceptional  -
       Ekinci applied) Jamaica [2006] UKAIT 00019).

   29.  The  suggestion  is  sometimes  made  that  the  "truly  exceptional
       circumstances" test is  not  one  which  is  used  by  the  Court  in
       Strasbourg and as such does not reflect its jurisprudence on  Article
       8. However, even if the "truly exceptional circumstances"  test  were
       considered to be a purely UK test, that would not in itself  show  it
       was contrary to Strasbourg jurisprudence,  since  that  jurisprudence
       has consistently emphasised that under Article 8  each  state  has  a
       "margin of appreciation" as to how they apply Article 8. In any event
       we do not  consider  that  this  test  is  at  odds  with  Strasbourg
       jurisprudence. On the  contrary,  Lord  Bingham's  above  formulation
       (like Lord Phillips MR's formulation in Mahmood) was  based  squarely
       on Strasbourg jurisprudence. Close reliance on Strasbourg  cases  was
       integral to all the speeches in Razgar. Illustrative of this  is  the
       observation by Lord Walker at [30]: "It is unnecessary to repeat  all
       the citations but it is relevant to note that the Strasbourg  court's
       insistence on the need for 'very exceptional circumstances' continues
       to  be  maintained  in  the  most  recent  jurisprudence:   see   the
       admissibility decision in Henao v  The  Netherlands  (unreported)  24
       June 2003."

   (d)  The  "small  minority"  of  cases  whose  circumstances  are  truly
   exceptional are properly to be left for identification on a case by case
   basis,  albeit  such  identification  must  always  be  informed  by  an
   awareness of the stringency of the "truly exceptional" test.

   30. It would be short-sighted to attempt an enumerative definition of the
       "small  minority  of  exceptional  cases..."   (Razgar   [20]).   The
       insistence by Lord Bingham on identification being only possible on a
       "case by case basis" is well-founded. There are very good reasons why
       identification should be left to a case-by-case basis. First and most
       obvious  of  all,  the  identification  of  cases  that  are   "truly
       exceptional" is essentially one of fact. Decisions are and have to be
       fact-specific (Lord Phillips MR, Mahmood [55(6)]). Secondly,  attempt
       at enumerative definition would be contrary to the Strasbourg Court's
       principle  of  dynamic  interpretation:  the  ECHR   is   a   "living
       instrument" (Golder v UK (1975) 1 EHRR 524).  Hence decisions of  the
       Strasbourg Court and those of the Tribunal and courts in the UK  have
       constantly to adapt to  developments  in  society.    UK  courts  and
       tribunals also have an ongoing duty under s.2 of the Human Rights Act
       1998 to take into account Strasbourg jurisprudence insofar as  it  is
       relevant to the proceedings in which  a  human  rights  question  has
       arisen.

   31. Thirdly,  what  is  required  when  assessing  proportionality  under
       Article 8 is the striking of a fair balance which means a weighing up
       of all the circumstances of the case, both those appertaining to  the
       applicant and those appertaining to the  state's  dealings  with  his
       case;  it  is  not  a  mechanistic  exercise  in   which   fixed   or
       predetermined weight is to be accorded to specific factors  (Carnwath
       LJ, Akaeke [24], GS (Article 8-public interest not a  fixity)  Serbia
       and Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00121). Conducting the balancing exercise
       will typically require having to consider circumstances  cumulatively
       and to gauge factors which carry weight on both sides of  the  scale.
       One cannot simply designate certain factors  as  "truly  exceptional"
       without considering them in their overall context.

   32. But this is not to say that the  identification  of  cases  that  are
       "truly exceptional" is wholly a matter of fact to  be  determined  by
       the decision-maker and without being subject to scrutiny.  As  Sedley
       LJ noted in Krasniqi [2006] EWCA Civ 391, the question of  whether  a
       case is truly exceptional "is in principle one of fact. But it  is  a
       question  of  secondary  fact  dictated  by   law   and,   therefore,
       susceptible of closer scrutiny than findings of primary fact".

   33. In this regard it will always be  important  to  recognise  that  the
       "truly exceptional" test is a stringent one. Accordingly it  will  be
       an error of law to equate  the  "truly  exceptional"  criterion  with
       circumstances which are merely compassionate or deserving of sympathy
       or admiration (CW, para [35], MG (Assessing interference with private
       life) Serbia and Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00113).  The  circumstances,
       to repeat Baroness  Hale's  words,  must  be  ones  where  "the  most
       compelling humanitarian  considerations"  obtain.  Plainly,  to  show
       circumstances which are "truly exceptional",  an  appellant  must  be
       able  to  point  to  circumstances  which  are  not  covered  by  the
       immigration rules or extra-statutory policies and which differentiate
       his situation from that  of  unsuccessful  claimants,  many  of  whom
       typically will have been in the  UK  for  some  length  of  time  and
       developed strong private and/or family life ties (Munby J, R (on  the
       application of (1) Karas (2) Miladinovic) v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department [2006] EWHC 747 (Admin)).

   34. It will always be important too to bear in mind the need for a proper
       approach to the question of proportionality. Although  the  decision-
       maker when conducting the proportionality exercise under Article 8(2)
       has to strike a  fair  balance  between  the  individual's  right  to
       respect for private and family life on the one hand and the interests
       of the state and wider community on the other,  that  does  not  mean
       they are to be treated as being normally  of  equal  weight.  To  the
       contrary,  the  interests  of  the  state  will  normally  be  of  an
       imperative character and are normally to be given very  heavy  weight
       (Lord Bingham, Razgar [19]; Laws LJ, Huang, [59]). In this regard the
       body of national immigration rules and extra-statutory policies  sets
       limits: the balance struck by the rules [and policies] will generally
       dispose of proportionality  issues  arising  under  Article  8  (Lord
       Bingham, Razgar [19]; Laws LJ, Huang, [60]; Sedley  LJ,  Miao  [24]).
       In  the  words  of  Ouseley  J  when  sitting  as  President  of  the
       Immigration Appeal Tribunal in CW:


             "They are to be regarded as the proportionate response of  the
             executive, approved by Parliament,  to  the  many  and  varied
             circumstances which individual  immigration  cases  present...
             When a rule or extra-statutory provision covers  the  sort  of
             circumstances upon which an individual relies, e.g. entry  for
             marriage, study, medical treatment or delayed decision-making,
             but the individual falls outside the specific requirements  or
             limits of the otherwise applicable rules or policy, that is  a
             very clear indication that  removal  is  proportionate."  (CW,
             [31], [32]).


   35. For this reason, to be called  "truly exceptional", a  case  must  be
       one that has of necessity to be described as not being encompassed by
       the (generally  Article  8-compliant)  immigration  rules  or  extra-
       statutory policies.

   36. It is for this reason that Laws LJ in Huang describes the cases which
       can  fall  into  the  limited  category  of  those  which  are  truly
       exceptional as being residual (Huang [57], [60]).

   37. However, the fact that a  person  cannot  bring  himself  within  the
       immigration rules or extra-statutory policies, whilst it sets  limits
       to the balancing exercise which must be conducted, is only  a  start-
       point for deciding whether the circumstances are "truly  exceptional"
       and so giving rise to disproportionality. The mere fact that a person
       cannot bring himself within the immigration rules or  extra-statutory
       policies does not entitle him to say his case is "truly exceptional".
       On the contrary, every case under this head has this feature at least
       in common. The question is therefore  not  merely  whether  the  case
       falls outside the rules or extra-statutory policies.  It  is  whether
       the nature of the case is such that the rules can be  shown  to  have
       failed as a code, to implement the state's Article 8 obligations.

   38. Some further indication of the type of cases which  fall  or  do  not
       fall within the residue of cases not catered for by immigration rules
       or extra-statutory policies and which are  also  "truly  exceptional"
       can be gleaned from guidance given in leading  cases.  We  recall  in
       this respect the summary of Strasbourg  jurisprudence  on  Article  8
       family life expulsion cases given by Lord Phillips MR in Mahmood:

               "55.  From  these  decisions  I  have  drawn  the  following
               conclusions as to the approach of  the  Commission  and  the
               European Court of Human Rights  to  the  potential  conflict
               between the respect for family life and the  enforcement  of
               immigration controls:
                    1) A State  has  a  right  under  international  law  to
                       control  the  entry   of   non-nationals   into   its
                       territory, subject always to its treaty obligations.
                    2) Article 8 does not impose  on  a  State  any  general
                       obligation to respect the choice of  residence  of  a
                       married couple.
                    3) Removal or exclusion of  one  family  member  from  a
                       State where other members of the family are  lawfully
                       resident will  not  necessarily  infringe  Article  8
                       provided that there are no  insurmountable  obstacles
                       to the family  living  together  in  the  country  of
                       origin of the family member excluded, even where this
                       involves a degree of hardship for some or all members
                       of the family.
                    4) Article 8 is likely to be violated by  the  expulsion
                       of  a  member  of  a  family  that  has   been   long
                       established in a State if the circumstances are  such
                       that it is not reasonable to expect the other members
                       of the family to follow that member expelled.
                    5) Knowledge on the part of one spouse at the time of
                       marriage hat rights of residence of the other were
                       precarious militates against a finding that an order
                       excluding the latter spouse violates Article 8.
                    6) Whether interference with family rights is  justified
                       in the  interests  of  controlling  immigration  will
                       depend on
                         (i)  the facts of the particular case and
                         (ii) the circumstances prevailing in the State
                         whose action is impugned."
   39. From this summary it is clear, for example, that a person will not be
       able to establish "truly exceptional"  circumstances  simply  on  the
       basis that he has developed significant private  life  and/or  family
       life ties and because there would be a degree of hardship involved in
       his family living together in the country of origin.  Likewise,  mere
       reliance on having enjoyed family life in the UK for  a  considerable
       period will not give rise to "truly exceptional circumstances"  where
       the appellant knew that his immigration status was precarious when he
       entered into such a relationship. A similar difficulty would confront
       an appellant seeking to rely (under the  "private  life"  rubric)  on
       having done valuable work in the community or on having worked in  an
       employment sector  in which there is a skills shortage.

   40. Leading cases not only contain guidance on what will  not  constitute
       "truly  exceptional"  circumstances,  but   also   what   may.   Such
       circumstances can arise where there are unusually compelling  reasons
       for attaching less weight than normal to the interests of  the  state
       due to special factors: e.g. bad faith, ulterior  motive,  deliberate
       abuse of power (Lord Bingham, Razgar [19]), failure of the  state  in
       the past to apply a policy which was in place  and  which  would,  if
       applied, have conferred a  benefit  on  the  applicant  in  terms  of
       immigration status (Schiemann LJ, Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 233). What is
       significant about such factors is how special they have to be.  Delay
       on its own, albeit always a relevant factor, is not  a  determinative
       factor (Strabac [2005] EWCA Civ 848; Carnwath LJ, Akaeke [2005]  EWCA
       Civ 947; Janosevic v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2005] EWCA Civ 1711).

   41. Conversely, factors which in a limited number of  cases  may  justify
       attaching decisive weight to the  appellant's  rights  under  Article
       8(1) so that they can override the normally imperative  interests  of
       the state include those where  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
       which (because there are insurmountable obstacles)  prevent  exercise
       of either of the normal  options  for  the  applicant  of  continuing
       family life aboard or of applying from  abroad  for  entry  clearance
       (Mahmood; MB [2005] UKIAT 00092, [29];  EH Iraq [2005]  UKIAT  00062;
       MS (inability to make entry  clearance  application)  Somalia  [2005]
       UKIAT 00030; KJ (Entry Clearance-  Proportionality)  Iraq  CG  [2005]
       UKIAT 00066).

   42. Limited help in  identifying  cases  which  are  or  are  not  "truly
       exceptional" can sometimes be gained  from  an  analysis  of  leading
       decided cases insofar as  they  can  be  seen  to  delineate  broadly
       similar facts or circumstances or persons who are similarly situated.
       These may be UK court or tribunal cases or Strasbourg cases. However,
       in relation to UK court decisions, it will be of little assistance in
       appeals which fall for decision on their merits, to cite cases  where
       the decision concerns legality, not merits. Thus, for example, in the
       case of Razgar himself, the only basis on which he  was  entitled  to
       succeed before the courts was in respect of whether it  was  possible
       that an Adjudicator might decide that his Article 8 rights  would  be
       violated by removal (majority decision of  Lord  Bingham  [24],  Lord
       Steyn [26] and Lord Carswell [78] upholding the certification of  his
       claim). Similarly, as we shall see,  our  eventual  decision  on  the
       facts of this case,  being  based  not  on  whether  the  Adjudicator
       reached the correct decision, but only on whether  her  decision  was
       one reasonably open to her, has  similar  limitations  as  a  factual
       yardstick.

   (e) All expulsion cases are  primarily  "foreign"  cases  and  the  high
   threshold of "truly exceptional" applies  even  where  such  cases  have
   significant "domestic" aspects or elements or "stages".


   43. A "foreign" case is one in which the conduct of the state in removing
       a person from its territory to another  territory  would  lead  to  a
       violation of a person's  Convention  rights  in  that  country  (Lord
       Bingham, Ullah [7]). A "domestic case" is one "where a state is  said
       to have acted within its own territory in a way which  infringes  the
       enjoyment of a Convention right by a person  within  that  territory"
       (Lord Bingham, Ullah [7], Baroness Hale, Razgar [41]).

   44. The  distinction  between  "foreign"  and  "domestic"  cases,  albeit
       useful,  is  one  which  was  recognised  at  the  outset  to  be  an
       "imperfect" one (Lord Bingham, Ullah, [9]). Ultimately it concerns  a
       distinction  between  indirect  and   direct   state   responsibility
       (Baroness Hale, Razgar [41]). The "truly exceptional" test applies to
       both "foreign" and "domestic" cases concerning  expulsion.  Arguments
       to the contrary have now been tried twice and rejected twice  by  the
       Court of Appeal in ZT and SN.   Such arguments sought to  exploit  an
       apparent difference of approach in Razgar between  Lord  Bingham  and
       Baroness  Hale  over  classification  of  cases  into  "foreign"  and
       "domestic".  It was asserted that Baroness Hale in  Razgar  was  only
       prepared to accept that expulsion cases which  were  'foreign'  cases
       required a high threshold of true exceptionality.  In  SN  Buxton  LJ
       has rejected these arguments. His conclusion was that since  all  the
       speeches in Razgar accepted that a high threshold was to  be  applied
       in all expulsion cases, the latter were properly to be treated always
       as "foreign" cases.

   45. In our view, the opinion of Buxton LJ in ZT and SN that all Article 8
       expulsion cases are "foreign" cases subject to a  high  threshold  of
       true exceptionality should be regarded as definitive.

   46. It should not be  thought,  however,  that  the  "foreign"/"domestic"
       distinction no longer has utility. It does, but in terms of practical
       application it is best understood as referring to elements or aspects
       or "stages" of a case.   As already noted, in expulsion  cases  there
       can sometimes be a degree of mixture  of  "foreign"  and   "domestic"
       elements (Lord Bingham, Ullah [9]; Baroness Hale, Razgar [41]; Buxton
       LJ, SN [13]). Cases can be of a hybrid nature  (Lord  Bingham,  Ullah
       [18]). In J [17], Dyson LJ refers to "foreign  and  domestic"  cases,
       but makes clear that one and the same appeal may need to be looked at
       in some respects  as  a  "foreign"  case,  in  other  respects  as  a
       "domestic" case.  "Foreign" elements  relate  to  conditions  in  the
       receiving state, "domestic" elements relate to the situation  of  the
       individual in exercising his right to respect for private and  family
       life in the UK. Because the "foreign"/"domestic" distinction requires
       the decision-maker to take  account  both  of  circumstances  in  the
       receiving state and circumstances  in  the  UK,  it  is  particularly
       useful in reminding  him  of  the  need  to  weigh  relevant  factors
       cumulatively. However,  it  should  always  be  borne  in  mind  that
       evaluating a person's situation in the territory of  the  destination
       state (examining "foreign" elements)  is  much  less  straightforward
       than  evaluating  his  (or  her)  situation  in  the  UK   (examining
       "domestic" elements), where the existing and  reasonably  foreseeable
       facts are more readily ascertainable.


   (f) "Health cases" encompass both physical and mental health  cases  and
   both types of cases  can  sometimes  require  consideration  under  both
   Article 3 (and Article 2) as well as under Article 8.

   47. The definition given by Baroness Hale in Razgar of a "health case" is
       a broad one. By a 'health case' is meant, she stated,  "one in  which
       the  applicant's  health  needs  are  being  properly  or  at   least
       adequately met in this country and the complaint is  that  they  will
       not be adequately met in the country to which he is to  be  expelled"
       (Razgar [54]).

   48. "Health cases" encompass both physical health cases (such as N [2005]
       UKHL 31 and D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423) and mental health cases  (such
       as J [2005] EWCA Civ 269 and Bensaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR  10  and  SN
       [2005] EWCA Civ 1683). The circumstances in mental as  distinct  from
       physical health cases are  not  precisely  analogous.  "One  material
       difference is that the risk arises not just from the person's removal
       to a place where the condition is likely  to  worsen,  but  from  the
       direct impact on that person's  mental  health  of  the  decision  to
       remove" (J [42]). However, such differences are less  important  than
       their underlying similarity as  health  cases  subject  to  the  same
       underlying Article 8 criteria (MK (Mental illness-Articles 3  and  8)
       Pakistan [2005] UKIAT 00075; JS (Suicide risks-Articles 3 and 8)  Sri
       Lanka [2005] UKIAT 00083).

   49. A "health case" may give rise to issues under  either  Article  3  or
       Article  8  or  both  (sometimes  Article  2  is  also   in   issue).
       Notwithstanding that the circumstances in  mental  as  distinct  from
       physical cases are not precisely analogous, we see no jurisprudential
       basis for the suggestion (made by Mr Gulvin in his submissions to  us
       in this case)  that physical  illness  cases  can  only  arise  under
       Article 3 and  mental illness cases can only arise under  Article  8.
       The analysis in N embraced  cases  of  physical  as  well  as  mental
       illness (N [44], [70]).  The Court in Bensaid considered whether  the
       applicant whose case was based on mental illness could succeed  under
       Article 3 and Article 8 but found on the particular facts in his case
       he could not succeed under either article. We would observe  that  it
       would be highly artificial to attempt in the  Article  8  context  to
       treat physical and mental illness  as  totally  separate  categories,
       since both relate to a person's private life  and  in  a  significant
       number of  cases  a  person's  physical  and  mental  conditions  are
       interrelated.

   (g)  "Health cases" under Article 8 normally require specific  focus  on
   the effect health problems have on the appellant's right to respect  for
   private life and in particular on whether  there  is  a  breach  of  his
   physical and moral integrity. It  is  clear,  however,  from  Strasbourg
   jurisprudence  that  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  views  its
   development of the concept of physical and moral integrity as a  limited
   extension designed to assist in cases which only just fail under Article
   3.

   50. Reliance may, in principle, be placed  on  Article  8  to  resist  an
       expulsion decision, even where  the  main  emphasis  is  not  on  the
       severance of family and social ties which a person has enjoyed in the
       expelling country but on the consequences for his  mental  health  of
       removal in the receiving country (Lord Bingham, Razgar [9]).

   51. "Health cases" arise under Article 8 as an aspect  of  the  right  to
       respect for private life, in particular the  right  to  physical  and
       moral integrity. In Razgar  Lord  Bingham  emphasises  that  "private
       life" is a broad term and the court has wisely eschewed  any  attempt
       to define it comprehensively" ([9]). The Tribunal has considered that
       "private life" can indeed be understood  in  its  broadest  sense  as
       embracing family as well  as  non-family  aspects  of  the  right  to
       personal  development  and  the  right  to  establish   and   develop
       relationships with other human beings and the outside  world  (Nhundu
       and Chiwera). This fits  well  with  the  exposition  given  by  Lord
       Bingham in paragraph [9] of Razgar. But in mental  health  cases  the
       focus is on the physical and psychological integrity of a  person  or
       the "physical and moral integrity" of a person (Razgar [9]).

   52. But, reflective of Lord  Bingham's  second  question  ("...will  such
       interference have consequences of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to
       engage the operation of Article 8"), for an  interference  with  this
       aspect of private life to  be  shown,  there  must  be  "sufficiently
       adverse effects on physical and moral integrity" (Razgar [8],  [17]).
       This  formulation of Lord Bingham in turn reflects the  jurisprudence
       of the European Court of Human Rights, which views its development of
       the concept of "physical and moral integrity" as a limited  extension
       designed to assist in cases which only just  fail  under  Article  3:
       Raninen v Finland (1998)  26  EHRR  563;  Costello-Roberts  v  United
       Kingdom (1993) 19 EHRR 112.

   53. Although we have  dealt  earlier  with  the  general  status  of  all
       expulsion cases as "foreign" cases, it is appropriate  to  point  out
       that in any event all the leading decisions  have  treated  expulsion
       cases involving health as "foreign" cases, notwithstanding that  they
       are often cases which have significant domestic  elements  (see,  for
       example, Baroness Hale, Razgar [54]; Dyson LJ, J [63]).

   54. The way in which mental health  cases  concerning  expulsion,  always
       primarily "foreign cases", can contain domestic elements  or  aspects
       or "stages" is clarified by Dyson, LJ in J. Domestic elements can  be
       particularly significant when it is asserted in a mental illness case
       that the conduct of the UK  authorities  will  lead  to  a  violation
       within its own territory either (i) when the  applicant  is  informed
       that a decision has been made to remove  him,  or  (ii)  when  he  is
       physically removed by aeroplane to another country (J [17]). Domestic
       elements may also be significant in cases where the principal  source
       of harm is said to be the severance of medical ties (as distinct from
       family or social ties) which a person has been enjoying in the UK and
       where these medical ties consist in a treatment regime for  a  mental
       health illness.

   (h) In considering whether an  appellant  in  a  health  case  can  show
   "truly   exceptional"   circumstances   one    particularly    important
   consideration will be whether he was  already  suffering  from  physical
   and/or mental illness before coming to the UK or  at  a  time,  if  any,
   when he had valid leave to remain in the UK.

   55. When focussing on health cases  under  Article  8  it  is  especially
       important to bear in mind  the  analysis  in  Huang  and  CW  of  the
       significance  of  national  immigration  rules  and   extra-statutory
       policies. This analysis builds on Lord Bingham's reasoning in  Razgar
       [20] (see also [19]) which emphasised that "decisions taken  pursuant
       to the lawful operation of immigration control will be  proportionate
       in all save a small minority of cases identifiable on a case to  case
       basis" (emphasis added). This body of rules and policies  caters  for
       numerous categories of  person,  including  those  persons  who  have
       health needs, albeit requiring them to satisfy a number of  financial
       and other requirements (paragraphs 51-56 of HC395 as amended set  out
       the current rules for persons requiring leave to enter as  a  visitor
       for private medical  treatment).   It  is  entirely  compatible  with
       Convention rights that such rules (and related policies)   should  be
       made subject to  requirements of this kind, since there is  no  human
       right to travel to another country to receive health care or  welfare
       (Lord Bingham, Razgar [3]; Lord Nicholls, N [16]-[18], Lord Hope [48]-
       [50], Lord Brown [90]; Buxton LJ, ZT [19]-[20]).  Thus  if  a  person
       comes to the UK or is in the UK without complying with such rules  or
       policies, then it will require  truly  exceptional  circumstances  to
       justify such lack of compliance (CW [32]).

   56. Accordingly, a very important consideration in  health  cases  is  to
       examine to what extent a person's health problems  existed  prior  to
       coming to the UK or during a time, if any, when he or she was in  the
       UK with valid leave (Buxton LJ, ZT [19]-[20]).  If such problems  did
       pre-exist, yet someone is here without having been  given  permission
       to  come  or  to  stay  under  health-related  immigration  rules  or
       policies, then that is a factor pointing heavily towards his  or  her
       expulsion being regarded  as  proportionate.  The  situation  may  be
       different for a person who whilst lawfully here (e.g. as a student or
       work permit  holder)  has  contracted  a  serious  illness  requiring
       essential medical treatment and for whom there is no  such  treatment
       available in his receiving state -   although  here  too  it  may  be
       difficult, without more, to establish circumstances which are  "truly
       exceptional".

   (i)  Suicide cases can engage an appellant's rights under Articles 2,  3
   and 8 of the Convention (Baroness Hale, Razgar [64]), but they  are  not
   to be seen as a wholly separate category


   57. In J it was pointed out that the  Strasbourg  Court  in  Bensaid  was
       concerned  with  the  general  issue  of  suffering  associated  with
       deterioration in a person's mental illness.  Self-harm  and  harm  to
       others are thus to be seen as among the  possible  manifestations  of
       suffering of this kind. Suicide  cases  can  raise  distinct  issues,
       under Articles 3 and 8, but not so as to require the  application  of
       different legal tests (we leave aside here suicide cases reliant upon
       Article 2).

   (j) So far as suicide  cases  which  seek  to  rely  on  Article  8  are
   concerned, the principles are still  primarily  those  set  out  by  the
   European Court of Human Rights in Bensaid v UK  (2001) 33  EHRR  10  and
   the facts in  Bensaid  afford  a  particularly  important  yardstick  in
   assessing whether the circumstances of a case are truly exceptional.

   58. Important guidance on the application of Article 3 to  suicide  cases
       has been set out by the Court of Appeal in  J.  However,  so  far  as
       suicide cases which seek to rely on  Article  8  are  concerned,  the
       principles are still primarily those set out by the European Court of
       Human  Rights  in  Bensaid  and  the  facts  in  Bensaid   afford   a
       particularly   important   yardstick   in   assessing   whether   the
       circumstances of a case are "truly exceptional".

   59. Bensaid concerned someone who had been diagnosed as  a  schizophrenic
       suffering from psychotic illness of  such  severity  that  compulsory
       detention  in  a  psychiatric  hospital  was   considered,   although
       eventually his condition was managed outside hospital except for  one
       brief period.  The reason why the Court did not consider that Article
       3 requirements were met was that the  applicant's  medical  condition
       had not reached such a critical  stage  that  there  were  compelling
       humanitarian grounds for not removing him to  a  place  which  lacked
       medical and social services which he  would  need  to  prevent  acute
       suffering. We draw here on the summary contained in  paragraphs  [5]-
       [8] of Razgar. In considering Mr Bensaid's position under  Article  8
       the Court noted that  it  had  been  submitted  on  his  behalf  that
       withdrawal of treatment and taking him away from the  social  support
       ties he  had  built  up  over  11  years  in  the  UK  would  risk  a
       deterioration in his serious mental illness and that there  would  be
       an immediate and  real  risk  that  he  would  act  in  obedience  to
       hallucinations telling him to harm himself  and  others  ([44]).  The
       applicant  contended  that  the  nearest  hospital   at   which   his
       psychiatric illness could  be  treated  in  Algeria  was  some  75-80
       kilometres from his home village, and adduced evidence that there was
       a high risk of his suffering  a  relapse  of  psychotic  symptoms  on
       returning.  He had lost all insight into the fact that he was ill and
       believed the persecutory delusions and abuse  which  he  experienced,
       including voices telling him to harm other people. He had  previously
       felt so hopeless and depressed as  to  contemplate  suicide.  In  the
       opinion of a psychiatrist, there was a  substantial  likelihood  that
       forcible repatriation would result in significant and lasting adverse
       effects.


   60. In deciding that there was no breach of Article 8, the  Court  stated
       at paragraph [48]:


              "Turning to the present case, the court recalls that  it  has
              found above that the risk of damage to the applicant's health
              from return to his country was based on largely  hypothetical
              factors and that it  was  not  substantiated  that  he  would
              suffer  inhuman  and  degrading   treatment.   Nor   in   the
              circumstances  has  it  been  established  that   his   moral
              integrity would be substantially affected to a degree falling
              within the  scope  of  Article  8  of  the  Convention.  Even
              assuming that the dislocation  caused  to  the  applicant  by
              removal from the United Kingdom where he has  lived  for  the
              last eleven years was to be considered by itself as affecting
              his private life, in the context  of  the  relationships  and
              support framework which he enjoyed there, the Court considers
              that such interference may be regarded as complying with  the
              requirements of the second paragraph of Article 8, namely  as
              a measure "in accordance with the law", pursuing the aims  of
              the protection of the economic well-being of the country  and
              the prevention of  disorder  and  crime,  as  well  as  being
              "necessary in a democratic society" for those aims."


   61. It is noteworthy that in  the  above  passage  the  Court  found  the
       applicant had not shown that his right to  respect  for  his  private
       life would be sufficiently affected  to  come  within  the  scope  of
       Article 8(1). The Court only went on to consider the  proportionality
       issue under Article 8(2) in the alternative.  Recasting  the  Court's
       analysis in terms of Lord Bingham's five  questions  in  Razgar,  the
       Court in Bensaid did not find that the applicant  was  able  to  show
       under question 2 that there was an interference  having  consequences
       of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article  8.
       In the alternative the Court found that even if  it  considered  that
       Article 8 was engaged under question 5, the expulsion measure was not
       disproportionate.

   The appellant's case
   62. We return now to consider the appellant's case in the  light  of  the
       above summary of case law.  So far as  Mr  Gulvin's  point  that  the
       Adjudicator failed to deal properly with  proportionality,  we  would
       agree that the Adjudicator did not conduct any detailed consideration
       of factors weighing for and against the appellant when analysing  the
       Article 8 claim. The most she did  was  show  that  she  undertook  a
       balancing exercise.  Thus  at  paragraph  56,  when  considering  the
       appellant's position if returned to  the  Occupied  Territories,  the
       Lebanon or Dubai, she stated:


             'To expect him to go to one of three countries, none of  which
             is  guaranteed  to  accept  him  without  a   good   deal   of
             administrative negotiation and preparation which the appellant
             is arguably not capable of, and given that  in  two  of  these
             countries he is extremely unlikely to be able to  access  even
             treatment at a  moderate  level  for  a  very  serious  mental
             condition, is in my view  disproportionate  to  the  need  for
             effective immigration control in the UK' (emphasis added).




   63. Whilst this suffices to show that she weighed the competing interests
       at stake, it does not  to  show  she  understood  that  normally  the
       interests of the state are imperative and it would only be in a small
       minority of exceptional cases that the claim of the individual  would
       prevail. Accordingly her  approach  to  the  balancing  exercise  was
       legally flawed: she had failed to apply the correct legal criteria.

   64.  The  second  related  point  Mr  Gulvin  highlighted  was  that  the
       Adjudicator nowhere stated that she had  approached  the  appellant's
       circumstances under Article 8 by reference to the test that they  had
       to be shown to be 'truly exceptional'.


   65. Again we agree. The Adjudicator did not analyse Article 8  using  the
       language of exceptionality, nor did her approach sufficiently  accord
       with that enjoined in Razgar. It is true that the language  she  used
       at paragraph 52 suggests some awareness  that  she  had  to  apply  a
       stringent test as part of her analysis of the appellant's  Article  8
       claim: in that paragraph she stated her view that  if  the  appellant
       were to suffer a relapse (as seemed likely at  some  stage)  and  was
       unable to get appropriate treatment, "I think he would be at risk  of
       physical harm because of his behaviour and I think there would  be  a
       flagrant denial of his right to physical  and  moral  integrity".  If
       anything the language she used  here  appeared  to  apply  an  unduly
       stringent test of "flagrant denial", but, since she was focussing  on
       the appellant's situation in the territory of the destination  state,
       we think this was consistent with  established  principles  and  that
       overall she can be taken as having been concerned to  establish  that
       grave consequences  would  result  from  the  interference  with  the
       appellant's right to respect for private life: see  above  paragraphs
       21-26.

   66. However, even accepting that  the  Adjudicator  adequately  addressed
       Lord Bingham's second question, it has still to be  examined  whether
       she adequately addressed Lord  Bingham's  fifth  question  concerning
       proportionality. For a finding of disproportionality more had  to  be
       considered  than  whether  grave  consequences  would   result   from
       interference with   the  appellant's  right  to  physical  and  moral
       integrity. It had also to be considered whether,  after  weighing  up
       the relevant facts, the circumstances  could  be  seen  to  be  truly
       exceptional.


   67. We particularly bear in mind  here  that  the  medical  evidence  had
       identified that there have been periods in the UK when the  appellant
       has posed a threat to the human rights of others as well as to public
       order, e.g.  through acts of arson and  violence;  hence  there  were
       weighty immigration control considerations. We do not think that  the
       Adjudicator undertook this further consideration or took full account
       of all relevant considerations on  both  sides  of  the  scales.  Her
       failure to do so, in our view, constitutes a related error of law.


   68. However, whilst the Adjudicator made two interrelated errors of  law,
       we do not find that these amounted to material errors. Here we remind
       ourselves firstly of the limits of our error of law jurisdiction.  We
       are not concerned with whether the Adjudicator  reached  the  correct
       decision on the merits. We are only entitled to  interfere  with  her
       decision if it was materially wrong in law: Eman  Abbas  [2005]  EWCA
       Civ 992.  Had we been adjudicating the appellant's Article  8  appeal
       at first instance, we very much  doubt  we  would  have  allowed  the
       appeal, but that is not our function in this type of case.

   69. Secondly we remind ourselves that in considering materiality we  have
       to look at the extent to which, even though applying the wrong  legal
       tests, the Adjudicator's  reasoning  in  fact  identified  a  set  of
       circumstances which, by reference to the correct legal  tests,  could
       reasonably be said to constitute "truly exceptional" circumstances.

   70.  We  think  her  decision  does  identify  circumstances  capable  of
       amounting when weighed in the balance (and even taking  into  account
       factors such as the appellant's history of posing  a  threat  to  the
       human  rights  of  others  through  acts  of  violence)   to   "truly
       exceptional" circumstances. What were these circumstances?

   71. Before seeking to identify  the  circumstances  relied  upon  by  the
       Adjudicator, we would first of all observe that this is not a  "pure"
       mental health case in which reliance is placed on  a  combination  of
       foreign aspects relating to lack of adequate medical treatment abroad
       and domestic aspects of the appellant's case relating to him being at
       risk either by virtue of the withdrawal of the treatment  in  the  UK
       and/or by virtue of the impact on him  whilst  here  of  any  adverse
       decision (contrast J [17]). Nor is it a case in which it is said that
       there is any specific risk of suicide upon return, although there are
       serious (and important) concerns about a significant deterioration in
       the appellant's mental health in the Occupied Territories.

   72. Had the appellant's case been a pure health case in the above  sense,
       we very much doubt we would have concluded that the  Adjudicator  was
       entitled (notwithstanding  legal  errors)  to  allow  the  appeal  on
       Article 8 grounds.  For one thing the appellant  was  suffering  from
       mental illness before he came to the UK and  (although  mitigated  to
       some extent by his own lack of awareness of this) made no attempt  to
       apply under  the  relevant  immigration  rules  relating  to  private
       medical treatment (notwithstanding that in his statement he  said  he
       had come to the UK for "peace and quiet"). For another he  has  never
       had valid leave to remain in the UK. Further, at the date of  hearing
       his medical condition was not at a critical stage. It was foreseeable
       that despite recent improvements he would suffer a  relapse,  yet  it
       was not suggested that there were any intrinsic medical  reasons  for
       regarding his condition upon relapse as unmanageable. Nor were  there
       any intrinsic medical reasons for thinking that, if  able  to  access
       treatment, he would commit self-harm or  pose  a  serious  threat  to
       others. His  condition  was  not  untreatable  or  acute.  We  remind
       ourselves here of the insistence  by  the  European  Court  of  Human
       Rights in Bensaid on an appellant being able  to  show  "sufficiently
       adverse effects on physical and moral integrity" ([46]).

   73. In our view the subsequent view of the  House  of  Lords  in  Razgar,
       which considered that both under Article 3 and Article 8 there had to
       be a particularly high threshold, properly reflects this core finding
       in Bensaid.

   74. However, we do not need to reach a definite conclusion on this matter
       because it is clear to us that the appellant's is not a  pure  health
       case in the sense outlined above. In particular, among  the  relevant
       factors which the Adjudicator looked  at  cumulatively,  was  one  in
       particular which was not intrinsically health-related. That concerned
       the  very  unusual  set  of  country  conditions  prevailing  in  the
       destination  country,  namely  that  the  Occupied   Territories   is
       afflicted by significant levels of violence  in  the  context  of  an
       ongoing  armed  struggle  being  conducted  by  various   Palestinian
       organisations against the Israeli authorities and  there  is  also  a
       very significant presence  of  fundamentalist  Muslim  organisations.
       This factor took on enhanced importance in view of a further  factor,
       which concerned the appellant's likely behaviour in such a country.

   75. The significance which attaches or can attach to the first factor has
       been highlighted by the European Court of  Human  Rights  in  a  case
       mentioned by  Baroness Hale in  Razgar [46]:  the case of Jakupovic v
       Austria (2003) 38 EHRR  595,  [2003]  INLR  499.   This  concerned  a
       sixteen year old boy facing  return  to  Bosnia  as  a  result  of  a
       residence  prohibition  imposed  for  criminal  offences.  The  court
       observed that very weighty reasons would be needed to justify sending
       a 16 year old alone to a country which had recently experienced armed
       conflict and where he had no close relatives.  The  Court  held  that
       the decision to remove him was disproportionate.

   76. The important implications of this first factor for the general issue
       of the significance of the appellant's likely behaviour on return  is
       explained in more detail below.

   77. Bearing in mind that this was not a pure health case,  we  find  that
       whilst the Adjudicator erred in law in not properly  approaching  the
       balancing exercise she had to perform according to the correct  legal
       criteria  and   not   applying   a   test   of   "truly   exceptional
       circumstances", the factors she identified as being decisive in  this
       case, when considered cumulatively, were factors  capable  of  giving
       rise to truly exceptional circumstances. What were these?

   78. There was first of all the appellant's medical condition.  His mental
       illness was long term. He has been variously diagnosed as a  paranoid
       schizophrenic  and  as  someone  suffering  from  Bipolar   Affective
       Disorder and Psychotic Mania.   Since his arrival in the  UK  he  had
       spent a significant amount of time in and out of psychiatric hospital
       care, having been  compulsorily  detained  under  the  mental  health
       legislation a number of times.  There  has  been  a  pattern  to  his
       condition: being controlled and  sometimes  improved  by  medication,
       only for him to relapse following his failure to take  medication  or
       to turn up for injections. It was the real risk  of  further  relapse
       which the Adjudicator saw as complicating the matter  of  what  would
       happen to him if he were removed from the  UK,  where  he  had  ready
       access to a high standard of medical treatment.

   79. It was in the context of having found a very  high  risk  of  relapse
       that  the  Adjudicator  approached  the  evidence  relating  to   the
       availability  of  relevant  medical   treatment   in   the   Occupied
       Territories.  We have already explained why we see no error of law in
       the Adjudicator's approach  to  the  issue  of  the  availability  of
       relevant medical treatment there, but it is important to reiterate it
       here because it formed an  important  premise  in  her  reasoning  as
       regards risk on return.

   80.  Moving  beyond  health-related  factors,  a   further   factor   the
       Adjudicator saw as of particular importance related to the  situation
       of generalised violence in the  Occupied  Territories:  this  is  the
       Jakupovic point.  This area of the world was not  simply  an  Islamic
       country or area whose local populace could well be affronted  by  the
       appellant's expression of his religious views. It was  also,  in  the
       Adjudicator's words "effectively a  war  zone".   As  she  stated  at
       paragraph 4:

             "The security situation in the Occupied  Territories  is  well
             documented.  There  are  still  serious  problems.  There  are
             reports  of  curfews  and  closures.   There  are  reports  of
             killings by suicide bombers, the destruction of  homes,  human
             rights  abuses  and  poverty.  It  does  appear   to   present
             difficulties for people who are vulnerable."

   81. The Adjudicator also attached particular importance  to  the  way  in
       which the appellant's mental illness  manifested  itself.  She  noted
       that it caused him to behave from time to time in  an  uncontrollably
       violent and dangerous fashion. At paragraph 52, she  stated  that  if
       the appellant were to  relapse  and  be  unable  to  get  appropriate
       treatment "he would be at  risk  of  physical  harm  because  of  his
       behaviour ...".  She attached signal weight to the fact that Dr Singh
       had expressed serious disquiet about the religious views expressed by
       the appellant when he was ill. These views included that he  was  God
       or had authority from God or had been chosen  by  God,  that  he  was
       superior to other people, that he was Jesus, that he had  risen  from
       the dead, that he was the Devil, that he had been receiving the words
       of prophets and was the only person in the whole universe to  receive
       such prophecies.  He had also  expressed  very  hostile  views  about
       Saudi Arabia. What concerned Dr Singh and the Adjudicator was that in
       this regard the appellant completely  lacked  insight  into  his  own
       mental condition.

   82. The Adjudicator clearly considered that on  return  to  the  Occupied
       Territories, an Islamic country  or  area,  the  appellant's  bizarre
       religious views combined with his aggressive behaviour could  attract
       hostility  from  the  local  populace.  There  was   a   combination,
       therefore, of behaviour which would  be  threatening  or  harmful  to
       others and behaviour which would attract  harm  from  others  in  the
       context of a country which was effectively a war zone.

   83. The Adjudicator  also  identified  as  a  relevant  factor  that  the
       appellant would not have any family support on return to the Occupied
       Territories: "... no support no  job  and  no  family"  was  how  she
       expressed this in paragraph 52. She had also accepted in this  regard
       that persons of Palestinian origin faced discrimination in access  to
       certain services such as housing and that this  particular  appellant
       had never been to the Occupied Territories.

   84. Accordingly, despite the Adjudicator making certain errors of law  in
       properly identifying  and  applying  Article  8  legal  criteria,  we
       consider that the above factors as identified by her were just enough
       to form a sufficient basis for her conclusion  that  removal  to  the
       Occupied Territories would breach the appellant's Article 8 rights by
       disproportionately interfering with his  right  to  respect  for  his
       private life.   Although the appellant's case considered purely as  a
       health (mental illness) case was not one which brought it within  the
       "small minority of exceptional cases" category, it was open to her to
       find that it did fall within that category once  proper  account  was
       taken of the likely consequences for the appellant and his  behaviour
       of the general conditions in the Occupied Territories and the lack of
       relevant medical treatment.

   85. For the above reasons we find that the Adjudicator did not materially
       err in law.

   86. Accordingly, the decision of the Adjudicator to allow the  appeal  on
       Article 8 grounds must stand.


   Signed                                Date

   Dr H H Storey
   Senior Immigration Judge

