

    NA (risk categories - Hema) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2008] UKAIT
                                                                       00071

                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 30 June 2008                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE PERKINS
                                 MRS J HOLT

                                   Between

                                     NA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Henderson of Counsel instructed by the IAS
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

      1.   The country guidance in AB and DM (Risk categories reviewed -
    Tutsis added) DRC CG [2005] UKAIT 00118 is confirmed subject to adding
    that members of the Hema tribe are likely to be treated by the
    authorities in the DRC in the same way as Tutsis and Rwandans and may
    be at risk of persecution on return to the Ituri region. Tribal
    membership by itself is not determinative.

      2.   Whether a member of the Hema is at real risk of persecution or
    is able to relocate internally depends not only on his ethnicity but
    also on his profile, background and circumstances looked at in the
    light of the country evidence as a whole.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is the reconsideration of  an  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 23 March 2005 refusing to vary the  appellant's  leave
    to remain following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo  (DRC)
    born on 12 April 1986.  He arrived in  this  country  on  28  May  2003
    claiming asylum on 15 July 2003.  His application  was  refused  on  12
    August 2003 but he was granted limited leave to remain until  11  April
    2004.  On 19 February 2004 the appellant applied for further  leave  to
    remain on the grounds that he would be at real risk of  persecution  on
    return to the DRC because he belonged to the Hema  ethnic  group.   The
    respondent did not believe the appellant's account of events in the DRC
    taking the view there were grave doubts about the appellant's claim  to
    be a member of the Hema and did not accept that he  would  be  at  real
    risk of serious harm on return or that  there  would  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8.  On 23 March the respondent refused  the  appellant  further
    leave to remain.

3.    The appellant's claim was that he had been  forced  to  flee  the  DRC
    following an attack on his home village in which his  father  had  been
    killed, his mother raped and his brothers and  sisters  had  fled.   He
    also claimed to be at risk because he was a member of  the  Hema  which
    was in dispute with the Lendu.  There  had  also  been  an  attempt  to
    recruit him to the Union of Congolese Patriots (UPC) by a man  (T)  who
    used to take boys of the appellant's age to join in order to fight  the
    Lendu.

4.    The respondent set out his reasons for  refusing  the  application  in
    the original reasons for refusal letter of 12 August 2003 as follows:

         "8.      You claim that on 26/5/2003 your father was killed by  the
             RCD movement when they came to your home.   RCD  is  a  former
             rebel group. Formed by rebels in August 1998, the organisation
             split into two separate groups  in  1999:  RCD-Goma  and  RCD-
             Kisangani (later renamed RCD-ML).  The leader of  RCD-Goma  is
             Adolphe Onusumba and the leader of RCD-ML is  Mbusa  Nyamwisi.
             A faction of the RCD-ML, called the RCD-National  (RCD-N)  has
             recently formed.   The  leader  of  RCD-N  is  Roger  Lumbala.
             Another RCD faction, called RCD-Originale (RCD-O) has recently
             formed.  The RCD-O leader is Felix Mumbere.  You described how
             the men from the RCD movement wanted to rape your mother,  and
             that when your father tried to prevent this they cut  off  his
             head, took his heart out  and  ate  it.   After  killing  your
             father you stated that they then raped  your  mother.   During
             this incident you claimed that you were able to run  for  your
             life and found a man that was eventually to help you leave the
             country.  The circumstances and ease with which you were  able
             to escape from the RCD movement casts  considerable  doubt  on
             the authenticity of your claim.  It is not accepted  that  you
             would be able to escape from such ruthless  and  vicious  men,
             who were no doubt  armed,  simply  by  running  away.   Having
             persecuted your family, such individuals  would  not  let  you
             escape in the way you claim.


         9.       You claim that you cannot go back home because a  man  [T]
             from  the  UPC  movement  has  tried  to  make  you  join  the
             aforementioned organisation. As you did not  want  to  do  the
             UPC, you claim that this man tried to kill you.  In the  Ituri
             region of the north east,  two  tribally  based  armed  groups
             emerged in 2002.  These  were  the  Lendu-dominated  Patriotic
             Army of the Congo (APC) supported by the RCD(ML), and the Hema
             dominated UPC, led by Thomas  Lubanga  and  supported  by  the
             Rwandan and Ugandan governments.   Your  claim  regarding  you
             being made to join the UPC movement is  deemed  fallacious  on
             the grounds that had such an organisation wanted you  to  join
             them, you would have little if no choice  as  to  whether  you
             wished to be part of them.  Likewise, any refusal on your part
             given the nature and strength of the group would have resulted
             in certain death, and not just someone trying to kill you.


         10.      You claim to belong to the Hema clan  who  in  turn  fight
             against the Lendu clan.  You stated that the reason  for  this
             fighting was because within the province where you lived there
             was  a lot of gold.  [T] from the UPC movement (see  paragraph
             9 above), you claim is part of the Hema  people.   You  stated
             that the town that  has  the  gold  is  called  Ituri.  It  is
             accepted that during 2002 in the Ituri province  in  Orientale
             province, fighting between  members  of  the  Lendu  and  Hema
             ethnic groups resulted in thousands of civilian deaths and the
             displacement of more than 500,000  persons.   UPDF  and  rebel
             factions  have  armed  both  groups  and  manipulated   ethnic
             tensions  resulting  from  long  standing  land  disputes  and
             colonial patriotism to  the  Hema,  to  exploit  the  region's
             resources.    There  have  been  reports  that   the   Rwandan
             government has supplied and trained Hema militia led by Thomas
             Lubanga, while the RCD-ML  have  supported  Lendu  combatants.
             With this information in mind it is considered that  the  risk
             to yourself, and many others, of being embroiled  or  affected
             by such a conflict, was no less and no greater than any  other
             civilian in similar, albeit difficult circumstances."

      These reasons were adopted in the reasons for  refusal  letter  of  23
    March 2005 and the respondent's view was that  the  appellant  had  not
    give a truthful account of events in the DRC.


The hearing before the Immigration Judge

5.    At the hearing before the Immigration Judge the appellant relied on  a
    witness statement in which he confirmed his description of  the  attack
    on the houses in the village, the fact that T had tried to force him to
    join the UPC and there had been an occasion when he had been chased  by
    them to conscript him.  He said in his oral evidence that the Hema were
    still being killed by the Lendu because of their ethnicity and that his
    life would be in serious danger if he had to return to the DRC.  He was
    a member of the Hema from the south and could speak some Kihema but not
    fluently.  His parents had moved to Bunia before he was born.   He  had
    now built a new life for himself in this country and had worked hard to
    educate himself and become a responsible person.

6.    In cross-examination he said that when  the  RCD  men  came  to  their
    house he was in the living room.  He repeated the  description  of  the
    attack on his father and mother and said that during the fracas he  was
    able to flee out of the back door.  There were no rebels at the back of
    the house and he was able to join  other  villagers  who  were  running
    away.  He accepted that in the  DRC  he  had  never  been  arrested  or
    detained.  He said that he could not return to live in another part  of
    the country because it would be known that he was Hema from his accent.



The findings of the Immigration Judge

7.    The immigration judge believed that the appellant's account was  true.
     He said that he kept in mind that when the appellant  had  arrived  in
    this country he was only 17, he had immediately sought  the  assistance
    of the Red Cross here and been put into the care  of  Social  Services.
    The judge accepted this explanation for the delay in  claiming  asylum.
    At his interview he  had  been  questioned  in  English  as  a  Swahili
    interpreter  was  not  available  and  the  judge  accepted  that  this
    adequately explained any discrepancies.  He found that the  appellant's
    account was consistent  with  the  objective  evidence  for  2003.   He
    accepted that the appellant was at his home when  RCD  rebels  attacked
    the village and his father was killed and mother raped.  He found  that
    everything the appellant said happened in May 2003 was amply  supported
    by the objective evidence which showed that at that time  there  was  a
    conflict between the Lendu and Hema and that the RCD, on behalf of  the
    Lendu, had carried out horrific attacks on Hema including killings  and
    rapes.

8.    However, the judge said that the appellant's evidence must be seen  in
    the context of a civil war and there was no evidence that the appellant
    and his family were specifically targeted.  As the judge expressed  it,
    in paragraph 103 of his determination, they were simply  caught  up  in
    the ethnic frenzy that was going on at the time.   He  found  that  the
    situation in the Ituri area and around Bunia had substantially improved
    and, although there may well still be isolated incidents, the situation
    was not what it was in 2003.  He commented that the appellant  had  not
    been personally harmed and had never suffered physical harm.  He  found
    on the evidence before him that there was no  real  likelihood  of  the
    appellant being persecuted on return to  the  DRC  on  account  of  his
    ethnicity or his actual imputed political beliefs.   He  accepted  that
    the appellant had no family in the DRC but found  that  he  was  a  fit
    young man who was well able to return  to  the  DRC.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.

 9. Reconsideration was ordered on  the  appellant's  application  and  the
    Tribunal (Senior Immigration Judge Perkins, Ms P L Ravenscroft and Mr F
    T Jamieson) found that  the  judge  had  materially  erred  in  law  as
    follows:



         "1.      The Appellant was born on 12 April 1986 and so is now aged
             20 years. He is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
             The Immigration Judge found that the appellant is a member  of
             the Hema clan who had lived with his family in  Bunia  in  the
             DRC.

         2. He had refused an invitation to join the UPC.

         3. He left the DRC shortly after this  mother  was  raped  and  his
             father was murdered brutally in a racially inspired attack  by
             RDC rebels.

         4. The Immigration Judge found  that  the  appellant  could  return
             safely to the DRC because the 'situation in the Ituri area and
             around Bunia has ... substantially improved, as it set out  in
             the CIPU report and, indeed, in the second refusal letter'.

         5. The Immigration Judge did not accept that the appellant would be
             at  risk  now  because  he  declined  to  join  the  UPC.  The
             Immigration Judge also  ruled  that  the  appellant's  removal
             would [not] be contrary to his protected human rights.

         6. We see no basis for criticising either of these findings. It was
             not suggested  before  us  that  the  UPC  is  able,  or  even
             inclined, to extract vengeance on people who chose not to join
             it and there was no suggestion before us that the decision  to
             dismiss the appeal on human rights  grounds  was  in  any  way
             erroneous.

         7. Additionally the determination  was  attacked  because,  it  was
             said, the Immigration Judge had  made  contradictory  findings
             and because he had not considered properly  (or  at  all)  the
             background material.

         8. The suggestion that the Immigration Judge had made contradictory
             findings is wrong.  It  was  based  on  a  misreading  of  the
             determination. At  paragraph  107  of  his  determination  the
             Immigration Judge says "I do not find that this Appellant was,
             himself, persecuted on account of  his  ethnicity".  This  was
             said to contradict the Immigration Judge's  finding  that  the
             appellant's family  was  attacked  because  the  ethnicity  of
             family members. This is not a contradiction.  The  Immigration
             Judge's point is that  the  appellant's  family  was  attacked
             because of its ethnicity  and  not  because  of  any  personal
             animosity  towards   the   appellant.   The   appellant,   the
             Immigration Judge found, was not attacked at all.

         9. However we find that the criticism of  the  Immigration  Judge's
             reasoning in support of  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant
             would not be at risk now is so inadequately explained that  it
             is erroneous in law, even though it may in fact be the correct
             conclusion.

         10.      Certainly Miss  Leatherland  showed  us  passages  in  the
             background  material  that  tend  to  support  the  conclusion
             reached by  the  Immigration  Judge.  Ms  Braganza  showed  us
             passages that tended to  support  a  contrary  conclusion.  We
             could not be satisfied that the Immigration Judge's conclusion
             was the result of  a  properly  reasoned  examination  of  the
             bundle of background  material  provided  by  the  appellant's
             representative which extended to 365 pages. Even if it was the
             result of such an analysis it was not explained in a way  that
             could be scrutinised or at all.

         11.      The Immigration Judge erred  because  he  failed  to  give
             reasons or any  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  material
             matters;

         12.      It follows that although we find no material error of  law
             in the Immigration Judge's conclusion that  the  appellant  is
             not at risk because he chose not to  join  the  UPC  and  that
             returning the appellant to the DRC would  not  contravene  his
             protected human rights he did err because his conclusion  that
             the appellant could return  safely  to  the  DRC  is  reasoned
             inadequately and that point must be reconsidered.

         13.      In order to do this the appellant may well  want  to  give
             oral evidence himself and call expert evidence to show that he
             could not relocate safely to  a  different  part  of  the  DRC
             and/or  that  he  should  not  be  expected  to  relocate.  We
             encourage him to make an appropriate application under rule 32
             of the Asylum and Immigration Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2005
             which the Tribunal will consider."



10.   The Tribunal directed that  the  existing  findings  of  fact  on  the
    appellant's evidence were to stand and reconsideration was  limited  to
    arguments about the risk, if any, that the appellant would face in  the
    event of his returning to the DRC on account of his  ethnicity  whether
    he could avoid such risks by relocating.

11.   The parties were subsequently  notified  that  this  appeal  would  be
    listed for potential country guidance on the issue of whether there was
    a risk on return to members of the Hema tribe from Ituri and on whether
    re-internal relocation was available.  The matter is listed for  us  to
    consider these issues.  It was also accepted that we should  reconsider
    the Article 8 appeal in the light of the opinions of the House of Lords
    in Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL
    39.

Evidence at this hearing

12.   The appellant's documentary evidence is set out in  a  bundle  indexed
    and paginated 1- 445 including an expert report from Erik Kennes  dated
    12 June 2008 (A5) with a further supplementary  report  dated  25  June
    2008 and a report from Claudia  Seymour  dated  18  June  2008  with  a
    supplementary report of 25 June 2008.  The appellant  and  his  partner
    have filed further witness statements  both  dated  27  June  2008.  Mr
    Henderson has produced a skeleton argument.  The respondent's documents
    are contained in a bundle R (1-28 together with the COI report for  the
    DRC February 2008 and  May  2008).   A  full  list  of  the  background
    evidence  before  the  Tribunal  is  set  out  in  the  appendix.   The
    appellant, his partner and Ms Seymour gave oral evidence.


The evidence of the appellant

13.   In his further witness statement the appellant said  that  he  had  no
    family in the DRC that he knew of.  He was  born  in  Bunia  and  lived
    there with his parents.  He had never left that area or  lived  in  any
    other part of the country.  It would not be safe for  him  in  Kinshasa
    because he was a member of the Hema.  The Hemas were  farmers,  keeping
    cattle and cultivating the land.  His father had a  small  farm  and  a
    shop selling produce.  He had tried to find his family through the  Red
    Cross in this country but to no avail.  He now lived with his  partner.
    They had a daughter born on 13 September 2005 and his partner  was  now
    some ten weeks' pregnant.  She also had a son who had been born to  her
    in Kenya.

The evidence of the appellant's partner

14.   The appellant's partner said that she was  in  fear  of  returning  to
    Kenya.  She is a Kenyan citizen who has applied for asylum.  Her appeal
    has been dismissed.  The judge accepted her account of events but  came
    to the view that she would be able to relocate in  a  non-Kikuyu  area.
    She did not accept that this was the case and her  representatives  had
    made further submissions to the respondent.  She was afraid of going to
    the DRC with the appellant.  She was pregnant.  She had one son settled
    at school and a young daughter.   If  she  was  allowed  to  marry  the
    appellant, she would.  She could not put her  children  or  her  unborn
    child at risk by taking them to the DRC.

15.   In cross-examination she confirmed that her  daughter  had  been  born
    when she was living in a hostel.  She had been anxious for her  son  to
    be happy with her relationship with the appellant.  He used to come  to
    stay with her at weekends and sometimes in  the  middle  of  the  week.
    They had now started living together.

The evidence of Claudia Seymour

16.   Ms Seymour has served as a Child Protection Officer  with  the  United
    Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations (MONUC) in the  DRC  from
    February  2006  to  June  2007.   She  has  personal  and  professional
    experience of the Eastern DRC and has carried out doctoral research  on
    children's experience of violent conflict in North Kivu.  In her report
    dated 18 June 2008 she provides evidence about  the  situation  in  the
    Ituri district of the Eastern DRC and an assessment  of  the  potential
    dangers that the appellant might face were he to be returned there.

17.   She says that the situation in Ituri district although safer  than  it
    was  when  the  appellant  initially  claimed  asylum,  remains  highly
    insecure.  There are inter-communal tensions and  the  government  does
    not exert  effective  control  anywhere  in  the  district.   Dissident
    militias remain active and local communities are heavily armed.   There
    is considerable political uncertainty  in  the  lead-up  to  the  local
    elections planned for 2009.  She warns that caution should be used when
    discussing terminology such as "the Hema" and "the  Lendu":  these  are
    ethnic classifications over-simplifying  the  complexity,  history  and
    politics of group dynamics in Ituri.   However,  these  classifications
    are real and it is her view that there  is  the  possibility  that  the
    appellant  will  be  targeted  for  his  Hema  ethnicity  in  acts   of
    retributory violence.

18.   She says that the current levels of insecurity in Ituri should not  be
    underestimated where there remains serious concern about  the  presence
    of armed groups and militias.  Most of the armed groups in  Ituri  have
    been brought under control but dissident factions of the FRPI, FNI  and
    FARDC have caused large scale civilian displacement.   There  are  high
    levels banditry and criminality particularly in  the  urban  centre  of
    Bunia.  There is a local perception that Hema men are being targeted by
    soldiers and police in reprisal killings and  since  the  beginning  of
    2008 six Hema taxi drivers have been killed.  Young men in Ituri are at
    real risk of forced recruitment to local militias or conscripted labour
    in the mining and timber industries on behalf of militia commanders  or
    by FARDC.

19.   In her supplementary report dated 25 June 2008 Ms Seymour comments  on
    the appellant's situation were he and his family to return to Kinshasa.
     A young family returning there without a  family  or  support  network
    would in her opinion struggle to survive as there  are  effectively  no
    state provisions.  Young  children  would  be  especially  at  risk  of
    serious malnutrition, illness and death.  According to UNICEF,  under-5
    mortality rates in the DRC were 205 per 1,000 births in 2006 making  it
    the ninth highest country in the world for under 5 mortality rates.

20.   In her oral evidence she confirmed that in  her  view  young  children
    would be particularly at risk in Kinshasa, particularly  new  arrivals,
    as they would not have  built  up  any  natural  immunity.   There  was
    evidence of prevalent  sexual  violence  in  the  DRC  which  could  be
    described as an epidemic.  It had been used as a  weapon  initially  by
    the military but now, it was happening in a civilian context.

21.   In cross-examination she said that in  the  DRC,  the  perception  was
    that the Hema were cousins of the  Tutsi  and  came  from  Rwanda.   In
    Kinshasa there was a xenophobic attitude to Rwandans.   Hema  would  be
    recognised from their facial and body structure although  she  accepted
    that it was right to be cautious about such generalities.  On return to
    Kinshasa survival would be extremely difficult.  Even if the  appellant
    had  money  he  would  targeted  for  extortion.   Survival  would   be
    difficult.  She accepted that there were wealthy Tutsis in Kinshasa who
    were able to obtain protection and had the resources to leave  in  case
    of trouble.  She said that she had not met  the  appellant  before  the
    hearing, but she could see immediately  from  his  appearance  that  he
    would be recognised as a member of the Hema.

22.   In re-examination she referred  again  to  the  fact  that  since  the
    beginning of 2008 six Hema men had been killed in what appeared  to  be
    acts of retribution.  There was a generalised risk in the  DRC  but  in
    addition a risk arising from being a member of the Hema.  There  was  a
    particular problem in Kinshasa for internally  displaced  people.   She
    had no experience or knowledge of someone being returned to the DRC who
    had been able to obtain work.

The expert report of Erik Kennes

23.   In his report dated 12 June 2008 Mr  Kennes  deals  with  the  general
    situation in the DRC and then turns to the situation in Ituri and Bunia
    (A27ff).  The basis of his expertise on the DRC is set out at pages 1-2
    of his report.  For the purposes of this determination we need only set
    out the briefest of summaries of Mr Kennes' comprehensive account.   He
    says that there were a number of  structural  conflicts  in  the  Ituri
    region which were more or  less  kept  under  control  before  the  war
    started in 1998.  Basically two ethnic groups are pitted  against  each
    other:  the  Lendu,   who   are   of   Sudanese   origin   and   mainly
    agriculturalists and the Hema, of Bantu origin and mainly pastoralists.
     He says that even if this parallel  is  not  entirely  correct  it  is
    constantly used to explain the support of the Ugandan army for the Hema
    whereas the Kinshasa government is generally accused of supporting  the
    Lendu.  His view is that the Hema, Lendu and other ethnic groups in the
    area have constantly been manipulated by Ugandan army officers and in a
    later phase by the Rwandan government and that  the  conflict  is  kept
    alive by outside forces to gain access to the huge gold reserves in the
    region.  At times the conflict has run totally out of  hand,  the  only
    constant element being  the  strategies  by  the  Ugandan  and  Rwandan
    governments for control of the natural resources in the region.

24.   The conflict abated to a certain extent in May 2003 when  the  leaders
    of the different factions signed a peace  agreement  in  Dar-Es-Salaam.
    In June 2003 a military intervention of the European Union  calmed  the
    situation down and in  September  2003  MONUC  forces  took  over  that
    mission.  They settled the situation to a certain extent but left  free
    space for armed factions in the areas uncontrolled by MONUC.  By way of
    example Mahigi was a battleground between the FNI (Lendu) and the  FAPC
    in a struggle for control of customs  posts  and  goldmines.   However,
    some civil administration has been restored and the arrest of  some  30
    leaders of armed groups has made a significant impact  on  the  region.
    However, there continued to be fighting between  various  armed  groups
    but by November 2006 the remaining Ituri  armed  groups  had  signed  a
    comprehensive peace agreement with the government agreeing to surrender
    their weapons and to enter the process of  disarmament,  demobilisation
    and reintegration.  The only movement that  refused  to  carry  out  an
    agreement was Peter Karim's against whom decisive military  action  was
    taken.  He surrendered with his main officers in April 2007.  It is  Mr
    Kennes' view that although the situation has calmed down in Ituri,  the
    armed conflicts between a myriad of armed factions continues not always
    along ethnic lines but mainly for  the  control  of  lucrative  natural
    resources.

25.   When dealing with the position of those with a Hema profile Mr  Kennes
    says (at A56):

        "The situation of the Hema in the DR Congo is closely linked to the
        popular feeling of being invaded by a 'Nilotic network' and by  the
        'Hema-Tutsi'.  There are persistent rumours about such an invasion.
         The major part of the Congolese population is Bantu and there is a
        tendency to assimilate  the  Congolese  with  the  Bantu  speakers,
        excluding the pygmies, the Sudanese and the Nilotic peoples.


        The conflict with Rwanda, Burundi  and  Uganda  also  explains  the
        situation of insecurity for the Tutsi  and  Hema  populations  from
        these countries in the DRC.  A trans-national anti-Nilotic ideology
        reigns in the DR Congo.  It stigmatises the  'Hema-Tutsi  arrogance
        and hegemonic drive' and it attacks a trans-national complot of the
        'international Tutsi power'  aiming  at  the  submission  of  Bantu
        peoples."

26.   Mr Kennes says that the relevant authorities in  the  DRC  regard  the
    Hema as close to the RDC and Kigali.  He continues:

        "They are thus assimilated  to  'the  Tutsi'.   It  is  still  very
        dangerous to be Tutsi or to pretend to be  and  to  return  to  the
        country.  They are  considered  to  be  enemies  or  more  or  less
        permanent suspects.  The animosity of  the  Congolese  against  the
        (real or so-called) 'Rwandans' is so intense and visible  that  one
        does not need to look very far to  have  elements  of  proof.   The
        policy by the regime in Kigali to threaten regularly  and  untimely
        to invade the eastern part of the DRC  has  a  direct  and  adverse
        effect for the ethnic 'Rwandans' in the DRC.  This concerns firstly
        the Tutsi but the Hutu are also associated.  The security  services
        sometimes consider them even more dangerous because  they  resemble
        morphologically the 'real' Congolese."

27.   Insofar as the appellant is concerned Mr Kennes makes the  point  that
    he has an ethnic Hema profile  and  is  physically  recognisable  as  a
    member of the Hema.  His opinion is that if left on his own in Kinshasa
    the appellant would run a security risk and he would also be at risk as
    a failed asylum seeker coming from this country.  He would run the risk
    of being perceived as a member of an anti-government movement linked to
    the Tutsi groups in Kivu.  This would warrant further interrogation  in
    the Kin Maziere detention centre where he would be at  risk  of  cruel,
    inhuman and degrading treatment.  The risk to him as a  member  of  the
    Hema is based on the association made by the Congolese between Hema and
    Tutsi.  The Hema-Hima-Tutsi are put "in the same bag" by the  Congolese
    and regarded as enemies.  This cultural factor must be  taken  together
    with the social background.  The Hema were advantaged  by  the  Belgian
    colonisers just as the Tutsi were considered to be.   The  Hema  had  a
    higher social status and possessed much of the land in Ituri.   Finally
    there is also a political element; some Hema groups (as for example the
    militia of Thomas Lubanga) have been supported by  the  Rwandan  regime
    thus reinforcing the association between Hema  and  Tutsi.   Mr  Kennes
    sets out in his report how he forwarded a picture of the  appellant  to
    four different people from the east of the DRC, one of whom specialised
    in the Ituri region.  Their  reply  was  unanimous:  the  form  of  the
    appellant's face, his nose and lips portrayed a Hema physiognomy.  This
    was not the same as a Tutsi physiognomy but in Kinshasa and the western
    part of the country the Hema tribe was associated with the  Tutsi  even
    if they were physically different.   He  says  that  the  appellant  is
    clearly identified as a member of the Hema and would be  so  identified
    by the relevant immigration and security services on arrival.

Submissions

28.   In her submissions Mrs Tanner accepted that the issue was whether  the
    appellant would be at real risk as a member of the Hema  on  return  to
    Kinshasa.  She submitted that he would receive protection in government
    controlled areas.  She  relied  on  the  OGN  of  August  2007  and  in
    particular paragraphs 3.10.6 and 9.  She  submitted  that  much  of  Mr
    Kennes' report was historical and that the situation had  now  improved
    in Ituri.  The  evidence  about  the  appellant's  physical  appearance
    should be treated with caution.  The views expressed by Mr Kennes  were
    not his own but those of anonymous  sources.   There  was  no  adequate
    evidence that the appellant would be at risk because of his appearance.
     She submitted he was not entitled to asylum or humanitarian protection
    nor would he be at risk  of  a  breach  of  Article  3.   However,  she
    accepted in the light of the opinions of the House of Lords  in  Beoku-
    Betts that removal would be a disproportionate  interference  with  the
    appellant's family and private life.  She  accepted  that  family  life
    existed between the appellant and his partner and her  son,  that  they
    had one child and that his partner was  expecting  another  child.   It
    would not be reasonable to expect her to return with him to the DRC  or
    for him to return to make an application for entry clearance.

29.   Mr Henderson submitted that the appeal should also succeed  on  asylum
    grounds.  He argued that the appellant would be at risk not only in his
    home area but also in Kinshasa.   Even  if  the  question  of  internal
    flight did arise, in the light of his  family  circumstances,  it  must
    follow that it would be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate.   There
    would be no adequate protection in Ituri and it would not be reasonable
    for him to return to Kinshasa.  There was clear evidence to  show  that
    in the eyes of the  DRC  authorities  the  Hema  were  associated  with
    Rwandans and Tutsis.  It was accepted that the appellant was  a  member
    of the Hema and this alone would put him at risk.  In any  event  there
    was cogent evidence that he would be identified as a member of the Hema
    and would be at risk in Kinshasa.

Article 8

30.   Mrs Tanner conceded that the article 8 appeal should  succeed  and  we
    need deal no further with that matter save to make it clear  that  this
    concession was properly made.  The  appellant's  partner  is  a  Kenyan
    citizen whose own claim for asylum was refused and her appeal dismissed
    in a determination issued on 22 November 2007.  The  Immigration  Judge
    accepted that there was a real risk of FGM in her home area  but  found
    that she would be able to relocate.  He also found that it would not be
    a breach of Article 8 for the appellant and her family to  relocate  in
    Kenya.  We were told that further representations have been made to the
    respondent and they must be for her to consider.  However, the question
    for us is not whether the appellant's  partner  and  family  should  be
    returned to Kenya but what the position would be on return to the  DRC.
    In the light of the evidence of Ms Seymour it would be unreasonable  to
    expect the appellant's partner with her children  to  return  with  the
    appellant to the DRC and for the appellant to be separated from her and
    their daughter.

The Asylum Appeal

31.   We remind ourselves that the appellant is entitled to asylum if  owing
    to a well-founded fear of persecution for a  Convention  reason  he  is
    outside his country of nationality, the DRC, and is unable or, owing to
    such fear, is unwilling to avail himself  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.  He has to show there is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
    that he faces such persecution.  This test can  also  be  expressed  as
    whether there is a real  risk  of  persecution.   We  have  taken  into
    account  the  provisions  of  the  Refugee  or  Persons  in   need   of
    International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations   2006   which,
    together with amendments to the Immigration Rules,  have  brought  into
    effect the provisions of the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC.

The Situation in the DRC

32.   We do not need to  deal  at  any  great  length  with  the  background
    situation in the DRC which has  already  been  covered  extensively  in
    previous country guidance determinations and in particular  AB  and  DM
    (Risk categories reviewed - Tutsis added) DRC CG [2005] UKIAT 00118 and
    BK (Failed asylum seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 0098.  This  appeal  has
    focused on the situation in Ituri in the eastern DRC and in  particular
    the conflict between the Hema and the Lendu.  The general position  has
    been summarised in the Human Rights Watch Report 2008 in para  8.23  of
    the COI Report May 2008 as follows:

        "The people of the eastern Congo, buffeted by years of war, endured
        more armed conflicts and human rights  abuses,  including  murders,
        rape, and the  recruitment  and  use  of  child  soldiers,  despite
        political agreements meant to  resolve  conflicts  in  the  eastern
        province of North Kivu.  Early in the year combatants loyal to  the
        renegade General Laurent Nkunda were integrated into  the  national
        army in a process  called  'mixage'.   The  newly  organised  mixed
        brigade killed scores of civilians and committed  rapes  and  other
        abuses in their operations against the Forces for the Liberation of
        Rwanda (FDLR), a Rwandan rebel group based in  eastern  Congo.   By
        August the political agreements had collapsed and many of  Nkunda's
        former troops returned to  his  control;  renewed  clashes  between
        Nkunda's troops and government soldiers followed.


        Government  policy  towards  the  FDLR  followed  a  confused   and
        contradictory  course,  with  the  army  sometimes  supporting  and
        sometimes attacking this  group.   The  FDLR  composed  largely  of
        Rwandese combatants, is supposedly committed  to  overthrowing  the
        current government of Rwanda, but in recent years its members  have
        attacked Congolese  civilians  more  than  they  have  engaged  the
        Rwandan military.


        The shifting configurations of the conflict have variously seen all
        forces fighting each other.  The Congolese  government,  backed  by
        the international community, tried  various  measures  to  end  the
        fighting, but failed to address its  underlying  causes.   Although
        crimes by  all  parties  constituted  violations  of  international
        humanitarian law, virtually none has been  investigated  let  alone
        prosecuted."

      This summary confirms in more general terms the description  given  by
    Mr Kennes.

33.   In the OGN of 20 August 2007 (A138-9)  it  is  accepted  that  serious
    incidents of violence between the Lendu and Hema ethnic groups  in  the
    Ituri area in Orientale province have been  occurring  since  2002  and
    serious human rights abuses have been perpetrated by  both  sides.   It
    records the gains made on the military front in 2005 but  accepts  that
    the overall security situation remains fragile.  Dealing with the issue
    of sufficiency of protection, para 3.10.6 reads as follows:

        "3.10.6  Sufficiency of protection: the government  is  seeking  to
               establish its authority throughout the entire  country,  but
               the government's control in certain areas of the East of the
               country remains weak.  As such the state is as yet not fully
               able to provide sufficient protection to either the Lendu or
               Hema in  the  Ituri  region.   The  government  can  however
               provide sufficient protection within areas fully  under  its
               control."

34.   The OGN goes on to deal with the issue  of  internal  relocation.   It
    accepts that movement between the different areas in  the  DRC  can  be
    hazardous but concludes as follows:

        "3.10.9   Conclusion.   Despite  tangible   improvements   in   the
               government's   anti-rebel   offensives    and    disarmament
               programmes in 2005 and 2006 the security  situation  in  the
               Ituri region  remains  unstable  and  serious  human  rights
               abuses of the civilian population continue to  be  reported.
               Nevertheless claimants who  cite  a  serious  risk  of  ill-
               treatment at the hands of  non-state  agents  in  the  Ituri
               region as a consequence of their ethnic origin are  able  to
               escape that treatment by relocating  to  Kinshasa  or  other
               government controlled areas where they will, should the need
               arise, also be  able  to  seek  protection  from  the  state
               authorities.  It is therefore unlikely  that  the  grant  of
               asylum will be appropriate in such cases."

The Current Country Guidance

35.   As we have already indicated, the  current  country  guidance  on  the
    issue we are concerned with is found in  AB  and  DM  (Risk  categories
    reviewed - Tutsis added) DRC  CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00118.   The  Tribunal
    summarised its findings in paragraph 51 as follows:

        "51.      Building  on  previous  country  guidance  cases  and  in
             particular  M  and  VL,  the  Tribunal  would  reformulate  and
             summarise the current risk categories as follows:


              i) We confirm as continuing to be a risk category those with a
                 nationality or perceived nationality of a state regarded as
                 hostile to the DRC and in  particular  those  who  have  or
                 presumed to have Rwandan  connections  or  are  of  Rwandan
                 origins.


             ii) We consider that in light of recent developments  there  is
                 now a risk category consisting of those who are  Tutsi  (or
                 Banyamulenge)  or   are   perceived   to   be   Tutsi   (or
                 Banyamulenge).  The only possible exception to it arises in
                 relation to high-level officials of  RCD/Goma.   We  accept
                 that in practice there is  considerable  overlap  with  (i)
                 since, as a result of the events  of  2004   "Rwandan"  and
                 "Tutsi" are more often regarded as  the  same  by  the  DRC
                 authorities and civilian population and as a result  Tutsis
                 and those perceived as such face higher risks than  before.
                 However, they are  distinct  categories,  one  nationality-
                 based, the other ethnicity-based.


             (iii)     We also confirm as an existing  risk  category  those
                 having or being perceived to have a military  or  political
                 profile  in  opposition  to  the  government.    The   risk
                 fluctuates in accordance with the political situation.   On
                 the basis of the evidence before us, the  current  position
                 is as follows.  The Tribunal accept that there  is  a  real
                 risk at present for UDPS activists.  In  the  eyes  of  the
                 authorities in Kinshasa  UDPS  supporters  are  assimilated
                 with supporters of the RDC/Goma  movement  because  of  the
                 alliance reached in 2003 even if  later  officially  ended.
                 At present there is a lesser risk for PALU members.   There
                 is a potential risk for DSP members who are  considered  as
                 potential or actual collaborators for JP Bemba and his  MLC
                 movement.  The risk for those associated  with  the  Mobutu
                 regime has considerably lessened.  It  is  clear  from  the
                 background evidence that close  relatives  of  Mobutu  have
                 returned to the DRC  from  exile:   CIPU  report  paragraph
                 6.110-2.  It  is  reported  that  those  not  suspected  of
                 collaboration with the rebels would no longer  be  at  risk
                 and affiliation to the MPR would not normally  involve  the
                 risk of political  persecution.   No  repression  has  been
                 organised against PDSC members since the death  of  Laurent
                 Kabila.


             iv) The evidence before us  sought  to  identify  a  number  of
                 further potential risk categories: rebel  movement  members
                 now in opposition to their own movement and those who  come
                 from the east (including Kivu) but are returned to Kinshasa
                 without a political or military  profile.   However,  these
                 issues do not arise in the present appeal  and  we  do  not
                 have sufficient evidence to make it  appropriate  to  reach
                 conclusions about them."

36.   The Tribunal  gave  further  guidance  in  paragraphs  53  and  54  as
    follows:

        "53.     The Tribunal would reiterate some earlier observations  on
             the task of assessing whether a person falls  within  the  new
             second risk category as now  extended.   There  are  two  main
             aspects to this.  Firstly on the evidence before us, most  but
             not all Tutsis would be at risk.  As noted in  paragraphs  39-
             40, some Tutsis may be able to obtain the protection of  MONUC
             albeit in practice they may be limited to  those  with  wealth
             who are high-level officials within RCD/Goma and  appear  able
             to look to the authorities for protection.


        54.      Secondly, as with the military or political category, much
             depends on the perception of the  authorities  as  to  whether
             they view someone adversely.  It  is  not  sufficient  for  an
             appellant simply to state that he is Rwandan or Tutsi or would
             be perceived as such.  Evidence as to ethnicity will  need  to
             be scrutinised carefully.  Given that Tutsis are described  as
             being physically  distinct  from  other  tribes  (CIPU  report
             October 2004 para 6.71) a person is more likely to  be  viewed
             as a  Tutsi  by  the  authorities  if  he  or  she  has  those
             distinctive characteristics.  Similarly those  whose  dialect,
             tribal links and geographical origins  link  them  closely  to
             Tutsis such as the Banyamulenge  would  also  appear  to  fall
             within the at risk category.  However, the mere fact of coming
             from the East or being of mixed ethnicity is unlikely  without
             more to give  rise  to  a  perception  of  being  Tutsi.   The
             assessment must be made on the basis of a careful analysis  of
             an appellant's ethnicity, background and profile."

The Risk to the Hema

37.   The issue raised in this appeal is whether there is a risk  on  return
    to the DRC for members  of  the  Hema  tribe  from  Ituri  and  whether
    internal relocation is a viable option.  In the light  of  the  current
    situation in Ituri and the history of conflict between the Hema and the
    Lendu, even though the situation is being brought under some control, a
    member of the Hema tribe may be potentially at risk of serious harm  on
    return to the Ituri region.  Whether any particular members of the Hema
    will in fact be at real risk  must  take  into  account  not  only  his
    ethnicity but also his background and profile.  The appellant's account
    accepted by the original Tribunal was that he was able to  escape  when
    his home was attacked by RCD rebels, an attack in which his father  was
    killed and his mother raped.  Taking into  account  the  provisions  of
    para 339K of HC 395 that the  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been
    subjected to persecution or serious harm will be regarded as a  serious
    indication of a person's well-founded fear of persecution or real  risk
    of serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider  that  the
    persecution or serious harm will not be repeated,  although  there  has
    been some improvement in Ituri, in the light of what  has  happened  to
    this appellant in the past we find that there is at least a  real  risk
    that the appellant will be at real risk of further serious  harm  as  a
    member of the Hema.  We also are satisfied that  when  this  attack  is
    looked at in the context of the violence in Ituri,  the  appellant  was
    not simply a victim of the civil war but the attack  was  motivated  by
    the ethnic conflicts in that region.

Internal Relocation

38.   The  must  now  consider  whether  the  appellant  in  his  particular
    circumstances is able to relocate in government controlled  areas.   It
    is the respondent's case that he can but it was argued on behalf of the
    appellant that members of the Hema are  treated  in  the  same  way  as
    Tutsis/Rwandans and for this reason he would be at risk in Kinshasa  or
    any other government controlled area.  On this  issue  there  is  ample
    evidence to show the hostility of the DRC authorities to those of Tutsi
    or Rwandan origin.  This issue was explored at length  in  AB  and  DM.
    The issue for us is whether the Hema will be treated in the same light.
     We accept Mr Kennes' evidence  on  this  issue.   The  authorities  do
    associate the Hema with the Tutsi for the reasons set out in Mr Kennes'
    evidence.  There are cultural, social and political reasons behind this
    perception which, whether justified or not, is real in the eyes of  the
    DRC authorities.  The respondent argued that  the  appellant  would  be
    able to look to the authorities for protection.  It may  be  that  some
    members of the Hema or persons perceived in the same way as  Tutsis  by
    reason of their official position or wealth may be able to  do  so  but
    the appellant does not fall within any such category or otherwise  have
    characteristics which could lead to a conclusion that he would not face
    the same risk as other members of the Hema.

39.   The risk to the appellant arises from the fact that he is a member  of
    the Hema but his appearance will in any event give  him  away.   In  Mr
    Kennes' report he says that he forwarded a picture of the appellant  to
    four different people from the East of the DRC and that their reply was
    unanimous: the form of his face, his nose  and  lips  betrayed  a  Hema
    physiognomy.  Mrs Tanner rightly made the point that this evidence  was
    second hand evidence from anonymous people and for this reason it  must
    be treated with caution, but it was confirmed by Ms Seymour's  evidence
    given at the hearing that although  she  had  not  seen  the  appellant
    before, she could see immediately from his appearance that he would  be
    recognised as a member of the  Hema.   We  accept  that  this  view  is
    genuinely expressed and that Ms Seymour has the experience  of  working
    in the DRC from February 2006 to June 2007 and for this reason is in  a
    position to give an informed view.  We also note that it  was  accepted
    in the evidence before the original Tribunal that the  appellant  spoke
    Kihema.  We are therefore satisfied that the appellant not  only  is  a
    member of the Hema but would be recognised as such and for this  reason
    be at real risk in Kinshasa.

40.   For the sake of completeness we make it clear  that  even  if  it  was
    safe for the appellant to return to Kinshasa in our view  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect him to relocate there because of his family  and
    domestic circumstances as outlined when  dealing  with  the  Article  8
    appeal.

41.   So far as country guidance is concerned we confirm the guidance  given
    in AB and DM amending it to  the  extent  that  the  risk  category  in
    paragraph 51(2) should include those from the Hema tribe who are likely
    to be treated by the DRC authorities in the  same  way  as  Tutsis  and
    Rwandans.  We adopt and repeat the guidance in paragraph 53 of  AB  and
    DM that although the Hema come within a risk category, clan  or  tribal
    membership by itself is not determinative.  Whether an appellant is  at
    risk or is able to relocate depends not only on his ethnicity but  also
    on his own background and circumstances looked at in the light  of  the
    country evidence as a whole.

42.   In the light of  our  findings  we  do  not  need  to  deal  with  the
    humanitarian  protection  appeal  or  with  the  issues   which   arise
    particularly under paragraph 339C(iv).

Decision

43.   The original Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law.   We  substitute  a
    decision allowing the  appeal  on  asylum,  Article  3  and  Article  8
    grounds.  The appeal on humanitarian protection grounds is dismissed.

44.   We are satisfied that at the time when  reconsideration  was  ordered,
    the appeal had substantial prospects of success.   We  order  that  the
    costs of the  application  for  reconsideration,  the  preparation  for
    reconsideration and the reconsideration be paid from the relevant found
    within the meaning of rule 33 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005.






Signed                                             Date: 4 September 2008


Senior Immigration Judge Latter



















Schedule: Background Evidence before the Tribunal

|1  |1 January 2001   |Human Rights Watch, Background to the Hema-Lendu  |
|   |                 |Conflicts in Uganda-controlled Congo.             |
|2  |6 March 2003     |Integrated Regional Information Network News      |
|   |                 |(IRIN) DRC: Fear of Massacres as Lendus, UPDF     |
|   |                 |Storm Bunya, Force Out UPC.                       |
|3  |8 July 2003      |Human Rights Watch, Ituri: "Covered in Blood":    |
|   |                 |Ethnically Targeted Violence in North-Eastern DRC |
|   |                 |Congo.                                            |
|4  |24 April 2003    |IRIN, DRC Who's Who in Ituri Militia              |
|   |                 |Organisations, Leaders.                           |
|5  |26 April 2005    |Watch List on Children and Armed Conflicts (USA), |
|   |                 |Struggling to Survive: Children in Armed Conflict |
|   |                 |in the DRC.                                       |
|6  |10 May 2006      |MONUC The Human Rights Situation in the DRC April |
|   |                 |to December 2005.                                 |
|7  |27 July 2006     |MONUC Human Rights Situation in the DRC during the|
|   |                 |Period January to June 2006.                      |
|8  |27 July 2006     |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK) Ituri: |
|   |                 |The Congo's Own Rwanda.                           |
|9  |11 October 2006  |Amnesty International DRC: Children at War        |
|   |                 |Creating Hope for the Future.                     |
|10 |31 October 2006  |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK), Plight|
|   |                 |of Girl Soldiers Overlooked.                      |
|11 |8 November 2006  |Human Rights Watch DR Congo: ICC Hearing Could    |
|   |                 |Pave Way for Court's First Trial.                 |
|12 |30 November 2006 |IRIN DRC Last Rebels Sign Peace Deal in Ituri.    |
|13 |3 January 2007   |IRIN DRC Rekindled Clashes Displace Thousands in  |
|   |                 |Ituri.                                            |
|14 |15 January 2007  |MONUC, UNHCR The Congolese Merit More Than Just   |
|   |                 |Plastic Sheeting.                                 |
|15 |25 January 2007  |Amnesty International DRC: Disarmament,           |
|   |                 |Demobilisation and Reintegration and the Reform of|
|   |                 |the Army.                                         |
|16 |29 January 2007  |Norwegian Refugee Council, Internal Displacement  |
|   |                 |Monitoring Centre DRC: Worsening Humanitarian     |
|   |                 |Crisis as Internal Displacement Escalates in the  |
|   |                 |East.                                             |
|17 |31 January 2007  |United Nations News, DR Congo: UN Reports Clashes |
|   |                 |and Abuses in East Despite Overall Calm.          |
|18 |20 February 2007 |MONUC, Monthly Human Rights Assessment January    |
|   |                 |2007.                                             |
|19 |6 March 2007     |US Department of State Country Reports on Human   |
|   |                 |Rights Practices 2006.                            |
|20 |20 March 2007    |United Nations 23rd Report of Secretary General on|
|   |                 |the UN Organisation Mission in the DRC.           |
|21 |26 April 2007    |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre Norwegian |
|   |                 |Refugee Council, DR Congo: Returns Outnumber New  |
|   |                 |Displacements in the East.                        |
|22 |13 June 2007     |IRIN DRC Conflict Causes State of Permanent       |
|   |                 |Displacement.                                     |
|23 |2 July 2007      |UN Nation's Mission in the DRC, New DDR Phase     |
|   |                 |Three Programme for Ituri.                        |
|   |                 |                                                  |
|24 |5 July 2007      |International Crisis Group Congo: Consolidating   |
|   |                 |the Peace.                                        |
|25 |3 August 2007    |Rights Net UNHCR DR Congo A Regional Analysis.    |
|26 |7 August 2007    |United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,|
|   |                 |Committee on Elimination of Racial Discrimination |
|   |                 |Considers Report of DRC.                          |
|27 |15 August 2007   |MONUC UNHCR: 640,000 Internally Displaced in Kivu |
|   |                 |Provinces between June and July 2007.             |
|28 |20 August 2007   |UK Home Office Border and Immigration Agency OGN. |
|29 |21 August 2007   |United Nations News DR Congo 3,500 Ex-Military    |
|   |                 |Members in Volatile District Agree to Disarm.     |
|30 |11 September 2007|OCHA Briefing to the Security Council by          |
|   |                 |Undersecretary General for Humanitarian Affairs   |
|   |                 |and Emergency Relief Coordinator on Mission to DR |
|   |                 |Congo.                                            |
|31 |19 October 2007  |IRIN DRC More Displaced as Insecurity Persists in |
|   |                 |North Kivu.                                       |
|32 |24 October 2007  |MSF Ituri "Civilians Still the First Victims".    |
|33 |24 October 2007  |IPS DRC Hospitals Tale Reveals Missing Children,  |
|   |                 |Brutalised Woman.                                 |
|34 |4 November 2007  |UNHCR Displaced Congolese Return to Ituri with    |
|   |                 |UNHCR Help.                                       |
|35 |8 November 2007  |UN News Service Website DR Congo Disarmament in   |
|   |                 |Ituri Progresses but Other Steps Needed.          |
|36 |14 November 2007 |UN 24th Report of the Secretary General on the    |
|   |                 |United Nations Organisational Mission in the DRC. |
|37 |14 November 2007 |UN Service Website DR Congo UN Refugee Agency     |
|   |                 |Helps Hundreds of Displaced to Return to Ituri.   |
|38 |14 November 2007 |Reuter Alert Net Website Displaced Congolese      |
|   |                 |Return to Ituri with UNHCR Help.                  |
|39 |21 November 2007 |IRIN DRC Ituri Displaced Receive Aid.             |
|40 |29 November 2007 |IDMC Centre Norwegian Refugee Council DRC         |
|   |                 |Worsening Humanitarian Crisis as Internal         |
|   |                 |Displacement Escalates in the East.               |
|41 |10 January 2008  |OCHA Population Movements in Eastern DR Congo     |
|   |                 |September to December 2007.                       |
|42 |15 January 2008  |IRIN DRC Rekindled Clashes Displace Thousands in  |
|   |                 |Ituri.                                            |
|43 |21 January 2008  |United Nations News DR Congo: UN Backed Peace     |
|   |                 |Summit Extended.                                  |
|44 |29 January 2008  |IRIN DRC Army Kills Ten Rebels in Ituri.          |
|45 |31 January 2008  |Human Rights Watch World Report 2008 DRC.         |
|46 |1 February 2008  |United States Institute of Peace Elections in the |
|   |                 |DRC The Bemba Surprise.                           |
|47 |4 February 2008  |Institute for War and Peace Reporting Comment:    |
|   |                 |North Kivu's Fragile Peace.                       |
|48 |11 February 2008 |UN News Service Congolese Rebel Leader Makes First|
|   |                 |Appearance at International Criminal Court.       |
|49 |11 March 2008    |US Department of State Country Reports 2007 Congo |
|   |                 |DRC.                                              |
|50 |14 March 2008    |UN News Service Website Eastern Province of DR    |
|   |                 |Congo Heading Towards Stability - UN Official.    |
|51 |19 March 2008    |United Nations News DRC UN Mission Says Katanga   |
|   |                 |Conditions Still Suitable for Refugee Returns.    |
|52 |27 March 2008    |Channel 4 Unreported World Horrific Sexual        |
|   |                 |Violence Rife in Eastern DRC.                     |
|53 |15 April 2008    |UN News Service Website Eastern DR Congo Will     |
|   |                 |Remain Focus of Mission's Resources.              |
|54 |17 April 2008    |Inter Press Service News Agency Politics: DRC     |
|   |                 |Cautious Calm Settles Over War-Scarred Ituri      |
|   |                 |Region.                                           |
|55 |28 April 2008    |UN News Service Website Trial of Congolese        |
|   |                 |Defendant "Crucial Step" to End Impunity.         |
|56 |29 April 2008    |UN News Service Website International Criminal    |
|   |                 |Court Calls for Arrest of Congolese Militia       |
|   |                 |Leader.                                           |
|57 |1 May 2008       |Inter Press Service News Agency DRC: With Rebel   |
|   |                 |Leader's Indictment, a Tentative Step to          |
|   |                 |Accountability.                                   |
|58 |21 May 2008      |Country of Origin Information Report DRC.         |
|59 |1 June 2008      |UNHCR Global Report 2007 DRC.                     |
|60 |4 June 2008      |MONUC, Clashes Reported in DRC as Hundreds of     |
|   |                 |Rebels Surrender.                                 |
|61 |9 June 2008      |UNHCR Works against Confrontation and for         |
|   |                 |Cooperation in South Kivu.                        |
|62 |16 June 2008     |IAS Research Analysis, People from the Hema       |
|   |                 |Ethnicity.                                        |




