
PB and Others (Goa:  EEA discretionary permit;  interpretation) India
[2005] UKIAT
          00082                                                          | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of Hearing: 30 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               20 April 2005
                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)

Between:

                                                                  APPELLANTS

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Bombay
                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co
For the Respondent:          Mr M Vale, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellants are citizens of India.  They appeal,  with  permission,
     against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  A  G  O'Malley,
     dismissing their appeals against the decision of the Respondent  on  8
     July 2002 refusing them EEA family permits for residence in the United
     Kingdom with the sponsor.

  2. The Appellants and the sponsor are all from Goa.  We envisage that the
     principles we set out in this determination will be  deployed  in  the
     determination of many similar appeals  by  Goans.   Goa,  as  is  well
     known, was a colony of Portugal.  As a result,  some  Goans  have  the
     right to Portuguese citizenship.  One of them is the sponsor.   We  do
     not know exactly the history of his movements, but he has a Portuguese
     identity card, issued in Lisbon on 25 May 2001 and giving his place of
     residence as "Marvila Lisbon".  He subsequently acquired a  Portuguese
     passport, issued on 29 May 2001.  He came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
     June and has been working  here  since  25  June  2001.   The  present
     applications were made in Bombay on 23 April 2002.  The applicants  at
     that stage were the present Appellants, who are the son  and  daughter
     of the sponsor, both aged thirty-two at the date of the  decision  and
     their daughter, aged three;  and the  sponsor's  wife,  his  unmarried
     daughter aged twenty-eight and another son aged under eighteen at  the
     time of the  application.   The  three  last  have  subsequently  been
     granted permits.  The three Appellants were refused on the ground that
     the Entry Clearance Officer did not think that they were dependent  on
     the sponsor.  The Adjudicator heard oral evidence, which  he  regarded
     as lacking in credibility.  He  too  found  that  the  Appellants  had
     failed to establish dependency on  the  sponsor.   The  basis  of  the
     Appellants' appeal is that they may nevertheless be  entitled  to  the
     permits they seek.

  3. We have considered the oral and written  submissions  in  this  appeal
     with care. We do not need to set them out.  We proceed at once to give
     our views on the law, including its background and its application.

  4. Regulation (EEC) No 1612/98 of the Council of 15 October  1968  is  on
     the subject of freedom of movement for workers within  the  Community.
     Regulation 10 is in the following terms:

           "1.   The following shall, irrespective  of  their  nationality,
                 have the right to install themselves with a worker who is a
                 national of one Member State and who  is  employed  in  the
                 territory of another Member State:


                 (a)   his spouse and their descendants who  are  under  the
                       age of 21 years or are dependants;
                 (b)   dependent relatives in  the  ascending  line  of  the
                       worker and his spouse.

              2. Member States shall facilitate the admission of any  member
                 of the family not coming within the provisions of paragraph
                 1 if dependent on the worker referred to  above  or  living
                 under his roof in the country whence he comes.


              3. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and  2,  the  worker  must
                 have available for his family housing considered as  normal
                 for national workers in the region where  he  is  employed;
                 this   provision,   however   must   not   give   rise   to
                 discrimination between national workers  and  workers  from
                 the other Member States."

  5. That Article finds  its  expression  in  United  Kingdom  law  in  the
     Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2000,  as  amended.
     The relevant Regulations are as follows:

           "13.  Issue of EEA family permit


           (1)   An entry  clearance  officer  must  issue  an  EEA  family
                 permit, free of charge to a person who applies for  one  if
                 he is a family member of-


                    a) a qualified person;  or
                    b) a person who is not a qualified  person,  where  that
                       person-
                           i) will be travelling to the United Kingdom  with
                              the person who has made the application within
                              a year of the date of the application;  and
                          ii) will be a qualified person on arrival  in  the
                              United Kingdom.

              2) But paragraph (1) does not apply if-


                    a) the applicant;  or
                    b) the person whose family member he is


                 falls to be excluded from the United Kingdom on grounds  of
                 public policy, public security or public health.

             10. Dependants and members of the household of EEA nationals


           (1)   If a person satisfies any of the conditions  in  paragraph
                 (4), and if in all the  circumstances  it  appears  to  the
                 decision-maker appropriate to do so, the decision-maker may
                 issue to that person an  EEA  family  permit,  a  residence
                 permit or a residence document (as the case may be).


           (2)   Where a permit or document has been issued under paragraph
                 (1), these Regulations apply to the holder of the permit or
                 document as if he were the family member of an EEA national
                 and the permit or document had been  issued  to  him  under
                 regulation 13 or 15.


              3) Without prejudice to regulation 22,  a  decision-maker  may
                 revoke (or refuse to renew) a  permit  or  document  issued
                 under paragraph (1) if he decides that the holder no longer
                 satisfies any of the conditions in paragraph (4).


              4) The conditions are that the person [is a relative of an EEA
                 national or his spouse and]-

                    a) is dependent on the EEA national or his spouse;
                    b) is living as part of  the  EEA  national's  household
                       outside the United Kingdom;  or
                    c) was living as part of the  EEA  national's  household
                       before the EEA national came to the United Kingdom.

              5) However, for those purpose 'EEA national' does not include-


                    a) an EEA national who is in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
                       self-sufficient  person,  a  retired  person   or   a
                       student;
                    b) an EEA  national  who,  when  he  is  in  the  United
                       Kingdom,  will  be  a  person  referred  to  in  sub-
                       paragraph (a)."

  6. "Family member" is defined in Regulation 6.  Save where the  principal
     is a student, the persons who are the members of his  family  are,  by
     Regulation 6(4):

           "(a)  his spouse;
           (b)   descendants of his or of his spouse who are  under  21  or
                 are their dependants;
           (c)   dependent relatives in his ascending line or that  of  his
                 spouse."

  7. It is clear from both the Council Regulation and  the  UK  Order  that
     there is a mandatory requirement of issue of a permit to some  persons
     and a further discretion to issue a permit to others.

  8. Clearly one should begin with the mandatory elements.  If an applicant
     is a "family member",  as  defined,  of  a  qualified  person,  he  is
     entitled to a permit.  In deciding whether an applicant  is  a  family
     member for these purposes, it may be necessary to make  a  finding  of
     fact on dependency.  For these purposes, it is clear  that  dependency
     is a question of fact.  There is no requirement that dependency be  of
     necessity.

  9. If there are applicants who do not qualify under  Regulation  13,  the
     decision-maker must next consider Regulation 10.  The crucial part  is
     Regulation  10(4),   which   poses   three   separate   questions   of
     construction.  First, what is a "relative"?  There is no definition in
     these Regulations, but, given the terms of Regulations 13 and 6, which
     we have just considered, it is clear to us  that  "relative"  must  be
     intended to have a wider sense than "family member".  We would  regard
     the question of whether a person is a "relative" for these purposes as
     one of fact and degree.  Certainly, the  word  is  apt  to  include  a
     person's daughter-in-law, like the second  Appellant  in  the  present
     case.

 10. The second question is the relationship between the three lettered sub-
     paragraphs of Regulation 10(4).  Is (a) a requirement in all cases, to
     be accompanied by either  (b)  or  (c)?   Or  are  (a),  (b)  and  (c)
     alternatives?  This is a point of some concern to the  writer  of  the
     written submissions made to us.  We do  not,  however,  regard  it  as
     posing any real difficulty.  It is quite usual at the present time for
     draughtsmen to use a conjunction only between the last two elements of
     a list, so that the fact that the word "or" appears only  between  (b)
     and (c)  does  not  rule  out  the  possibility  that  all  three  are
     alternatives.  What is clear is that the wording of  Regulation  10(2)
     of the EEC Council Regulation demonstrates that dependency  and  prior
     residence  are  alternatives.   Therefore,  (a),  (b)  and   (c)   are
     alternatives.  The decision-maker should consider whether any  one  of
     the three applies to any applicant.

 11. The third question is the meaning of "before the EEA national came  to
     the United Kingdom" in Regulation 10(4)(c).  Does it mean "immediately
     before", or does it mean "at any time before"?   In  order  to  decide
     this issue, we have to bear two things in mind.  The first is that the
     EU right is the right of the person  who  has  citizenship  of  an  EU
     country:  it is not a right which belongs essentially or independently
     to his relatives.  The purpose of the Regulations we  are  considering
     is to enable a qualified person - that  is  to  say,  an  EU  national
     exercising treaty rights - to  exercise  his  rights  freely,  without
     being hindered or discouraged by having to leave family members behind
     when he exercises his rights.  The  second  consideration  is  closely
     related.  It is that the purpose of these Regulations is to  ease  the
     movement  of  qualified  persons  around  the  Union.   There  is   no
     suggestion of any additional intention to enable non-EU  nationals  to
     enter the Union.

 12. Regulation 10(4)(c) must be interpreted in its context and  in  a  way
     that best promotes the purpose of  this  legislation.   A  person  who
     comes from a non-EU country, country A, to the EU  is  not  exercising
     treaty rights.  He is not exercising treaty rights even if he has,  or
     is entitled to acquire,  citizenship  of   EU  country  B.   In  those
     circumstances, when he moves to country B he is simply exercising  the
     rights of a citizen of that country.  If, however, he  moves  from  EU
     country B to EU country C, he may well be  exercising  treaty  rights.
     EU law has nothing to do with his movement from country A  to  country
     B, but it may have a great deal to do with his movement from country B
     to country C. The Regulations relating to family members will apply to
     enable him to have his family with him when he moves from country B to
     country C.  If they did not so apply, his movement from country  B  to
     country C would be less easy.

 13. Where country C is the United Kingdom, the governing  regulations  are
     those in the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Order.   In  its
     context, and for the reasons we have given,  we  take  the  view  that
     Regulation 10(4)(c) refers to the members of the person's  family  who
     were with him in country B.  If he  had  already  separated  from  his
     family by moving from country A to country B, then the absence of  his
     family cannot have affected his movement from country B to country  C.
     It is only if his family was with him in country B that  his  exercise
     of treaty rights in moving from  country  B  to  country  C  would  be
     hindered by not being able to take his family  with  him.   Thus  sub-
     paragraphs (b) and (c) of Regulation 10(4) have an  identical  effect.
     Where the family moves together in the exercise of one family member's
     treaty rights, Regulation 10(4)(b) applies.  If the  qualified  person
     goes ahead his family members  can  make  the  same  journey,  because
     Regulation 10(4)(c)  applies.   Nothing  in  any  of  the  Regulations
     suggests to us that they give a right for a person who was formerly  a
     member of a qualified person's household to move directly from country
     A (outside the EU) to country C.  Any  such  interpretation  would  be
     well outside the purpose of these  Regulations  and,  as  it  happens,
     would also produce an absurd disparity  between  Regulations  10(4)(b)
     and 10(4)(c).  That is because a family moving together from country A
     to a country within the EU  could  not  benefit  from  the  Regulation
     because none of them would be  exercising  treaty  rights;   in  these
     circumstances, it cannot be intended that  they  should  acquire  such
     rights by travelling separately.  Further, it would be  surprising  if
     EU Regulations designed  to  secure  the  freedom  of  movement  of  a
     national of country B to country A had  the  effect  of  allowing  his
     relatives to enter country A in circumstances where they would not  be
     permitted to be with him in country B, his country of nationality.

 14. We turn now to the application of these principles to the  Appellants.
     We may begin with Upasnaben.  She is the granddaughter of the  sponsor
     and, being under twenty-one, falls within the  definition  of  "family
     member" in Regulation 6(4)(b).  She is entitled  to  a  family  permit
     under Regulation 13(1).  The other two Appellants have entirely failed
     to establish their dependency on the sponsor.  They have no right to a
     family permit.  It is, however, common ground that the Entry Clearance
     Officer ought to have considered whether they fall  within  Regulation
     10(4)(c) and, if so, ought  further  to  have  considered  whether  to
     exercise his discretion in their favour.  We have indicated  our  view
     of the proper interpretation of that Regulation,  but  the  matter  is
     clearly not beyond dispute and it was not explored  fully  before  us.
     For this reason, we take the view that it is right to  determine  this
     appeal in the sense agreed at the hearing, which is that,  because  of
     the Entry Clearance Officer's failure to consider Regulation  10,  the
     decision that he made is not in accordance with the law and  that  the
     first  and  second   Appellants'   applications   accordingly   remain
     outstanding before him.

 15. These appeals are therefore allowed.  The third Appellant's appeal  is
     allowed in substance and we direct that she be issued with the  permit
     she sought.  The first and second Appellants' applications are now  to
     be decided by the Entry Clearance Officer under Regulation 10.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
