
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ahmad (scope of appeals) [2018] UKUT 00084(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                SHAHBAZ AHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, Counsel, instructed by MTUK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) A notice of removal  window  (Form  RED.0004  (fresh))  is  not  an  EEA
decision for the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006. The notice cannot  accordingly  be  appealed  under  those
Regulations. Even if it could constitute a decision, the notice  of  removal
window will constitute an EEA  decision  only  if  it  concerns  a  person's
removal from the United Kingdom under regulation 19 of those Regulations.

(2) Section 85(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  does
not enable the Tribunal hearing an appeal in the  United  Kingdom  to  treat
that appeal as including an appeal which has been  certified  under  section
94 as clearly unfounded and which, as a result, can  be  brought  only  once
the appellant is outside the United Kingdom.

(3) A statement made by an appellant under section 120 of the  2002  Act  in
response to a One-Stop notice is a statement made to the Secretary of  State
or an Immigration Officer. Accordingly, a statement made only  in  a  ground
of appeal to the Tribunal is not a statement under that section.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, was born on 15 January 1973.   He
    claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  in  December
    2001.  He subsequently claimed asylum unsuccessfully  and  his  ensuing
    appeal was dismissed, following a hearing in August 2003.

 2. After becoming appeal rights exhausted in December 2003, the  appellant
    remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  On 28 July 2014, he applied
    for an EEA residence card.  That application was refused on 15 December
    2015.

 3. On 17 March 2016, the appellant made a further such application.   This
    was refused on 13 September 2016.

 4. The  appellant  appealed  against  that  refusal.   This  appeal  ("the
    residence card appeal") has the reference EA/12374/2016.

 5. In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  dated  6  October
    2016, in respect of the residence card appeal, the appellant  contended
    that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with   the
    Immigration  Rules  or  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.  Furthermore, the appellant stated that the  decision
    was incompatible with his Article 8 rights.

 6. It was not until August 2017 that the residence card appeal came before
    a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, for substantive consideration.   By
    that time, a number of other things had happened.

 7. On 5 July 2017, the respondent served on the  appellant  a  "notice  of
    removal window" (Form RED.0004 (fresh)).  The notice of removal  window
    included (or was accompanied by; it  matters  not)  a  One-Stop  Notice
    under section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act").  The power to serve this One-Stop Notice derives,  in
    the present case, from section 120(1)(c), which  covers  the  situation
    where "a decision to ... remove [the appellant]  has  been  or  may  be
    taken".

 8. Section 120(2)  provides  that  the  serving  of  the  One-Stop  Notice
    requires the recipient to provide a statement, setting out his  or  her
    reasons for wishing to remain in the  United  Kingdom,  and  any  other
    grounds on which he or she should be permitted to remain, together with
    any grounds on which he or she should not be removed from  or  required
    to leave the United Kingdom.  The  provision  is  to  set  out  in  the
    Appendix to this decision, together with other relevant legislation.

 9. On 4 July 2017, the appellant made an application to the respondent for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, on Article 8 grounds.   He  said
    that he was married to a British citizen who was present and settled in
    the United Kingdom.  He had been  living  together  with  his  wife  in
    Chobham, Surrey, until he had been detained whilst reporting on 3  July
    2017.  His wife had established an internet  caf�  business  in  Spain,
    which required her to travel to that country.  The appellant also  made
    further  submissions  as  to  why  his  removal  would   constitute   a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights.

10. On 12 July 2017, the respondent refused to grant the appellant leave to
    remain.  Additionally, the respondent certified the  appellant's  human
    rights claim, pursuant to section 94 of the 2002 Act, on the basis that
    it was clearly unfounded.

11. On 14 July 2017, the appellant filed a notice of appeal with the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The notice purported to challenge  a  refusal  decision
    dated "13/09/2016" - that is to say, the residence card decision -  and
    one dated "12.07.2017" - which is, as we have seen,  the  date  of  the
    certification of the appellant's human rights claim.

12. The grounds of appeal, however, drafted by Mr  Mold,  stated  that  the
    appeal lay "against the notice of removal window dated 5 July 2017".

13. On 18 July 2017, a Duty Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  caused  a
    letter to be sent to MTUK Solicitors, in which it was stated  that  the
    "July 2017 decision is certified as clearly unfounded,  with  reference
    to section 94 of the 2002  Act.   Consequently,  the  Tribunal  has  no
    jurisdiction to admit or to consider that appeal".

14. Subsequently, a decision was taken that the Judge hearing the residence
    card appeal, which was listed for 11 August 2017, would also  consider,
    as a preliminary issue, whether a  right  of  appeal  lay  against  the
    notice of removal window.

15.  At  that  hearing,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   addressed   the
    preliminary issue.  He noted that Mr Mold, on behalf of the  appellant,
    relied upon regulations 2 and 26 of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006, in submitting that a right of appeal did lie in
    respect of the notice of removal window.

16. Mr  Mold  drew  attention  to  the  definition  of  "EEA  decision"  in
    regulation 2.  Such a decision is there defined as  "a  decision  under
    these Regulations that concerns -

         "...

         (c)  a person's removal from the United Kingdom ... ."

17. Mr Mold submitted to  the  Judge  that  the  notice  in  Form  RED.0004
    concerned the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.   The  Judge
    did not agree.  His reasoning was as follows:-

         "10. I am satisfied that Mr Mold's submissions  in  relation  to  a
             right of appeal against  the  notice  of  removal  window  are
             misconceived for two reasons.  First, I find that  the  notice
             is not a decision "made under the regulations".  As  the  Home
             Office guidance makes clear,

                  "normally Protection or  Human  Rights  claimants  without
                  leave will receive a fresh notice  starting  the  3  month
                  removal window (RED.0004 (fresh))  when  they  are  appeal
                  rights  exhausted  (ARE)  and   they   become   removable.
                  Vulnerable group will receive a further notice by  way  of
                  removal directions (IS 151D) or limited notice of  removal
                  (IS 151G)".

         11.  The appellant became appeal rights exhausted in December  2003
             and has been liable to being removed since then. The  RED.0004
             notice of removal window is served because  the  appellant  is
             deemed to be removable and has nothing  to  do  with  the  EEA
             regulations and is not an EEA decision.

         12.  Secondly, I find that the RED.0004 notice of removal window is
             not a decision which is concerned with a person's removal from
             the United Kingdom.  The notice is just that and it is  not  a
             decision.  The fact that the appellant has been notified of  a
             removal window is a pre-curser (sic) to his eventual  removal.
             Accordingly, the notice is not concerned with his removal from
             the United Kingdom, rather it concerns his potential  removal,
             if at all.

         13.  For the above reasons, I find that there is no right of appeal
             against the issuance of a RED.0004 notice of  removal  window.
             Accordingly, there is no  valid  appeal  in  front  of  me  in
             relation to the issuance of the notice."




Discussion

(1) The challenge to the notice of removal window

18. Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Mold submitted that the Judge  had  erred
    in law in those  conclusions.   Mr  Mold  said  that  the  respondent's
    Guidance - General Instruction: Immigration  returns,  enforcement  and
    detention - arranging removal  Version  1.0  26  April  2017  contained
    nothing to suggest that Form RED.0004 (fresh) could be used only  in  a
    case of protection or human rights claims.  According to Mr  Mold,  the
    Judge had erred in concluding that the notice of removal window did not
    "concern" the appellant's removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.   In  Mr
    Mold's submission, it plainly did.  This could be seen  from  the  fact
    that the notice stated the appellant "will be given further  notice  of
    when you will be removed".  The  second  box  in  the  Form  also  made
    provision for the recipient to be told he would not be removed after  a
    certain date, without further notice.

19. For all these reasons, according to Mr  Mold,  the  notice  of  removal
    window constituted an EEA decision, falling within regulation 2.   This
    meant that regulation 26 operated to give  the  appellant  a  right  of
    appeal against the EEA decision.

20. The Upper Tribunal rejects  these  submissions.   The  reason  why  the
    notice of removal window does not constitute an  EEA  decision,  within
    the meaning of regulation 2, is not  to  do  with  whether  the  notice
    concerns a person's removal from  the  United  Kingdom.   Plainly,  the
    notice of removal window does concern removal.

21. The Tribunal agrees with Ms Isherwood that the notice of removal window
    is, in reality, no more than a statement of  a  person's  liability  to
    removal from the United Kingdom.  That liability arises from  the  fact
    that the person in question falls within the ambit of section 10 of the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, as being a person who  requires  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom, but does not have it.  The  notice  of
    removal window is  not,  therefore,  a  EEA  decision,  as  defined  by
    regulation 2.

22. In any event, even if the notice of removal window  could  be  said  to
    constitute a decision, in the present case, it is manifestly  not  made
    under the 2006 Regulations, as required by the definition in regulation
    2 (see paragraph 16 above).  Our reasons for so finding are as follows.

23. Regulation 19 contains powers of removal in respect  of  EEA  nationals
    and their family members.  There is no suggestion that, in the  present
    case, the respondent has decided to remove the  appellant  pursuant  to
    the powers of regulation 19.  The appellant cannot, in any  case,  fall
    within regulation 19(3), as he is not  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national.  The appellant's wife is, as we have seen, a British citizen.



24. Mr Mold relied upon a passage in paragraph 34 of the judgments  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Amirteymour  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353 as supporting his interpretation of "EEA
    decision" in regulation 2.  In paragraph 34, Sales LJ, having  set  out
    his reasons for concluding that,  in  the  absence  of  a  section  120
    notice, an appeal under the EEA Regulations cannot raise  human  rights
    issues, noted that section 84(1)(c) and (g) of the 2002 Act (as then in
    force) contemplated as a permissible ground of appeal that the decision
    is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being
    incompatible with the appellant's human rights:-

        "However, those paragraphs only apply in so far as such a ground of
        appeal might be relevant to an appeal "against  an  EEA  decision".
        In my opinion they are made to  apply  because  an  "EEA  decision"
        under the EEA regulations may concern "a person's removal from  the
        United Kingdom" (see the definition of "EEA decision" in regulation
        2(1)), in that if he is refused some EU entitlement  to  remain  in
        the UK the decision made by the Secretary of State might be to  the
        effect that he has no EU right to be in the UK and that accordingly
        she now sets removal directions to have him removed.    In  such  a
        case, by virtue of the definition of "EEA decision" he is  afforded
        an opportunity to raise his Convention rights  against  removal  on
        his appeal to the FtT under regulation 26(1)."

25. These remarks of Sales LJ are plainly obiter.  As  is  clear  from  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Ahmed v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 303,  where  the  respondent  concludes
    that a person has no EU right to be in the UK; for example, because his
    marriage is regarded as one of  convenience,  the  respondent  may  act
    under section 10 of the 1999 Act to remove the person  concerned.   The
    respondent does not  -  indeed  cannot  -  use  the  power  of  removal
    contained in the 2006 Regulations (see above) because that person  does
    not fall within the terms of  regulation  19.  The  respondent  is  not
    seeking to remove the person as an EEA national or the family member of
    such a national.

26. In any event, there is no  indication  that,  in  making  these  obiter
    remarks, the Court in Amirteymour had heard argument on the matter.

27. Whilst it  is  true  that  regulation  9  (Family  members  of  British
    citizens) provides a mechanism whereby a person who is a family  member
    of a British citizen will fall to be treated, for the purposes  of  the
    Regulations, as if the British citizen were an EEA  national,  that  is
    not the case with the appellant.

28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the application of  regulation
    9 at paragraphs 15, 16 and 21 of his decision.   The  appellant's  case
    was that his wife had gone to Spain  in  order  to  pursue  a  business
    there.  The appellant had remained in Chobham, staying  in  residential
    premises that his wife leased from the local authority.  There  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant had ever been to Spain, whether with  his
    wife  or  otherwise.  The  appellant  accordingly  failed  to   satisfy
    regulation 9(2)(b): see Appendix.

29. In those circumstances, the Judge was, we consider, entirely correct to
    hold that regulation 9 was not satisfied.   We  shall  return  to  this
    issue in the context of the residence card  appeal.   For  the  moment,
    however, this finding -  which  the  appellant  has  not  seen  fit  to
    challenge in the context of the  notice  of  removal  window  -  itself
    disposes of Mr Mold's case that a right of appeal  exists  against  the
    notice of removal window.

30. For these reasons, the Upper Tribunal  concludes  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision as regards EA/06549/2017 contains no material
    error of law.




(2) The residence card appeal

31. We turn to the residence card appeal.  As we have already observed, the
    Judge correctly found that the appellant  could  not  fall  within  the
    ambit of regulation 9.  The Judge nevertheless dealt  with  submissions
    made on behalf of the appellant by reference (it seems) to the judgment
    of the Court of Justice of the European Union (as it  now  is)  in  the
    case of Carpenter v the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2002] EUECJ C-60/00.

32. The facts of Carpenter were essentially as follows.  Mrs  Carpenter,  a
    national of  the  Philippines,  overstayed  her  leave  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She married Mr  Carpenter,  a  British  citizen,  who  ran  a
    business from the United Kingdom, selling advertising space in  medical
    and  scientific  journals  and  offering  various  administrative   and
    publishing services to the editors of those journals.   Mr  Carpenter's
    business  was  established  in  the  United  Kingdom.   A   significant
    proportion of that business, however, was  conducted  with  advertisers
    established in other Member States and as a result Mr Carpenter used to
    travel to those States for the purposes of his business.

33. Mrs Carpenter resisted deportation proceedings brought against  her  by
    the Secretary of State on the ground that -

         "since her husband's business required  him  to  travel  around  in
         other Member States, providing and receiving services, he could  do
         so more easily as she was looking after his children from his first
         marriage, so that her  deportation  would  restrict  her  husband's
         right to provide and receive services" (paragraph 17).

34. The Immigration  Adjudicator  who  heard  Mrs  Carpenter's  appeal  was
    satisfied that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and  that  she  played  an
    important part in the upbringing of  her  step-children.   He  accepted
    that she could be "indirectly responsible for the increased success  of
    her  husband's  business".   The  Immigration   Adjudicator,   however,
    dismissed the appeal because, although Mr Carpenter travelled to  other
    Member States to provide services, since he remained  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom, he could not be considered to be exercising any freedom
    of movement within the meaning of Community law.

35. In its submissions to the Court, the United Kingdom government  pointed
    out that since Mr Carpenter had not exercised his right to  freedom  of
    movement, Mrs Carpenter could not rely on the cases of Singh [1992] ECR
    1-4265 or Asscher [1996] ECR 1-3089.

36. At paragraph 30 of its judgment, the Court noted  that  Mr  Carpenter's
    right freely to provide services guaranteed by Article 49  EC  "may  be
    relied on by a provider as against the state in which he is established
    if the services are provided for persons established in another  Member
    State".

37. So far as concerned a person in the position of Mr Carpenter,  who  had
    not  established  himself  in  another  Member  State,  the  Court,  at
    paragraph 36, held that -

         "the answer to the question referred to the Court therefore depends
         on whether,  in  the  circumstances  such  as  those  in  the  main
         proceedings, a right of residence in favour of the  spouse  may  be
         inferred from the principles or other rules of Community law."

    At paragraph 39, the Court noted that the "separation  of  Mr  and  Mrs
    Carpenter would be detrimental to their family life and, therefore,  to
    the conditions under  which  Mr  Carpenter  exercises  the  fundamental
    freedom".  The Court went on to explain how, in  the  circumstances  of
    this case, deporting Mrs Carpenter  would  constitute  a  violation  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  In  this  regard,  the  Court  noted  that  the
    marriage was genuine "and that Mrs Carpenter continues to lead  a  true
    family life [in the United Kingdom], in particular by looking after her
    husband's children from a previous marriage".

38. The Court's conclusion was summarised as follows:-

         "46. In view of the foregoing the answer to the  question  referred
             to the Court is that Article 49 EC, read in the light  of  the
             fundamental right  to  respect  for  family  life,  is  to  be
             interpreted as precluding in the circumstances such  as  those
             in the main proceedings, a refusal, by  the  Member  State  of
             origin of a provider of services established  in  that  Member
             State who provides services to recipients established in other
             Member States, of the right to reside in its territory to that
             provider's spouse, who is a national of a third country."

39. It is manifest that, on the facts of the present case, Carpenter has no
    application.  On the contrary, the  uncontested  facts  show  that  the
    present case is not one where the national of the Member  State  (here,
    the United Kingdom) has left  that  State  and  become  established  in
    another State, providing services there.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge
    found as follows:-

         "17. Oral evidence was given by the appellant and  his  UK  citizen
             wife in accordance with their witness  statements,  signed  at
             the hearing.  Whilst an application had been made to the Irish
             Naturalisation and Immigration Services in 2004, on the  basis
             of the appellant living with his current wife in  Ireland,  it
             was confirmed  that  the  current  application  is  solely  in
             relation to the wife's residency in Spain.

         18.  The appellant's wife went to  Spain  in  November  2013.   The
             appellant was unable to go with her to Spain because he had no
             visa.  Instead, the appellant looked after his wife's house in
             Chobham and also looked after the cat.  In his wife's absence,
             the appellant couldn't leave the council property, as his wife
             would have lost her council tenancy.

         19.  The appellant's wife returned to  the  UK  in  September  2016
             after her business partner died.  Also, the  appellant's  wife
             had inherited her mother's house and had decided to  use  that
             money to set up another business in Spain."

40. Regulation 9 of the 2006 Regulations thus governs the position  of  the
    appellant.  As we have seen, the appellant cannot come within the terms
    of regulation 9.  It is, we find, not possible for  the  appellant,  in
    the light of that failure, to seek to rely upon the case of  Carpenter.



41. In any event, even if the fundamental point of distinction between  the
    present case and that of Carpenter was not present, the Court  in  that
    case made it plain that its findings were fact specific: see  paragraph
    46 of its judgment.  Although the appellant challenges the  finding  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his  wife  was  not,  in  fact,  genuine,  even  if  that
    challenge was made out, this would not affect the fact that there is  a
    substantial difference between, on the one hand, the  circumstances  of
    Mr and Mrs Carpenter, living together in the United  Kingdom  with  Mrs
    Carpenter helping to look after Mr Carpenter's  step-children,  and  on
    the other, the circumstances of the present case, as put forward by the
    appellant.

42.  In the present case, the appellant's wife had established  herself  in
    business abroad, where she lived for years on end.  The  appellant  was
    not named in the council tax notice in relation to his  wife's  address
    in Chobham.  It appears that the tenancy was in her  name  alone.   The
    appellant's case was, in fact, that he was living in  the  property  in
    order to assist his wife  in  the  highly  questionable  enterprise  of
    maintaining her council tenancy, in circumstances  where  she  did  not
    live at the property.  As for the cat, any  suggestion  that  it  could
    play any material part in giving the appellant  derivative  EEA  rights
    would, in the circumstances, be absurd.

43. There is, accordingly, no material error of  law  in  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant could not succeed  in  his
    residence card appeal, absent any issue  regarding  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.




(3) Article 8 and the residence card appeal

44. Mr Mold's final set of submissions was that the Article 8 arguments  of
    the appellant should have been addressed by the Judge in the  residence
    card appeal.

45. This set of submissions depends  on  a  close  analysis  of  regulation
    26(7), paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to the 2006 Regulations, section 85 of
    the 2002 Act and section 120 of that Act: see the Appendix.

46. Mr Mold began by pointing out that regulation  26(7)  states  that  the
    provisions of or made under the 2002 Act, referred to  in  Schedule  1,
    have effect for the purposes of an appeal  under  the  Regulations,  in
    accordance with that Schedule.  Paragraph  1  of  Schedule  1  has  the
    effect that the sole permitted ground of appeal under section 84 of the
    2002 Act is that the decision breaches the appellant's rights under the
    EU Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in the United  Kingdom.



47. Section 85 governs the matters to be considered in an  appeal.   In  an
    EEA appeal, paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 provides that the references to a
    section  120  statement  (One-Stop  Notice)  in  section   85   include
    references to a statement under that section, as applied by paragraph 4
    of Schedule 2 to the Regulations.

48. Accordingly, Mr Mold said that section 85 of the 2002  Act  applies  to
    the appellant's EEA appeal. This had two consequences, according to  Mr
    Mold.  First, section 85(1) required the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to
    consider the respondent's refusal of 12 July 2017  of  the  appellant's
    human rights claim (which, as we have said, was certified under section
    94).  Secondly, Mr Mold submitted that, in any event, the appellant had
    made a statement under section 120 of the 2002 Act and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was required to consider  the  matters  raised  in  that
    statement.

49. So far as concerns section 85(1), Mr Mold is right to  say  that,  even
    though the refusal  of  the  human  rights  claim  was  certified,  the
    appellant has a right of appeal, albeit that  the  certification  means
    the right is not exercisable until the appellant has  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  However, this takes the appellant's case nowhere.  Section 92
    provides in terms that a claim  certified  under  section  94  must  be
    brought from outside the United Kingdom.  Accordingly,  the  effect  of
    sections 92 and 94 was that the appellant could not pursue  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge an appeal against the refusal  of  his  human
    rights claim.  Section 85(1) has to be read in that light.

50. As we have seen, the notice  of  removal  window  included  a  One-Stop
    Notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act.  Mr Mold submitted  that  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in respect  of
    the residence card appeal constituted a statement for the  purposes  of
    section 120(2). Accordingly, regardless of sections 92 and 94, Mr  Mold
    said the service of the One Stop Notice meant that the appellant could,
    in fact, advance his human rights appeal before the Judge.

51.  Again, Mr Mold relied upon the judgment in Amirteymour:-

         "36. In my view, the only  situation  in  which  the  Tribunal  has
             jurisdiction to consider a general case  based  on  Article  8
             (not concerning a decision to  remove  the  appellant)  in  an
             appeal pursuant to regulation 26(1) is where the Secretary  of
             State or an immigration officer serves a notice under  section
             120 of the 2002 Act - sometimes called a  "one  stop  notice":
             see AS  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076; [2011] 1 WLR 385, para. [3] -
             requiring the appellant to set out the entirety of his case as
             to why he says he is entitled to remain in the UK.   Paragraph
             4(8) of Schedule  2  to  the  EEA  Regulations  provides  that
             section 120 shall apply "if an EEA decision has been taken  or
             may  be  taken"  in  relation  to  the  individual  concerned.
             Paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 provides that section 85 of the 2002
             Act applies in relation to an appeal  pursuant  to  regulation
             26(1).  Section 85(2), read  as  adjusted  for  that  context,
             provides that "if an appellant under regulation 26(1) makes  a
             statement under section 120, the Tribunal shall  consider  any
             matter raised in the statement which constitutes a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84(1) against the  decision
             appealed against";  and  in  my  view  for  this  purpose  the
             reference to grounds of appeal listed in section 84(1)  is  to
             be taken to be a reference to all the  grounds  of  appeal  in
             that provision, including also paragraphs (a) and (f).

         37.  The object of a "one stop notice" under section 120 is to make
             the applicant bring forward his whole case regarding his claim
             to be allowed to remain in the UK so that it can be considered
             in one go in all its aspects, either by the Secretary of State
             or  (after  the  Secretary  of  State  has  taken  a  relevant
             decision) by the Tribunal on an appeal which  is  on  foot  in
             respect of such a decision.  Where such a  notice  is  served,
             the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider all claims  made  in
             response to it, whether or not they  were  raised  before  the
             Secretary of State at the time she made the relevant  decision
             against which the appeal is  brought:  see  AS  (Afghanistan);
             Lamichhane v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]
             EWCA Civ 260; [2012] 1 WLR 3064, [43]  (Stanley  Burnton  LJ);
             and Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]
             UKSC 72; [2014] AC 651 at [44] (Lord Carnwath JSC)  and  [67]-
             [70] (Lord Mance JSC). The effect of para. 4(8) of Schedule  2
             to the EEA Regulations and para. 1 of Schedule 1  to  the  EEA
             Regulations (read with section 85(2) and (3) of the 2002  Act)
             is to enable the Secretary of State to require  the  applicant
             for a  decision  regarding  his  entitlements  under  the  EEA
             Regulations to bring forward all  the  immigration  claims  on
             which  he  seeks  to  rely  and  incorporate  them  into   his
             application to be  considered  in  one  go  as  part  of  that
             application or, where the Secretary of State has already  made
             an adverse EEA decision in his case, to require the  applicant
             to bring forward all the immigration claims on which he  seeks
             to rely and  incorporate  them  in  his  appeal  against  that
             decision, to be considered in one go by the Tribunal.

         38.  The claims which might be asserted in response  to  a  section
             120 "one stop  notice"  could  include  claims  based  on  the
             Immigration Rules as well as claims  based  on  Article  8  or
             other Convention rights.  In my opinion, where this occurs the
             Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation to an  appeal  against  an
             EEA decision brought pursuant  to  regulation  26(1)  will  be
             expanded to cover all the claims raised by  the  appellant  in
             his response to the section 120  notice,  including  both  the
             claims based on the Immigration Rules and general claims based
             on Convention rights. It is only by giving this effect to  the
             section 120 notice that the object which  it  is  intended  to
             have, to ensure that all immigration claims by that  appellant
             are dealt with in one go through a  simplified  and  truncated
             procedure, can be achieved.  The effect given to a section 120
             notice by para. 4(8) of Schedule 2 and by para. 1 of  Schedule
             1 (read with section 85(2) and (3)) in the context of  an  EEA
             decision and an  appeal  against  an  EEA  decision  therefore
             includes an expansion of the claims which are to  be  regarded
             as included in the relevant application  made  under  the  EEA
             Regulations  and  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal  to
             consider such claims on  an  appeal  against  a  relevant  EEA
             decision.  Accordingly, for example, if in answer to a section
             120 notice served in the course of an appeal  against  an  EEA
             decision the applicant for leave  to  remain  puts  forward  a
             claim based on the Immigration Rules, the Tribunal determining
             that appeal will also  have  jurisdiction  to  determine  that
             claim, notwithstanding the fact that para. 1 of Schedule 1  to
             the EEA Regulations states  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
             section 84(1)(a) and (f) of  the  2002  Act  relating  to  the
             Immigration Rules  do  not  apply  in  respect  of  an  appeal
             pursuant to regulation  26(1).   Service  of  a  notice  under
             section 120 confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal in any appeal
             then on foot to deal with all claims made in response  to  the
             notice.

         39.  No procedural unfairness to the Secretary of State arises from
             treating the Tribunal's jurisdiction as being expanded in this
             way.  Such an expansion of jurisdiction only occurs  when  the
             Secretary of State or the relevant immigration  official  opts
             to serve a section 120 notice.  By  opting  to  serve  such  a
             notice they take the risk of an expansion of the claims to  be
             addressed in existing  proceedings  in  order  to  secure  the
             benefit of being able to deal with all claims definitively and
             promptly in a single set of proceedings: see Patel v Secretary
             of State for the Home Department at [69] (Lord Mance JSC)."

52.  Again, we do not consider that the judgment in Amirteymour assists the
    appellant. That case says nothing about certification. It is  certainly
    not authority for a proposition that the mere  service  of  a  One-Stop
    notice  has  any  material  effect  on  the   respondent's   power   of
    certification under section 94.

53.  In the present case, on 4 July 2017, the appellant had put forward his
    Article 8 case for remaining in the United Kingdom.  On 12  July  2017,
    the respondent refused that  claim  and  certified  it.   The  One-Stop
    Notice issued on 5 July 2017 in connection with the notice  of  removal
    window reminded the appellant -

         "As you have previously been served with a notice under section 120
         of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  if  your
         circumstances have changed so that you have a new reason for  which
         to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or grounds on  which  you
         should be permitted to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         grounds on which you should not be  removed  from  or  required  to
         leave the United Kingdom, you must tell us about those  reasons  or
         grounds as soon as reasonably practicable."

    This wording follows that in section 120(5) which requires P, in  those
    circumstances, to "provide a supplementary statement to  the  Secretary
    of State or an Immigration Officer setting out  the  new  circumstances
    and the additional reasons or grounds".

54. Even if the appellant had responded to the One-Stop Notice  of  5  July
    2017 by providing a statement under section 120 that raised  Article  8
    grounds, we do not consider that - given the certification of the human
    rights claim - the First-tier Tribunal Judge could have entertained  an
    appeal which involved the claim which had been refused  and  certified:
    see paragraph 49 above.

55. In any event, we are satisfied that the reference to Article 8  in  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal regarding the residence card decision did
    not constitute "a statement under section 120". We  say  this  for  two
    reasons. First, the  contents  of  the  grounds  were  inadequate.  The
    grounds merely asserted, without giving any reasons, that "the decision
    is a breach of his Article 8 rights" (paragraph 18(2)).   However,  the
    clear effect of section 120(4) and (5) is that a statement in  response
    to the notice will  only  have  effect  insofar  as  it  constitutes  a
    supplementary statement containing additional reasons or grounds.   The
    appellant's bare reference to Article 8 does not meet this requirement.

56. The second reason is that any statement required to be made under  that
    section has to take the form of a statement made to the  respondent  or
    an Immigration Officer, as the case may be.  Section 120(5) makes  this
    requirement express in the case of subsequent statements;  that  is  to
    say, where a section 120 notice  has  been  subsequently  served.   The
    requirement  is,  however,  in  our  view  inherent  in  the  preceding
    subsections of section 120.

57.  One of the essential purposes of section 120 is to provide a mechanism
    whereby the respondent can, where appropriate,  respond  positively  to
    the  statement,  for  example,  by  granting   the   person   concerned
    international protection and/or lifting a threat of  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom.  This point emerges plainly from the judgment of  Arden
    LJ in AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 1076: see esp. paras 37 to 39.   There,  the  Court  of
    Appeal was at pains to emphasise that although, in some  circumstances,
    the respondent may not  have  had  time  to  react  to  a  section  120
    statement by the time the appellant's appeal against  a  section  82(1)
    decision comes before the Tribunal, it was  "unlikely  that  Parliament
    intended that the [Tribunal] will become a primary decision-maker" on a
    substantial scale.  If a person could make a section 120 statement only
    in his or her grounds of appeal to the Tribunal,  the  scope  for  that
    Tribunal to become the primary decision-maker  would  be  significantly
    expanded. Thus, the statement has to be given to the respondent or  her
    Immigration Officer.

58. That this is the proper construction of section 120  is,  we  consider,
    underscored by the distinction drawn in section 85(2) between a "matter
    raised in the statement" and a "ground of appeal of a  kind  listed  in
    section 84 against the decision appealed against".  Thus, a section 120
    statement, even though not formally repeated in the grounds of  appeal,
    must be considered by the Tribunal.  If, as the appellant contends, the
    grounds of appeal can themselves constitute the  statement,  one  would
    have expected the statutory provisions to say so.

59. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  correct  to  find
    that, in the circumstances of the  appellant's  case,  the  appellant's
    residence card appeal did not require the Judge to address Article 8 of
    the ECHR.




(4) Was Article 8 a "new matter"?

60. In view of our findings, it is unnecessary for us to consider Mr Mold's
    submissions on whether Article 8 might constitute a "new matter" within
    the meaning of section 85(6).  The Judge did not have the  function  of
    deciding the Article 8 issue, whether or not it might have  constituted
    a "new matter".

61. Were we required to do so, however, we would find that  the  Article  8
    issue would (assuming Mr Mold was correct  in  his  other  submissions)
    constitute a "new matter", with the result that  the  Judge  could  not
    have considered it unless the respondent  had  given  him  her  consent
    (which was not forthcoming).

62. The reason why we come to this view is as follows.  The bald  assertion
    of Article 8 in the appellant's grounds of appeal of 14 July  2017  had
    not  been  previously  considered  in  the  context  of  "the  decision
    mentioned in section 82(1)".  For present purposes, that  decision  can
    only be the decision to refuse to give the appellant a residence  card.
    There  is  no  indication  that  the  respondent  has  considered   the
    appellant's Article 8 position in the context of that decision.

63. So far as concerns section 85(6)(b)(ii), since Mr Mold's  case  depends
    on the section 120 statement being the Article 8 grounds of appeal, the
    respondent had, manifestly, not considered that statement  "previously"
    to the appeal hearing.




Decision

64. In conclusion, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  does  not
    contain a material error of law.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


                               Signed   Date:  19 January 2018







                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                  APPENDIX


Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

85 Matters to be considered

   (1) An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be treated by
   [the Tribunal] as including an appeal against any decision in respect of
   which the appellant has a right of appeal under section 82(1).


   (2) If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement under  section
   120, [the Tribunal] shall consider any matter raised  in  the  statement
   which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed  in  [section  84]
   against the decision appealed against.


   (3) Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under section 120 whether
   the statement was made before or after the appeal was commenced.


   (4) On an appeal under [section 82(1)] against a decision [the Tribunal]
   may consider any matter which [it] thinks relevant to the  substance  of
   the decision, including a matter arising after the date of the decision.




   [(5) But the  Tribunal  must  not  consider  a  new  matter  unless  the
   Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.


   (6) A matter is a "new matter" if-


     (a) it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in  section  84,
     and


     (b) the Secretary of State has not previously considered the matter  in
     the context of-


      (i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or


      (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120.]

...

120 Requirement to state additional grounds for application etc


   (1) Subsection (2) applies to a person ("P") if-


     (a) P has made a protection claim or a human rights claim,


     (b) P has made an application to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,
     or


     (c) a decision to deport or remove P has been or may be taken.


   (2) The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may serve a  notice
   on P requiring P to provide a statement setting out-


     (a) P's reasons for wishing to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,


     (b) any grounds on which P should be permitted to enter  or  remain  in
     the United Kingdom, and


     (c) any grounds on which P should not be removed from  or  required  to
     leave the United Kingdom.


   (3) A statement under subsection (2) need not repeat reasons or  grounds
   set out in-


     (a) P's protection or human rights claim,


     (b) the application mentioned in subsection (1)(b), or


     (c) an application to which the decision mentioned in subsection (1)(c)
     relates.


   (4) Subsection (5) applies to a person ("P") if P  has  previously  been
   served with a notice under subsection (2) and-


     (a) P requires leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom but  does
     not have it, or


     (b) P has leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom only by virtue
     of [section 3C of the Immigration  Act  1971]  (continuation  of  leave
     pending decision or appeal).


   (5) Where P's circumstances have changed since the Secretary of State or
   an immigration officer was last made  aware  of  them  (whether  in  the
   application or claim mentioned in subsection (1) or in a statement under
   subsection (2) or this subsection) so that P has-


     (a) additional reasons for wishing to enter or  remain  in  the  United
     Kingdom,


     (b) additional grounds on which P  should  be  permitted  to  enter  or
     remain in the United Kingdom, or


     (c) additional grounds on  which  P  should  not  be  removed  from  or
     required to leave the United Kingdom,


   P must, as soon  as  reasonably  practicable,  provide  a  supplementary
   statement to the Secretary of State or an  immigration  officer  setting
   out the new circumstances and the additional reasons or grounds.


   (6) In this section-
      "human rights claim" and "protection claim" have the same meanings  as
      in Part 5;
      references to "grounds" are to grounds on which an appeal under Part 5
      may be brought (see section 84).



Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006

Regulation 2 (General interpretation)

...............

'EEA decision' means a decision under these Regulations that concerns -
   ...
  (c) a person's removal from the United Kingdom ...

Regulation 9 (Family members of British citizens)

9.  -  (1)  If  the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,   these
Regulations apply to a person who is the family member of a British  citizen
as if the British citizen ("P") were an EEA national.

(2) The conditions are that -
  (a) P is residing in an EEA State as a worker or self-employed person  or
  was so residing before returning to the United Kingdom;


  (b) if the family member of P is P's spouse or civil partner, the parties
  are living together in the EEA State or had entered into the marriage  or
  civil partnership and were living together in the EEA  State  before  the
  British citizen returned to the United Kingdom; and


  (c) the centre of P's life has transferred  to  the  EEA  State  where  P
  resided as a worker or self-employed person.
...

Regulation 19 (Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom)

...
(3)... an EEA national who has entered the  United  Kingdom  or  the  family
member of such a national who has entered the United Kingdom may be  removed
if-
  (a) that person does not have or ceases to have a right to  reside  under
  these Regulations;


  (b) the Secretary of State has  decided  that  the  person's  removal  is
  justified on grounds of public policy, public security or  public  health
  in accordance with regulation 21; or


  (c) the Secretary of State has  decided  that  the  person's  removal  is
  justified on grounds of abuse of rights  in  accordance  with  regulation
  21B(2)


  ...

Regulation 26 (Appeal rights)

...

(7)  The provisions of or made under the 2002 Act referred to in Schedule  1
shall have effect for the purposes of an appeal under these  Regulations  to
the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with that Schedule.


                                 SCHEDULE 1

                     Appeals to the First-Tier Tribunal

1. The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002 Act have  effect  in
relation to an appeal under these Regulations to the First-tier Tribunal  or
Upper Tribunal as if it were an appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary
of State under section 82(1) of  the  2002  Act  (right  of  appeal  to  the
Tribunal)-

    section 84 (grounds of appeal, as though the sole permitted  ground  of
    appeal were that the decision breaches the appellant's rights under the
    EU Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom )
    "an EU ground of appeal");


    section 85 (matters to be considered), as though-

        (i) the references to a statement under section 120 of the 2002 Act
        include, but are not limited to, a statement under that section  as
        applied by paragraph 4 of Schedule 2 to these Regulations; and


        (ii) a "matter" in subsection (2) and a "new matter" in  subsection
        (6) include a ground of appeal of a kind listed in  section  84  of
        the 2002 Act and an EU ground of appeal;

    section 86 (determination of appeal);
    section 105 and any regulations made under that section; and
    section 106 and any rules made under that section.

