
YS and HA (Midgan - not generally at risk) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00088


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing : 10 February 2005
                                                                       Date
                           Determination notified:
                                                               22 April 2005

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                        Mr J Perkins (Vice President)
                               Dr A U Chaudhry








                                                                  APPELLANTS


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Appearances:
Mr M.A. Rana of Counsel instructed by Aden & Co. Solicitors  for  the  first
Appellant; Mr M. Goldborough,  Legal  Representative,  of  Pickup  &  Jarvis
Solicitors, for the second appellant;  Mr L. Parker, Home Office  Presenting
Officer, for the respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. Both appeals before  us  concern  appellants  claiming  to  be  Midgan
      (sometimes spelt Midgen  or  Midgaan  and  sometimes  referred  to  as
      Madhiban  or  Madiban).  One  version  of  their  name  translates  as
      "harmless".  We decided to hear them together under  Rule  51  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003, as they  raised
      the common issue of whether members of the Midgan or  of  other  caste
      groups are generally at risk of persecution or treatment  contrary  to
      Articles 3 or 4 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). Art
      4, which prohibits slavery and forced labour, is relevant here because
      it was alleged in both cases that Midgan faced a real risk  of  having
      to work in conditions of slavery or servitude or forced  labour.   Our
      determination in respect of both appeals will  be  designated  Country
      Guidance case and is to be seen as  replacing  four  previous  Country
      Guidance determinations:

           -MA (Risk - Jaaji Clan -Benadiri) Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT  04084
           (previously known as Amin  [2002] UKIAT 04084);
           -IJ (Risk - Midgan) Somalia CG [2002]  UKIAT  06314  (previously
           known as  Ibrahim Abdi Jama [2002] UKIAT 06314); and
           -FB (Risk - Class  -  Midgan)  Somalia  CG  [2002]  UKIAT  06753
           (previously known as Beldeq [2002] UKIAT 06753)
           -AH (Midgan - Disabled Woman - Relocation -  Mogadishu)  Somalia
           CG [2002] UKIAT 07343 (previously known as  Hirsi  [2002]  UKIAT
           07343).


2.    In Amin  the  Tribunal  considered  the  position  of  a  "Jaajii",  a
      minority group said to be included in the term Midgan. At paragraph 17
      the Tribunal found that  the  appellant  belonged  to  a  defined  and
      recognised subgroup in Somali society who could not in  general  terms
      place any reliance on the traditional infrastructure of clan  support.
      Their vulnerability needed to be approached on  a  case-by-case  basis
      depending on the specific facts. It went on to find  on  the  specific
      facts before it that the appellant would be at risk in  Mogadishu  and
      elsewhere. In Ibrahim Abdi  Jama  the  Tribunal  held  that  a  Midgan
      appellant would not face a real risk of ill treatment contrary to  Art
      3 either because of his own particular circumstances or because of the
       generalised risk arising for him in living in Somalia. In  Beldeq the
      Tribunal found that the appellant was a Midgan and as such a member of
      a "vulnerable underclass" who faced and would again  face  persecution
      in her home area (Somaliland). Allowing her appeal on asylum and human
      rights grounds, the Tribunal did not consider she would have a  viable
      internal relocation alternative  since  she  was  a  woman  without  a
      husband or family support and the background information  showed  that
      the Midgan are spread across  the  country  without  any  recognisable
      Midgan communities from whom she might be able  to  gain  support.  In
      Hirsi the Tribunal  did  not  consider  that  either  the  appellant`s
      personal circumstances (she was registered disabled) or  the  position
      of Midgan generally would mean that she would face a real risk of  ill
      treatment on return to Mogadishu.

3.    In setting the two present cases down for hearing  it  was  recognised
      that there was an apparent tension between the line of cases including
      Amin, Ibrahim Abdi Jama and Hersi on the one hand, which  treated  the
      issue of whether Midgan are at risk as needing  to  be  decided  on  a
      "case by case" basis, and Beldeq on the other, which was said to  view
      the Midgan as a persecuted underclass.

The first appellant
4.    The first  appellant,  who  is  aged  twenty-four  appeals  against  a
      determination of the Adjudicator E.B. Grant notified on 11  June  2004
      dismissing his appeal against a decision refusing  to  vary  leave  to
      remain on asylum grounds.

5.    The  Adjudicator  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  Midgan  from
      Kismayo. His father was a shoemaker. During the civil war  his  family
      endured attacks from majority clan militia. His sister had been  raped
      and had then fled. She had not been heard of since.   His  mother  had
      been attacked. This had worsened her heart condition and she died soon
      after.

6.    The only matters about which  the  Adjudicator  did  not  believe  the
      appellant concerned events said to have befallen him and his family in
      June 2001 and thereafter. The appellant had claimed  that  gunmen  had
      attacked  his  family,  shot  his  father,  kidnapped  the  appellant,
      interrogated him continuously, tortured him and used him as a slave to
      carry out menial duties for the soldiers. He had  further  claimed  he
      had managed to escape after one month when the base was  attacked  and
      captured by different rival militia.  The Adjudicator  concluded  that
      the appellant and the rest of his family were  "not  in  any  imminent
      danger when he left Somalia".

7.    We need not go into the Adjudicator's reasons for rejecting this  part
      of the appellant's claim since the grounds  did  not  challenge  them.
      Their sole  objection  was  to  the  Adjudicator's  rejection  of  the
      appellant's claim  that  simply  by  virtue  of  being  a  Midgan  the
      appellant would be at risk. At paragraph 34 the Adjudicator wrote:

             "There is no evidence in  the  objective  background  material
             that the  Midgan  are  persecuted  in  Somalia  although  they
             clearly  have  problems  from  time  to  time.  The  objective
             background material indicates that many  of  the  Midgan  live
             safely in northern Somalia and although the appellant is  from
             Kismayo there is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  return  to
             northern Somalia and live with other clan members on return to
             Somalia".

   8. (We note here that it  is  far  from  clear  whether  the  Adjudicator
      actually meant 'northern' rather than Somalia in general in the  above
      passage; but in any event no point was taken that the Adjudicator  did
      not intend her findings to apply to Midgan in Somalia generally).


   9. The grounds of appeal contended that this and other  passages  in  the
      Adjudicator's determination betrayed two errors of  law.  Firstly  she
      failed to consider or  give  reasons  in  her  determination  for  not
      accepting the Tribunal decision in   Beldeq  in  particular  or  other
      objective evidence that the Midgan were a persecuted minority.  In his
      skeleton  argument  Mr  Rana  contended  that  the   errors   in   the
      Adjudicator's appraisal of the objective evidence was made transparent
      by the expert report of Dr Virginia Luling (based largely on the  same
      materials), whose expert credentials had been approved by the Tribunal
      in a number of cases.  Secondly, it was submitted that the Adjudicator
      failed to apply the correct standard of proof.

The second appellant
10.   The second appellant, aged forty-one, appeals against a  determination
      of Adjudicator, Mr A.J. Parker, notified on 30 April  2004  dismissing
      his appeal against a decision also refusing to vary leave to remain on
      asylum grounds.

11.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was from Baidhaba.  His
      family had moved to Mogadishu in 1968.  In 1999, when he  was  working
      for an NGO called "Crescent of Hope", a majority clan militia attacked
      his workplace. They detained him with eight  others  in  a  warehouse.
      After ten weeks he managed  to  escape.   Militia  members  then  came
      looking for him at his home. They shelled it. He and his family  fled,
      hiding elsewhere  in  Mogadishu.   Soon  after  he  left  Somalia  for
      Ethiopia. He stayed there for twenty months but could not remain as he
      had seen the same gunmen searching for him in Ethiopia.

12.   The  Adjudicator  found  his  account  credible.   Despite  making  an
      adverse credibility finding in respect of the appellant's  account  of
      his past experiences, the Adjudicator did however accept that he was a
      member of the  Midgan. At paragraphs 33 and 34 he wrote:


             "I would have  to  find  that  the  appellant's  case  is  not
             credible and that there was no  attack  on  the  warehouse.  I
             would find as a fact that he is from the  Midgan  clan.  Based
             on the background material, I would find that his clan is  not
             a persecuted minority. I do not  believe  that  asylum  status
             should be granted or  exceptional  leave  be  extended  merely
             because of the appellant's background.


             There is no particular  reason  why  the  appellant  has  been
             targeted or will be targeted on his return. He would  be  like
             other Midgan clan members.  The CIPU confirms  that  they  are
             not subject  to  the  same  degree  of  persecution  as  other
             minority groups in Somalia."

13.   The grounds of appeal contended that the Adjudicator's  findings  were
      contradictory, as elsewhere he had accepted that the  Midgan  have  no
      territory of their own and that "They do  face  some  dangers  at  the
      hands of the militia because of their ethnic origin" (paragraph 3) and
      he had before him a US State Department Report 2002 which included the
       Madhiban (an alternative name  for  the  Midgan)  in  their  list  of
      minority groups and low caste clans. In other words,  the  Adjudicator
      should have recognised throughout that  the  Midgan  is  a  persecuted
      minority in Somalia.  The  second  main  point  raised  was  that  the
      Adjudicator erred in paragraph  34  in  considering  that  there  were
      `degrees  of  persecution.   There  was  also  a  challenge   to   the
      Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings. This took the  Adjudicator
      to task for disbelieving the appellant's  account  of  militia  gunmen
      travelling 1000 km to  silence  him  and  then  failing  to  kill  him
      straightaway.  Finally there was  a  challenge  to  the  Adjudicator's
      failure to make any findings in relation to the appellant's Article  8
      rights.

The hearing
14.   At the hearing Mr Rana sought to clarify that  his  argument  had  two
      limbs.  Firstly he submitted that his  appellant  should  succeed  (i)
      simply on the basis that he was a Midgan. But even  if  his  appellant
      could not   succeed on that basis he should succeed (ii) on the  basis
      of being a Midgan with a history of being the subject  of  attacks  by
      majority clan members in Kismayo.  Mr Rana further emphasised that the
      view of the Midgan as a persecuted minority was one adopted by several
      experts on  Somalia, Dr Luling, Dr Gilkes and Professor Asha  A  Samad
      in particular.   In relation to internal relocation he contended  that
      neither the background materials nor Tribunal case law suggested  that
      internal relocation would be a viable option for the  Midgan.  In  AJH
      (Minority group-Swahili speakers)  Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT 00094   the
      Tribunal has found that relocation in the safer  areas  of  Somaliland
      and Puntland would only assist those who originated from there of  had
      their own clan residing there. This would rule out the Midgan who were
      regarded as the lowest of the low, rather  like  the  untouchables  in
      India used to be.

15.    Mr  Goldborough  associated  himself   with   Mr   Rana's   principal
      submissions as to the position of the Midgan generally.  He  confirmed
      pursued challenges set out in the grounds to the Adjudicator's adverse
      credibility findings. He accepted, however, that the challenge to  the
      Adjudicator's failure to address his appellant's Article 8 rights  was
      weak and he did not wish to pursue it further.

16.   Mr Parker's argument in relation to the position  of  the  Midgan  was
      that, whilst they were a minority group, they were  not  a  persecuted
      group. He invited the Tribunal to consider minority groups as existing
      at different points along a continuum of risk.  At the one end of  the
      spectrum, there were groups such as the  Benadiri  and  Bravanese  who
      were most at risk. Somewhere in the middle were  groups  such  as  the
      Bantu and the Eyle.  He submitted that groups such as the Midgan  were
      towards the other end  of  the  continuum:   they  certainly  suffered
      measures of discrimination and other disadvantages, but they were able
      generally speaking to find majority clan patrons, in particular  noble
      clan patrons, to protect them.

17.   In relation to the first  appellant,  Mr  Parker  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator could not be said to have  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
      follow Tribunal Country Guidelines, since at that time (11 June  2004)
      he notified his determination none  of  the  cases  dealing  with  the
      Midgan had been designated as Country Guideline cases and in any event
      said different things about whether the Midgan per se  were  at  risk.
      Furthermore, in a case dealing with another occupational caste group -
      the Yibir - HF ( Persecution - Discrimination -  Yibir  -Occupation  -
      Caste) Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT 05520, it was  expressly  not  accepted
      that occupational caste groups per se were at risk of persecution.

18.   In the case of the second appellant,  Mr Parker pointed out  that  his
      family still lived in his home area and he had not been found credible
      in respect of his claim that he and they faced an imminent  threat  of
      persecution in their home area.

19.   At the end of the hearing we directed that the parties use their  best
      endeavours to obtain a copy of  the  report  by  Dr  Gilkes  to  which
      reference had been made in previous determinations, FB in  particular,
      together with any submissions they wished to make, within ten days.

20.   In the event nothing  further  was   forthcoming  from  either  party.
      However, we have noted from what is said about the  contents  of  this
      report , which is dated some time in 2002, that  it  takes  a  similar
      view to that taken by  Dr Luling in her report, which was before us.

Our Assessment

The first appellant
21.   We do not think that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
      determination of  the  Adjudicator  in  this  case.  She  is  open  to
      criticism for not raising with the parties whether there were reported
      Tribunal cases in existence dealing with the position of  the  Midgan.
      Although when she dealt  with  the  case,  Beldeq  had  not  yet  been
      designated as a Country Guideline case (sub nominee FH), nor  had  any
      other case dealing with the  Midgan or any other occupational  castes.
      However, until the publication on the IAA website of a list of Country
      Guideline cases in mid-2004 there was no regular way of  knowing  what
      the Tribunal had said in reported cases on country  conditions.  Hence
      we do not think that mere failure to refer to reported  cases  dealing
      with a country issue was an error of law. Neither party  had  put  any
      Tribunal case dealing with the  Midgan before her.  In the context  of
      an essentially adversarial system,  an  Adjudicator  cannot  refer  to
      cases that are  not  well  known  unless  giving  to  the  parties  an
      opportunity to comment   on ones identified through  his  or  her  own
      research.

22.   In  any  event,  it  cannot  be  said  that  there  was  a  clear  and
      unequivocal line of Tribunal authority on the position of the  Midgan.
      The case of Amin (later designated as MA), although  identifying  that
      the  Midgan  could  not  place  any  reliance  on  the     traditional
      infrastructure of clan support, had concluded that whether they are at
      risk as a result had to be decided on a case-by-case basis.   The case
      of  Ibraaahim Abdi Jama   (later designated as IJ) had found that  the
      Midgan were not in general at risk. To similar effect was the case  of
      Hersi.  And the case of Beldeq (later known as FH) whilst  indubitably
      considering more background sources than the aforementioned,  did  not
      appear to have known about the existence of IJ,  although  the  latter
      had in fact been promulgated several weeks earlier (IJ was heard on 26
      November 2002 but not promulgated until 29 January 2003); FH was heard
      on 12 December 2002, but not  promulgated  until  21  February  2003).
      Furthermore, despite making reference to Amin the Tribunal  in  Beldeq
      did not  specifically  disagree  with  its  conclusions.  Nor  did  it
      specifically conclude that the Midgan generally were at real  risk  of
      persecution or  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3.     It  certainly
      accepted the appellant had been persecuted in  the  past  because  she
      belonged to a `vulnerable underclass`. It  certainly accepted too,  in
      the light of her lack of a husband or family support or settled Midgan
      community to return to, that the appellant would be at risk. But these
      findings were clearly specific to the appellant.    They  did  contain
      some general findings, in  particular  (i)  that  the  Midgan  were  a
      "vulnerable underclass" and (ii) that the Midgan in Somalia are spread
      across the country without any recognisable Midgan communities able to
      give support, but not general findings dealing with whether the Midgan
      were, as a consequence, to be considered generally at risk.

23.   As regards  Mr  Rana's  second  ground  concerning  the  Adjudicator's
      interpretation of the background evidence, we do not think he  can  be
      said to have erred n law in this respect either.   Dr Luling's  report
      was not before her and   so  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  identify  a
      material error of law: see CA [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1165.   Nor  was  the
      August 2002 report of Professor Asha A Samad. We do not consider  that
      the body of background materials before him clearly indicated that the
      Midgan are generally at risk. (We shall deal later with  the  separate
      question of whether a different view should be taken on this issue  in
      the light of the further evidence from the experts and other sources.)

24.    As  regards  Mr  Rana's  second  ground  of  appeal,  concerning  the
      Adjudicator's approach to the standard of proof, we see  no  merit  in
      it.  The Adjudicator properly directed herself in paragraph 10  as  to
      the approach of "real risk" approved by the Tribunal  in  the  starred
      determination Kacaj (01/TH/00634) and there  is  nothing  to  indicate
      that she applied this in a way which depended on a standard  of  proof
      higher than that of a reasonable degree of likelihood.

The Second Appellant
25.   We should first of  all  address  Mr  Goldborough's  attack  upon  the
      Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings. His  first  complaint  was
      that the Adjudicator was wrong to  count  against  the  appellant  (as
      being implausible) the claim that the militia gunmen would  have  gone
      1000 km to search for him. All he had said, argued Mr Goldborough, was
      that he  "just happened to bump into him (the gunman)".   However,  we
      see nothing in this point. It is clear from paragraphs 21 and 22  that
      the Adjudicator was fully aware, when  questioned  as  to  why  gunmen
      would have travelled 1000 km from one country to another (Mogadishu in
      Somalia to Addis Ababa in Ethiopia) to locate him, that  the  response
      of the appellant was to say he just happened to bump into him. But the
      appellant also went on to state that he considered  information  about
      him being in Ethiopia had "got out" through neighbours.   He  did  not
      take the opportunity  to  deny  therefore  that  the  gunmen  were  in
      Ethiopia to search for him.  Nor  did  he  seek  to  resile  from  his
      evidence elsewhere that the gunmen had  searched  for  him  after  the
      detention at his home because they  were  angry  that  he  had  broken
      silence about the detention.

  26. As  regards  Mr  Goldborough's  assertion  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      "substituting his own version of the appellant story" we see no  merit
      in this either. It was open to the Adjudicator, having considered  the
      evidence as a whole, to find that the appellant had failed to  give  a
      satisfactory account of  why  the  militia  would  have  kept  him  in
      detention rather than killing him, as they later threatened and  tried
      to do. The challenge to the Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings
      fall on stony ground.


27.   That  naturally  brings  us  to  Mr  Goldborough's  criticism  of  the
      Adjudicator's reference at para 34 to 'degrees of  persecution'.  What
      he objected to was the following passage: `The CIPU confirms that they
      are not subject to the same degree of persecution  as  other  minority
      groups in Somalia."


  28. We would agree that the Adjudicator fell into error  here.  Once  harm
      reaches a level of severity sufficient  to  amount  to  serious  harm,
      there is persecution (assuming always that in addition there is a lack
      of protection). If there is persecution, then whatever its degree,  an
      appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed  under  the  Refugee   Convention
      (assuming he can also show a causal nexus with  a  Refugee  Convention
      ground).  But  read  as  a  whole  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the
      Adjudicator did not accept that the Midgan were a persecuted  minority
      and indeed said so in terms. Hence we do not consider that this  error
      on the part of the Adjudicator was a material  one.  Even  applying  a
      correct understanding of persecution to the evidence  before  him,  he
      would still have been fully justified in concluding that  the  dangers
      faced by Midgan at the  hands  of  militia  because  of  their  ethnic
      origin, albeit significant, did not  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
      serious harm.

  29. As already noted, Mr  Goldborough  abandoned  reliance  on  Article  8
      ground at the outset.

30.      Mr Goldborough's only remaining ground  was  that  the  Adjudicator
      had misinterpreted the background materials before them, as  evidenced
      by seeming recognition elsewhere in his determination that the  Midgan
      were a minority group who had been targeted. In our view, this  ground
      is essentially the same as Mr Rana's principal ground in the  case  of
      the first appellant. The error of law in both cases is said to be that
      the background materials before each Adjudicator, properly  understood
      demonstrated that the Midgan are generally a persecuted  minority  and
      so each Adjudicator should have allowed the appeal.

31.    As with the case of the first appellant, so  with  the  case  of  the
      second appellant, we must address this common ground in the context of
      considering the issue  of  whether  Midgan  were  to  be  regarded  as
      generally  at  risk,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before   each
      Adjudicator.

The treatment by each Adjudicator of the evidence  before  him  relating  to
whether the Midgan generally were a persecuted minority

32.   It is important to bear  in  mind  the  specific  body  of  background
      materials before each Adjudicator. In neither case did what was before
      the Adjudicator compel a conclusion that the  Midgan generally are  at
      risk. We remind ourselves  here  of  what  is  required  in  order  to
      identify a material error of law, a set out in E & R [2004]  EWCA  Civ
      49 and in CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.  If it was  a  conclusion  that  no
      reasonable Adjudicator could have reached, then it would be irrational
      one and hence a material error  of  law.  However,  it  if  it  was  a
      conclusion which was within the range  of  reasonable  decisions  that
      could be made on such materials, it cannot be  considered  a  material
      error of law.

33.   The first Adjudicator relied heavily on  paragraph  9  of  the    2000
      Joint Report (see Appendix A). That report confirmed the status of the
        Midgan as an outcaste group.  It noted that they  had  traditionally
      performed  specialised  occupational  services  for  majority   clans,
      although in the past few decades  many  Midgan  had  migrated  to  the
      cities, finding jobs  with  politicians  as  drivers,  bodyguards  and
      spies.  At 9.32  it was stated:

             "Other clans also employed Tumaal, Midgan and Yibir  families.
             To this day their work opportunities are  mainly  confined  to
             menial  jobs  as  hairdressing,  blacksmithing,  metalworking,
             tanning, shoemaking and pottery and are craftsmen in general."

34.    At  paragraph  9.4,  dealing  with  the  security  and  human  rights
      situation of the Midgan, the same report notes that during  the  civil
      war ushered in by Barre's downfall in 2001  the  occupational   castes
      were in general not specifically targeted, although as groups  without
      natural clan  allies  they  were  sometimes  attacked  with  impunity.
      Particular individuals, and families who  had  visibly  supported  the
      Barre regime were however  vulnerable  to  targeted  retaliation.  The
      report concludes:

             "Midgan,  Tumal  and  Yibir  today  live  scattered  all  over
             Somalia,  but  mostly  in  northern  areas.   There   are   no
             indications that the security of Midgan, Tumal and Yibir is at
             risk from targeted action by other clans  at  the  same  time,
             indications are that their relationships with the other  major
             Somali clans have not improved much  from  traditional  times,
             and that they are still discriminated against  in  the  social
             and economic spheres."

  35. Concern is expressed, however,  about  Madhiban  Internally  Displaced
      Persons (IDPs) as  being  especially  vulnerable  to  spontaneous  and
      forced relocations.

  36.  The first Adjudicator also had before her  the  US  State  Department
      Report. But whilst this report did identify the Midgan as  a  minority
      group and did state that along with other minority  groups  they  were
      subject to attacks, it did not state  anything  about  the  scale  and
      frequency of these in respect of the Midgan and it  did  not  identify
      the Midgan as a persecuted minority.


  37. The Adjudicator who decided the appeal of the second appellant  placed
      particular reliance on the CIPU Report for April  2004  and  the  2004
      Joint Report (see Appendix A). He took account at paragraph 26 of  the
      appellant's representative's submissions that according to this  Joint
      Report at 4.7 the situation has not changed for the better, the Midgan
      were scattered throughout Somalia, they  did  not  control  their  own
      territory and internal flight was not possible. At paragraphs  28  and
      29 he concluded that although the Midgan did face danger at the  hands
      of clan militia because of their ethnic  origin,  their  position  had
      improved since the civil war and "There are no indications that  their
      security is at risk from other clans. They have found  recovery  after
      the civil war difficult and economically they  are  mostly  in  menial
      jobs".

38.   Like the Adjudicator in the  first  appeal,  the  Adjudicator  in  the
      second appeal also had the US State Department Report before him, but,
      as already stated this did not identity the  Midgan  as  a  persecuted
      minority.

  39. As already  noted,  in  neither  appeal  were  any  previous  Tribunal
      decisions dealing with the Midgan cited to the Adjudicator.  But  even
      if we assumed that these should have been taken into account  in  each
      appeal, we do not consider for reasons given earlier that any of  them
      can properly be read as having identified the Midgan as  generally  at
      risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3.


The particular circumstances of the first appellant

40.   We return at this point to the second limb  of  Mr  Rana's  submission
      which was that, even if not at risk by virtue of being a  Midgan,  the
      appellant would be at risk in view of his history of  attacks  at  the
      hands of majority clan members in Kismayo.  However,  this  submission
      presupposes that the Adjudicator made a positive  credibility  finding
      in respect of the appellant`s past experiences  in  Somalia.  She  did
      not. Indeed she specifically found that the appellant and the rest  of
      his family 'were not in any imminent danger  when  he  left  Somalia'.
      Accordingly we see no error of law in the Adjudicator  concluding,  on
      the basis of her findings of fact in respect of this  appellant,  that
      he would not be at risk on return.

The position of the Midgan in the light of more recent materials
41.   As  indicated  at  the  outset,  we  have  decided  to  designate  our
      determination  in  respect  of  these  two  appellants  as  a  Country
      Guideline decision. We recognise that what we go on to say by  way  of
      guidance can only be given on an obiter basis, since in  neither  case
      have we found an error of law. However, we heard detailed  submissions
      put to us against the  background  of  a  very  comprehensive  set  of
      background materials and reports (see Appendix  B)  and  hence  it  is
      appropriate to give our assessment of it.

The Midgan
42.     It is convenient to start our consideration of the Midgan  with  the
      June 11, 2004 report of Dr Virginia Luling  entitled  'Report  on  the
      Midgaan And Other Caste Groups in  Somalia'. The body of the report is
      as follows:

             'The Midgaan
             There are a number of small groups in   Somali  society  which
             are sometimes described as "caste" groups because of their low
             status and specialisation in certain  occupations.   The  most
             numerous are  the  Midgaan;  their  other  name,   which  they
             prefer, is "Madiban", which means "harmless". The other  caste
             groups are the Tumaal (smiths), Yibir and a few  other   small
             pariah groups: the Bon, Ribi and Eyle hunters  in  the  south.
             Other names that one comes across are Jaji (who are  fishers),
             Yahar, Ga'ansibir (smiths), Musa Deryo, and Rer  Wardere. Some
             of them also call themselves Baidari  or  Gaboye.   Everything
             that I say here about the Midgaan  applies  equally  to  these
             others.


             These people have been described  as  "not  only  outcast  but
             outside the place of classification" and  are  known  as  "the
             people without brothers"1, because they are not found  in  the
             general scheme of genealogy of the Somali "noble" clans.


             There are no proper population figures for them, but all caste
             groups together have been estimated at only about 1% of Somali
             society. The Midgaan were reckoned in 1958 to  number 9,000  -
             almost certainly an underestimate, since  they  would  conceal
             their origin from outside questioners2.  Since then no one has
             attempted to count them.


             The origin of the  Midgan is obscure - it may be that they  in
             part derive from pre-Somalia population of the region. However
             it is reported that people could also become Midgaan by  being
             degraded in punishment for some crime, or in  some  other  way
             losing status, and this degradation was  passed  on  to  their
             descendants. In recent times the  Yibir  have  claimed  Jewish
             origin, and sometimes the other groups make the same claim.


             However Midgaan and members of the other caste groups  do  not
             show any  physical  differences  from  the  majority   Somalia
             population. They do not have special dialects, but speak  like
             the majority populations of the areas where they live: however
             some if not all of these groups have a special  secret  slang,
             which was developed in order to  converse  secretly  and  hide
             their meaning from the majority  population3.   This  is  more
             likely to be known by older people than the young.


             They are generally very poor people. The Midgaan  of  Hargeisa
             in 2003 are described[1] as  living  in  extreme  squalor  and
             deprivation and having no access to the hospital.


             The Midgaan, like the other outcast groups,  carry  on  trades
             and  perform  tasks   that   other   Somalia   would   refuse.
             Traditionally they  were  hunters,  leather  workers   (making
             shoes, belts etc) and barbers. The women were  and  are  birth
             attendants, and perform girls'  circumcision,  while  the  men
             perform that of boys.  (However the same tasks carried out  by
             modern trained medical personnel carry no stigma and are  done
             by "noble" Somali).  The Tumaal are  blacksmiths,  while  they
             have certain magical powers attributed to them.  These  groups
             can thus be compared to the  "untouchables"  of  Indian  caste
             society.


             In recent times however many of them have  moved  into  towns,
             often trying to hide their origins in their  new  environment,
             and found other ways of living. Some worked  as  labourers  or
             started up as shopkeepers, some joined the army, a natural way
             to escape or disguise their low status.


             Midgaan could not  intermarry  with  members  of  the  "noble"
             Somali clan. This rule is less  strictly  observed  in  modern
             times, but all the same there are known case  of  couples  who
             tried to do so  being  lynched.  The  Joint  Danish,  Finnish,
             Norwegian and British Fact Finding Mission to Nairobi,  Kenya,
             7-12 January 2004, p.52 cites  "a case ... where a man of  the
             Midgan minority group  married  a  woman  from  a  major  clan
             originating  in  Sool  region  in   Somaliland.  After   their
             marriage in  Sweden,  the  couple  travelled  to  the  bride's
             original home  in   Sool.  The  bride  was  badly  beaten  and
             disowned by her father ... the couple could no longer live  in
             Somalia."


             There are groups of Midgaan scattered all over  Somalia.  They
             are attached as servants or clients to various "noble" Somalia
             clans and subclans, who in the traditional  order  would  give
             them some degree of protection in return for the services they
             performed. This protection can however no longer be relied  on
             when (a) the Midgaan have moved into towns far away from their
             former patrons and (b) the anarchy of the present  time  makes
             such  traditional  roles  inoperative.  In   any   case   this
             protection only applied as long as the Midgaan accepted  their
             low  status.


             During the time of  Siyad Barre there was an  explicit  policy
             of advancing low-status people, in keeping with the  socialist
             ideology of the regime. Certain  individuals  were  raised  to
             important positions in the  government;   the  motivation  for
             this however was that since they had  no  clan  allegiance  of
             their own they would be  reliable  servants.   An  outstanding
             example was Mohamed   Ali  Samatar,  who  became  Minister  of
             Defence and then Prime Minister. He was a Tumaal.  The  result
             was that after the fall of Barre these people became specially
             targeted for revenge.


             The Midgaan have suffered greatly in the  civil  war  and  the
             current lack of government, as they do not belong  to  any  of
             the major clans and thus do not have the power base that  this
             affords. As no revenge will be  taken  by  the  more  powerful
             clans they can be attacked with impunity. Professor I.M. Lewis
             has told in a letter of a case in which a young Midgan working
             as a  shoeshine   boy  in  Mogadishu  complained  because  his
             customer had not paid him enough. The customer  pulled  out  a
             gun and shot him dead.


             To quote the Amnesty International   Annual  Report  for  2001
             under "Somalia": "Women and the minorities  were  particularly
             vulnerable to abuses including rape, killing and theft of land
             and property. The minorities at risk, who  had  suffered  most
             from  militia  attacks  in   the   civil   wars   and   social
             discrimination, included ... artisan  groups  (Midgan,  Tumal,
             Yibir ... Prison conditions, particularly in  Mogadishu,  were
             harsh ... Many prisoners seemed  to  be  from  minorities  who
             lacked support from any armed clan."


             I would therefore conclude that Midgaan and other caste  group
             people are particularly at risk in the Somalia of today.'

 43.   Also in a report adduced for the Tribunal by  those  instructing  the
      first appellant was a summary of the  research  by  Professor  Asha  A
      Samad dated August 2002  of  the  City  University  of  New  York  and
      Executive Director, SAFRAD - Somali Association presented  to  the  UN
      Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.  She  describes
      most Midgan as being attached  to  "noble"  dominant  clans  as  their
      "clients, serfs, or virtual slaves. Should they complain, or  seek  to
      organise  they  face  severe  reprisals  from  those   "noble"   clans
      dominating them".  She goes on:

             'In Somalia, the outcaste groups are collectively referred  to
             as  "Midgan"  or  "Madhiban",  the  former  being  much   more
             disrespectful and insulting than  the  latter  one.   However,
             there are actually many more Somalia outcaste groups.  Each is
             connected as clients, former slaves, or servants  to  a  noble
             clan group. They include the Kuulbeer,  Hildid, Khayr, Hubone,
             Aden,  Aarsade,  Howie  Aforta,  Ganbar,  Gaakaab,  Mudoraale,
             Magtal, Omar, Hussein and others scattered all over the Somali
             regions, including Ethiopia, Kenya, and  the  broader  Somalia
             diaspora. The Midgan constitute the largest   Somali  outcaste
             family  and  its  subclans  include  the   Madhiban,   Maxamed
             Gorgaate, Muuse-Darye, Tumaal, Yibir, Howle, Mahaad-Bore, and,
             according to SIMA, hidden others.'
44.   Elsewhere she describes them as one of the groups  worst  affected  by
      the civil war.   She considers that, post-civil war, any  Midgan would
      be at risk of serious physical danger if found in any part of  Somalia
      in which his family is not a client of the local powerful clan family.
       She considers that very few Somalis or clans will protect the Midgan-
      Madhiban either for fear of being targeted and attacked themselves  or
      because they too feel they merit no  protection  (as  an  outcaste  or
      "polluted" group).  As no clan is  permitted  to  marry  the   Midgan-
      Madhiban, they have no kinship ties with other groups  to  offer  them
      shelter or protection.  She summarised the situation this way: "Midgan-
      Madhiban, Yibir, Tumal and other  outcaste  groups  are  still  facing
      restrictions,  prejudice,  discrimination,   harassment,   abuse   and
      attacks".

45.   Subsequent to Dr Luling's June 2004 report, there has been  a  further
      CIPU Report for October 2004.  At paragraphs 6.86 to 6.88 it states:

           'Midgan, Tumal, Yibir and Galgala
           6.86 According to the  [Joint Reports  of  2000  and  2002:  see
           Appendix A], the  Gaboye/Midgan  (usually  referred  to  as  the
           Midgan but also known as the   Madhiban),  Tumal  and  Yibir  (a
           group said to have Jewish origins) traditionally  lived  in  the
           areas of the four main nomadic clan families  of  Darod,  Isaaq,
           Dir and Hawiye  in northern and central Somalia.   In  the  last
           few decades many of them migrated to the  cities,  these  groups
           are now scattered through the country but are  mainly  found  in
           northern and central regions;  Midgan have been able  to  settle
           in  Puntland.


           6.87 According to the [the 2000 Joint Report] these  groups  are
           called  "occupational  castes"  as  they  traditionally  perform
           specialist services  and  settle  in  areas  where  they  obtain
           protection from a clan and build up an  economic  activity.   As
           reflected in OCHA report of August 2002:


                 "Most of these minority groups have assimilated into  other
                 Somalia clans with whom they live. For example, the Galgala
                 have assimilated into the Abgal in  Jowhar  and  Mogadishu.
                 However, they identify themselves as Nuh  Mohamud,  a  sub-
                 clan of the  Majerten clan.  Some Gaboye, Tumal  and  Yibir
                 assimilated into the Isak in Somaliland, while others  have
                 assimilated into the Darod in Puntland and central regions.
                 There  are  also  other  Gaboye,  Tumal   and   Yibir   who
                 assimilated with  Hawadle, Murasade and  Marehan  clans  in
                 Galgadud region.


           6.88 According to the OCHA  Minorities Study of August 2002, the
           Midgan, or Madhiban, have always been placed at the lower end of
           Somali society. In Hargeisa there are five telephone  companies,
           six  money  transfer  companies,   several   light   industries,
           transportation and construction companies; all of  which  create
           hundreds of job opportunities. The minorities claim  that  these
           jobs are  offered  according  to  the  ethnic  identity  of  the
           individual.   The Gaboye, Tumal and  Yibir  have  no  access  to
           those jobs because of their ethnicity.  Midgan can trade freely,
           although they are usually unable to own property  and  livestock
           the  [2002 Joint Report: see Appendix A] noted the  position  of
           the Midgan/Gaboye improved at time of stability and recovery.'


Our assessment of the current position of the Midgan

46.    We would accept that the fuller body  of  background  materials  made
      available to us casts a somewhat different light  on  the  current-day
      position of the  Midgan, albeit the October 2004 CIPU Report does  not
      portray the  Midgan being  particularly  at  risk.    But  we  do  not
      consider the fuller body of evidence calls for a  radically  different
      conclusion from that which the Tribunal has reached previously.

47.   We see considerable accord between on the  one  hand  the  conclusions
      drawn by the Tribunal and by the two adjudicators in these appeals and
      on the other hand, the latest materials, including the opinions of the
      two experts.

48.   Firstly, whilst Dr Luling and Professor Samad both  highlight  growing
      protection gaps, they do not suggest that either in the  civil war  or
      post-civil war periods the  Midgan, save  in  exceptional  case,  have
      been targeted by majority clans. (It may well    be  that  the  Midgan
      suffered disproportionately from militia attacks during the civil  war
      and its immediate aftermath, but that does not  mean  that  they  were
      targeted.)
 49.     Secondly, neither expert denies that the  Midgan as  an  underclass
      and outcaste group have traditionally sought, although they  have  not
      always obtained, protection  from  majority  clans,  especially  noble
      ("bilis") clans.    This places them in a different position from some
      of the Somali minority clans, such as the Benadiri and the Ashraf, who
      have never been able  to  build  clan  protection  relationships  with
      majority clan patrons except in isolated individual cases. The  Midgan
      have been defined essentially by their client relationship of  service
      to majority clan patrons and their ability to receive (or not receive)
      protection has always been primarily governed by this fact.

50.   If there is a real point of difference between  the  materials  relied
      upon  by  the  two  Adjudicators  and  those  relied  upon  by   those
      representing  each  appellant  (particularly  the  Luling  and   Samad
      reports), it is this. Whereas  those  materials  considered  that  the
      scope of protection the Midgan can still access to be relatively wide,
      the two reports see it as having begun, especially in recent years, to
      narrow.   Thus Dr Luling in paragraph 3 of her report stated:

             "This protection can however no longer be relied on when   (a)
             the Midgaan have moved into towns far away from  their  former
             patrons and (b) the anarchy of the  present  time  makes  such
             traditional rules inoperative. In  any  case  this  protection
             only applied as  long  as  the    Midgan  accepted  their  low
             status.


             ... I would therefore conclude that Midgaan  and  other  caste
             group people are particularly at  risk  in  the    Somalia  of
             today.'

51.   We are prepared to accept that the scope of  protection  has  narrowed
      in the way Dr Luling describes, although we note that  Dr  Luling  has
      not elsewhere suggested that the 'anarchy' of current-day  Somalia has
      wholly prevented protection being afforded by majority clans to  their
      own members or those under their patronage. And we  take  her  (b)  as
      mainly meant to drive home the point that no reliance can be placed on
      any recognition by Somalis  generally  that  the  Midgan  have  to  be
      considered under traditional  rules  governing  majority  clan  patron
      protection.


  52.  We also heed the words of Professor Samad: she  considers  that  very
      few  Somalis or clans will protect the Midgan-Madhiban either for fear
      of being targeted and attacked themselves or  because  they  too  feel
      they merit no protection (as an outcaste or "polluted" group).

  53.  What implications does the latest body of  background  evidence,   Dr
      Luling's report and Professor Samad's research in particular, have for
      the approach to be taken by immigration  judges  to  persons  who  are
      found to be Midgan from Somalia?

54.    We do not consider that the general position  of  the  Midgan  as  an
      "outcaste underclass" occupying the lowest  level  of  Somali  society
      entails that they are to be viewed as a persecuted minority. It may be
      that in some cases the circumstances in which  they  have  to  perform
      their occupational work   are tantamount to serfdom or  even  slavery.
      But there is no evidence to indicate that this is the  common  lot  of
      Midgan generally. Thus for most Midgan it would appear that,  although
      they  face  widespread  societal  discrimination  and  work  on   very
      disadvantageous terms, their contract to work is voluntary;  they  are
      paid for the services they provide and they are able to trade freely.

55.   Given that significant numbers of Midgan previously  living  in  rural
      areas are said to have moved to the cities and in the  process  become
      detached from the noble clan patronage systems traditionally operative
      in rural areas it will be particularly important  in  cases  involving
      Midgan to establish (a) whether their own personal  history  indicates
      that they have recently moved from a rural area  to  a  city  and  (b)
      whether they have previously received dominant clan protection and, if
      they have, whether they could again avail themselves of it on  return.
      (Regarding (a), we should clarify that we do not see that  Midgan  who
      have previously resided in cities and secured patron  clan  protection
      there could not do so again - unless there are  special  circumstances
      arising in the particular case).

56.    We  do  not  understand  there  to  be  any  real  visible   physical
      differences between the Midgan and members of  Somali clans. It  would
      seem they speak the same language as  the  clans  amongst  which  they
      live. But equally it is well-established that in  Somalia it would  be
      impossible for a Midgan to hide the fact of his underclass identity.

57.   As in the case of persons from Somali minority clans, it is  important
      to bear in mind that the onus is on the claimant who is  a  Midgan  to
      establish his or her claim in material particulars.


  58. But if all an appellant can establish is that he or she is  a  Midgan,
      that will not suffice to show a real risk of serious harm,  since  one
      of the necessary elements to demonstrate such  a  real  risk  are  not
      present   namely  being  a  Midgan  who  has  become   detached   from
      traditionally provided noble or dominant  clan  patron  patronage  and
      protection.



      The internal travel issue

59.    If, however, someone is able to establish not just the fact of  being
      a Midgan from Somalia but also that he or she hails from a  particular
      home  area,  then  there  is   a   further   dimension   which   needs
      consideration.


60.   That further dimension relates to the need in  such  circumstances  to
      consider whether the appellant would be able to travel in safety  from
      the point of landing in Somalia (e.g. the airport near  Mogadishu)  to
      his or her home area.
61.    In these two appeals we did not  hear  arguments  addressed  to  this
      issue of internal safety  of  travel.  That  has  very  recently  been
      identified as a key issue in SH (Return-Gedo-Burden of Proof)  Somalia
      [2004] UKIAT 00164 and in a pending  Country  Guideline  case  dealing
      with returnees and lone women. It is envisaged that  the  latter  will
      set guidance on this issue, but to the extent that the issue arises in
      relation to Midgan or other caste cases, we  consider  that   where  a
      positive finding has been made  as  to  the  home  area  of  a  Midgan
      claimant and it has further  been  accepted  that  there  would  be  a
      majority clan patron for that  claimant,   it  would  take  compelling
      evidence to persuade us that safe transit could not  be  secured.   If
      there is no reason to think that a Midgan  has  become  detached  from
      traditional sources of noble or dominant clan protection, then in  our
      view there is no reason to think such a  person  would  be  unable  to
      arrange in advance of  return  for  clan    militia  protection,  even
      though this may involve some payment.


            Female Midgan

  62. Neither of the appeals before us concerned a female Midgan and neither
      representative made any specific submissions regarding their position.
      However, we are conscious of the fact  that  in  Beldeq  (FH)  it  was
      plainly  considered  a  relevant  factor  that  the  appellant  was  a
      vulnerable female. It is therefore appropriate if we set out in  brief
      form our view of whether being female changes the general position for
      those who are Midgan. On the  evidence  before  us,  whilst  we  would
      accept that the fact of being a woman or a lone  woman  increases  the
      level of risk, we do not consider it would increase it to the level of
      real risk under the Refugee Convention or the ECHR.  What we say  here
      must be subject to what is said by the Tribunal in the pending Country
      Guideline case dealing with women and lone women  returnees.  However,
      we anchor our assessment here on this essential fact: the question  of
      real risk comes down to whether a  Midgan  would  be  able  to  access
      protection from a majority clan patron. There is nothing to show  that
      such protection would be denied to a female Midgan where it  would  be
      afforded to a male Midgan.


  63. However, we would  emphasise  that  we  are  dealing  only  here  with
      generalities. It may still be the case that  an  individual  appellant
      will be able to show in the particular circumstances of her case  that
      she would be at real risk of serious harm and that protection would be
      unavailable.


           Internal relocation

  64. Since neither Adjudicator in the two appeals before us  accepted  that
      the appellant had shown he would be at risk,  the  issue  of  internal
      relocation did not arise, although it could be argued that para 34  of
      the determination  of  the  Adjudicator  in  the  case  of  the  first
      appellant (see above para  7 ) resembled a finding that a Midgan  from
      Kismayo would be able to relocate safely in other  parts  of  Somalia.
      But we have already had cause to consider  the  Tribunal  decision  in
      Beldeq (FH)  finding  that  she  would  not  have  a  viable  internal
      relocation alternative because she was a woman without  a  husband  or
      family support or any recognisable Midgan community  to  turn  to.  We
      have also noted that there are said to be, amongst the large number of
      IDPs in Somalia (estimated at around 375,000), a high proportion  from
      minority groups. However, for reasons already  explained,  we  do  not
      consider that this case had  general  application  since  it  involved
      someone found to be at risk of  having  to  return  as  an  Internally
      Displaced Person (IDP).


  65. That said, we consider that internal relocation would rarely, if ever,
      be a viable option for a Midgan.  We bear in mind generally the  point
      made in the UNHCR Position on the Return of Rejected Asylum Seekers to
      Somalia, January 2004 about it not being reasonable `to expect someone
      to take up residence in an area or  community  where  persons  with  a
      different ethnic, tribal, religious  and/or  cultural  background  are
      settled,  or  where  they  would  otherwise  be  considered   aliens`.
      Specifically we bear in mind that for Midgan  any  available  majority
      clan patron protection will normally exist in his  or  her  home  area
      only:  there are no Midgan communities in Somalia.  Thus,  if  it  has
      been found that a Midgan would be at risk in his  or  her  home  area,
      then it is difficult to see how he or she could  move  elsewhere  with
      any real prospect of securing an alternative source of  majority  clan
      protection. It is true, that in the ordinary  course  of  events  some
      Midgan do move away from their home areas in search of work  and  this
      way are said to  have  found  work  in  diverse  occupations,  usually
      menial. But in such circumstances it is hard to see they would be able
      to arrange in advance for any clan militia escort.  Furthermore,  from
      what is said by Dr Luling regarding Midgan  in  Hargeisa  and  by  the
      October 2004 CIPU Report regarding Hargeisa, even in Somaliland (where
      there would not necessarily be a need for  majority  clan  protection)
      Midgan face serious measures of socio-economic discrimination.

  66. It is true that we noted earlier that the  October  2004  CIPU  report
      refers at para 6.86 to `Midgan have been able to settle  in  Puntland`
      and in general terms UNHCR (in its  January  2004  report)  and  other
      sources view internal relocation as sometimes being a viable option in
      northern Somalia. However,  by  the  same  token  the  authorities  in
      Somaliland and Puntland are said to accept only those who have a  clan
      connection with  or  were  previously  resident  in  their  respective
      territories.  Almost  by  definition  Midgan  will  not  have  a  clan
      connection in Somaliland or Puntland.  And  in  respect  of  a  Midgan
      previously resident in northern  Somalia  (as  was  the  appellant  in
      Beldeq), if the home area is unsafe, then it would be a  question  of,
      once again, being detached from any realistic source of majority  clan
      patron protection.
  67. It may be, in light of what is said in the October  2004  CIPU  Report
      about Puntland that  that  part  of  Somalia  could  afford  a  viable
      internal relocation alternative in some cases, particularly bearing in
      mind  that  it  is  currently  said  to  encourage   migrant   labour,
      irrespective of clan or tribal background and that Midgan are seen  to
      have occupational skills. However, we would expect the Home Office  to
      produce evidence to show that the authorities  in  Puntland  would  be
      prepared in practice to admit someone who was a Midgan.

Other caste groups
  68. The two appeals before us concerned Midgan. However, we have sought to
      include references from the background materials to other occupational
      caste groups (of which the Midgan is said to be the largest)  so  that
      this case can be a reference point  in  cases  involving  other  caste
      groups. We note that in her report Dr Luling equated the  risk  facing
      the Midgan with that faced by caste groups generally.


       69. We  note  that  other  reports  tend  also  to  regard  all  the
           occupational caste groups as being in a very  similar  position.
           Accordingly,  we  consider  that  for  us  to  find  any   other
           particular occupational caste group as being generally  at  risk
           would require compelling new evidence and argument.  The  start-
           point should be that, like the Midgan in  general,  other  caste
           groups are not at risk in general either. We  do  not  rule  out
           that such evidence may be forthcoming, but we have set out  what
           we regard as the proper start-point.   Whilst  in  view  of  the
           conclusions  we  reached  in  this  case  as  to  caste   groups
           generally, what was said by the Tribunal  in   HF  (Persecution-
           Discrimination-Yibir-Occupation-Caste) Somalia CG  [2004]  UKIAT
           05520 remains useful guidance, that case must now be read in the
           light of the further evidence on occupational  castes  which  we
           have considered in this case.

70.   For completeness we should add two observations. Firstly,  at  several
      points Mr Parker made criticism of Dr Luling's recent report, pointing
      out for example that it was not fully sourced and relied in large part
      on the major country reports, those  by  the  joint  delegations  from
      certain European countries published in 2000, 2002 and 2004.  However,
      as the Tribunal has  made  clear  in   AH  (Town  Tunnis  regarded  as
      Bravanese) Somalia   CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00144,  and  MN  (Town  Tunnis
      regarded as Bravanese) Somali CG   [2004] UKIAT  00224,  the  Tribunal
      generally regards Dr  Luling as an expert whose  opinions  are  to  be
      accorded considerable weight.  That is not to say,  having  considered
      the evidence as a  whole, that the Tribunal will always  come  to  the
      same conclusions as Dr Luling  as  to  risk  categories.  Whatever  Dr
      Luling's (or Professor Samad's) own conception of `risk`, the question
      immigration judges have  is  whether  there  exists  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or treatment contrary to Arts 3  and  4  of  the  ECHR  in
      accordance with the criteria set out in leading cases.  But so long as
       Dr Luling's reports show care  and  preparation,  the  Tribunal  will
      continue to take them seriously.

71.   Secondly, whilst we do not seek in this determination  to  set  out  a
      specific list of minority groups that in our view are or  are  not  at
      risk in current-day Somalia, we do see merit in Mr Parker's suggestion
      that minority groups in that country  be  seen  as  existing  along  a
      continuum, some being generally at risk and some not  being  generally
      at risk. The Tribunal in KS (Minority  Clans-Bajuni-ability  to  speak
      Kibajuni) Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT 00271   has already  indicated  that
      members of certain minority  clans  are  to  be  considered  generally
      (although not universally) at risk. It is clear from the  two  appeals
      before us that in the Somali context, when considering monitories, one
      has to analyse not only the situation of minority clans, but also that
      of other minority groups which for one reasons or another are seen  to
      fall outside, or co-exist with, the Somalia clan system.  (The  Midgan
      fall outside because they are an `underclass`; the 2004  Joint  Report
      identifies the Bantu as a minority group also outside  the  mainstream
      Somali clan structure, albeit for different reasons). Of  course,  the
      situation with any particular minority  group  may  also  change  over
      time.  But whether considered in  terms  of  minority  clans  or  (the
      broader category of) minority groups, it will only be  in  respect  of
      certain minorities that the  evidence  will  establish  their  members
      generally to be at real risk of serious harm or of treatment  contrary
      to Art 3.

  72. For the above reasons both appeals are dismissed.

  73. Summary of conclusions

   (i)      This decision should  be  seen  as  superseding   four  previous
      Country Guidance determinations:

           -MA (Risk - Jaaji Clan -Benadiri) Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT  04084
           (previously known as Amin  [2002] UKIAT 04084);
           -IJ (Risk - Midgan) Somalia CG [2002]  UKIAT  06314  (previously
           known as  Ibrahim Abdi Jama [2002] UKIAT 06314); and
           -FB (Risk - Class  -  Midgan)  Somalia  CG  [2002]  UKIAT  06753
           (previously known as Beldeq [2002] UKIAT 06753)
           -AH (Midgan - Disabled Woman - Relocation -  Mogadishu)  Somalia
           CG [2002] UKIAT 07343 (previously known as  Hirsi  [2002]  UKIAT
           07343).

   (ii) Each appeal must be decided on  its  own  facts  but  the  following
   should be treated as  authoritative  guidance  on  cases  concerning  the
   Midgan (also called the Migden, Midgaan  and  Madhiban  and  Madiban)  in
   Somalia. One version of their name translates as "harmless".

   (iii) This decision is also authoritative guidance for the  consideration
   of cases of members of other small caste groups identified  in  paragraph
   42 above.

   (iv) Midgan are expected to perform low status jobs in Somali society and
   are usually poor. However, they are not slaves.

   (v) Midgan living in rural communities can generally  expect  to  receive
   patronage and therefore protection from noble clans.

   (vi) Midgan who have left rural communities  to  settle  in  cities  will
   sometimes have gained the patronage and protection of noble clans.

   (vii) Midgan who enjoyed the patronage and protection  of  a  noble  clan
   when they left Somalia can normally be expected to regain such  patronage
   and protection in the event of  their  return.  The  protection  afforded
   would extend to provision being made upon return for their internal  safe
   travel back to rural areas.

   (viii) A Midgan who has lost the protection of a local patron  (or  local
   patrons) and who had not found alternative protection in a city would  be
   vulnerable to persecution.

   (ix) A Midgan who has lost protection from a noble clan patron or patrons
   in his or her home area would not  be  able  to  relocate  safely  within
   Somalia.

   (x) Being a female Midgan increases the level of risk on return but  does
   not on its own increase it to the level of real risk  under  the  Refugee
   Convention and the ECHR.






                                DR H H STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
    Appendix A: Principal Background Materials considered by the Tribunal

Joint British, Danish and Dutch Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Nairobi,  Kenya;
Report on minority groups in Somalia, 17-24 September 2000 (elsewhere  `2000
Joint Report`).


 Amnesty International: Somalia,  No  lasting  peace  without  human  rights
covering events January-December 2002, May 2003.

   -  UNCU/UN - OCHA - Somalia, A  Study  of  Minority  Groups  in  Somalia,
      August 2002.

   - Professor  Asha  A  Samad,  Brief  Review  of  Somalia  Caste  Systems:
      Statement  to   the   Committee   on   the   Elimination   of   Racial
      Discrimination, August 2002 [a summary of research].

IRIN, Somalia: Review of 2002, 17 January 2003.

US State Department Report: Country  Report  on  Human  Rights  Practices  -
2002, March 31, 2003.

April 2003 CIPU Report on Somalia.

UNHCR Position on Return of Rejected Asylum Seekers  from  Somalia,  January
2004.

April 2004 CIPU Report on Somalia.

   -  Joint Danish, Finnish Norwegian and British Fact  Finding  Mission  to
      Nairobi, Kenya 7-21 January 2004, Human rights and security in central
      and southern Somalia (elsewhere `2004 Joint Report`).

US  State  Department:  Country  Report  on  Human  Rights  Practices  2003,
February 25, 2004.

October 2004 CIPU Report on Somalia.

Dr Virginia Luling, Report on the Midgan and Other Caste Groups in  Somalia,
June 11, 2004.

   -  CIPU Somalia Country Report, October 2004.






Appendix B:  Cases cited to the Tribunal

MA (Risk - Jaaji Clan-Benadiri) Somalia CG [2002]  UKIAT  04084  (previously
cited as Amin [2002] UKIAT 04084).

HF (Persecution - Discrimination - Yibir - Occupation -  Caste)  Somalia  CG
[2004] UKIAT 05520 (previously cited as Farah [2002] UKIAT 05520).

IJ (Risk - Midgan) Somalia  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  06314  (previously  cited  as
Ibrahim Abdi Jama [2002] UKIAT 06314).

FB (Risk - Class - Midgan) Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT 06753  (previously  cited
as Beldeq [2002] UKIAT  06753).

AH (Midgan - Disabled Woman - Relocation  -  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2002]
UKIAT 07343 (previously cited as Hersi UKIAT 07343).

AJH (Minority group-Swahili speakers) Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT 00094.

SH (Return-Gedo-Burden of Proof) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00164.

KS (Minority Clans-Bajuni-ability  to  speak  Kibajuni)  Somalia  CG  [2004]
UKIAT 00271.





-----------------------
[1] E. Cerulli 'Somalia - Scritti Vari Editi ed Inediti, Vol II, Firenze
1959, p.26 findings of fact
2I.M. Lewis, 'A Pastoral Democracy' International African Institute,
London, 1961
3E. Cerulli 'Somalia - Scritti Vari Editi ed Inediti, Vol II, Firenze 1959,
pp 101-104


-----------------------
      2


