
HK (Interviewer as advocate: unfair?) Ethiopia  [2006] UKAIT 00081

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                   Determination
Promulgated:
On 28 September 2006              On 17 October 2006


                                   Before

                       Mr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                        Senior Immigration Judge Warr
                      Senior Immigration Judge Perkins


                                   Between

                                     HK
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Christopher Jacobs instructed by White
                 Ryland
For the Respondent:    Mr Robin Tam instructed by the Treasury Solicitor

There is no overarching prohibition on advocates acting  as  witnesses,  nor
any statutory  prohibition  on  HOPOs  doing  so.   Where  the  respondent's
interviewing  officer  appears  as  advocate  on  an  appeal  there  is   no
procedural unfairness as such.  But in the rare case where the  interviewing
officer is required to give  evidence  it  may  be  inappropriate  for  that
person to present the case.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant was born on 6 March 1979 and is a  citizen  of  Ethiopia.
    She came to the United Kingdom using her own passport on 11 June  2005.
    She had entry clearance as a fianc�e.  Her child Luke Master K  born on
    11 September 2005 in the  UK.   The  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  21
    November 2005.  Her son's status falls to be determined with hers.

 2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's asylum claim.  Her claims  under
    the European Convention of Human Rights were also refused.  The reasons
    were set out in a letter from the Respondent to  the  Appellant  on  13
    December 2005.  She appealed against those decisions.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was heard on 10 February 2006 in  Manchester  by
    Immigration Judge Martin.  The appeal  was  dismissed  on  both  asylum
    grounds and human rights grounds in a determination dated  13  February
    2006.

 4. The Appellant applied for a reconsideration of that  determination.   A
    Senior Immigration Judge ordered a reconsideration  on  2  March  2006.
    The matter first came on for hearing on 25 July 2006 and  the  Tribunal
    adjourned the hearing.  The Tribunal wished to hear  full  argument  on
    the appropriateness or otherwise of appeals being presented  on  behalf
    of the Respondent by the same person who  conducted  the  initial  Home
    Office interview of the Appellant.

The Issues in this Reconsideration

 5. There are three issues which are before  the  Tribunal.   They  may  be
    summarised as follows:

    (a)     Was the hearing procedurally unfair to  the  Appellant  as  the
        Home Office official  who  had  conducted  the  substantive  asylum
        interview of the Appellant also presented the Secretary of  State's
        case at the hearing.


    (b)     Did the Immigration Judge err by  considering  the  Appellant's
        human rights at all given that this is a variation appeal and there
        are no removal directions in place.


    (c)     Did the Immigration Judge  erred  in  relying  on  the  country
        guidance case HB (Ethiopia EDP/UEDP  members)  Ethiopia  CG  [2004]
        UKIAT 00235.

 6. The first ground raises important issues of principle and was the  main
    focus of argument in this reconsideration hearing.

Procedural Unfairness

 7.  Those  seeking  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  interviewed  by
    representatives of the Respondent, generally  in  considerable  detail.
    In this case the Appellant was interviewed on 6 December 2005 by a Home
    Office official.  Acting on behalf  of  the  Respondent  and  no  doubt
    having considered the application in detail that official  refused  the
    claim and wrote and signed the reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  13
    December 2005.  When the appeal came on for hearing on 6 February  2006
    the official who had interviewed, presented the case on behalf  of  the
    Respondent appearing as the Home Office Presenting Officer (HOPO).

 8. This process of an Interviewing Officer, then acting as  the  HOPO,  is
    said by the Respondent to  have  happened  periodically  in  the  past.
    Further  under  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal   (Fast   Track
    Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005 No. 560) persons  who  are  detained  in
    immigration removal centres and who have appealed  against  an  adverse
    asylum decision have their  appeals  considered  very  speedily.   This
    process is known as the fast track procedure.  This Tribunal must  list
    appeals to which these Rules apply not later than two  days  after  the
    relevant documents are filed with this Tribunal (see Rule  11(1)).   It
    is routine that the Interviewing  Officer  in  fast  track  cases  also
    appears as the HOPO before the Immigration Judge at the hearing of  the
    appeal.  The Respondent's New  Asylum  Model  procedures  envisage  the
    process of the Interviewing Officer appearing as HOPO  to  present  the
    case as extending, subject no doubt  to  resources,  to  asylum  claims
    other than those in the fast track.  This is the first occasion, so far
    as the Tribunal is aware, on which  the  procedural  fairness  of  this
    process has been challenged.

The Appellant's Case on Procedural Unfairness

 9. As the Presenting Officer had conducted the asylum interview  with  the
    applicant the record  of  that  interview  constituted  the  Presenting
    Officer's own evidence of what had occurred.  It was said there  was  a
    clear factual dispute as to what had happened in  the  interview.   The
    Appellant attributed an  error  in  translation  of  the  name  of  her
    political party to the Home  Officer  interpreter.   It  was  said  the
    Immigration  Judge  attached  significant  weight  to  this  error  and
    rejected the Appellant's claim  to  belong  to  this  opposition  group
    solely on this basis.

10. As the Presenting Officer was a witness it was said to be  procedurally
    unfair to allow her to  present  the  case  in  this  manner.   Such  a
    practice  is  contrary  to  the  principles  of  natural  justice   and
    prejudicial to appellants.  It  runs  counter  to  the  Bar's  Code  of
    Conduct and the Solicitor's Professional Conduct Rules.

11. It is also suggested that appellants will  perceive  an  appearance  of
    prejudicial procedural irregularity if this procedure is followed.  The
    parties  to  the  appeal  cannot  be  on  an  equal  footing  in   such
    circumstances.  A Tribunal cannot deal with such a  case  justly.   The
    practice does not comply with the overriding objective of ensuring  the
    proceeding before the Tribunal are  handled  as  "fairly,  quickly  and
    efficiently as possible".

The Respondent's Case on Procedural Unfairness

12. The Respondent says the HOPO was not a material witness in  any  event.
    Even had she  been  the  Respondent  says  there  are  no  rules  which
    prohibits any HOPO who is a material witness to a matter in dispute  in
    an appeal from presenting the Secretary of State's case  at  an  appeal
    hearing.  In particular there is no express prohibition or any rule  of
    law to this effect.  No such rule  is  referred  to  in  the  Codes  of
    Conduct of the legal professions.  In any event witnesses regularly act
    as advocates particularly litigants in person.  The Secretary of  State
    is entitled to choose who he wishes to represent him.  There  is,  says
    the Respondent, nothing in this aspect of this claim.

The Advocate as Witness - Procedural Unfairness

13. The Tribunal was not referred to any rule of law or  any  authority  of
    general application which sets out a prohibition on a person who  is  a
    material witness from also acting as an advocate.  The Codes of Conduct
    which apply to  both  barristers  and  solicitors  severely  limit  the
    circumstances in which advocates  may  appear  as  witnesses  in  cases
    conducted by them. The maintenance of  professional  independence,  the
    potential prejudice to the administration of justice  and  the  general
    duties of advocates to the court all provide reasons for this position.



14. Paragraph 603 of the Code of Conduct for barristers provides:

        "A barrister must not accept any instruction  if  to  do  so  would
        cause him to be professionally embarrassed and for this  purpose  a
        barrister will be professionally embarrassed:
        ...
      (d)   if the matter is one in which he has reason to believe that  he
           is likely to be a witness"


15. Further paragraph 608 provides:

        "A barrister must cease  to  act  and  if  he  is  a  self-employed
        barrister must return any instructions:
        (a)      if continuing to act would cause him to be  professionally
           embarrassed within the meaning of paragraph 603 provided that if
           he would be professionally embarrassed only because  it  appears
           to him that he is likely to be a witness on a material  question
           of fact he may retire or withdraw only if he can do  so  without
           jeopardising the client's interest."

16. The Law  Society  Guide  to  the  Professional  Conduct  of  Solicitors
    provides:

      "21.12      Solicitor called as Witness
              A solicitor must not accept instruction to  act  as  advocate
              for a client if it is clear that he or she or a member of the
              firm will be called as a witness on  behalf  of  the  client,
              unless the evidence is purely formal.
           1.    A solicitor must exercise judgment as to whether to  cease
                 acting where he or she:
                 (a)   has already accepted instructions  as  advocate  and
                       then becomes aware that he or she or a member of  the
                       firm will be called as a witness  on  behalf  of  the
                       client; or
                 (b)   is instructed to act as litigator and knows that  he
                       or she must give evidence.
           2.    The circumstances in which a solicitor should continue  to
                 act as advocate, or as a litigator must be  extremely  rare
                 where it is likely that he or she would be called  to  give
                 evidence other than that which is purely  formal.   Factors
                 to be taken into consideration include whether  giving  the
                 evidence will create a conflict  of  interest  between  the
                 solicitor and the client, or whether the  solicitor's  duty
                 to the court is likely to be impaired.  See practice rule 1
                 p.1.
           3.    It may be possible for a solicitor to continue to  act  as
                 an advocate if a member of the firm will be called to  give
                 evidence  as  to  events  witnessed  whilst   advising   or
                 assisting a client, for example at a police station  or  an
                 identification  parade.   In   exercising   judgment,   the
                 solicitor should consider the nature of the evidence to  be
                 given,  its  importance  to  the  case  overall   and   the
                 difficulties faced by the client if the solicitor  were  to
                 cease  to  act.   The  decision  should  be  taken  in  the
                 interests of justice as a  whole  and  not  solely  in  the
                 interest of the client."

17. For the Bar there is a strong prohibition on accepting instructions  if
    the  barrister  is  likely  to  be  a  witness.   There   are   however
    circumstances  where  a  barrister  will  have  to  continue   to   act
    notwithstanding  that  he  is  likely  to  be  a  witness.   In   those
    circumstances  he  may  only  withdraw  "if  he  can  do   so   without
    jeopardising the client's interests".

18. For solicitors the prohibition on accepting  initial  instructions  for
    the client is slightly less strong.  This must not be  done  if  it  is
    "clear" that the solicitor will be called as a witness on behalf of the
    client.  There is in fact an exception where the evidence to  be  given
    is purely  formal.   There  are  however  clearly  circumstances  where
    solicitors are permitted to continue to act as advocates even where the
    solicitor or a member of the solicitor's firm may have to appear  as  a
    witness.  If they continue to act solicitors must not impair their duty
    to the court or create a conflict of interest  between  themselves  and
    their client.  The interests of justice as a whole must be at the  core
    of any decision.

19. There are it is  clear  two  separate,  different  and  detailed  codes
    governing the conduct of the two branches of the  legal  profession  in
    England and Wales as to the position of an advocate who may have to  be
    a witness.  Such codes would not be necessary, says the Respondent,  if
    there were an absolute rule prohibiting a  person  from  being  both  a
    witness and an advocate.   We  were  referred  to  no  authority  which
    supported such a rule.

20. Indeed such a rule would make the position  of  a  litigant  in  person
    impossible. A litigant in person will generally be a witness  in  their
    own case and will be likely to cross-examine opposing witnesses.  Above
    all a litigant in person is an advocate in his or her own cause.  Every
    individual litigant has a right to conduct his or her own case  subject
    only to rare statutory prohibitions.  There are no such prohibitions in
    immigration cases.

21. The Respondent relied on other examples to support the claim that there
    is  no  general  prohibition  on   witnesses   acting   as   advocates.
    Historically before the Police and Criminal Evidence  Act  1984  police
    officers  would  routinely  act  as  prosecutors  and  appear  as  both
    advocates and witnesses.  Housing Associations use their  own  officers
    in the County Court to present possession proceedings in which they may
    also give evidence as witnesses.  Private prosecutions by  shops  which
    employ private detectives were regularly conducted by those  detectives
    also acting as witnesses.

22. We are satisfied that as a matter of law that there is  no  rule  which
    prohibits an advocate in proceedings before this Tribunal  also  giving
    evidence as a witness.

 Statutory Position of HOPOS

23. It is the Respondent's position that the statutory provisions  relating
    to the representation of the Secretary of State are  inconsistent  with
    the suggestion that a HOPO who is a material witness in a  case  cannot
    present the case on behalf of the Secretary of State.

24. The Respondent acknowledges that Section 84(1) Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act  1999  provides  "no  person  may  provide  immigration  advice  or
    immigration  services  unless  he  is  a  qualified  person".   However
    "immigration advice" and "immigration services" are defined by  Section
    82(1) of the 1999 Act by reference to advice and services  provided  on
    behalf of individuals.  The restriction does not apply to those who act
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.

25. Further it is said, and we accept, that HOPOs are  covered  by  Section
    84(6) of the 1999 Act:

        "Sub-Section (1) does not apply to a person
        (a)       wholly in office under the Crown,  when  acting  in  that
        capacity;
        (b)       employed  by,  or  for  the  purposes  of  a   government
           department when acting in that capacity;
        (c) acting under the control of a government department; or
        (d)      otherwise exercising functions on behalf of the Crown."

26. Rule 48(2) Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    provides:
        "A respondent to an appeal, the Secretary of State  or  the  United
        Kingdom representative may be represented by any person  authorised
        to act on his behalf."


    There is nothing to say that  the  rules  of  the  professional  bodies
    controlling the conduct of barristers  and  solicitors  apply  to  Home
    Office Presenting Officers. The Tribunal should not seek  to  influence
    or restrict the Secretary of State's choice of  representative  unless,
    no doubt very exceptionally, he chooses to be represented  by  somebody
    who could not present the case justly. It is also clear that  there  is
    no statutory provision governing representation in this  Tribunal  that
    suggests any prohibition on a person who is a  material  witness  in  a
    case also acting as the Secretary of State's advocate.


Interviewers as advocates

27. The Appellant contends that  there  is  an  inherent  unfairness  in  a
    procedure which can lead to  a  Home  Office  interviewer  becoming  an
    advocate for the respondent in later proceedings.  Appellants in asylum
    claims are vulnerable.  They claim to  be  fleeing  persecution.   Home
    Office interviews are  challenging  and  difficult.   The  Interviewing
    Officer is in opposition to the interests  of  the  appellant.   It  is
    wrong it is said in these circumstances that a person who has been part
    of the decision-making process should  present  the  case  against  the
    appellant before the Tribunal.

28. This submission misunderstands the function of the interview.  The  aim
    is  to  establish  whether  or  not  a  person  has  a  good  claim  to
    international protection by the United Kingdom because of  events  that
    have happened to the appellant in his or her country of origin.   As  a
    result of interviews, applicants can be granted asylum or  humanitarian
    protection.  It is not  the  function  of  the  interviewer  to  direct
    questions to achieve the rejection of the claim.

29. But the Appellant argues that challenges to an interview may  arise  at
    any time during a hearing.  Where that happens an individual  appellant
    may perceive an appearance of the Interviewing Officer as  advocate  as
    prejudicial, unfair and in breach of the overriding  objective  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  (SI  2005  No.
    230).

      "(4)  The overriding objective of  these  rules  is  to  secure  that
             proceedings before the Tribunal are handled as fairly,  quickly
             and efficiently  as  possible;  and,  where  appropriate,  that
             members of the Tribunal have the  responsibility  for  ensuring
             this, in the interests of the parties to the proceedings and in
             the wider public interest."

30. The Appellant supports this argument with an  analogy  with  the  Civil
    Procedure Rules  which  provides  that  the  overriding  objective  "of
    enabling the court to deal with cases justly" is to  ensure  "that  the
    parties are on an equal footing" (CPR Rule 1(1)(a)).  It is argued that
    the parties cannot be on an equal  footing  where  one  party  is  both
    interviewer and advocate.

31. It is clear that there have been and, unless prohibited, will  continue
    to be cases where an Interviewing Officer on behalf of  the  respondent
    can expect to appear as an advocate before this Tribunal in cases where
    a person's claim to asylum is refused by the respondent and that person
    thereafter appeals.  It is also clear that the  eventual  appellant  is
    always likely to have to give evidence  about  what  was  said  at  the
    interview.  There are routine challenges in this field  to  differences
    between appellant's statements made in writing  or  orally  at  various
    times during the processes leading up to the eventual Tribunal hearing.
     Most appellants appearing before the AIT do give evidence.   Many  are
    represented, some represent themselves.
32. The questioning, the cross-examination  and  the  submissions  made  in
    relation to what was said at an interview are  generally  compared  and
    contrasted by the respondent with other things said  and  done  by  the
    appellant.  The appellant generally contends that the whole of what has
    been said or done is coherent or can be properly explained as a  result
    of exterior factors.


33. It is on the other hand  rare  for  an  Interviewing  Officer  to  give
    evidence before the Tribunal. In the Tribunal's  judgment  it  will  be
    clear in the majority of asylum claims that  the  Interviewing  Officer
    will neither be required to nor  needed  to  give  evidence  about  the
    contents of the interview or what happened during the interview process
    itself.  In those circumstances we see no objection to the Interviewing
    Officer  acting  as  Presenting  Officer.   There  is  no  common   law
    prohibition on advocates acting as witnesses and the statutory position
    of Home Office Presenting Officers contains no such prohibition either.



34. There may be cases  where  the  appellant  is  particularly  vulnerable
    because of disability or some other factor.  That  might  lead  to  the
    Secretary of State deciding that it  is  unwise  for  the  interviewing
    officer to present the case. But such a decision is entirely  a  matter
    for him to be taken on a case by case basis.

Challenges to Interviews

35. The will however be cases where the conduct of the interview is  called
    in question or what happened during the course of the  interview  gives
    rise to challenge.  When that happens it  will  be  important  for  the
    Secretary of State to decide whether or not evidence of  what  happened
    is required to be given on his behalf. Will it be necessary to call the
    interviewer?

36.  Most challenges to what actually happened at interviews  arise  around
    challenges to the interpretation  process.   That,  as  will  be  seen,
    occurred in this case.  Such challenges are not in themselves enough to
    disqualify the Interviewing Officer acting as Presenting  Officer.  The
    assertion that the interpreter mistranslated something can  clearly  be
    made by an appellant. But the interviewer will be unlikely to  be  able
    to give evidence about the alleged  mistranslation  unless  he  or  she
    knows the language involved.

37.  There may be rare cases in which it is alleged that the interview  has
    been conducted in a wholly inappropriate  manner  with  allegations  of
    hectoring, bullying or the like. Such  an  allegation  should  be  made
    promptly  by  anyone  asserting  such  conduct.  It  will  be  for  the
    respondent to decide if the allegation needs to be dealt with by formal
    evidence. As a party he is responsible for deciding  what  matters  are
    put on his behalf before the Tribunal.

38. Challenges of this sort are  likely  to  be  personal  attacks  on  the
    integrity of the interviewer and what took place. Where the  respondent
    accepts that the allegation will need to be dealt with by evidence from
    the Interviewing Officer it will be wise for that officer not to appear
    as an advocate. Indeed it might be unfair for such  an  interviewer  to
    represent.  It is foreseeable, for  instance,  that  the  tendency  for
    animosity could be so strong that the immigration judge might well have
    to intervene and stop the hearing or insist  that  the  respondent  was
    separately represented or stop points being put to a witness.

39.  There may be cases where similar allegations are raised for the  first
    time at a Tribunal hearing. It is likely to be  a  matter  for  comment
    that the issue was not raised previously. But it will be for the  Judge
    to decide how to proceed. Applications for adjournments at what will be
    a very late stage will need to  be  considered  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective.    It  may  be  appropriate  to  suggest  to  the
    Presenting Officer that he or she might wish to give  evidence  on  the
    issue rather than deal with the position solely in submissions. Whether
    such  evidence  is  given   or  not  will  be  the  decision   of   the
    interviewer/advocate. But the judge must control the proceedings.

The Disputed Interview

40. It is the Appellant's case that there was a clear factual dispute as to
    what happened at the interview in that the applicant had attributed  an
    error in the translation in the name of her political party to the Home
    Office interpreter.  It is further  said  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    attributed significant weight to this error and that she  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim to belong to the particular opposition  group  solely
    on this basis.  We set out below the relevant parts  of  the  interview
    record,  the  Immigration  Judge's  Record  of  Proceedings   and   the
    Immigration Judge's decision.

             The  interview  record  showed  the  following  questions  and
    answers:-
            '9.  Name of party you were a member of?
                 All Ethiopian People's Organisation
                 (literal translation - int said)
                 Applicant looks in her paperwork for something  can't  find
                 anything.  Now looks on mobile for correct abbreviation.

             10. What are you checking for?
                 It is recorded in my message section of my mobile.

             11. What is recorded?
                 The correct name of the organisation.  What I told  you  in
                 Amharic is the correct one.  I was just trying to find  out
                 in English.

             12. Why did you need to check you mobile for the name of party?
                  If you were truly a member you would know this?
                 I know it in Amharic which we normally use it, but I  don't
                 know in English which I was trying to find from my mobile.

             13. When did you join the All Ethiopian People Org?
                 2 years ago

             14. Correct abbreviation for this party?
                 EDHP.'

        At the end of the interview, the following was recorded:-


                 'Are you still feeling fit and well?
                 Yes, not bad.


                 Have you understood all of the questions put to you today?
                 Yes.


                 Have you understood the Home Office interpreter?
                 Yes.'


        The Immigration Judge's record of proceedings showed:-


                 'Confirm name of political[?]
                 CUD - The All Ethiopian Unity Party


                 How long a member
                 2 years


                 More precise - year
                 Can't remember now


                 Said joined 2 yrs ago At  int  said  November  2003  can  u
                 explain discrepancy
                 My head is not right because of the child.  I  can't  think
                 properly


                 If u had concerns re int y not raise these during int
                 I don't know it in Eng. I know it is Amharic.


                 U said u don't know it in Eng - just have - explain
                 I received my id this week thru[?] HL it was with my mother
                 - at int I said I had one


                 ...


                 U said the reasons for discrepancy was problems  at  int  +
                 didn't know in Eng.  U said received card [?] from  mother.
                 Is it true didn't know name of party til had  card  [?]  in
                 front of u
                 I said it in Amharic but Intr made a mistake translating


                 U were represented - y not ask Representative to write into
                 us about interpreter mistakes
                 I told them.'


        The  Immigration  Judge  in  her  determination  referred  to  this
        evidence as follows:-


             '18. The Appellant attended her substantive SEP interview  with
                 Miss Barnes, the Home Office Presenting Officer  presenting
                 the case on 6th December 2005.  She  claimed  to  fear  the
                 government because she was a member of  a  different  party
                 than that which she now  claims  membership  of.   She  was
                 asked the name of the party.  She  replied  (question  9):-
                 "All Ethiopian People's Organisation".  It is  recorded  in
                 the record of interview and  it  is  not  disputed  by  the
                 Appellant that she looked in her  paperwork  for  something
                 and then looked on her mobile phone.  She was asked by  the
                 interviewer what she was doing and she  answered:-  "It  is
                 recorded in my message section of my mobile".   When  asked
                 what was recorded she  said:-  "The  correct  name  of  the
                 organisation what I told you in Amharic is the correct one.
                  Just trying to find out in English."  She was  then  asked
                 why she needed to check the name of the party if she was  a
                 member of it and her response was:- "I know it  in  Amharic
                 which we normally use, but I don't know in English which  I
                 was trying to find from my mobile."  She  claimed  to  have
                 joined the group 2 years previously.  She then stated  that
                 the correct abbreviation for the group was "EDHP".


             19.  In the Letter of Refusal it was pointed out that there  is
                 no mention in the objective evidence anywhere  of  a  party
                 under the name of the All Ethiopian peoples Organisation or
                 with the abbreviation of EDHP.


             20.  In her rebuttal statement, the Appellant stated  that  the
                 Home Officer Interpreter was unsure how  to  translate  the
                 name of the party and that is how the error  occurred.   At
                 the hearing she claimed to be a member  of  the  CUD  which
                 does exist.  She was asked during the hearing why  she  had
                 given a different name for the party at her  interview  and
                 she claimed again that the interpreter had  got  it  wrong.
                 However, it was pointed out that at  no  point  during  the
                 interview [had] she raised any concerns about  the  quality
                 of the interpretation.  Despite being represented  she  did
                 not lodge any complaint subsequently through her solicitors
                 about the quality of interpretation'."

41. As the Respondent points out in his skeleton argument  the  Appellant's
    complaint at the interview was about the quality of the translation  by
    the interpreter of her Amharic answers  into  English.   There  was  no
    direct evidence other than the Appellant's about what she said  to  the
    interpreter or what the  interpreter  said  to  her  in  Amharic.   The
    Interviewing Officer was entirely dependent on the translation provided
    by the interpreter.  She could not know herself whether the translation
    was of good or  poor  quality.   The  Interviewing  Officer  noted  her
    observations in English and the answers given  by  the  interpreter  in
    English together with the observations about the  Appellant's  actions.
    There was no challenge to any of this.

42. Further there was a lack of any complaint by the  Appellant  about  the
    interpreter at the time of the interview.  No  positive  complaint  was
    made by her. As the record shows she was looking for the  English  name
    of the party in her phone.  She said she had given the correct name  in
    Amharic.

43.  At the conclusion of the interview  as  quoted  above  she  raised  no
    concerns about not understanding the  Home  Officer  interpreter.   The
    Appellant took steps to challenge the interpretation of the name of her
    party after the interview in correspondence with the respondent.  We do
    not accept that the HOPO was giving evidence  when  she  cross-examined
    the Appellant  at  the  hearing  before  the  Immigration  Judge.   The
    Appellant was asked "if you had concerns regarding  the  interview  why
    did you not raise these during the  interview".   That  is  a  question
    based on the absence of any challenge recorded in the interview  notes.
    Any person in possession of the interview record  could  properly  have
    asked the question.

44. The issue for the Appellant  was  whether  she  actually  said  to  the
    interpreter what she claimed she said i.e. that she  gave  the  correct
    name of the party she belonged to in Amharic but that she did not  know
    it in English.  She did however accept in interview  that  the  correct
    name of the party was EDHP.

45. The Immigration Judge had to reach conclusions on  this  issue  from  a
    combination of the Appellant's oral account given at  the  hearing  for
    which there was no supportive documentary evidence and inferences drawn
    from the undisputed record of the interview recorded in English.

46. We note that the Immigration Judge recorded at paragraph 21 and 22 that
    the Appellant had only recently read the proper name of  the  party  in
    English from her membership card which had been  sent  to  her  by  her
    mother.  The Appellant confirmed that she had read the English  on  her
    identity card and that she could read English.   At  paragraph  22  the
    Immigration Judge concluded:

      "22.  If an Appellant is sufficiently  proficient  in  English  to  be
             able to read it as well as speak it it is not credible that she
             would not have known the English name of her party if  she  had
             indeed been a member of it for some  two  years.   Furthermore,
             given her knowledge (she gave much of her evidence  in  English
             and answered questions in English) she would  have  been  aware
             immediately of any interpreter problems  during  her  interview
             and if there were I find  would  have  mentioned  that  at  the
             time."

47. We conclude on the facts of this case that the Presenting  Officer  did
    not give evidence in the form of cross-examination of the Appellant  or
    in the form of submissions before the  Immigration  Judge.   The  Judge
    reached her conclusions on the basis of what she had heard in  evidence
    and the inferences she drew from that and the record of the interview.

Intimidation of the Appellant

48. It is further part of the Appellant's  case  that  she  was  prejudiced
    during the hearing  because  she  was  unable  to  distinguish  whether
    questions reflected the Secretary of State's position or  the  personal
    view of the interviewer.  This is said to  be  wrong  and  unreasonable
    "for a witness in an asylum appeal to be placed in a position where she
    must embark on a personal argument with  an  advocate  or  accuse  that
    advocate of misrepresenting the facts.   Many  asylum  seekers  may  be
    intimidated in  such  circumstances".   There  may  be  cases  where  a
    particularly vulnerable asylum claimant might feel intimidated  by  the
    questioning at the  hearing  by  the  same  person  who  conducted  the
    interview, we refer to that at paragraph 34 above. We saw  no  evidence
    in this case that this appellant might be considered vulnerable in  the
    way suggested.

The Judge's Conclusions

49. We reject the claim that there was procedural unfairness in  this  case
    for the reasons given above. The judge made no error of law in the  way
    in which she conducted the  case.  She  was  not  wrong  to  allow  the
    interviewing officer to present the case as the HOPO.

50. We also regard her  conclusions  on  the  appellants  asylum  claim  as
    entirely  sustainable.  She  analysed  the  evidence  and  made   clear
    findings. These were adverse to the appellant but they were not legally
    wrong.

Human Rights

51. A further ground of appeal is that the  Immigration  Judge  should  not
    have considered human rights in this appeal.  She  concluded  that  the
    articles 2 and 3 claims stood or fell  with  the  asylum  appeal.   Any
    return of the claimant to Ethiopia  would  not  breach  either  article
    given her findings on the asylum claim.  She also concluded that  there
    would be no breach of the Appellant's article 8 rights if she  were  to
    be removed from the UK.

52. The  Appellant  says  that  the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in  law  by
    considering human rights which should not be considered in a  variation
    appeal when there are no removal directions.  The Appellant  relies  on
    the starred decision of JM (Human  Rights  unarguable)  Liberia  [2006]
    UKAIT 00009 which has in fact been overruled subsequent to the  hearing
    of this case.

53. It is said that the Immigration Judge should not have considered  human
    rights.  However, we agree with the  respondent's  submission  on  this
    matter.  We find no error or law in the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  on
    asylum. Such error of law, if any, as may have been made by  the  Judge
    in considering the human rights grounds was in fact immaterial.  Had JM
    Liberia been followed the Immigration Judge would  have  dismissed  the
    human rights appeal in any event  as  being  premature.   There  is  no
    material error of law in this finding by the Judge.

HB (Ethiopia EDP/UEDP Members) Ethiopia CG [2004] UKIAT 00235

54. The Immigration Judge in her determination places some reliance on  the
    HB case.  She indicated "that limited involvement by an Appellant  such
    as attending meetings and paying contributions is not reasonably likely
    to result in an Appellant being monitored or identified  and  therefore
    not at risk".  HB refers to members  of  opposition  groups  activities
    outside of Ethiopia.  However the Appellant's  claimed  activities  did
    take place in Ethiopia except that after she moved to Dubai she claimed
    to have worked and contributed money to the party every month.  Overall
    the Immigration Judge gave a series of clear reasons  for  disbelieving
    the Appellant.  They included her lack of knowledge of the names of the
    party she said she supported; she rejected the claim that the Appellant
    sent more than half of her income earned  in  Dubai  to  the  political
    party in Ethiopia.  She concluded the Appellant did not make  financial
    contributions to a political party when working  in  Dubai.   She  also
    rejected the Appellant's claim that her father had  been  detained  and
    then released merely because his blood pressure was bad.

55. Her conclusions are in the Tribunal's view entirely  sustainable.   For
    the reasons given above we do  not  regard  that  there  has  been  any
    unfairness in the way she reached those decisions.  Such error as there
    was in the misapplication of the case of HB was therefore not material.

Conclusion

56. We conclude that there was no material error of law in the  Immigration
    Judge's decision in this case.  The decision by the  Immigration  Judge
    to dismiss the Appellant's appeal therefore stands.







                                                        Mr Justice Hodge OBE
                                                                   President
                                                             16 October 2006



