
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                     Abisoye (entry clearance appeal - Tier 2) [2012] UKUT
82 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                         dr adeoye emmanuel abisoye
                            mrs tolulope abisoye
                            ashley abisye abisoye

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PORT LOUIS

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms O Ogundipe, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


The effect of section 88A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002 and the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  (Commencement
No.8 and Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2008  is  that  a  person
refused entry clearance as a Tier 2 Migrant has a right  of  appeal  limited
to race discrimination and human rights grounds only.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellants are citizens of Nigeria and  were  born  on  27  August
    1975, 1 February 1976 and 28 December 2003,  respectively.   The  first
    and second appellants are the parents of the third  appellant  who  was
    aged 6 years at the date of decision.

2.    The first appellant applied for entry clearance as a  Tier  2  Migrant
    in order to take up a post as a clinical fellow in  emergency  medicine
    working for the Winchester and Eastleigh NHS  Trust.   The  second  and
    third appellants applied as  his  dependants.   The  applications  were
    refused in decisions dated 27 August 2010,  in  respect  of  the  first
    appellant with reference to paragraph 245ZD(a) and  paragraphs  320(7A)
    and (7B) of the Immigration Rules.  The appeal of the second  appellant
    was refused with reference to paragraph 319C(b) and in relation to  the
    third appellant under paragraph 297(i)(b), although arguably, the third
    appellant should have been refused with reference to paragraph 319H(b).
     For the purposes of the appeal however, nothing turns on this.

3.    The Entry Clearance Officer was satisfied  that  the  first  appellant
    was entitled to the points claimed.  However, the  notice  of  decision
    states that the appellant entered the UK on visit visas on 9 March 2005
    and on 15 October 2005, ostensibly to visit his uncle. It  is  apparent
    that he undertook the Plab  (Professional  and  Linguistic  Assessments
    Board) exams and took up a clinical  attachment  programme  during  his
    visit.  He attempted to enter the UK in 2006, again on  a  visit  visa,
    shortly after having been refused a student visa and  just  before  the
    course for which he was refused a student visa was  due  to  start,  in
    January 2007.  A search of his baggage revealed that he had  paid  fees
    towards the course and that he held references from  his  employer  who
    had approved two years study leave for him from September 2006.   There
    was also, apparently, a letter from Oxford Brookes  University  stating
    that the start date of his course had been postponed to  January  2007.
    It seems that he stated at interview that he still wished to  study  in
    the UK and would appeal against the student refusal whilst in  the  UK.
    He had apparently stated to the Immigration Officer that he was  coming
    for a holiday but his true intention was to study and he had  documents
    suggesting that that was the purpose of  his  visit  to  the  UK.   The
    notice of decision goes on to state that he attempted  to  deceive  the
    Immigration Officer and breached the conditions attached to  his  visit
    visa, following which his visa was cancelled.  Furthermore, in  respect
    of this present application, at question 6.3 of the application form he
    did not state that he had  been  refused  a  Tier  2  General  visa  in
    Pretoria in July 2009 or, at question 6.6, that he had been  in  breach
    of the immigration conditions on his previous visits.  These  were  the
    bases for the refusal in  this  present  application  under  paragraphs
    320(7A) and (7B), as well as the  general  grounds  for  refusal  under
    paragraph 245ZD(a).

4.    The notice of decision in respect of the first appellant states  that:
    "Your application does not attract a full right of appeal under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Your  right
    of appeal is limited to any or  all  of  the  grounds  referred  to  in
    section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002".  Those grounds are in respect of the Race Relations Act 1976 and
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

5.    The appeal came before Immigration Judge Miles on  8  June  2011.   At
    paragraph  8  of  the  determination  he  concluded  that   the   first
    appellant's right of appeal was indeed limited to  race  discrimination
    and human rights grounds. In respect of the decision  relating  to  the
    first appellant, he said at paragraph 9 that:

       "Although the respondent's representative did not pursue the  alleged
      conduct of the appellant in March and October 2005, there is evidence,
      albeit circumstantial,  which  was  produced  to  me  to  support  the
      respondent's assertion that when the appellant purported to enter  the
      country in December 2006 as a visitor he was, in  fact,  intending  to
      study. Furthermore, it is accepted that in  the  application  form  in
      relation to this  application  the  appellant  did  not  disclose  the
      refusal of a previous application  made  in  Pretoria  in  July  2009,
      although he submits that the respondent was aware of  that  matter  by
      virtue of the production of his passport."

6.    The judge goes on to state that  because  the  appellant's  appeal  is
    limited it is not necessary for him to determine those issues  one  way
    or the other but says as follows at paragraph 9:

      "However, I make these observations to clarify that the  respondent's
      concerns in this regard are supported by evidence  and  are  therefore
      neither mere suspicions nor fanciful allegations."

7.    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that there was an error of law in the Immigration Judge's  decision  in
    his finding that the first  appellant  only  had  a  limited  right  of
    appeal.  The grant of permission goes on to refer  to  the  Immigration
    Judge's consideration of paragraph 320(7A) and (7B)  in  terms  of  the
    evidence that was before him on those issues.

8.    At the hearing before me, Ms Ogundipe, who also  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, contended that  the  first  appellant's  right  of
    appeal was not limited in the way described.  Her submissions  on  that
    issue were as follows: that it was in the interests of  justice  for  a
    full right of appeal to be permitted otherwise there was no way for the
    appellants to challenge the decision; that the  legislative  provisions
    are unclear; that in  granting  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had concluded that the right of appeal was not  limited;
    that directions were given by the  First-tier  Tribunal  prior  to  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal in terms  of  requiring  the
    respondent to produce evidence in  support  of  the  allegations  under
    paragraphs 320(7A) and (7B) which again suggested that previous  judges
    had concluded that the right of appeal was not limited.  I did not find
    those submissions persuasive and Ms Ogundipe did not  identify  how  it
    was suggested that the relevant legislative provisions are unclear.

9.    Section 82(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act") includes, at (b),  amongst  the  list  of  immigration
    decisions, a refusal of entry clearance.  Section 84 of  the  same  Act
    sets out the grounds of appeal.  Section 88A reads as follows:

        "88A Entry clearance


        (1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) against refusal  of
        an application for entry clearance unless the application was  made
        for the purpose of-
           (a) visiting a person of a class or  description  prescribed  by
           regulations for the purpose of this subsection, or
           (b) entering as the  dependant  of  a  person  in  circumstances
           prescribed by regulations for the purpose of this subsection.


        (2) Regulations under subsection (1) may, in particular-
           (a) make provision by reference to whether the  applicant  is  a
           member of the family (within such meaning as the regulations may
           assign) of the person he seeks to visit;
           (b) provide for the  determination  of  whether  one  person  is
           dependent on another;
           (c) make provision by reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the
           applicant, of the person whom the applicant seeks to visit or on
           whom he depends,  or  of  both  (and  the  regulations  may,  in
           particular, include provision by reference to-


              (i) whether or not a person is lawfully settled in the United
              Kingdom within such meaning as the regulations may assign;
              (ii) the duration of two individuals' residence together);


           (d) make provision by reference to  an  applicant's  purpose  in
           entering as a dependant;
           (e) make provision by reference to immigration rules;
           (f) confer a discretion.


        (3) Subsection (1)-


           (a) does not prevent the bringing of an appeal on either or both
           of the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b) and (c), and
           (b) is without prejudice to the effect of section 88 in relation
           to an appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  refusal  of  entry
           clearance."


10.   Section 88A is  an  amendment  to  the  2002  Act  introduced  by  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006,  section  4(1).   It  was
    brought into force by the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006
    (Commencement No.8 and Transitional and Saving Provisions)  Order  2008
    ('the Commencement Order') by virtue of article 3 of that Order.   This
    states that section 4 (entry clearance) of the 2006 Act shall come into
    force on 1 April 2008.  Article 4 of the Order states as follows:



         "Saving and Transitional Provision

         4.  Notwithstanding the commencement of section 4 of the 2006  Act
         and the substitution of section 88A of the 2002 Act and section  23
         of the 1999  Act,  section  4(1)  (appeals:  entry  clearance)  and
         section  4(2)  of  the  2006  Act  (monitoring  refusals  of  entry
         clearance) shall  have  effect  only  so  far  as  they  relate  to
         applications of a kind identified in immigration rules as requiring
         to be considered under a "Points Based System"."


11.   Thus, the limitation under section  88A  of  the  2002  Act  on  entry
    clearance appeals is confined to applications  under  the  Points-Based
    System.

12.   However, as can  be  seen  above,  section  88A(3)  of  the  2002  Act
    provides that grounds of appeal in terms  of  race  discrimination  and
    human rights are available. Put simply, a person who has made a points-
    based application  for  entry  clearance  whose  application  has  been
    refused only has a limited right  of  appeal,  that  limited  right  of
    appeal being on race discrimination or human rights grounds.  That,  it
    seems to me, is precisely the situation which prevails  in  respect  of
    the appellants here.

13.   It follows from that, notwithstanding what is  said  in  the  detailed
    manuscript grounds of application for permission to appeal  or  in  the
    appellant's skeleton argument submitted  for  the  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, that the first appellant's arguments in  terms  of  why
    this present application should not have been refused under the general
    grounds for refusal are irrelevant to any exercisable right of  appeal.
    The appellants do not  have  a  right  of  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  That is so, notwithstanding that part of the  basis
    of the refusal was with  reference  to  paragraphs  320(7A)  and  (7B).
    Those grounds for refusal are brought into play by  paragraph  245ZD(a)
    which provides that an applicant  for  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  2
    Migrant "must not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general  grounds  for
    refusal".  The first appellant's application is undoubtedly  caught  by
    article 4 of the Commencement Order, being an application  "of  a  kind
    identified in immigration rules as requiring to be considered  under  a
    'Points Based System'."

14.   Although Ms Ogundipe sought to persuade me that  it  would  be  unfair
    for the first appellant to be deprived of a  general  right  of  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules, he is in my  view  only  entitled  to  the
    Administrative Review, which, it appears, is contained in  Home  Office
    guidance only.  The Administrative Review is the forum  for  the  first
    appellant to raise the issues argued in respect of  paragraphs  320(7A)
    and (7B).  In this respect however, there appears to be a 28  day  time
    limit for making such an application.

15.   So far as race discrimination is relied  on  as  a  ground  of  appeal
    under section 84(1)(b) of the 2002 Act,  the  Immigration  Judge  found
    that  there  was  no  evidence  to  indicate  that   there   was   race
    discrimination.  It was not contended that there was any error  of  law
    in the Immigration Judge's decision in this respect.

16.   So far as human rights are concerned, this is limited to private  life
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  However, although  it  appears  that  the
    first appellant is a doctor and has been offered employment in  the  UK
    by the Winchester and Eastleigh NHS Trust, the Immigration Judge  gives
    sustainable reasons for concluding that Article 8 is not  engaged.  The
    skeleton  argument  before  me  contends  that  the  refusal   of   the
    application by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  has  caused  the  first
    appellant "misery and untold hardship".  It states that he is unable to
    find employment in Nigeria that would  provide  him  with  the  desired
    level of "exposure" in terms  of  his  career.   At  the  date  of  the
    decision, it appears that all the appellants were  in  the  Seychelles.
    In any case, in my view  there  is  simply  no  basis  from  which  the
    Immigration Judge could have concluded that the  respondent's  decision
    amounts to a breach of the appellant's human rights under Article 8  in
    terms of his private life.  The first appellant may not have  the  same
    opportunities in Nigeria or in the Seychelles to  develop  his  career,
    but that is a far cry from the conclusion that refusing entry clearance
    interferes with, or shows a lack of respect for, his private life.

17.   The skeleton argument before me also maintains an  argument  that  was
    put before the Immigration Judge in terms of the decision amounting  to
    a breach of the  first  appellant's  human  rights  with  reference  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR.  That is plainly an unsustainable  argument  and
    was inevitably rejected by the Immigration Judge.

18.    Similarly,  it  has  been  suggested  that  because  the  appellant's
    daughter is an Irish citizen, the appellant is able to rely on her  EEA
    rights. The decision of Ruiz  Zambrano  (European  citizenship)  [2011]
    EUECJ Case C-34/09 is relied on.  However,  the  Immigration  Judge  at
    paragraph 16 states that there are serious  doubts  about  whether  the
    appellant's daughter is in fact a national of  Eire  in  the  light  of
    "contradictions" in the documentary  evidence.  Although  he  does  not
    identify what those contradictions are, there is no  challenge  to  his
    finding in that regard. In any event, he, correctly in my view,  points
    out that the limitation on the right of appeal to  race  discrimination
    and human rights grounds excludes consideration  of  rights  under  the
    Community Treaties which is itself a distinct right of appeal under the
    2002 Act (section 84(1)(d)).  Further, the appellant's daughter is  not
    in the UK.  The  application  is  by  the  first  appellant  for  entry
    clearance as a Tier 2 Migrant and in respect of the  second  and  third
    appellants as his dependants.  This is not an application in any  sense
    in connection with the exercise of  Treaty  rights.   The  decision  in
    Zambrano has no application.

19.   In conclusion therefore, I am satisfied  that  the  first  appellant's
    right  of  appeal  was  limited  in  the   way   described,   to   race
    discrimination and human rights grounds.  There is no error of  law  in
    the First-tier judge's decision in that regard or in  relation  to  his
    conclusions as to the merits of the appeal on those grounds.

20.    Although  the  second  and  third   appellants'   applications,   and
    consequent appeals, are not caught  by  paragraphs  320(7A)  and  (7B),
    their appeals must necessarily fail under  paragraphs  319C  and  319H,
    they being dependent on  the  first  appellant's  application  with  no
    distinct  human  rights  or  race  discrimination  issues  arising  for
    consideration in their cases.

      Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  involve  the  making
    of an error on a point of law. The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeals
    stands.


Signed                                       Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
Immigration                and                Asylum                 Chamber

