

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    RS (immigration/family court liaison: outcome) [2013] UKUT 00082(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Originally heard at Field House               |  Promulgated                |
|On 23 May  2012                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       THE PRESIDENT, MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                            LORD JUSTICE McFARLANE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     RS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

(1)  This case provides an example of the  importance  of  co-operation  and
communication between the two jurisdictions, family and  immigration,  where
two sets of parallel proceedings, closely  dependent  upon  each  other  are
ongoing.

(2)  Following the Ruling of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RS  (immigration  and
family court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT  00218  (IAC),  the  appellant's
Article 8 case against deportation fell to be determined  in  the  light  of
the judgment of the  family  court  regarding  the  best  interests  of  the
appellant's child, H. The family court held that H's best interests did  not
lie with her parents but by being placed in long-term  foster  care  in  the
United Kingdom. The family court regarded it as acceptable for contact  with
H's parents to be face-to-face annually (by H's visiting them in  India,  at
public expense) and monthly by means of Skype.

(3)  Since those arrangements satisfied H's best  interests  in  the  family
proceedings, where those interests were the paramount concern,  it  followed
that the Tribunal could be satisfied, when considering  H's  best  interests
as  a  primary  consideration  in  the  deportation  proceedings,  that  the
appellant's deportation did not interfere with H's best interests.

(4)  The arrangements identified by the family court  as  meeting  H's  best
interests provided for the likelihood of the  appellant's  deportation.  The
family court took into account [53] of the Tribunal's Ruling in [2012]  UKUT
00218.

(5)  The appellant's deportation was, accordingly,  not  unlawful  on  human
rights grounds.

We direct that in any report of these proceedings the identity of the  child
H and her parents shall not be revealed.


                                DETERMINATION
Introduction

    1. We issued a Ruling and Directions  dated  18th  June  2012  in  this
       appeal under reference RS (immigration and family court proceedings)
       India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC) in which we adjourned the  deportation
       appeal to await the decision of the family court.  We note that  the
       Court of Appeal has since endorsed our ruling in Mohan v SSHD [2012]
       EWCA Civ 1363 albeit at [32]  stressing  the  need  for  caution  in
       anticipating the immigration consequences of a  decision  in  family
       proceedings that was yet to be taken. We directed  either  party  to
       make written representations within  20  days  of  disposal  by  the
       family court, on receipt of which  we  would  further  consider  the
       appeal and proceed to a final  determination  without  further  oral
       hearing. This determination should be read in conjunction with  that
       Ruling.

    2. We indicated in paragraph 53 of that Ruling that if the family court
       concluded that H should be permanently removed from the care of  her
       parents then we  did  not  consider  that  the  deportation  of  the
       appellant would be unlawful as a disproportionate interference  with
       the right to respect to the family life he enjoys with his wife  and
       H or his private life derived from his residence here.  Our  reasons
       for so finding are contained in  that  paragraph.  Alternatively  we
       indicated in paragraph 54 that if the family  court  concluded  that
       H's welfare required her to be  reintroduced  to  the  care  of  her
       parents, then the appellant's deportation would be  disproportionate
       and in breach of the human rights of each member of the family.

    3. The family court has now finally concluded the proceedings before it
       by the making of a Final Care Order. We have been  provided  with  a
       copy of District Judge Wilding's judgment of 18th October  2012  and
       the Final Care order, a copy of the Agreed Final Threshold  Document
       and a copy of the Final Care Plan of  Luton  Borough  Council  dated
       17th October 2012.

    4. This appeal has  provided  an  example  of  the  importance  of  co-
       operation and communication between the  two  jurisdictions,  family
       and immigration, where two sets  of  parallel  proceedings,  closely
       dependent  upon  each  other  are  ongoing.  The  judges   in   each
       jurisdiction recognised the importance of their  decision-making  to
       what takes place in the other and for that  reason  there  has  been
       close co-operation and sharing of information in this case; that  is
       how Judge Wilding was able to quote from our Ruling in his judgement
       and we from his in ours. In this case, we  conclude  that  given  an
       indication of the immigration outcome when  the  family  proceedings
       were concluded has enabled the family court to shape the  Care  Plan
       to address the immigration issues.

    5. The Tribunal has now received written submissions from both parties.

The written submissions

    6. On behalf of the Secretary of  State  we  received  a  fairly  brief
       submission relying upon Judge Wilding's paragraphs 72 to  74  which,
       it is said clearly envisages that the  appellant  will  be  removed,
       that his wife intends to go  with  him  and  that  suitable  contact
       arrangements have been made in that event. The Tribunal is asked  to
       determine the appeal without a further hearing and dismiss it.


    7. The appellant's representative has, unsurprisingly, provided a  more
       lengthy submission that  summarises the Care Order as follows:-

          "District Judge Wilding, sitting at Luton County  Court,  ordered
          on 16 October 2012 there be a final care order to  Luton  Borough
          Council in respect of H. However, the Appellant and his wife, Mrs
          K, have an opportunity  to  discharge  the  care  order,  in  the
          future, if they are deemed fit to  care  for  H.  The  care  plan
          envisaged H would continue to have contact with the Appellant and
          Mrs K. However the frequency and duration of the contact would be
          reviewed as the care plan evolves."

The decision of the family court

    8. So far as that summary is concerned, we consider that  it  does  not
       paint an entirely  accurate  picture  of  what  was  decided.  Judge
       Wilding's judgement is a 20 page, 75 paragraph document. It explains
       at paragraph 31 that:-


          "The  Local  Authority's  Final  Care  Plan  had  changed  between
          hearings and the latest was dated 9th July 2012 and  provided  for
          long-term fostering of H as a protracted  trawl  of  the  adoption
          register have found no matches for H".


    9. It is clear therefore that the reason that H is to be  in  long-term
       foster care is because of the inability of the  local  authority  to
       identify suitable adoptive parents for her. It is not because  there
       is any future plan for her to be rehabilitated to her parents;  that
       is clear in the Final Care Plan. (Paragraph  4.5  -  "There  are  no
       plans for reunification").


   10. Whilst Mr Khan submits that the door is open for the  appellant  and
       his wife to seek to discharge the Care order  in  the  future,  that
       course  is  clearly  not  envisaged  by  Judge  Wilding,  the  Local
       Authority or H's Guardian within the care  proceedings  who  clearly
       view her foster placement as a permanent one. It  is  with  that  in
       mind that the contact is to be  reduced  to  once  per  month  only.
       Throughout the care proceedings contact was three times per week. It
       is clearly being reduced to a level  to  maintain  the  relationship
       only.

   11. Judge Wilding then goes on to explain how the 9th  July  2012  Final
       Care Plan was deficient because it did not allow or  deal  with  the
       possibility of father's deportation and mother leaving  the  country
       with him, or alternatively choosing to remain in England. There  was
       therefore another Final Care Plan of 15th October which did  provide
       for contact in the event that father is removed;  by  Skype  once  a
       month and by the Local Authority funding annual visits by H to India
       for face-to-face contact.

   12. All this paints a rather different picture than  that  contained  in
       paragraph 2 of Mr Khan's submission that "whilst H  has  been  place
       into care, she has not been permanently removed from her parents and
       it should be noted that she has not been put  up  for  adoption  but
       instead placed in long-term foster care", suggesting that this was a
       deliberate choice with  a  view  to  the  future.  Clearly  that  is
       incorrect; long-term foster care was  the  only  possible  permanent
       placement for her, as no adoptive parents were identified.

   13. The submission goes on to suggest that the Care Plan recognised that
       the appellant and Mrs K have attended parenting courses with a  view
       to improving their parenting skills but  recognises  that  the  Care
       Plan concluded it would not be in the best interests of H to  return
       to the care  of  her  parents  because  they  have  been  unable  to
       implement what they have learned in practice. It is  then  suggested
       that the Care Plan therefore indicates that  if  they  are  able  to
       improve their parenting  abilities  and  implement  what  they  have
       learnt H can be returned to the care.

   14. Reading the Final Care Plan and Judge Wilding's judgement,  that  is
       not our understanding. It seems clear  that  no  one  envisages  H's
       return to the care of her parents. The care proceedings in this case
       have taken a very long time. H has been in care since February 2010.
       Unusually, there were considerable delays in  order  to  afford  the
       parents every opportunity to attend classes and  therapies  so  that
       they could demonstrate that they were capable of providing  adequate
       care for H.  They  were  unable  to  do  so.  The  judge  eventually
       concluded that H could wait no longer.

   15. The appellant also suggests that because the parents  will  maintain
       some contact with H and because Social  Services  will  ensure  that
       they continue to do so, the parents will continue to have  influence
       over H's care and again  this  demonstrates  that  H  has  not  been
       permanently removed from their care. Again, we  find  that  this  is
       putting a gloss upon the judgement and  final  care  plan  which  is
       simply not there.  Paragraph 5.5 of the Care Plan reads:-

             "During the court  process  (our  emphasis)  the  Department's
             intention will be to actively involve Mrs K and Mr  S  in  the
             decision making process where appropriate"

   16. At paragraph 4.9 of the Final Care Plan  -


             "It is expected that Mrs K and Mr S will  attend  all  contact
             sessions at the times and dates to be specified  and  will  be
             consulted when and where appropriate about the welfare  of  H.
             In addition it is expected that Mrs K and Mr S will attend the
             Looked After Children Reviews so that they are kept up to date
             with H's progress."


   17. This does not suggest that the appellant and his wife  are  involved
       in any meaningful way in her day to day care; rather they are to  be
       kept informed once the Final Care Order is made.


   18. Perhaps the best submission made on the appellant's behalf  is  that
       if he is removed to India then it will be impossible  for  H  to  be
       returned to the parents' care. Due to Mrs K's mental health problems
       she is entirely reliant upon the appellant and cannot look  after  H
       on her own. In summary, in order to have any prospect  of  having  H
       returned to them, they need to be in the UK. They will be unable  to
       show that they are fit to care for her if the appellant is in  India
       and will be prevented thereby from making application to  set  aside
       the care order.

   19.  However, reading the documents as a  whole,  there  is  clearly  no
       expectation that H will return to their  care  in  the  future.  The
       longer H is placed in a stable foster  home  the  less  likely  that
       becomes.


   20. The appellant goes on to submit that the Care Plan seeks to  include
       him and Mrs K in H's life rather than exclude them. It proposes that
       contact should continue and that the frequency  and  level  will  be
       reviewed; it is submitted that this indicates the level  of  contact
       can increase over time if it is deemed to be positive.  We  consider
       that such an outcome is speculative. The  Care  Plan  and  judgement
       report  that  there  are  real  concerns  over  contact.  It  cannot
       therefore be assumed that contact would increase.

   21. The appellant notes that the Care Plan articulates H's view that she
       wishes to return to her parents but realises it may not be  possible
       and that she enjoys the contact sessions.

   22. The Care Plan and Judge Wilding's judgement however record that H is
       eight and said to be settled  and  well  integrated  in  her  foster
       carer's family. They also describe concerns over  contact  that  has
       taken place thus far and in particular the interactions between  the
       Appellant and his wife in the presence of H.

   23.  The Care Plan makes clear that what  is  proposed  is  the  parents
       being kept informed rather than being consulted. The decisions  will
       primarily be made by the foster carers subject to  the  approval  of
       the Local Authority. The Care Plan clearly envisages H's  long  term
       future as being a fully integrated member of the foster family.  The
       Care Plan clearly reflects H's best interests.

Discussion

   24. We noted in the previous Ruling that this  Tribunal  has  inadequate
       powers and  resources  available  to  it  to  support  its  task  of
       determining the best interests of a  child;  although  there  is  no
       doubt that those  best interests have  to  be  taken  as  a  primary
       consideration in immigration  decision  making:  see  ZH  (Tanzania)
       [2011] UKSC 4. It is how the Tribunal  reaches  such  an  assessment
       that is made complicated by the lack of resources.


   25.  The Tribunal does not have the benefit of  separate  representation
       on behalf of the child.  It  does  not  have  highly  qualified  and
       independent Guardians to represent the child's  best  interests  and
       put forward their views and nor does it  have  the  availability  of
       social workers who alongside the Guardian interview all persons  and
       professionals concerned in the child's life to come to a view as  to
       where the child's best interests lie.

   26.  Before undertaking any balancing exercise in assessing the  Article
       8 case, what must first be identified is where  H's  best  interests
       lie. By deferring the immigration decision until  the  family  court
       reached  its  conclusions  we  have  had   available   to   us   the
       authoritative assessment of the Final Care Plan and more importantly
       Judge Wilding's judgement.


   27. It is clear that H's best interests do not lie with her parents  but
       by being placed in what is clearly viewed by  the  Local  Authority,
       the Guardian and the Judge as a permanent placement, away  from  her
       parents, in long-term foster care. She is described  as  being  well
       integrated into that family which is culturally appropriate. She  is
       now doing much better at school  and  her  attendance  has  improved
       enormously since she has been away from the care of her parents. She
       has some difficulties with social interaction  with  her  peers  but
       this is being addressed by the school. It was clearly  envisaged  by
       the Local Authority that  adoption  would  have  been  in  her  best
       interests but that  route  was  blocked  by  the  unavailability  of
       prospective adopters. As it is the plan is long-term foster care. It
       is abundantly clear that nobody envisages a return to  the  care  of
       her parents. Judge Wilding makes clear that there have been numerous
       psychiatric and psychological assessments of the mother and that the
       appellant has undergone a variety of therapies.  Despite  this  they
       have been unable to demonstrate not just that it  would  be  in  H's
       best interest to return to their care but that it would even be safe
       for her to do so.

   28. Judge Wilding's judgement and the Final Care Plan indicate that  the
       Local Authority, the Judge and the Guardian all  took  into  account
       and provide for the likelihood of the appellant's  deportation  once
       the family court proceedings were concluded. It is for  that  reason
       that provision was put in place for contact by Skype and for  annual
       visits by H to India to meet with her  parents  at  local  authority
       expense. The family court therefore clearly  contemplated  that  the
       consequence of its decision  represented  an  indefinite  separation
       taking into account paragraph 53 of our Ruling, i.e. in anticipation
       of the appellant's deportation.

   29. It is argued strenuously on the appellant's behalf that it does  not
       represent a permanent separation. Whilst  it  is  correct  that  the
       terms  of  the  Final  Care  Order,  not  being  adoption,  do   not
       permanently sever relations between H and  her  parents,  the  Local
       Authority and the family court proceeded on the basis that it  meant
       a permanent removal of H from her parents' care.

   30. At the time we made our Ruling, Mr Khan's submission  envisaged  the
       alternatives were adoption/long-term fostering or a  return  to  the
       parents either immediately or on a phased  return.   We  anticipated
       that if the family court ordered any kind of return of H to the care
       of her parents that deportation would be disproportionate.

   31.  Even though the result is not adoption, we are satisfied that  what
       has been decided represents  a  permanent  removal  of  H  from  the
       appellant and Mrs K; this has been decided by  a  court  far  better
       placed than we are to determine where H's best  interests  lie.  H's
       best interests are of course  the  paramount  consideration  in  the
       family  court.  The  family  court  is  satisfied  that  those  best
       interests are served by H remaining in the UK with her foster carers
       and that it is acceptable for contact with her parents to be face-to-
       face annually and by Skype monthly. If the family court is satisfied
       as to that arrangement when her best  interests  are  the  paramount
       consideration then it follows that we are satisfied when considering
       her best interests as a primary consideration that deportation  does
       not interfere with her best interests.

Conclusions

   32. In the previous Ruling we have explained our reasoning with  respect
       to the balance between competing interests apart from the unresolved
       issue of where H's best interests lie. We now have an  authoritative
       ruling on what H's best interests are and how  they  impact  on  the
       appellant's removal. Apart from  the  information  provided  by  the
       family court no new evidence has come to light or new issue emerged.

   33. We are conscious that during the period of the  adjournment  of  the
       decision while we awaited the family court's decision, from  9  July
       2012 new Immigration Rules have come into force explaining  in  some
       detail the Secretary of State's new approach in Article 8 cases.  It
       has not been suggested to us that those rules afford the appellant a
       new argument against the decision to deport. Indeed, the  new  rules
       are generally more strict than the legal principles  we  applied  in
       reaching our Ruling: see Izuazu v SSHD [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC).

   34.   We, therefore, conclude that there is no reason for us  either  to
       reconvene for a further  oral  hearing,  or  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant's deportation would be  unlawful,  as  a  disproportionate
       interference with the family life enjoyed between H and her parents.
       We take into account the family court's findings and reasons and the
       provision made therein for such residual  contact  with  H  as  that
       court considered appropriate in the circumstances we  had  envisaged
       at paragraph 53 of our ruling. We do  not  consider  the  difference
       between face-to-face contact and contact via Skype three  hours  per
       month to be sufficient to outweigh the public interest in  deporting
       this appellant.

   35.  The appellant's deportation is not unlawful on human rights grounds
       We accordingly re-make this appeal by dismissing it.

   36. All members of this panel have contributed to this decision.

                               Signed


                               Date 31 January 2013
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
