
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MT and ET (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT
00088(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2018                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                  MT AND ET
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr J Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Greater
Manchester
     Immigration Aid Unit (via video-link)
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


    1.  A very young child, who has not started  school  or  who  has  only
    recently done so, will have difficulty in establishing that her Article
    8 private and family life has a material element,  which  lies  outside
    her need to live with her parent or  parents,  wherever  that  may  be.
    This position, however, changes over time,  with  the  result  that  an
    assessment of best interests must adopt a correspondingly wider  focus,
    examining the child's position in the wider world, of which school will
    usually be an important part.

    2.  The giving of ex tempore decisions furthers the aim of dealing with
    immigration and asylum appeals as  efficiently  as  possible.  But  any
    formal attempt to identify and manage in advance those cases which  may
    lend themselves to the giving of ex  tempore  decisions  needs  careful
    handling; not least to ensure procedural fairness.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants,  citizens  of  Nigeria,  are  respectively  mother  and
    daughter.  The mother, MT, arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
    daughter in July 2007.  At that time the daughter, ET, was 4 years old.
     The appellants entered as visitors and overstayed.   The  mother  made
    several applications for leave to remain on Article  8  grounds,  which
    were refused.  Following her last refusal, she appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Her appeal was dismissed by Immigration  Judge  Birrell
    in January 2011.

 2. The mother applied for asylum in 2011, which was refused and certified.
     Following a successful judicial review by the mother,  the  respondent
    made a new decision, carrying  an  in-country  right  of  appeal.   The
    mother appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and her appeal was dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baird in November 2012.

 3. Further applications ensued, leading to the respondent's  decisions  in
    August 2016 to refuse the appellants' human rights claims.

 4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  On  6  July  2017,
    their appeals were heard in Manchester by Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin,
    sitting in the First-tier  Tribunal.   She  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals in an oral (ex tempore) decision delivered at the  hearing  and
    subsequently reduced to writing.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 26  September
    2017.

 6. The appellants' appeals were dealt  with  as  part  of  the  "Proof  of
    Concept for the Extempore Judgment Pilot 2017".  A letter to the mother
    from the First-tier Tribunal, dated 7 March 2017, explained  the  Proof
    of Concept:-

         "The Appeal process will be front loaded with exchanges of evidence
         so that issues  can  be  identified  at  an  early  stage.   It  is
         anticipated that by the  time  of  the  hearing  there  will  be  a
         document, very much like a Pleading, which identifies the issues to
         be decided and specifies what an Appellant needs  to  establish  in
         order to succeed.  The hearing will then  be  restricted  to  those
         issues.

         It is hoped that this will shorten hearings and  weed  out  appeals
         which would succeed.  It will allow judges  to  give  an  extempore
         judgment on the day.

         It is anticipated that the Judge will hear two appeals in a day and
         that the proceedings will be recorded and  the  Extempore  Judgment
         will also be recorded and a transcript of the Judgment typed.  That
         will be the Decision and Reasons and while grammatical errors  will
         be corrected it is not envisaged that it will otherwise be amended.

         As this system involves a change in the way  of  working  for  both
         Appellants, Representatives, and for the Home Office, in  order  to
         succeed  it  is  dependent  on   all   parties   fulfilling   their
         obligations.  Before a full pilot is commenced there will be a much
         smaller "Proof of Concept" pilot.  This will be run  at  Manchester
         and Taylor House over one week.  The Proof of  Concept  will  allow
         the Home Office to identify what resources it  will  need  to  have
         available for a full pilot and both sides will be able to  identify
         any issues.

         This particular appeal has been  identified  as  suitable  for  the
         Proof of Concept and you will  see  detailed  directions  attached.
         You will also note the strict timescale and  probable  consequences
         for default.  Obviously, if there are genuine problems/reasons  for
         needing more  time  either  side  should  apply  to  the  Tribunal.
         Otherwise the Tribunal expects the time table to be adhered to."

 7. Also on 7 March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal issued the  parties  with
    the following directions:-

         "1.  The Respondent shall, no later than  4  April  2017  file  and
             serve  a  consolidated,  indexed  and  paginated   bundle   of
             documents containing all  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
             Secretary of State.

           2. The Appellant shall, no later than 2 May 2017, file  with  the
             Tribunal and serve on the Respondent all evidence relied  upon
             (including evidence already served on the  Respondent).   This
             shall be contained in a consolidated,  indexed  and  paginated
             bundle of documents.   The  bundle  must  include  a  skeleton
             argument setting  out  a  summary  of  the  Appellant's  case,
             including any new matters, which should be set out (in  brief)
             under the hearing 'New Matters'.

           3. Failure to comply fully with  Directions  1  and  2  above  is
             conduct likely to fall within rule 9(2) of the Tribunal (First-
             tier Tribunal) Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014,
             which may require the Tribunal to  exercise  its  power  under
             rule 9(3) of those rules to make Orders for payment  of  costs
             and interest on costs (or, in Scotland, expenses).

           4. Any application for an extension of time in  which  to  comply
             with Direction 1 and 2 above shall be filed with the  Tribunal
             and served on the Respondent promptly and  be  accompanied  by
             reasons.

           5. The Respondent shall, no later than 30 May 2017 file with  the
             Tribunal and serve on the Appellant a Statement of  Issues  in
             the prescribed format which appears at Annex 1 specifying  (by
             means of completion of Sections A and B of the Form) whether:

             (a)  permission is sought to withdraw the decision giving rise
                  to the appeal; or

             (b)  the appeal is conceded; or

             (c)  the appeal continues to be opposed (or opposed in  part),
                  in  which  case  particulars  must  be  provided  in   the
                  Statement)

             In the event that (c) above applies, the Respondent  shall  set
             out in the Statement those facts which the Respondent  contends
             must to be proved by the Appellant to the required standard  in
             order  for  the  Appellant  to  succeed  in  the  appeal.   The
             Respondent must also indicate whether or not consent  is  given
             with regard to any new matters raised by the Appellant.

           6. The Appellant shall, no later than 13 June 2017 file with  the
             Tribunal and  serve  on  the  Respondent  a  Response  in  the
             prescribed format  which  appears  at  Annex  2  by  means  of
             completion of Sections C and D.

             (a)  confirming  agreement  with  the  Respondent's  Statement
                  (where 5 (c) above  applies)  in  relation  to  the  facts
                  required to  be  shown  in  order  for  the  Appellant  to
                  succeed; or

             (b)   if  the  Appellant  disagrees  with   the   Respondent's
                  Statement, identify the facts the Appellant believes  must
                  be shown (and proved) to succeed in the appeal and  shall,
                  at the same time, refer  to  the  part  or  parts  of  the
                  bundle(s) where the relevant supporting evidence appears.

             (c)  In addition, the Appellant to state if an interpreter  is
                  required and if so in which language.

         THE TRIBUNAL WILL NOT, SAVE IN  EXCEPTIONAL  CIRCUMSTANCES,  PERMIT
         ANY AMENDMENT BY EITHER PARTY OF  THE  CASE  INDENTIFIED  FOLLOWING
         COMPLETION OF DIRECTIONS 5 AND 6 ABOVE.

         A failure to comply with these directions may engage the Tribunal's
         powers under  Rule  9  of  the  FtT  (IAC)  Procedure  Rules  2014.
         Furthermore, the parties will be in  breach  of  their  obligations
         under Rule 2(1) & 2(2) of the 2014 Rules in failing to  assist  the
         Tribunal with its overriding objective to  determine  cases  fairly
         and without unforeseeable delay."

 8. On 2 May 2017, Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit,  on  behalf  of
    the appellants, submitted a  bundle  of  documents.   This  included  a
    skeleton argument, which,  having  set  out  extracts  from  case  law,
    summarised the appellants' case as follows:-

         "[ET's] best interests  are  clearly  met  by  remaining  with  her
         mother, but that is not the end of the matter.  She has  lived  her
         [life] from the age of 4 until 14 in the UK.  This is  the  country
         where she has  grown  up,  developed  and  formed  friendships  and
         relationships within her school  and  community.   This  is  to  be
         contrasted to the situation in Nigeria where  she  has  no  support
         network, and no guarantee of even completing her education so as to
         fulfil her potential.  It is submitted  that  it  is  in  her  best
         interests to remain in the UK.

         Conclusion

         [ET] is a qualifying child and cannot reasonably  be  removed  from
         the UK.  To require her to leave the UK would be in breach  of  the
         Immigration Rules, Article 8 and s55  2009  Act.   Accordingly  her
         mother cannot be removed either.  It is submitted that  the  appeal
         should be allowed."

 9. In her statement within the bundle, the mother, MT, said that  "I  have
    already explained the problems  that  I  have  with  my  ex-husband  in
    Nigeria, and I still maintain that what I have said about him is true".
     So far as ET was concerned, the mother's statement said that "She  was
    only 4 years old when she came.  Since that time she has  grown  up  in
    the UK.  She has attended  nursery  in  the  UK,  following  which  she
    attended primary school, and then high school".  The statement referred
    to ET "preparing for her GCSE's", when she was going  to  be  "studying
    maths,  science,  history,  geography,   PE,   English   language   and
    literature, French, Spanish and Religious Education".  ET was  said  to
    be involved in the activities of a church in the United Kingdom and  to
    have a circle of friends who were said to be "stable"  and  to  provide
    her with support.  The statement referred  to  ET's  knowledge  of  the
    wider world having started only after she arrived in the United Kingdom
    and that she was now "thoroughly familiar with and comfortable with the
    English way of life.  She does not know what life is like in  Nigeria".
    The mother's statement ended by pointing out that the Home  Office  had
    not taken any steps to remove her and her daughter, since the  mother's
    last appeal was dismissed in 2012.

10. ET provided a handwritten letter, which was also  in  the  bundle.   In
    this she said that "Till this day, I still have the fear of going  back
    to Nigeria where my school teachers beat me  severely  because  my  dad
    refused to pay my school fees".  She also said:-

         "I have lived in this country for my whole life and feel like I  am
         part of the country so I find it sad how I'm still not classed as a
         British citizen even though a lot of my childhood memories  are  in
         this country.  I would love for my mum to work and for us to have a
         house that we can call home forever and not to worry  about  having
         to move from house to house.  The thought of me not having my  stay
         scares me."

11. The report from ET's Roman Catholic High School, also  in  the  bundle,
    said that:-

          "ET is generally a polite and thoughtful young lady who is  making
         good progress in many areas.  She now needs to take on  the  advice
         from her teachers contained in this report and  make  sure  she  is
         fully focussed in all lessons.  She must also continue to  try  and
         avoid conflict and dramas with individuals in her  free  time.   If
         she can do this I am sure 2017 will be a calm  and  productive  one
         for her."

12. On 15 May 2017, the respondent provided  a  "Statement  of  Issues  and
    Response" in connection with the forthcoming appeals.   Under  "Section
    A" the respondent stated that she had decided to oppose the appeals  on
    the basis that the appellants did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that they could not succeed "on Article 8 outside
    the rules".

13. Under "Section B", the respondent stated that the appellant  (sic)  was
    entitled to succeed if she proved to the  required  standard  of  proof
    that "the burden of proof is on [MT] to show that there would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration to Nigerian society  and  "the
    burden of proof is on [ET] to show that it is unreasonable for  her  to
    be removed to Ghana (sic) with her mother [MT]".  The respondent stated
    that she continued to rely on the detailed reasons for  refusal  letter
    of 16 August 2016 and that in the view of the Secretary of  State  "the
    factual issues to be resolved at the hearing are as set out above".

14. The reasons for refusal letter of 16 August 2016 set  out  the  reasons
    why the respondent considered that the  appellants  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  So far as ET was concerned,  it
    was noted that at the date of application she had lived in  the  United
    Kingdom for eight years and nine months.  In response to the submission
    that it would be unreasonable to expect ET to return  to  Nigeria,  the
    respondent considered that ET would be returning to  Nigeria  with  her
    mother "clearly the most important person in  her  life".   Her  mother
    "would be able to assist [ET] whilst she re-adapts to life in Nigeria".
     Although ET was enrolled in a school in the  United  Kingdom,  it  was
    clear  from  objective  information  available  that  Nigeria   had   a
    functioning  education  system,  which  ET  would  be  able  to  enter.
    Although ET had not lived in Nigeria since she was 4 years old, she had
    remained in the care of nationals of Nigeria  and  would  therefore  be
    aware, to some extent, of the language  and  culture  of  Nigeria  (the
    official language of which is English).  Finally in  this  regard,  the
    letter stated that:-

         "It is generally accepted that the best interests of a child  whose
         parents are facing removal from the UK  are  best  served  by  that
         child remaining with their parents and  being  removed  with  them.
         This represents the centrality of a child's relationship with their
         parents in determining their well-being."

15. At the hearing, the Judge allowed the  respondent's  representative  to
    admit the written determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baird,
    from 2012, concerning the appellants.   In  that  determination,  Judge
    Baird made adverse credibility findings regarding the claim  that  ET's
    father in Nigeria posed a risk of harm to her.  Judge  Baird  found  as
    follows:-

         "I have particular concerns about the content of the child's letter
         but I must take the view that she was influenced by her mother  and
         indeed was manipulated into writing that letter.  That  is  not  to
         say that I do not accept that the child has  these  fears  or  that
         they are not real to her, but I have concluded that these fears are
         groundless and I do not in  any  event  accept,  even  putting  the
         appellants' case at its very highest, there would be  any  risk  of
         the child being killed by her father and/or stepmother,  especially
         when there is not a shred of credible evidence that her father  has
         shown any interest in taking her away ...  It  is  unfortunate  the
         child had been subjected to anxiety about such a scenario  and  one
         would hope that this can be remedied."

16. Judge Martin noted that:

         "There was no mention  of  that  particular  risk  in  the  current
         letter, but there is the reference to having been beaten  for  lack
         of payment of school fees, and [ET] clearly  is  afraid  and  knows
         little about Nigeria.  That, I find, is because mother has  painted
         a negative picture.  Judge Baird found that she could not  place  a
         great deal of reliance on those express fears and I take a  similar
         view."

    At  paragraph  16  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  disagreed  with  the
    respondent's case, which had been that the best interests of ET lay  in
    returning to Nigeria with her mother.   Judge  Martin  considered  that
    ET's "best interests are clearly to live with her primary carer who  is
    her mother and to be in the UK.  ... [ET] has been in the UK  from  the
    age of 4 till the age of 14 and has no memory of Nigeria.  She is  well
    integrated in school and socially".

17. Having made that  finding,  Judge  Martin  did  not  consider  that  it
    required the appeals to be allowed.  She noted that section 117B(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had  been  interpreted
    by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) and Others v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  705.   That  provision  states
    that the public interest does not require a person's removal where  the
    person (who is not liable to deportation) has a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  In MA, the
    Court of Appeal held that in determining what was reasonable, the issue
    is not solely to be looked at from the child's perspective but requires
    a balancing exercise between what was in the public interest  and  what
    was in the interests of the child.

18. Judge Martin's decision continued as follows:-

         "28. In this case on one side of the balance, are the matters  that
             I have indicated above.  It is in E's best interests to remain
             here and she has been here for more than seven years, which MA
             (Pakistan) accepts is a weighty matter.  She has not only been
             here more than seven years, she has been here more  than  ten.
             She is well integrated, has little knowledge of Nigeria and as
             I have said it is in her best interests to remain.

           29.    However, I have to consider the other side of the balance,
             and on  the  other  side  of  the  balance  is  mother's  poor
             immigration history.  She came as a visitor and overstayed, so
             she has therefore been unlawfully in the  UK  for  almost  ten
             years.  She has made an unfounded asylum claim and  was  found
             to be a dishonest witness.  She committed a criminal  offence,
             an offence of fraud, and she is not  financially  independent.
             I am also concerned that in the conduct of  these  proceedings
             she neither mentioned  the  previous  determination  of  Judge
             Baird nor did she mention her education qualifications.

           30.    Also in Nigeria the Appellants have many  extended  family
             members  with  whom  E  can  build  relationships.   She   has
             grandparents, two  aunts,  two  uncles  and  various  cousins.
             Those family members can offer support and  assistance  and  I
             have not accepted that their circumstances are as described by
             the first Appellant.  Mother is highly educated and I find she
             will be able to secure employment.  As Judge Baird found,  she
             is a resourceful woman.

           31.    I have found that E's fears about  Nigeria  are  unfounded
             and it is in mother's power to protect and reassure her and to
             help her to adjust.  E is a bright, intelligent girl  and  she
             has no  health  issues.   There  is  an  education  system  in
             Nigeria; mother is proof of that, and E will be able to access
             it.  Their continued presence in the UK puts a  drain  on  the
             public  purse,  accessing  education,  health   services   and
             accommodation at public expense.

           32.    On arrival in the UK,  obviously  E  was  too  young,  but
             mother could never have had any expectation that she would  be
             permitted to remain.  Both are Nigerian nationals and  in  the
             same way that British children are entitled to be  brought  up
             in the country of their nationality, heritage and culture, the
             same applies to Nigerian  children.   Nigeria  is  an  English
             speaking country.  There are no other relatives in the UK that
             E has formed a relationship with.  Her  only  relationship  is
             with her mother, and that of course will continue.

           33.    It is of  course  the  case  that  children  move,  change
             schools, change homes, lose contact with friends, both  within
             the UK and moving outside the UK, on a  very  frequent  basis.
             Of course they do so because that is what their  parents  want
             to do, and there is never  any  suggestion  that  it  breaches
             their right to a  private  and  family  life  or  that  it  is
             unreasonable to expect them to accompany their parents.

           34.    All of the factors  that  I  have  indicated,  when  taken
             cumulatively together, I find render it reasonable to expect E
             to go with her mother to Nigeria, and those cumulative matters
             outweigh her best interests.  The only factor on her  side  of
             the scales I find, and I acknowledge it to be a  weighty  one,
             is her ten years  in  the  UK.   However,  all  of  the  other
             considerations point in the other direction,  and  so  I  find
             that it is reasonable for her to go to Nigeria.

            35.     Accordingly,  neither  Appellant  succeeds   under   the
             Immigration Rules, and  for  the  same  reasons  they  do  not
             succeed under Article 8 outside the Rules and the decision  is
             not a disproportionate interference with the Article 8  rights
             of either Appellant."

Discussion

(a) Error of law

19. We are satisfied that the Judge fell into legal error, both as  regards
    the way in which she conducted the Proof of Concept pilot  hearing  and
    otherwise.  Mr Deller, for the respondent, did not seek to persuade  us
    otherwise.  Indeed, he accepted that such errors had occurred.

20. The Proof of Concept letter and the directions issued with it  made  it
    clear that the respondent was expected to identify the  factual  issues
    which, if determined in favour of the appellants, would lead  to  their
    appeals being allowed.  It is quite  apparent  from  the  Statement  of
    Issues and Response of 15 May 2017, read with the reasons  for  refusal
    letter of 16 August 2016, that  the  respondent's  case  on  Article  8
    depended upon the First-tier Tribunal finding, as  a  fact,  that  ET's
    best interests lay in moving to Nigeria with her mother.   Importantly,
    there was no indication in the letter that the respondent  was  seeking
    to support the case that, even  if  ET's  best  interests  now  lay  in
    remaining in the United Kingdom, the particular immigration history  of
    MT was such that  the  Article  8  proportionality  balancing  exercise
    nevertheless fell to be struck in favour of the respondent,  on  public
    interest grounds.

21. It should, therefore, have been apparent to the Judge on  6  July  2017
    that the decision of the respondent's Presenting Officer to put  before
    the Judge and to seek to rely  upon  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Baird from 2012 represented  a  material  shift  on  the
    respondent's part, from her stance as indicated  in  the  Statement  of
    Issues and Response of some seven weeks earlier.

22. It is nothing to the point that the  "starred"  case  of  Devaseelan  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] IAT  702  requires  a
    judicial fact-finder to take a previous judicial  finding  of  fact  in
    respect of an appellant as the starting point for consideration of that
    appellant's current case.   Nor  is  it  anything  to  the  point  that
    appellant MT and her advisers could be expected to know about the  2012
    determination.  The approach taken by the  Proof  of  Concept  exercise
    depended upon the respondent being willing to state to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  that,  if  certain  matters  were  found  in  favour  of  the
    appellants, then the respondent accepted that the  appeal  fell  to  be
    allowed.  On the facts of the present case,  that  manifestly  did  not
    enable the Judge to embark upon a  proportionality  balancing  exercise
    that  placed  weight  upon  (a)  findings  from  2012   regarding   the
    reliability of ET's evidence to Judge Baird; (b) the fact that  MT  had
    made "an unfounded asylum  claim  and  was  found  to  be  a  dishonest
    witness" in 2012; (c) that she had committed "an offence of fraud"; and
    (d) that MT had "neither mentioned the previous determination of  Judge
    Baird nor did she mention her education qualifications"  (paragraph  29
    of the decision).

23. The stance of the Presenting Officer on 6 July 2017 was,  we  consider,
    analogous with the situation where the respondent seeks to  withdraw  a
    concession,  previously  made  in   appellate   proceedings.   In   MSM
    (journalists; political opinion; risk) Somalia  [2015]  UKUT  413,  the
    Upper Tribunal explained that a judge needs to adopt a  broad  approach
    to the issue of whether the respondent should be allowed to withdraw  a
    concession. Amongst other matters, fairness to the litigant  will  need
    to be considered (paragraph 24).  At the very  least,  what  the  Judge
    should have done was to consider  whether,  in  the  interests  of  the
    overriding objective, the respondent  should  have  been  permitted  to
    change her stance.  There is no indication  that  she  considered  this
    point.  Were she to have done so and  to  have  decided  to  allow  the
    respondent to do so, then the appeal should have been removed from  the
    Proof of Concept programme, so as to enable the appellants  to  have  a
    fair opportunity of responding.

24. Furthermore and in any event, we agree with Mr Nicholson and Mr  Deller
    that the Judge fell into error in the way in which she dealt  with  the
    evidence of ET.  In her judgment, the Judge found that ET had not  told
    the truth about her memory of her schoolteachers  beating  her  because
    her father had refused to pay ET's school fees.  It is evident, reading
    the decision and reasons as a  whole,  that  the  Judge  regarded  this
    matter as reflecting adversely on the behaviour of  ET's  mother,  with
    the result that the public  interest  in  removing  the  mother  became
    stronger.

25. ET gave evidence at the hearing.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
    Presenting Officer chose not to cross-examine ET, the Judge should have
    asked ET questions about this aspect of her evidence.  Her  failure  to
    do so was a further error of law.



(b) Re-making the decision

26. The Judge's errors were, we find, such as to require this  Tribunal  to
    set her decision aside.  We do so and proceed to re-make a decision  in
    the appeal.

27. In MA Elias LJ held as follows:-

         "43. But for the decision of the court of Appeal in MM (Uganda),  I
             would have been inclined to the view that section 117C(5) also
             supported the appellants' analysis.  The language  of  "unduly
             harsh" used in that subsection is  not  the  test  applied  in
             article 8 cases, and so the argument that the term is used  as
             a shorthand for the usual proportionality exercise cannot run.
              I would have focused on the position of the child  alone,  as
             the Upper Tribunal did in MAB.

         45.  However, the approach I favour is inconsistent with  the  very
             recent decision of the Court of Appeal in  MM  (Uganda)  where
             the court came down firmly in favour  of  the  approach  urged
             upon us by Ms Giovannetti, and I do not think that we ought to
             depart from it.  In my judgment,  if  the  court  should  have
             regard to the conduct of the applicant and any  other  matters
             relevant to the public  interest  when  applying  the  "unduly
             harsh" concept  under  section  117C(5),  so  should  it  when
             considering  the  question  of  reasonableness  under  section
             117B(6).  I recognise that the provisions in section 117C  are
             directed towards the particular considerations which  have  to
             be borne in mind in the case of foreign criminals, and  it  is
             true that the court placed  some  weight  in  section  117C(2)
             which states that the more serious the offence, the greater is
             the interest in deportation of the prisoner.  But the critical
             point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a  free-standing
             provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so  the
             court  in  MM  (Uganda)  held  that  wider   public   interest
             considerations must be taken into account  when  applying  the
             "unduly harsh" criterion.  It seems to  me  that  it  must  be
             equally so with respect to  the  reasonableness  criterion  in
             section 117B(6),  It would not be appropriate  to  distinguish
             that decision simply because I have reservations whether it is
             correct.  Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case,
             I will analyse the appeals on the basis that the Secretary  of
             State's submission on this point is correct and that the  only
             significance of section 117B(6) is that where the  seven  year
             rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some  weight  leaning  in
             favour of leave to remain being granted."

28. At paragraph 46, Elias LJ held that:-

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise".   Elias  LJ
         then referred to the  guidance  of  August  2015  in  the  form  of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes".  There, it is
         "expressly stated that once the seven years' residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be 'strong reasons' for refusing  leave
         (para 11.2.4)."

    At paragraph 49, we find the following:-

         "However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given   significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

29. Matters have, of course moved on from 15 May 2017, when the  respondent
    issued her  Statement  of  Issues  and  Response.   In  re-making  this
    decision, accordingly, the Upper Tribunal does not find itself  in  the
    same position as that of  Judge  Martin.   We  are  not  bound  by  the
    constraints of the Proof of Concept process. Mr Nicholson therefore did
    not urge us to find that we must allow the appeal, without more, if  we
    find that ET's best interests lie in remaining in the United Kingdom.

30. The fact that ET's best interests do so lie is, we find, manifest.   In
    this regard, we entirely agree with and endorse Judge Martin's findings
    on this issue in her decision.  ET has been in the United  Kingdom  for
    over ten years.  She arrived here when she was only  4.   She  is  well
    advanced in her education in this country.  As a 14 year old,  she  can
    plainly be expected to have  established  significant  social  contacts
    involving friends in school and outside (such as at church).   She  has
    embarked on a course of studies leading to the taking of GCSEs.

31. Conversely, ET has no direct experience of  Nigeria.   Whether  or  not
    there is a functioning education  system  in  that  country,  her  best
    interests, in terms of section 55 of the 2009 Act,  manifestly  lie  in
    remaining in the United Kingdom with her mother  rather  than,  as  the
    respondent contended, returning to Nigeria with  her  mother.   A  much
    younger child, who has not started school or who has only recently done
    so will have difficulty in establishing that her Article 8 private  and
    family life has a material element, which lies outside her need to live
    with her parent or parents,  wherever  that  may  be.   This  position,
    however, changes over time, with the result that an assessment of  best
    interests must adopt  a  correspondingly  wider  focus,  examining  the
    child's position in the wider world, of which school will usually be an
    important part.

32. This is why both the age of the child and the amount of time  spent  by
    the child in the United Kingdom will be relevant  in  determining,  for
    the purposes of section 55/Article 8, where the best interests  of  the
    child lie.

33. On the present state of the law, as set out in MA, we need to look  for
    "powerful reasons" why a child who has been in the United  Kingdom  for
    over ten  years  should  be  removed,  notwithstanding  that  her  best
    interests lie in remaining.

34. In the present case, there are no such powerful  reasons.   Of  course,
    the public interest lies in removing a person,  such  as  MT,  who  has
    abused the immigration laws of the United Kingdom. Although  Mr  Deller
    did not seek to rely on it, we  take  account  of  the  fact  that,  as
    recorded in Judge Baird's decision, MT had, at some stage,  received  a
    community order for using a false document to obtain employment.   But,
    given the strength of ET's case, MT's conduct in our view comes nowhere
    close to requiring the respondent to succeed  and  Mr  Deller  did  not
    strongly urge us to so find.  Mr Nicholson submitted that, even on  the
    findings of Judge Martin, MT was what might be described as a  somewhat
    run of the mill immigration offender who came to the United Kingdom  on
    a visit visa, overstayed, made a claim for asylum that was found to  be
    false and who has pursued various  legal  means  of  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom.  None of this is to be taken in any way as excusing  or
    downplaying MT's unlawful behaviour.  The point is that her immigration
    history is not so bad as to constitute the kind  of  "powerful"  reason
    that would render reasonable the removal of ET to Nigeria.



(c) Observations on the Proof of Concept Extempore Judgment Pilot 2017

35. Before concluding, it may be helpful to make some general  observations
    about the Proof of Concept for the Extempore Judgment Pilot. The aim of
    dealing with immigration and asylum appeals as efficiently as  possible
    is plainly a laudable one. It is recognised  across  the  legal  system
    that the giving of ex tempore decisions furthers that aim.  Any  formal
    attempt to identify and manage in advance those cases  which  may  lend
    themselves to the giving of such decisions will, however, need  careful
    handling. Where, as here, the  immigration  history  of  the  appellant
    involves previous judicial decisions, the appellant and the  respondent
    need to be aware of the stance taken by the other in respect  of  those
    decisions.

36. Both protection and human rights claims will involve the judicial fact-
    finder in making a value judgment, such as whether the appellant  faces
    a well-founded fear of  persecution  or  whether  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights. If
    the 2017 Proof of Concept were to lead to a pilot exercise,  the  cases
    that might appropriately be covered by it would  in  our  view  include
    those where the respondent and the appellant are agreed  on  the  value
    judgment, but not on the facts, so that if the facts are found  in  the
    appellant's favour, the respondent accepts that the appeal falls to  be
    allowed. An obvious category would be where the appellant, if credible,
    faces a real risk of Article 3 treatment, if returned to his country of
    nationality.

37. Another category would be where there is no dispute as to the facts but
    the parties are not agreed as to the result of the application  of  the
    relevant value judgment; for  instance,  whether  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with article  8.  We  have  seen  in  the
    present case how, in this category, care needs to be  taken  to  ensure
    that all the relevant facts are truly agreed.  In  particular,  if  the
    respondent intends to rely upon a particular aspect of the  appellant's
    history, as going to the public interest in removal, then that needs to
    be clearly explained.

38. On the face of it, where neither the facts nor the result  of  applying
    the value judgment to the facts is agreed, it is unlikely that the case
    would be suitable for a pilot project, along the lines of the Proof  of
    Concept.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
We set it aside and substitute a decision of our own, allowing  the  appeals
on human rights grounds (Article 8).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                               Signed


                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President
                               1 February 2018



