
VB (deportation of EEA national: human rights?) Lithuania [2008] UKAIT
00087


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

Heard at:   Field House (by video link with Sheldon Court)
On:         24th October 2008




Before:


                       Senior Immigration Judge McKee


Between:

                                     VB
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A. Mahmood of counsel, instructed by Tanfields

For the respondent:    Mr N.Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


   1. The respondent's power to deport an EEA national is  governed  by  the
      EEA  Regulations  2006,  and  is  much  more  restricted  than  in  an
      'ordinary' conducive case.  Only  if  satisfied  that  deportation  is
      required on grounds of public policy or  public  security  should  the
      Tribunal go on to consider whether deportation  would  contravene  the
      Human Rights Convention.
   2. When a deportation appeal is being considered under paragraph  364  of
      the Immigration Rules (as amended from 20th July 2006),  the  Tribunal
      should consider whether deportation would be contrary to  the  Refugee
      or the Human Rights Convention before considering  whether  there  are
      any exceptional circumstances which outweigh the presumption in favour
      of deportation.  But when the appellant is an EEA national, his  human
      rights should not be the first thing to be considered.


                                DETERMINATION


1.  This is the  reconsideration  of  an  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision  on  3rd  June  2008  to  make  a  deportation  order  against  the
appellant,  a  Lithuanian  citizen,  who  was  sentenced  to  three   years'
imprisonment  for  offences  involving  the   trafficking   of   women   for
prostitution.  The Notice of Decision states that  the  appellant's  removal
under regulation 19(3)(b) of the EEA Regulations 2006 is  justified  on  the
grounds of public policy or public security because the appellant meets  the
criterion laid down at reg  21(5)(c)  that  "the  personal  conduct  of  the
person concerned must represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society."   The
'Reasons for Deportation' letter notes that the appellant has been  assessed
as  requiring  the  minimum  level   of   Multi-Agency   Public   Protection
Arrangements, and that the National Offender  Management  Service  considers
her to pose a low risk of re-offending  and  a  low  risk  of  harm  to  the
public.  Nevertheless, the author of the letter considers the  appellant  to
be "easily led",  and  fears  that  she  might  be  tempted  back  into  re-
offending.

2.  That was not the view of a panel of the Tribunal  comprising  Designated
Immigration Judge Garratt and Mr M.E. Olszewski, who  heard  the  appeal  at
Bennett  House  on  4th  August  2008.   In  a  very  thorough  and  careful
determination, they took account  of  the  Crown  Court  judge's  sentencing
remarks (which included a recommendation for deportation).  HH  Judge  Ensor
found the appellant to have been "acting under very real  pressure"  and  to
have been "corrupted by despicable men."  The panel went on  to  assess  the
likelihood of the appellant's re-offending, and taking account both  of  the
OaSys Report, which gave her "the highest favourable rating  possible",  and
of the very positive assessments by the prison staff,  as  well  as  of  the
appellant's own evidence that she intended to live  a  decent  life  in  the
United Kingdom with her partner and her son  and  to  steer  well  clear  of
anything connected with prostitution, the panel were satisfied that she  did
not pose a risk to the public.  In particular, they were satisfied that  the
appellant did not "represent a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society."

3.  The appeal was allowed "on human rights and  deportation  grounds",  and
this decision was challenged by the respondent, a review  being  ordered  by
Senior Immigration Judge Waumsley on 4th September 2008.  The  greater  part
of the grounds is taken up with the panel's decision that deportation  would
breach the appellant's Article 8  rights.   According  to  paragraph  68  of
their determination, it was only in case they were  wrong  about  the  human
rights claim that the  panel  went  on  to  consider,  in  the  alternative,
whether deportation would infringe the 2006 Regulations.

4.  With respect, that was the wrong way round.  The panel  appear  to  have
been influenced by the guidance in EO (Turkey) [2007]  UKAIT  62,  in  which
the Deputy President explained that under the new version  of  rule  364  it
would first have to be decided whether  deportation  would  be  contrary  to
either the Refugee  or  the  Human  Rights  Convention,  before  considering
whether there were any exceptional circumstances to  rebut  the  presumption
in favour of deportation.  But  that  is  the  pattern  to  be  followed  in
'ordinary' conducive deportation appeals, which are  governed  by  paragraph
364 of the Immigration Rules.  Where the appellant is  a  European  citizen,
it is the EEA Regulations 2006 which govern the exercise  of  the  power  to
deport.   These  are  much  more  restrictive  than  the  power  under   the
Immigration Rules, and should be looked at  before  rather  than  after  any
human rights claim put forward by the appellant.

5.  In the instant case, the grounds (which were adopted and advanced by  Mr
Smart) criticize the panel's assessment of proportionality under Article  8,
and assert that this has affected their scrutiny  of  reg  21(5)(a)  of  the
2006 Regulations, which lays down the  principle  that  "the  decision  must
comply with the principle of proportionality."  There  is  nothing  in  this
contention.  What is  crucial  to  this  appeal  is  the  principle  at  reg
21(5)(c), already referred to above.  This makes the  risk  of  re-offending
the central element in deciding whether a "relevant  decision"  was  rightly
taken.  (There is, of course, case law such as Marchon  [1993]  Imm  AR  384
which holds that a European citizen can be deported even in the  absence  of
a  propensity  to  re-offend,  if  the  offence  which  he   committed   was
sufficiently serious.  But the seriousness of the  offence  in  the  instant
case clearly does not reach that threshold.)

6.  In ordering reconsideration SIJ Waumsley drew attention to  OH  (Serbia)
[2008] EWCA Civ 694, which was not  cited  in  the  grounds  for  seeking  a
review but upon which Mr Smart  understandably  placed  reliance.   In  that
appeal  against  deportation,  the  appellant  was  found  not  to  pose   a
significant risk of re-offending, but the Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the
Tribunal was wrong to allow the appeal simply because of  that.   The  panel
should have paid attention to the guidance in  N  (Kenya)  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
1094, which includes the proposition that,  in  the  case  of  very  serious
crimes, the risk of re-offending is not the  most  important  facet  of  the
public interest.  Other important facets include the need to  deter  foreign
nationals from  committing  serious  crimes,  the  expression  of  society's
revulsion at serious crimes, and the building of public  confidence  in  the
treatment of those foreign citizens who have committed serious crimes.

7.  Both N (Kenya) and OH (Serbia), however, are concerned  with  'ordinary'
deportation appeals where the Tribunal has to apply  paragraph  364  of  the
Immigration Rules.  As  Mr  Mahmood  for  the  appellant  pointed  out,  the
principles in reg 21(5) of the EEA Regulations are  quite  the  opposite  of
those emphasized by the Court of Appeal.  Far from warranting a decision  to
deport in order to build public confidence, reg 21(5)(b)  states  that  "the
decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of  the  person
concerned."  Far from warranting a decision to  deport  in  order  to  deter
others, reg 21(5)(d) states that "matters isolated from the  particulars  of
the case or which relate to considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
justify the decision."

8.  It is not argued for the respondent that the panel  were  not  justified
in their assessment of the appellant as posing no present or future risk  of
re-offending.  The seriousness of  the  crime  committed  by  the  appellant
falls well below the crimes featuring in  cases  like  Marchon  and  Schmelz
[2003] EWCA Civ 29, where the Court of Appeal held that the  deportation  of
European nationals was justified even in the absence of  any  propensity  to
re-offend, and which in any event pre-date the 2006 Regulations.     In  the
instant case, the panel were fully entitled to find that the appellant  does
not "represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat"  such  as
to justify her deportation.  There was in fact no  need  for  the  panel  to
find, as they  did,  that  deportation  would  also  be  a  disproportionate
interference with the appellant's family life in the United Kingdom.


DECISION

The Tribunal's determination allowing the appeal is ordered to stand.


Richard McKee
                                                           26th October 2008

