
CB (Validity of marriage: proxy marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080.

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |
|On 9 September 2008                           |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen


                                   Between

                                     CB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms I Cannell, Solicitor with Nabas Legal Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

There  is  no  exception  in  immigration  cases  to  the  rule  of  private
international law that the validity of a marriage is  governed  by  the  lex
loci celebrationis and on the authority of Apt v Apt [1948] P  83  there  is
no reason in public policy to deny recognition to a proxy marriage.

1.    The appellant is a national of Brazil.  He appealed to an  Immigration
    Judge against the Secretary of State's decision  of  20  February  2008
    refusing to issue a residence card.

2.    The appellant claimed to have entered into a lawful marriage  with  Ms
    Aneta Kowalczyk in Brazil on 10 March 2007.  It was a marriage by proxy
    with neither of the  parties  attending.   The  Immigration  Judge  had
    before him an expert  report  which  among  other  things  stated  that
    marriage by proxy  has  been  valid  under   Brazilian  law  since  the
    Brazilian Civil Code of 1916 (Article  201),  and  is  still  valid  by
    reason of Article 1542 of  the  Brazilian  Civil  Code  of  2002.   The
    Immigration Judge was satisfied from the factual  and  expert  evidence
    including a copy of the original Brazilian marriage  certificate,  that
    the appellant and Ms Kowalczyk had contracted a marriage by proxy which
    was recognised as lawful in Brazil.

3.    The Immigration Judge went on to note that marriages  by  proxy  which
    take place in the United Kingdom are not recognised under  the  law  of
    England and Wales.  He said however that the United Kingdom  recognises
    marriages as if they are valid under the domestic law of the country in
    which they take place, provided they have been executed  properly.   He
    commented that the validity of any given marriage is  not  governed  by
    the law of either party's  domicile.  The  relevance  of  domicile  was
    whether or not the parties had the capacity to enter into the  proposed
    marriage under the law of the country in which they were domiciled.  He
    noted  the  responses  by  the  appellant  and  his  wife  to  domicile
    questionnaires and concluded that at the time of  their  marriage  they
    were both domiciled in the  United  Kingdom.   [In  fact,  the  correct
    finding should have been that they are domiciled in England and  Wales,
    but that is not a material error]. This  indeed  was  a  conclusion  to
    which the Secretary of State had already come.

4.    The Immigration Judge went on to consider capacity to marry  of  those
    domiciled in the United Kingdom. This is governed by section 11 of  the
    Matrimonial Causes Act 1973.  There are four  requirements:  that  both
    parties are over the age  of  18,  neither  is  lawfully  married,  the
    parties are not inter-marrying, and the parties are  respectively  male
    and female.  By implication he found that the appellant  and  his  wife
    met these four criteria and that as a consequence there was nothing  in
    the law of their country of domicile to prevent them from contracting a
    valid marriage by proxy in Brazil. He accepted therefore that they were
    legitimately  married  and  that  the  appellant   was   therefore   Ms
    Kowalczyk's family member. She is a citizen of Poland and it seems  not
    to be contested that at all material times she  has  been  a  qualified
    person within regulation 6 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

5.    The Immigration Judge went on  to  consider  the  application  of  the
    recent decision of the European Court of Justice in Metock C-127/08 and
    concluded that in the light of that  judgment,  whether  the  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom before or after  his wife was an  irrelevant
    consideration, and that the words "accompany"  and  "join"  in  Article
    3(1) of Directive 2004/38 had to be read in a way non-restrictive of  a
    Union citizen's rights.  He concluded that the appellant  was  entitled
    to a residence card and the appeal fell to be allowed.

6.    The Secretary  of  State  sought  reconsideration  of  this  decision,
    arguing that there was a material error of law in the finding that  the
    proxy marriage in Brazil was to be recognised in the United Kingdom, on
    the basis that the Immigration  Judge  had  accepted  that  the  United
    Kingdom was the country of domicile and  the  United  Kingdom  did  not
    recognise marriage by proxy.  It was said that consideration of a valid
    marriage had to take into account the legislation  of  the  country  of
    domicile.  Reference  was  made  to  the  IDIs  chapter  8  (Annex  D2)
    concerning the proper test for and regulations relating to domicile.  A
    Senior Immigration Judge ordered reconsideration.

7.    The hearing before me took place on 9 September 2008. Ms I Cannell  of
    Nabas Legal Consultancy, appeared on behalf of  the  appellant.   Mr  J
    Gulvin appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

8.    Ms Cannell relied upon the reply that she had put in and the  attached
    authorities and also argued that the decision of the Secretary of State
    breached Articles 8 and 12 of the European Human Rights Convention.

9.    Mr Gulvin put in a copy of Mark v Mark  [2005]  UKHL  42.   He  argued
    that for immigration  purposes  it  was  contended  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the importance of  domicile  was  that  it  was
    accepted as being a status which determined the ability  to  marry  and
    under what law a person's marriage should be considered. The  appellant
    and his wife were both found to be domiciled in the United Kingdom, and
    therefore they had no capacity to marry by proxy or to have their proxy
    marriage regarded as valid in the United Kingdom.   It  was  irrelevant
    that the marriage was seen as valid in Brazil. There were two  ways  in
    which it could be determined whether a marriage was  valid,  either  by
    way  of  assessing  the  lex  loci  celebrationis  or  domicile.    For
    immigration purposes it was argued  that  it  was  proper  to  consider
    domicile. The appropriateness in other forms of law  of  the  lex  loci
    celebrationis did not translate into immigration, if a  couple,  as  in
    this case, had made the United Kingdom their domicile of choice in that
    then it was only right that their capacity to marry  should  be  judged
    under that  regime.  It was therefore a question of whether the  United
    Kingdom would accept a proxy marriage and not a question of recognition
    of the validity of the marriage in Brazil.   The  couple  were  not  in
    Brazil.

10.   Mr Gulvin referred to a decision put in by Ms Cannell of  Wilkinson  v
    Kitzinger and Others [2006] EWHC 2022 at paragraphs 15  and  16.   With
    regard to that he argued that for immigration purposes as a  matter  of
    policy it was of importance that if a couple had a domicile  of  choice
    in the United Kingdom,  the  validity  of  their  marriage  was  to  be
    governed by  the  laws  of  the  state  of  choice  and  therefore  the
    Immigration Judge had materially erred.  He referred to  paragraphs  38
    and 39 in Mark v Mark.  This  confirmed  that  capacity  to  marry  was
    determined by domicile.  If there were policy  considerations,  it  was
    such a consideration that the  validity  of  marriage  for  immigration
    purposes was determined by domicile.

11.   By way  of  reply  Ms  Cannell  agreed  that  capacity  to  marry  was
    regulated by domicile but argued that the  position  was  different  as
    between capacity and validity.  With regard to capacity,  she  referred
    to section 11 of the Matrimonial Causes Act of 1973.   The  couple  had
    the capacity to marry and all the criteria  set  out  there  were  met.
    There was no provision of the Act which excluded a marriage  celebrated
    abroad on the basis of a proxy.  She also referred to paragraph 3.1  of
    the relevant IDIs which said that proxy marriages were valid  and  also
    to section 2.

12.   She also referred to  paragraph  15  of  Wilkinson  v  Kitzinger.   In
    addition there was a reference at paragraph 17-067 in Dicey and  Morris
    (13th edition) where it was said that in order to  ensure  certainty  a
    marriage should always be upheld when each party had by the law of  his
    or her antenuptial domicile the  capacity  to  marry  the  other.   The
    marriage should not be seen as invalid for immigration purposes, and if
    it  were  so  argued  there  would  be  a  conflict   between   private
    international law and the United Kingdom common law and also  it  would
    be in breach of Articles 8 and 12 of the Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    She argued that the Secretary  of  State's  guidance  corroborated  the
    Immigration Judge's decision and the Immigration Judge put  forward  on
    behalf of the appellant. By way of reply Mr Gulvin  remarked  that  the
    IDIs were being redrafted to reflect the views that  he  had  expressed
    above.

13.   I reserved my determination.

14.   The interesting issue  in  this  case  is  whether  a  proxy  marriage
    contracted in Brazil and valid under Brazilian law, between two parties
    both of whom were domiciled in the United Kingdom at the relevant  time
    is valid under the United Kingdom law.

15.   I start with the guidance in Dicey and Morris in  the  relevant  parts
    of Rule 66.  This says the following:

         "Rule 66 - a marriage is formally valid when (and  only  when)  any
         one of the following conditions as to the form  of  celebration  is
         complied with (that is to say):


         (1)      if the marriage is celebrated in accordance with the  form
             required or (semble) recognised as sufficient by  the  law  of
             the country where the marriage was celebrated;


         (2)      if the marriage  is  celebrated  in  accordance  with  the
             requirements of the English common law in a country where  the
             use of the local form is impossible;


         or


         ..."

16.   Dicey and Morris go on  to  comment  that  until  the  middle  of  the
    nineteenth century English courts seldom drew any  distinction  between
    the formal validity of a marriage and the capacity of  the  parties  to
    marry.  They held that in both respects validity of a marriage depended
    on the lex loci celebrationis.  From 1858 onwards, however, it seems as
    a consequence of a decision in Brook v Brook (1858) 3 Sm & G  481,  the
    courts began to distinguish between capacity  and  form,  holding  that
    capacity is governed by the law of the  domicile.   Form  is  still  in
    general governed by the lex  loci  celebrationis,  although  there  are
    statutory exceptions.

17.   Dicey and Morris go on to say that a marriage celebrated in the  mode,
    or according to the rights or ceremonies required by  the  law  of  the
    country where the marriage takes place, is (as far as formal requisites
    go) valid.  The English courts give effect to the  principle  that  the
    form of a contract is governed by  the  law  of  the  place  where  the
    contract is made and the local form always suffices.  It  was  said  in
    Berthiaune v Dastous [1930] AC 79, 83:

         "If a marriage is good by the laws  of  the  country  where  it  is
         effected, it  is  good  the  world  over,  no  matter  whether  the
         proceeding or ceremony which constituted marriage according to  the
         law of the place would not constitute marriage in  the  country  of
         the domicile of one or other of the spouses."

18.   As regard marriages by proxy, it was said in Apt v Apt [1947] P 127

         "The celebration of marriage by proxy is a matter of  the  form  of
         the ceremony or proceeding, and not an essential of  the  marriage;
         that there is nothing abhorrent to Christian ideas in the  adoption
         of that form; and that,  in  the  absence  of  legislation  to  the
         contrary, there is no doctrine of public policy which  entitles  me
         to hold that the ceremony, valid where it  was  performed,  is  not
         effective in this country to constitute a valid marriage."

19.   This reasoning from the first instance decision of  Lord  Merriman  P,
    was upheld by the Court of Appeal  at  [1948]  P  83.   Cohen  LJ,  who
    delivered the judgment of the Court of Appeal, having held that it  was
    not contrary to public policy in  England  and  Wales  to  recognise  a
    marriage by proxy which had taken outside England and Wales,  said  (at
    88-89):

         "We are unable to see any  reason  in  public  policy  which  would
         require the English courts, if  they  recognised  the  validity  of
         proxy marriages celebrated outside the United Kingdom, to deny to a
         person domiciled in this country the  right  of  so  celebrating  a
         marriage, provided, of course, that he or she has in other respects
         the capacity to marry  and  does  not  infringe  any  provision  of
         English law."

20.   More recently this view was confirmed  by  Sachs  J  in  Ponticelli  v
    Ponticelli [1958] 2 WLR 439.

21.   This weight of authority in my  view  makes  the  position  abundantly
    clear.  Capacity to marry is regulated by  domicile  but  there  is  no
    suggestion here that the appellant and  his  wife  lacked  capacity  to
    marry.  It is equally clear  that  the  validity  of  the  marriage  is
    governed by the lex loci celebrationis which is Brazilian law and it is
    common ground  that  Brazilian  law  recognises  proxy  marriages.  The
    position is in no sense undermined by what is said at paragraph 3.1  of
    the  Immigration  Directorate's  Instructions  chapter  8   section   1
    (referred to by Mr Gulvin) concerned with the recognition  of  marriage
    and divorce where one finds the following:


         "3.1 Proxy marriages


         Where the law of the country requires a ceremony,  and  a  ceremony
         takes place with the participation of a proxy in that country, then
         the country where the marriage is  celebrated  is  the  country  in
         which the ceremony occurred, not the country from which  the  proxy
         was appointed by the  sponsor.  Thus,  such  a  marriage  would  be
         invalid."

22.    Ms  Cannell  also  referred  to  the  second   paragraph   of   those
    Instructions which say the following:

         "2.      Marriage Overseas


             The recognition of any marriage which has taken place overseas
             is governed by the following:


             .   Is the type of marriage one recognised in the  country  in
                  which it took place?
             .   Was the actual marriage properly executed so as to satisfy
                  the requirements of the law of the  country  in  which  it
                  took place?
             .   Was there anything in the law of either party's country of
                  domicile that restricted his freedom  to  enter  into  the
                  marriage?


         If the answers to the  above  questions  are  respectively,  'Yes',
         'Yes', and 'No' then the marriage is valid whether  or  not  it  is
         polygamous."


23.   The respective answers in this case do  indeed  appear  to  be  "Yes",
    "Yes" and "No" and therefore (clearly there is no issue of polygamy  in
    this case) according to those criteria also the marriage is valid.

24.   Mr Gulvin's argument is essentially  that  whatever  may  be  said  in
    other contexts about the rules governing validity of marriage,  in  the
    immigration context it  is  the  domicile  rather  than  the  lex  loci
    celebrationis that should determine  this,  since,  if  a  couple  have
    chosen as in this case to be domiciled in  the  United  Kingdom,  their
    capacity to be married should  be  judged  in  accordance  with  United
    Kingdom law, and United Kingdom law does not permit marriage by  proxy.
    Mr Gulvin did not cite any authority for this proposition  and  I  have
    been unable to find anything in Mark v Mark to  support  his  argument.
    The issue in that case, as identified by Baroness Hale at paragraph 15,
    is whether a person can be either habitually resident or  domiciled  in
    England and Wales if her presence in the United Kingdom is  a  criminal
    offence under the Immigration Act 1971.  The  paragraphs  to  which  Mr
    Gulvin specifically referred, paragraphs 38 and 39, refer to  the  fact
    that domicile governs a person's capacity  to  marry  or  make  a  will
    relating to moveable property and note its  relevance  with  regard  to
    other matters, and the  comment  is  made  that  this  list  shows  the
    particular importance of domicile as a connecting factor in family law.
     Paragraph 39 refers to the ability of an adult to acquire  a  domicile
    of choice by the combination of coincidence of residence in  a  country
    and an intention to make  his  home  in  that  country  permanently  or
    indefinitely, and examples of this are provided.

25.   I do not see here however any basis for the  argument  that  different
    rules should be applied to the legal framework  governing  validity  of
    marriage as between immigration law on the one hand  and  the  rest  of
    domestic law on the other hand.  In my view the position is clear;  the
    validity of a marriage is governed in this jurisdiction by the lex loci
    celebrationis and not the  domicile  of  the  parties.   Accordingly  I
    conclude that the Immigration Judge correctly decided that,  since  the
    lex loci celebrationis in this case, Brazilian  law,  recognises  proxy
    marriages, the marriage of the appellant  and  his wife is indeed valid
    under English law and as a consequence the relevant requirements of the
    EEA Regulations are met.  His decision  allowing  this  appeal  in  all
    respects is therefore maintained.







Signed                                             Date

Senior Immigration Judge Allen
