

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                        JY (Effect of following AE) Sudan [2006] UKAIT 00084


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 October 2006                            |                             |
|                                              |29 November 2006             |


                                   Before

                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LANE
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between



                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood, Solicitor of Messrs Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

There is nothing in Januzi, Hamid, Gaafar and Mohammed v Secretary of  State
for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5 that discloses any  error  of  law  in
the determination of  the  Tribunal  in  AE  (Relocation-Darfur-Khartoum  an
option) Sudan CG [2005] UKAIT 00101. It was not, therefore, an error of  law
for  the  Tribunal  to  regard  the  country  guidance  issues  in   AE   as
authoritative (so far as indicated in  paragraph  18.2(a)  and  (b)  of  the
Practice Directions), in determining appeals  between  18  May  2005  and  3
August 2006, when HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT  00062
replaced AE as relevant country guidance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Sudan born on  1  September  1976,  entered
    the United Kingdom concealed in a lorry on 11 January 2005 and  claimed
    asylum on 13 January.

2.   On 26 July 2005 the respondent decided that  the  appellant  should  be
    removed from the United Kingdom by way of  directions.   The  appellant
    appealed against that decision to the Tribunal and his appeal was heard
    on 10 October 2005 at Taylor House by  Immigration  Judge  Kaler.   She
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds.
    On 1 November 2005 a Senior Immigration  Judge  decided  under  section
    103A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  to  make  no
    order for reconsideration of the Immigration Judge's determination. The
    Senior Immigration  Judge  noted  that  the  grounds  accompanying  the
    application for reconsideration "represented a lengthy argument" as  to
    the position adopted by the Tribunal in AE  (Relocation-Darfur-Khartoum
    an option) Sudan CG [2005] UKAIT 00101. He considered  that  "no  doubt
    such points can be argued elsewhere".   Reconsideration  was,  however,
    ordered by Sullivan J on 24 November 2005 for the following reasons:

         "It is now clear that the legal argument  (which  is  developed  at
        excessive length in the grounds in  support  of  this  application)
        that internal relocation of Darfurians is unreasonable if the State
        itself is involved in a campaign of persecution in Darfur,  because
        (in summary) that would be  to  endorse  the  ethnic  cleansing  of
        Darfur, was presented before the Immigration  Judge.   She  applied
        the Country  Guidance  cases,  but  if  the  Tribunal  is  not  the
        appropriate forum to consider  the  point  of  law  raised  by  the
        applicant  I  do  not  understand  how  he  can  argue  the  points
        'elsewhere' as suggested by the Senior Immigration Judge."

3.   The nature of the appellant's claim to  be  in  need  of  international
    protection is as follows.  He is a  member  of  the  Berti  tribe  from
    Darfur.  Having sold a number of  sheep  to  members  of  the  Sudanese
    Liberation Army, he was arrested in October 2004 by Government security
    officers and held for 45 days,  during  which  time  he  was  regularly
    beaten.  Released on the condition that he should report once  a  week,
    the appellant decided not to do so and went into hiding.  As  a  result
    of this, the appellant's village was  attacked,  one  of  his  brothers
    killed and the other  brother  taken  into  detention.   The  appellant
    managed to obtain money which he used to travel to Port Sudan, where he
    embarked on a ship.  After disembarking, the  appellant  continued  his
    journey to the United Kingdom by lorry.

4.   Having heard the appellant give evidence, the Immigration  Judge  found
    that there were problems  of  credibility  regarding  his  claim.   His
    description of the events of 10 October 2004 was not  consistent.   Nor
    was his account of how he had come by the money to  finance  his  trip.
    The Immigration Judge did not accept that the appellant  would  have  a
    political profile "on the basis that he sold a few sheep  to  the  SLA"
    (paragraph  24  of  the  determination).   Any   interest   which   the
    authorities might have had in the appellant was, the Immigration  Judge
    considered, no more than a passing one.  The rest of his  account  had,
    she found, been exaggerated.

5.   The appellant was diagnosed as  suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder.  He was also described  in  a  medical  report  as  having  a
    "perfectionist bordering on obsessional pre-morbid personality".   This
    was said to be due to his place as the first child in the family.   The
    Immigration Judge accepted that the PTSD of the appellant could be  due
    in part to his having been driven away from his  village  by  an  armed
    militia, then suffering as he did on  the  sea  journey,  before  being
    locked up in a lorry for several days.   She  noted  that  the  medical
    report was silent about the effects of the  death  of  the  appellant's
    father and the fact that the appellant had  left  his  wife  and  other
    members  of  his  family  behind  in  Darfur.   At  paragraph  26   the
    Immigration Judge found that:-

         "26. This appellant does suffer from moderate depression and  post-
             traumatic stress.  There are facilities in Sudan for treatment
             to be given.  That the treatment he may receive would  not  be
             as advanced as he would receive in this country is not grounds
             for granting refuge in the UK."

6.   At paragraph 27, the Immigration Judge summarised her findings of  fact
    as follows:

         " - The appellant is a member of the Berti;

         - he suffered discrimination at the hands of the authorities;

         - he fled the area after the death of his father and raids  on  his
    village;

         - it may be that he was detained for a brief  period  for  selling
          sheep to the SLA,
         but I do not find that he has a political profile for this reason;

         - he may have been briefly detained, but the authorities  have  no
          further interest in him;

         - he has not been severely beaten, although it is likely  that  he
          suffered some form of lesser physical ill-treatment;

         - he is given to embellishment and exaggeration."

7.   The Immigration Judge considered the Country Guidance determination  in
    AE, as indeed she was bound to do by paragraph 18  of  the  President's
    Practice Directions of 4  April  2005.   She  also  said  in  terms  at
    paragraph 28 of the determination that she had considered the objective
    evidence to which she had been referred by both parties.  At  paragraph
    29, having noted that  the  area  around  Khartoum  contains  some  1.8
    million internally displaced persons, most of  whom  are  from  African
    tribes, the Immigration Judge quoted extensively from paragraph  36  of
    the determination in AE as follows:-

         "To suggest that this appellant on any return and on relocation to
         Khartoum faces a real risk of persecution or indeed a real risk  of
         ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 of the European  Convention  on
         Human  Rights  is  tantamount  to  accepting  that  all  and  every
         internally displaced person within Khartoum faces such a risk.  Had
         that been the case we  are  satisfied  that  UNHCR  with  long  and
         careful knowledge of the area  would  have  so  indicated  by  now.
         Internally displaced persons in the Khartoum area  clearly  face  a
         number of difficulties.  It may be that for some  there  may  be  a
         real risk arising out of the fact that the authorities would target
         them as active sympathisers of armed rebel grounds  or  as  persons
         connected with opposition political groups.  But we  cannot  accept
         that there is a real risk there to this individual  appellant.   We
         are conscious of having to consider this matter on a 'case by case'
         basis as urged by UNHCR.  There is no evidence to suggest that this
         appellant would be perceived as involved with armed rebel groups or
         opposition political groups or that he would inextricably be driven
         to the worst circumstances  for  internally  displaced  persons  in
         Khartoum, wherever they may be."

8.   At paragraph 30 of  her  determination,  the  Immigration  Judge  found
    that, as with the appellant in AE, the appellant in  the  present  case
    would not be perceived as a political  sympathiser  or  supporter,  nor
    that there was a  record  of  him  which  would  be  available  to  the
    authorities in Khartoum.  He would not be singled out  at  the  airport
    and there was no  real  risk  that  he  would  be  targeted,  arrested,
    persecuted or ill-treated.

9.   Finally, at paragraph 31, the Immigration Judge made reference  to  the
    determination in LM (Relocation  -  Khartoum  -  AE  reaffirmed)  Sudan
    [2005] UKAIT 00114.   The  Immigration  Judge  found  support  for  her
    conclusions in the fact that, in LM, the Tribunal had concluded that it
    would not be unduly harsh for a person with a  family  to  relocate  to
    Khartoum.  In the light of these  conclusions,  the  Immigration  Judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

10.   The  appellant's  grounds,  which  accompanied  his  application   for
    reconsideration of the  Immigration  Judge's  determination,  made  two
    basic submissions.  First, it was  asserted  that  the  concept  of  an
    internal protection (or relocation) alternative has no place  in  cases
    of State persecution; at least, where the persecution was as  gross  as
    that said to be carried out  by  the  Sudanese  authorities  and  their
    allies in Darfur.  Secondly, the grounds submitted that, in determining
    what might be regarded as  reasonable  for  the  purposes  of  internal
    relocation, the area of possible relocation must be  one  where  "basic
    norms of civil, political and socio-economic human rights" can be  said
    to exist.

11.  The House of Lords in Januzi, Hamid, Gaafar and  Mohammed  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5 (hereafter  referred  to
    as Januzi) has now shown that both of those submissions  are  wrong  in
    law.

12.  In AE, the Tribunal, at paragraphs 13 and 14 of its determination,  had
    rejected the suggestion that,  where  the  State  is  involved  in  the
    persecution of a person within a particular part of its territory, that
    person cannot in law be said to have the option of internal  relocation
    to another part of that territory.  The House  of  Lords'  opinions  in
    Januzi show that  the  Tribunal  was  correct  to  do  so.  Indeed,  at
    paragraph 21 of the opinions, Lord  Bingham  rejected  the  submission,
    based on the UNHCR guidelines of  July  2003,  that  there  is  even  a
    presumption against internal relocation in such circumstances:-

         "There can, however, be no absolute rule and it is, in my opinion,
         preferable to avoid the language  of  presumption.   The  decision-
         maker, taking account of all relevant circumstances  pertaining  to
         the claimant and his country of origin, must decide whether  it  is
         reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or whether  it  would
         be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  do  so.   The  source  of  the
         persecution giving rise the claimant's  well-founded  fear  in  his
         place of ordinary domicile may be agents of the  State,  authorised
         or directed by the State to persecute; or they may be agents of the
         State whose persecution is connived at or tolerated by  the  State,
         or not restrained by the State; or the persecution may be by  those
         who are not agents of the State, but whom the  State  does  not  or
         cannot control.  These  sources  of  persecution  may,  of  course,
         overlap and it may on the facts be hard to identify the  source  of
         the persecution complained of or feared.  There is, as Simon  Brown
         LJ aptly observed in Svazas v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2002] EWCA Civ  74  [2002]  1  WLR  1891,  para  55,  a
         spectrum of cases.  The decision-maker must do his best to  decide,
         on such material  as  is  available,  where  on  the  spectrum  the
         particular  case  falls.   The  more  closely  the  persecution  in
         question is linked to the State, and the greater the control of the
         State over those acting or purporting to act  on  its  behalf,  the
         more likely (other things being equal) that a victim of persecution
         in one place will be similarly vulnerable in another  place  within
         the State.  The converse may also be true.  All must  depend  on  a
         fair assessment of the relevant facts".


13.  As for the second submission in the appellant's grounds, the  House  of
    Lords emphatically rejected it in favour of a much stricter test, which
    the Tribunal in HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum)  Sudan  CG  [2006]  UKAIT
    00062 has  summarised  (at  paragraph  150  of  its  determination)  as
    follows:-

         "(T)he issue of reasonableness or  whether  conditions  are  unduly
        harsh is a rigorous one (Lord Carswell, paragraph 67);  and  it  is
        wrong  to  decide  this,  as  urged  by  the  Hathaway/New  Zealand
        approach,  by  reference  to  whether  those  conditions  meet  the
        requirements of international human rights law in full.  The  issue
        is whether 'conditions in that country  generally  as  regards  the
        most basic human rights that are universally recognised - the right
        to life and the right not to  be  subjected  to  cruel  or  inhuman
        treatment - are so bad that, it would be unduly harsh to  expect  a
        person to seek a place of relocation' (Lord  Hope,  paragraph  54).
        At most all that  can  be  expected  is  that  basic  human  rights
        standards, in particular non-derigable rights, are not breached."

14.  The first issue  for  this  Tribunal  on  the  reconsideration  of  the
    appellant's appeal is to establish whether the Immigration Judge  erred
    in law in relying upon the determination in AE in reaching her decision
    on the appeal.  Such an error would be established if it could be shown
    that there was anything in the opinions in Januzi which showed that the
    Tribunal had applied an incorrect legal test to the facts found  by  it
    or had committed some legal error in establishing those facts.

15.  Mr Deller, for the respondent, submitted that the reason why the  three
    Sudanese appellants in Januzi had had their  appeals  remitted  to  the
    Tribunal was because there  appears  to  have  been  a  consensus  that
    further evidence had come into being, since AE, which  required  to  be
    considered.  The most that the House of Lords might  be  said  to  have
    thought about AE was that country conditions might have changed in  the
    interim.

16.  The Tribunal considers that, although there is  force  in  Mr  Deller's
    submission, the complete picture is as follows. The Secretary of  State
    in the three Sudanese cases apparently did not demur that  the  appeals
    of two of the three Sudanese appellants should be  remitted.   However,
    he resisted remittal in the third case; it would appear on the basis of
    the adjudicator's strong adverse credibility  findings.   As  noted  at
    paragraph 55 of the opinions, the Secretary of State's agreement in the
    first  two  appeals  was  "on  the  ground   that   the   Adjudicators'
    determinations in these cases were inadequately reasoned, even applying
    the test for internal relocation set out in E and Another  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2004] QB 531".  At paragraph 58, Lord
    Hope considered that, in the case of the third  appellant,  "There  are
    sound reasons for doubting whether the risks  to  which  [appellant  M]
    would be exposed in any event if he were to be expected  to  return  to
    live in a camp in Khartoum were properly explored and  analysed."   The
    determinations in each of the Sudanese appellants' cases in Januzi were
    those of adjudicators.  They all pre-dated  the  determination  in  AE.
    Accordingly, the errors identified in those determinations can have had
    nothing to do with any reliance placed on AE. Nevertheless,  had  their
    Lordships considered that there was any error  of  law  in  AE,  it  is
    reasonable to assume that they would  have  said  so,  given  that  the
    determination in that appeal was cited to them.

17.  This Tribunal has taken account de bene esse of a line of  attack  upon
    AE, which Mr Mahmood did not put forward but which  we  are  aware  has
    featured in other reconsiderations of appeals  of  Sudanese  nationals.
    This is that the Tribunal in AE wrongly equated the  test  of  internal
    relocation with that of whether a person of a particular origin  would,
    on relocation, face a generalised real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.
     This assertion relies in particular upon the italicised rubric,  which
    is not part of the determination, but which features at  the  beginning
    of the reported CG version, and is as follows:-

     "Internal relocation in the Khartoum  area  is  an  option  for  those
        fleeing from Darfur.  The available evidence does not show that  on
        any  such  relocation  every  Darfurian  faces  a  real   risk   of
        persecution or ill-treatment contrary to article 3."


18.  A reading of the determination in AE reveals that the  line  of  attack
    just described is misconceived.   What  plainly  emerges  from  such  a
    reading is that the Tribunal in AE held (1) that as a  matter  of  law,
    internal relocation was not ruled out because the Sudanese State may be
    actively involved in the persecution in question; and (2) that  on  the
    evidence available to the Tribunal, the situation faced  by  Darfurians
    in general in Khartoum was not such as to violate article 3.

19. It is axiomatic that, if the evidence were to have  shown  that  ethnic
    Darfurians were as such facing persecution or Article  3  ill-treatment
    in Khartoum and its environs, then the  issue  of  internal  relocation
    could not even arise. It was  a  common  submission  by  appellants  in
    Sudanese asylum appeals at the time that the evidence showed  precisely
    such a state of affairs. Having reviewed the evidence  before  it,  the
    Tribunal in AE found that matters were in general not so  grave  as  to
    rule out in every case the possibility  of  internal  relocation  being
    available. AE did not purport to go any further  than  this  in  giving
    country guidance.


20. The  fact  that  the  Tribunal  in  AE  was  not  basing  the  test  of
    unreasonableness or undue harshness expounded in R v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department Ex p Robinson [1998] QB 929  on the presence or
    absence of a generalised risk of Article  3  ill-treatment  is  clearly
    shown in paragraph 15 of its determination:-

     "In general terms if there is a safe haven within his own country  for
        a person who has been persecuted in another part  of  that  country
        even with the complicity of the Government then  the  international
        community can expect a claimant to  go  there.   Many  hundreds  of
        thousands of people appear to have been displaced from Darfur as  a
        result of the activities of the militias widely  condemned  by  the
        international community as ethnic cleansing.  If  as  a  matter  of
        fact  they  are  safe  elsewhere  in  Sudan  it   cannot   be   the
        responsibility of the international community to give  them  refuge
        merely because of the abhorrent nature  of  the  policy  which  has
        driven them from their  homes.   We  speak  here  of  the  position
        generally.  Of course, in any individual case there may be specific
        circumstances which would  still  cause  relocation  to  be  unduly
        harsh, but none were identified by the Adjudicator  in  this  case"
        (Our emphasis).


21.   We accordingly find that there is nothing  in  Januzi  that  discloses
    any error of law in the determination of the Tribunal  in  AE.  It  was
    not, therefore, an error of law for other divisions of the Tribunal  to
    regard  the  country  guidance  issues   in   that   determination   as
    authoritative (so far as indicated in paragraph 18.2(a) and (b) of  the
    Practice Directions), in determining appeals between 18 May 2005,  when
    AE appeared on the Tribunal's website as a country guidance case, and 3
    August 2006, when  HGMO  replaced  AE  as  relevant  country  guidance.
    Paragraph 18.2 provides as follows:-

                "A reported determination of the  Tribunal  or  of  the  IAT
    bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated as an  authoritative  finding
    on the country guidance issue identified in  the  determination,  based
    upon the evidence before the members of the Tribunal or  the  IAT  that
    determined the appeal. As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been  expressly
    superseded  or  replaced  by  any  later  "CG"  determination,  or   is
    inconsistent with other authority that is binding on the Tribunal, such
    a country guidance case is authoritative in any subsequent  appeal,  so
    far as that appeal:

        (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and


        (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence."


22.  Without in  any  way  wishing  to  qualify  the  points  we  have  made
    concerning the distinction between the findings in AE as to the Article
    3 situation in general for Darfurians  in  Khartoum  and  the  test  of
    reasonableness in assessing the availability of internal relocation, it
    is pertinent to observe that, in practice, following  Januzi  there  is
    unlikely to be much scope for a claimant  to  show  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to relocate, unless  he  can  show
    that he would face a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment in so  doing.
    We have already noted at paragraph 13 above the  summary  at  paragraph
    150 of HGMO, with its references to the findings of Lord  Carswell  and
    Lord Hope in  Januzi.  Of  importance  also  is  paragraph  20  of  the
    opinions, in which Lord Bingham cites with approval paragraph 28 of the
    UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection of 23 July 2003:-

         "Where respect for  basic  human  rights  standards,  including  in
         particular  non-derigable  rights,  is  clearly  problematic,   the
         proposed area cannot be considered a reasonable alternative.   This
         does not mean that the deprivation of any civil, political or socio-
         economic human right in a protected area will  disqualify  it  from
         being an internal flight or  relocation  alternative.   Rather,  it
         requires, from a practical perspective, an  assessment  of  whether
         the rights that will not be respected or protected are  fundamental
         to the individual such that the deprivation of those  rights  would
         be  sufficiently  harmful  to  render  the  area  an   unreasonable
         alternative."

23.  Also significant are the passages in paragraph 29  of  the  Guidelines,
    concerning economic survival, which were cited  by  Lord  Bingham,  and
    which refer to "economic destitution or existence  below  at  least  an
    adequate level of subsistence."  Furthermore, Lord Bingham regarded  as
    helpful the passage in H Storey The internal flight  alternative  test:
    the  jurisprudence  re-examined  ((1998)10  International  Journal   of
    Refugee Law,  499),  which  refers  to  "economic  annihilation,  utter
    destitution or existence  below  a  bare  subsistence  level";  denying
    "decent means of subsistence"; and the absence of "the real possibility
    to survive economically, given  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    individual concerned".

24.  The relevance of the individual circumstances of the person  concerned,
    in assessing the reasonableness of internal relocation,  brings  us  to
    the main submission which Mr Mahmood sought to advance in  the  present
    case.  This was that the Tribunal in AE had not, in fact,  reached  any
    overall conclusion as to  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  a
    Darfurian to  relocate  to  Khartoum.   Accordingly,  it  fell  to  the
    Immigration  Judge  to  consider  the  matter  by  reference   to   the
    appellant's individual circumstances.  Mr Mahmood  submitted  that  the
    Immigration Judge had failed to do so.

25.  In response, Mr Deller said that the Immigration Judge  had,  in  fact,
    shown that she had carried out such an exercise.  He referred  to  what
    the Immigration Judge had said  about  the  appellant's  mental  health
    difficulties, and the finding as to the treatment he would be likely to
    receive on return (paragraph 26).  Furthermore, the  Immigration  Judge
    had (as this Tribunal has earlier noted) shown herself to be  aware  of
    the need to look at the individual circumstances of the  appellant,  in
    what she had had to say about the determination in LM  (paragraph  31).
    Further reference to the appellant's individual circumstances was to be
    found at paragraph 28.

26.  The Tribunal considers that the Immigration Judge  did  not  fall  into
    legal error in relation to this issue.  On any proper  reading  of  her
    determination, she used the country guidance findings in  AE,  together
    with the evidence that was before her, to reach the conclusion  that  a
    person from Darfur, such as the appellant, would not as such be at real
    risk of Article 3 treatment, whether by reason of the active  hostility
    of the Sudanese authorities in Khartoum or by reason of  conditions  in
    the kinds of places where it might be reasonably likely that  he  would
    have to live.  She then went on to consider whether there was  anything
    in the appellant's particular circumstances that might make  it  unduly
    harsh or unreasonable for him to be expected to relocate to that  city.
    Mr Mahmood, very fairly,  conceded  to  the  Tribunal  that  there  was
    nothing in the evidence before the Immigration Judge to  show  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate.   Therefore,  even
    if, (which we do not accept) the Immigration Judge  made  an  error  in
    this regard, it was plainly not material.

27.  On the findings of fact of the Immigration Judge,  the  appellant  does
    not fall to be treated as a refugee by  reference  to  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006 and related Immigration Rules.  Nor, on those findings,  is  he  a
    person who is entitled to a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection  under
    those Rules. So far as those Rules are concerned, it is noteworthy that
    paragraph 339O(ii) specifically provides that, in examining  whether  a
    part of a country of origin is a place in which a person will not  face
    a real risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  and  in  which  he  can
    reasonably be expected to stay, regard is to be  had  "to  the  general
    circumstances prevailing in  that  part  of  the  country  and  to  the
    personal circumstances of the person" (our emphasis).  The  Immigration
    Judge correctly used AE to inform her finding as to the  first  matter,
    before  considering  whether  the  appellant's  personal  circumstances
    rendered it unreasonable to expect him to relocate to Khartoum.

28.  The determination does not contain a material  error  of  law  and  the
    Tribunal accordingly orders that it shall stand.



        Signed
            Date: 20 November 2006


     Senior Immigration Judge Lane

