
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

              DM (Timing of funding application) Zimbabwe [2006] UKAIT 00088

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Determination Promulgated:

On:  24 October 2006                                       30 November 2006

                                   Before:

    Miss E Arfon-Jones DL, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration
                                  Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Drabu


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                   Against

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr C Yeo, IAS (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


There is no prescriptive time limit for an application  to  be  made  for  a
funding order under section 103 D (3) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002, nor in any  secondary  legislation,  nor  in  the  Practice
Directions.  Paragraph 6 of the CLS Regulations 2005 provides that an  order
under Section 103 D (3) must be made if the Tribunal  allows  an  appeal  on
reconsideration.  There is no requirement for an explanation for any delay.


                                DETERMINATION

History

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe,  who  arrived  in  the  United
   Kingdom on 20th January 2005 and applied  for  asylum  on  arrival.   The
   application for asylum was refused.  An Immigration Judge  dismissed  the
   appeal on both  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  in  a  determination
   promulgated on  25th  May  2005.   At  that  hearing  the  Appellant  was
   represented by the IAS.

2. A section 103A Notice was filed on  2nd  June  2005  on  the  Appellant's
   behalf by the IAS.  However, part D relating to costs was not  completed;
   there was no deletion of any one of the three  options.   Reconsideration
   was ordered on 9th June 2005 by Senior Immigration Judge Gill.

3. The first  stage  reconsideration  was  initially  listed  before  Senior
   Immigration Judges Freeman and  Gill  on  27th  September  2005  but  was
   adjourned pending a review of the country guidance.  On 10th January 2006
   the reconsideration  was  heard  by  a  panel  presided  over  by  Senior
   Immigration Judge Warr, sitting with Mrs J Holt and Mr  T  A  Jones  MBE.
   They concluded that the Immigration Judge had made a  material  error  of
   law and substituted a fresh decision allowing the Appellant's  appeal  on
   both asylum and human rights grounds in line with AA [2005] UK  AIT  0144
   and LK [2005] UK AIT 159.  The IAS made no request for a costs  order  at
   the conclusion of the hearing on the 10th January 2006.

4. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal
   on 17th February 2006, refused by Senior Immigration Judge Warr  on  10th
   March 2006.

5. On 2nd May 2006 the IAS wrote a letter  to  Field  House  in  which  they
   submitted a list of cases, including this case, in which they were  still
   awaiting funding orders.  They asked that such funding  orders  could  be
   forwarded as soon as possible.

6. On 6th June 2006 Senior Immigration Judge Warr  refused  the  application
   as follows:-

           "In this case the Appellant applies for a  funding  order.   The
           Appellant applied for an order of reconsideration on 2 June 2005
           but did not complete part D of  the  application  form.   Whilst
           this might not be fatal it would  require  explanation:  see  GD
           (Funding Orders - restrictions - 2005  Regulations)  Serbia  and
           Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00166.  There has been  no  explanation.
           Furthermore the Tribunal does not recall any application  for  a
           funding order being made at the hearing itself.
           It would appear to follow from paragraph 10  of  RS  (Funding  -
           meaning of "a significant prospect") Iran  [2005]  UKAIT  001388
           that it is necessary to make a application for a  funding  order
           on making the application for an order of reconsideration or, at
           the latest, at the hearing:
                 "10.  Although  it  is  not  directly  in  point  in   this
                 reconsideration  application,  because  the  Appellant  was
                 unrepresented when he made the  application,  it  does  not
                 seem to us that a  failure  to  complete  part  D  of  form
                 AIT/103A would preclude the making of such  an  application
                 at a later  date  although  the  Tribunal  would  no  doubt
                 require  a  cogent  explanation  for  the  failure  of  the
                 Representative properly to complete that part of the  form.
                 It should not be assumed that this would be regarded simply
                 as a formality by the Tribunal.  We note the wording of the
                 note which makes it clear that  an  affirmative  answer  is
                 required "to ensure" that consideration  is  given  to  the
                 meaning of a funding order.  But, we do not read that as  a
                 prerequisite or as a matter which in any  way  fetters  the
                 natural meaning of Rule 33 (1) (b) which  may,  subject  to
                 the note of caution which we have  sounded  above,  in  our
                 view be satisfied if the application is made at any time up
                 to the end of the reconsideration hearing.   (See  Rule  15
                 (5) of the current Practice Directions of the Tribunal)."
                 Accordingly this application is refused."


7. In a letter dated 8th June 2006 the IAS sought a review of  the  decision
   not to make a funding order and gave its reasons in the following terms:-

           "We seek a review of the decision to refuse to  make  a  funding
           order in this case.  The decision is unlawful by way of  section
           6 (2) of the Community Legal Services  (Asylum  and  Immigration
           Appeals) Regulations 2005.  That says:
                 "6 (1) The Tribunal must exercise  the  power  to  make  an
                 order under
                            section  103D(3)   in   accordance   with   this
                 regulation.
                       (2)   If   the   Tribunal   allows   an   appeal   on
                 reconsideration, it must
                          make an order under section 103D(3)."
           This appeal was allowed on reconsideration.  The Tribunal, it is
           contended, has no discretion in this matter.
           In any case there is nothing in the statutory regime,  including
           the Practice Directions, which precludes  an  application  being
           the following  the  final  determination  of  a  reconsideration
           application.  Rule 15 (5) of  the  current  Practice  Directions
           does  not  insist  in  that  regards  as  the  Rule  refers   to
           submissions in respect of the application for  a  Funding  Order
           and not to the application itself.  Following  the  promulgation
           of RS (Funding - meaning of "significant prospect") Iran  [2005]
           UKIAT  00138  such  submissions  would  readily  be   necessary.
           Furthermore, the section  of  RS  relied  upon  by  Mr  Warr  in
           refusing the order is not expressed as providing hard  and  fast
           rules.  Nothing in that passage amounts to a proposition in law.
            If it purports otherwise, it is clearly ultra vires of the 2002
           Act and Regulations referred to above.
           As to cogent reasons for a failure to tick the  appropriate  box
           on the PF244, or to apply for the funding order at the  hearing,
           we  simply  overlooked  doing  those  things.   That   was   our
           administrative error.  We apologise.
           We do nevertheless wonder why the Tribunal would want to deny us
           a funding order in this case.  However the matter is looked  at,
           there was nothing to preclude the granting of the order.  We are
           a charity with no other source of income for our casework.   The
           appeal was allowed.  The Tribunal  prefers  the  Appellants  are
           represented at hearings.  Was there really any point  in  trying
           to deny us funding for this case, incurring the use  of  further
           public funds to resolve the matter?"
8. Senior Immigration Judge  Warr  then  gave  instructions  that  the  oral
   hearing of the review of his decision to refuse an  order  under  section
   103D should be heard before another Senior Immigration Judge  under  Rule
   73 of the  Community  Legal  Service  (Asylum  and  Immigration  Appeals)
   Regulations 2005.

Hearing

9. At the hearing before us at Field House on 24th  October  2006  Mr  Colin
   Yeo, legal representative of the IAS in London appeared on behalf of  the
   Appellant.  Although Mr C Avery,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  was
   present, he was  not  invited  to  partake  in  the  proceedings  as  the
   application  did  not  in  any  way  impact  on  the  Respondent  to  the
   substantive appeal.

10. At the outset Mr Yeo acknowledged that the IAS had  failed  to  fill  in
   the application form correctly.  He also recognised that there  had  been
   no oral application at the conclusion of the  hearing.   Notification  of
   the application had  been  made  by  fax  communication  thereafter.   He
   informed  us  that  this  was  the  usual  practice  and  one  which  was
   administratively convenient for the IAS.

11. He informed us that because of this current application before  the  AIT
   the Home Office had recalled the file which had delayed  the  issuing  of
   the grant of indefinite leave to remain to the Appellant.   It  had  also
   resulted in further unfunded  work  by  the  IAS  which  he  reminded  us
   operated as a charity.

12. Relying on his detailed skeleton  argument,  Mr  Yeo  reminded  us  that
   paragraph 6 of the CLS Regulations 2005 was mandatory.  The  wording  "if
   the Tribunal allows an appeal on reconsideration, it must make  an  order
   under section 103D(3)", did not confer any discretion upon the  Tribunal.
   Its terms were unambiguous; the Funding Order had to  be  made  where  an
   appeal had succeeded on reconsideration.

13. Mr Yeo also relied on the Procedure Rules,  especially  Rule  33(1)  and
   the President of the AIT's Practice Directions.  He also referred  us  to
   the cases of GD, EB and RS.

14. At paragraph 6 of GD the Tribunal had found that  there  would  be  need
   for a "cogent explanation" where an application for funding had not  been
   specified at the outset on the appropriate form.  Mr Yeo  submitted  that
   there was no statutory basis for that assertion.  Nowhere in the  primary
   nor secondary legislation, nor the rules, nor the practice directions was
   there any requirement specified as to the timing of an application.   The
   statutory framework was entirely silent on the timing of  an  application
   for a  Funding  Order.   The  only  limitation  was  the  requirement  at
   paragraph 4 of the CLS Regulations which required  that  a  supplier  was
   acting pursuant to a grant of Legal Representation.

15. Whilst paragraph 15.4  of  the  AIT  Practice  Directions  purported  to
   require that a Funding Order Application under section 103D of  2002  Act
   "specified" at the time at which a reconsideration application was  made,
   Mr Yeo submitted that the President in his Practice Directions could  not
   disapply the requirement of the Procedure Rules or the CLS Regulations.

16. He invited us to approach the construction of  the  statutory  framework
   in a purposeful manner, reminding us that its intention was to discourage
   unscrupulous and incompetent  representatives.   Reminding  us  that  the
   Appellant had won his appeal, there was no discretion to refuse a Funding
   Order.   Financial  implications  had  ensued   from   these   protracted
   proceedings and he urged us  to  order  that  the  Appellant's  costs  in
   respect of the reconsideration be paid out of the prescribed Funds.

The Law

17. The statutory framework is found in the National Immigration and  Asylum
   Act 2002, in the Community Legal Service (Asylum and Immigration Appeals)
   Regulations 2005 ("CLS  Regulations")  and  The  Asylum  and  Immigration
   Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 as amended by the Asylum and  Immigration
   Tribunal (Procedures) (Amendment) Rules 2005, and the AITs  own  Practice
   Directions issued by the President, Mr Justice Hodge.

18. The relevant primary legislation is found in the  2002  Act  at  section
   103D which provides as follows:-

           "103D Reconsideration: legal aid
           (1)   On the application of an appellant under Section 103A, the
                 appropriate court may order that the  appellant's  cost  in
                 respect of the application under section 103A shall be paid
                 out of the Community Legal Service Fund  established  under
                 section 5 of the Access to Justice Act 1999 (c.22).
           (2)   Subsection (3) applies where the Tribunal has  decided  an
                 appeal following reconsideration pursuant to an order  made
                 -
                       (a)  under section 103A(1), and
                       (b)  on the application of the appellant
           (3)   The Tribunal may order that the appellant's costs -
                         (a)    in   respect   of   the   application   for
           reconsideration, and
                       (b)  in respect of the reconsideration,
                 shall be paid out of that Fund.
           (4)   The Secretary of State  may  take  regulations  about  the
                 exercise of the powers in subsections (1) and (3).
           (5)   Regulations under subsection (4) may, in particular,  make
           provision -
                       (a)  specifying or providing for the determination of
                       the amount   of payments;
                       (b)  about the persons to whom the payments  are  to
           be made;
                       (c)  restricting the exercise of the  power  (whether
                       by reference to the prospects of success  in  respect
                       of the appeal at the time when  the  application  for
                       reconsideration was made, the fact that  a  reference
                       has   been   made   under   section   103C(1),    the
                       circumstances of the appellant,  the  nature  of  the
                       appellant's legal representatives, or otherwise).
            (6)  Regulations under subsection (4) may make provision -
                       (a)  conferring a  function  on  the  Legal  Services
Commission;
                       (b) modifying a duty or power of  the  Legal  Service
                       Commission in respect of compliance with orders under
                       subsection (3);
                       (c)   applying  (with  or   without   modifications),
                       modifying  or  disapplying  a  provision  of,  or  of
                       anything done under, an  enactment  relating  to  the
                       funding of legal services..."

19. Section  107  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
   provides that:-

           "107. Practice directions
             (1) The President of [the Tribunal] may give directions as  to
                 the practice to be followed by the Tribunal."

20. The relevant secondary legislation is found at paragraph 6  of  the  CLS
   Regulations 2005 which sets out the  criteria  for  making  orders  under
   section 103D(3) as follows:-

           "General restrictions on power to make section 103D orders


           4. (1)      The High Court or the Tribunal  shall  only  make  a
                 section 103D order in immigration review proceedings  where
                 an appellant is represented by a supplier  acting  pursuant
                 to a grant of Legal Representation.
           (2)   The High Court or the Tribunal shall not  make  a  section
                 103D order in fast track proceedings.
           (3)   Regulations 5 to 8 apply in relation to immigration review
                 proceedings in which the High Court  or  the  Tribunal  has
                 power, under section 103D(1)-(3) and  this  regulation,  to
                 make a section 103D order.


           Criteria for making orders under section 103D(1)


           5. (1)      The appropriate court must  exercise  the  power  to
                 make an order under section 103D(1) in accordance with this
                 regulation.
           (2)   If, upon a section 103A application, the appropriate court
                 makes an order for reconsideration,  subject  to  paragraph
                 (5) it must not make an order under section 103D(1).
           (3)   If the High Court makes a reference under section 103C  of
                 the 2002 Act, it must make an order under section 103D(1).
           (4)   If the appropriate court dismisses or makes  no  order  on
                 the section 103A application, it may make  an  order  under
                 section 103D(1) only if-
                       (a)  there  has  been  a  change  in   any   relevant
                       circumstances or  a  change  in  the  law  since  the
                       application was made; and
                       (b)  at the time when the application was made, there
                       was a significant prospect that the appeal  would  be
                       allowed upon reconsideration.
           (5)   The appropriate court may, on an application in writing by
                 a supplier or counsel instructed by the supplier,  make  an
                 order under section 103D(1) where it has made an order  for
                 reconsideration, but no reconsideration of the appeal takes
                 place.
            (6)  In this regulation, "the appropriate court" means -
                       (a)  the High Court; or
                       (b)  a member of the Tribunal who considers a section
                       103A  application  by  virtue  of  paragraph  30   of
                       Schedule 2 to the 2004 Act.

            Criteria for making orders under section 103D(3)

           6.(1) The Tribunal must exercise the  power  to  make  an  order
                 under section 103D(3) in accordance with this regulation.
           (2)   If the Tribunal allows an appeal  on  reconsideration,  it
                 must make an order under section 103D(3).
           (3)   If the Tribunal does not allow an appeal, it must not make
                 an order under section 103D(3) unless it is satisfied that,
                 at the time  when  the  appellant  made  the  section  103A
                 application, there was  a  significant  prospect  that  the
                 appeal would be allowed upon reconsideration.
           (4)   If, where paragraph (3) applies, the Tribunal decides  not
                 to make an  order  under  section  103D(3),  it  must  give
                 reasons for its decisions.

           Review by Tribunal of decision not to make order  under  section
      103D(3)

           7.(1) A supplier, or counsel instructed by a supplier, may apply
                 to the Tribunal in writing for a review of  a  decision  by
                 the Tribunal not to make an order under section 103D(3).
           (2)   An application under this regulation must be filed  within
                 10 business days after the  supplier  is  served  with  the
                 Tribunal's decision not to make an order,  or  such  longer
                 period as the Tribunal may allow.
           (3)   A review shall be carried  out  by  a  Senior  Immigration
                 Judge who was not the member of the Tribunal, or  a  member
                 of  the  constitution  of  the  Tribunal,  which  made  the
                 original decision.
            (4)  The Senior Immigration Judge may -
                       (a)  carry out the review without a hearing; or
                       (b)  hold an oral hearing, if one is requested by the
                       supplier or counsel.
            (5)  The Senior Immigration Judge may -
                       (a)  make an order under section 103D(3); or
                       (b)  confirm the Tribunal's decision not to  make  an
order.
           (6)   The Senior Immigration Judge must  give  reasons  for  his
                 decision on a review.


           Terms and effect of section 103D orders


           8.(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a section 103D order shall  have
                 effect as an order for payment of all the costs incurred by
                 a supplier representing the appellant in the proceedings to
                 which the order relates,  including  the  fees  of  counsel
                 instructed by the supplier, for which payment is  allowable
                 under the terms of the contract between the Commission  and
                 the supplier.
           (2)   In  relation  to  proceedings  in  which  a  supplier  has
                 instructed counsel, the High Court or the Tribunal  may  in
                 special circumstances make a section 103D order -
                       (a)  in respect of counsel's fees only; or
                       (b)  in respect of the costs incurred by the supplier
                       excluding Counsel's fees
            (3)  A section 103D order must not specify -
                       (a)  the amount to be paid by the Commission; or
                       (b)  the person or persons to whom payment is  to  be
made.

           And the Commission shall determine those matters  in  accordance
           with the terms of its contract with the supplier. "

21. The 2005 Procedure Rules also  provide  for  the  arrangements  for  the
   making of a funding order as follows:-

           "Orders for funding on section 103A applications


           28A.(1) This rule applies where a section 103A  application  has
           been made by
                 an appellant in relation to an appeal decided  in  England,
                 Wales or Northern Ireland.
           (2)   If an immigration judge, when he considers a section  103A
                 application, makes an order under section  103D(1)  of  the
                 2002 Act, the Tribunal must send a copy of that order to -
                       (a)  the appellant's representative; and
                       (b)  the relevant funding body.
           (3)   If, pursuant to regulations under section 103D of the 2002
                 Act, the appellant's representative applies  for  an  order
                 under section 103D(1) of the 2002 Act where an  immigration
                 judge has made an order for reconsideration  of  an  appeal
                 but the reconsideration does not proceed -
                       (a)   the   immigration   judge   may   decide   that
                       application without a hearing; and
                       (b)  the Tribunal must sent notice of  his  decision
                 to -
                            (i)   the appellant's representative; and
                            (ii)  if  he  makes  an  order  under   section
                            103D(1), the relevant funding body.
            (4)  In a case to which rule 27(5) applies, the  Tribunal  must
                 not send an order  or  decision  under  this  rule  to  the
                 appellant's representative until either -
                       (a)  the respondent has notified the  Tribunal  under
                       rule  27(5)(c)  that  it  has  served  the  documents
                       mentioned in rule 27(5)(b) on the appellant; or
                       (b)  the Tribunal has served those documents  on  the
                       appellant under rule 275(d).
           (5)   In this rule, "relevant funding body" has the same meaning
                 as in rule 33.

            Orders for funding on reconsideration

            33.(1)     This rule applies where -
                       (a)   the  Tribunal  has   reconsidered   an   appeal
                       following a section  103A  application  made  by  the
                       appellant  in  relation  to  an  appeal  decided   in
                       England, Wales or Northern Ireland; and
                       (b)  the  appellant's  representative  has  specified
                       that he seeks an order under section 103D of the 2002
                       Act for his costs to be  paid  out  of  the  relevant
                       fund.
           (2)   The Tribunal must  make  a  separate  determination  ("the
                 funding determination") stating whether it orders that  the
                 appellant's costs -
                         (a)    in   respect   of   the   application    for
reconsideration; and
                       (b)  in respect of the reconsideration,
                 are to be paid out of the relevant fund.
            (3)  The Tribunal must send the funding determination to -
                       (a)  the appellant's representative; and
                       (b)  if the Tribunal has made an order under  section
                       103D, the relevant funding body.
           (4)   Where the determination of the reconsidered  appeal  ("the
                 principal determination") is served in accordance with rule
                 23, the Tribunal must not send the funding determination to
                 the appellant's representative until -
                       (a) the respondent has notified  the  Tribunal  under
                       rule  23(5)(b)  that  it  has  served  the  principal
                       determination on the appellant; or
                       (b)   the   Tribunal   has   served   the   principal
                       determination on the appellant under rule 23(6)
           (4A)  Where, in accordance with regulations under  section  103D
                 of the 2002 Act,  a  senior  immigration  judge  reviews  a
                 decision by the Tribunal not to make an order under section
                 103D(3), the Tribunal must send notice of the decision upon
                 that review to -
                       (a)  the appellant's representative; and
                       (b) if the senior immigration judge  makes  an  order
                       under section 103D(3), the relevant funding body.
            (5)  In this Rule -
                       (a)  "relevant fund" means -
                            (i)   in  relation  to  an  appeal  decided  in
                            England or Wales, the Community  Legal  Service
                            Fund established under section 5 of the  Access
                            to Justice Act 1999[7];
                            (ii)  in  relation  to  an  appeal  decided  in
                            Northern Ireland, the  fund  established  under
                            paragraph 4(2)(a) of Schedule 3 to  the  Access
                            to Justice (Northern  Ireland)  Order  2003[8];
                            and
                       (b)  "relevant funding body" means -
                            (i)  in relationto an appeal decided in England
                            or Wales, the Legal Services Commission;
                            (ii)  in  relation  to  an  appeal  decided  in
                            Northern Ireland, the  Northern  Ireland  Legal
                            Services Commission."

22. The Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal's  Practice  Directions  also  make
   provision for Funding Orders in the following terms:-

           "15  Legal aid on reconsideration


           15.1  The relevant statutory provisions concerning the provision
                 of legal aid in respect of the reconsideration  of  appeals
                 (other than fast track  appeals)  decided  in  England  and
                 Wales are to be found in:
                       (a)  section 103D (as inserted by section  26(6)  of
           the 2004 Act);
                       (b)  rule 28A (orders for  funding  of  section  103A
                       applications)  (as  inserted  by   the   Asylum   and
                       Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  (Amendment)  Rules
                       2005)  and   rule   33   (orders   for   funding   on
                       reconsideration);
                       (c)   the  Community  Legal   Service   (Asylum   and
                       Immigration  Appeals)  Regulations  2005  ("the   CLS
                       Regulations").
           15.2  On an application under section 103A which is  dealt  with
                 by an immigration judge under the filter provision referred
                 to in paragraph 13.3, the immigration judge  has  power  to
                 make an order under section 103D for the appellant's  costs
                 to be paid out of the CLS fund ("a funding  order").   That
                 power  is,  however,  exercisable  only  in  the  following
                 circumstances:
                       (a)  where the immigration judge dismisses  or  makes
                       no order on the section 103A application, that  judge
                       may make a funding order only where there has been  a
                       change in relevant circumstances or a change  in  the
                       law since the application was made and  at  the  time
                       the application was made,  there  was  a  significant
                       prospect  that  the  appeal  would  be  allowed  upon
                       reconsideration (regulation 5(4));
                       (b) where the immigration judge makes  an  order  for
                       reconsideration but, in the event, no reconsideration
                       takes place (e.g. because  the  immigration  decision
                       appealed against is withdrawn) (regulation 5(5)).
           15.3  A funding order of the kind described in paragraph 15.2(b)
                 can be made only on application by a supplier  (as  defined
                 in the  CLS  Regulations)  or  counsel  instructed  by  the
                 supplier (regulation 5(5)).
           15.4  Rule 33 (orders for funding on  reconsideration)  requires
                 the Tribunal that has reconsidered  an  appeal  to  make  a
                 funding determination, where the appellant's representative
                 has specified in the application for  reconsideration  that
                 he is seeking a funding order.  The  funding  determination
                 is separate from the determination of the appeal itself.
           15.5  Unless it directs otherwise, the Tribunal shall  hear  any
                 submissions as to such as order at the  conclusion  of  the
                 proceedings on the reconsideration.
           15.6  If the Tribunal allows the appeal on  reconsideration,  it
                 is required by regulation 6(2) to make a funding order.  If
                 it does not allow the appeal, the Tribunal must not make  a
                 funding order unless it is satisfied that, at the time when
                 the appellant made the section 103A application, there  was
                 a significant prospect that the  appeal  would  be  allowed
                 upon reconsideration (regulation 6(3)).
           15.7  The Tribunal must give reasons where  it  decides  not  to
                 make a funding order, following  a  reconsideration  of  an
                 appeal  (regulation  6(4)).    A   supplier,   or   counsel
                 instructed by supplier, may apply under regulation 7 for  a
                 review of such a decision.  The review will be carried  out
                 by a senior immigration judge, who will decide  whether  to
                 hold a hearing, if one is requested.
           15.8  It should be noted that the power to make a funding  order
                 in the circumstances described in paragraph 15.2(b)  covers
                 only the costs in respect of the  review  application;  not
                 any costs incurred  in  connection  with  preparing  for  a
                 reconsideration that does not, in the  event,  take  place.
                 In certain circumstances, it may  be  inappropriate  for  a
                 supplier or counsel to be  denied  a  funding  order  which
                 would cover the costs of preparing for the reconsideration.
                  In an  appropriate  case,  therefore,  the  Tribunal  will
                 consider representations as to whether  it  should  make  a
                 decision by consent on the appeal following reconsideration
                 (whether or not involving a hearing), so as to  enable  the
                 Tribunal to make a funding order under section  103D(3)  in
                 respect of the review application and the  reconsideration,
                 notwithstanding  that  it  may  not  otherwise  have   been
                 necessary to undertake the reconsideration.
           15.9  A funding order can only be made where there has  been  an
                 application for an order under section 103A(1) (see section
                 103D(2)(b)).  Accordingly, a funding order may not be  made
                 in a case described in paragraph 14.6 or  paragraph  14.11.
                 Nor can such an order  be  made  in  a  case  described  in
                 paragraph 14.1 where a pending application to  the  IAT  is
                 treated  as  an  application  under  section  103A(1)  (see
                 paragraph  14.5  and  article  6(5)  of  the   Commencement
                 Order)."

23. Senior Immigration Judge Warr in his  determination  of  6th  June  2006
   refusing the application for a  funding  order  referred  to  two  recent
   reported cases promulgated on the subject of Funding Orders.

24. Reference  was  made  to  GD  (Funding  Orders  -  restrictions  -  2005
   Regulations) Serbia and Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00166 and RS  (Funding  -
   meaning of "a significant prospect") Iran [2005] UKAIT 001388.

25. In the case of RS the panel, having reminded itself  that  regulation  6
   of the CLS Regulations provides that the  Tribunal  must  make  an  order
   under  section  103D(3)  where  the  Tribunal   allows   an   appeal   on
   reconsideration, went on to  consider  the  mode  of  application  for  a
   funding  order.   The  Tribunal  at  paragraph  5  of  the  determination
   considered the method of application as follows:-

           "These regulations are silent as to the mode of application  for
           a funding order which is the subject of a specific provision  in
           the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  at
           Rule 33.  The only part of those  rules  which  relates  to  the
           making of the application is that contained in subparagraph 1 of
           Rule  33.   Rule  33(1)(b)  merely  refers  to  an   appellant's
           representative having "specified" that he seeks an  order  under
           section 103D of the 2002 Act for his costs to be paid out at the
           relevant fund."

26. At paragraph 9 of the determination the Tribunal stated:-

           "It does not appear to us, having regard to  the  provisions  of
           Rule 33(1) of the  2005  Procedure  Rules,  that  there  is  any
           limitation in point of time as to the making of  an  application
           for  a  funding  order.   All  that  is  required  is  for   the
           appellant's representatives to "specify" that he seeks  such  an
           order under section 103D of the 2002 Act."

27. The Tribunal considered the  timing  of  making  an  application  for  a
   Funding Order in the case of GD, albeit that on the particular  facts  of
   that case the Tribunal had no power  to  make  a  Funding  Order  as  the
   Appellant's representative was not a supplier acting pursuant to a  grant
   of Legal Representation.  It nevertheless at paragraph 6  considered  the
   timing of an application for a Funding Order in the following terms:-

           "We took the view that the  fact  that  the  application  for  a
           funding order had not been made in the application form  as  not
           fatal as it is clear from the case of RS (Funding -  meaning  of
           "significant"  prospect)  [2005]  UKAIT  138,  that   where   an
           application for review  is  successful  and  reconsideration  is
           ordered, an application for funding under s103D(3) may  be  made
           at any time up to the end of the substantive reconsideration  of
           the appeal.  But where the application for review was made by  a
           legal representative rather than the Appellant in person,  there
           will need to be a cogent explanation  why  the  application  for
           funding was not specified at the outset on the form AIT/103A."

Conclusions

28. It is incontrovertable that the CLS  Regulations  require  at  paragraph
   6(2) that the Tribunal must make a  funding  order  where  an  appeal  is
   allowed on reconsideration.  It is clear that where a request is made for
   a funding order that the  Tribunal  has  no  discretion  to  refuse  that
   request if the relevant criteria are met  namely  that  the  supplier  is
   acting pursuant to a grant of Legal Representation.

29. There is no prescribed form for making a request  for  a  funding  order
   under section 103D of the 2002 Act.   Rule  33  of  the  Procedure  Rules
   states that  a  Funding  Order  can  be  granted  where  the  Appellant's
   representative has "specified" that he seeks an order.  The  case  of  RS
   Iran reinforces that position.

30. The AIT's Practice Directions at paragraph 15.4 appear to  require  that
   a Funding Order application under section 103D of the Act is  "specified"
   at the time at which the reconsideration application is  made.   However,
   we note that the Procedure Rules do not require that the Funding Order be
   sought  in  the  application  for  reconsideration.    Indeed   no   such
   requirement exists in the Procedure Rules, nor in the CLS Regulation, nor
   in the 2002 Act itself.  Section 107 of the 2002 Act does confer a  power
   on the President of the AIT to make practice directions  to  provide  for
   the practice to be followed by the Tribunal.  We accept Mr Yeo's argument
   that section 107 does not enable the President to override or in any  way
   disapply the requirements of the Procedure Rules nor the CLS Regulations.
    No such requirement as to timing of the application for a Funding  Order
   exists in any of the primary or secondary legislation and the requirement
   at paragraph 5.4 of the Practice Directions therefore exceeds the  powers
   conferred on the President by section 107 of the 2002 Act.  The  Practice
   Directions can not restrict the powers contained in Rule 33.

31. Similarly the requirement in RS that there be cogent reasons given by  a
   representative for making a late request for a Funding Order has no basis
   in any of the legislative framework.  The only legal requirement is  that
   they representative "specifies" that a Funding Order is sought.

32. Whilst administrative convenience would suggest that  a  request  for  a
   Funding Order be made at the time of the application for reconsideration,
   there is no legislative basis for that requirement.  Excessive  delay  in
   requesting funding could, in some circumstances, amount to  an  abuse  of
   procedure but each case would  inevitably  turn  on  its  own  particular
   facts.

33. Having found that there is no prescriptive time limit expressed  in  any
   of the statutory framework applying to Funding Orders, we would add  that
   there is an important public interest aspect to this matter.  The purpose
   of the legislation in respect of  Funding  Orders  is  clearly  to  deter
   unscrupulous and incompetent representatives from pursuing  unmeritorious
   applications.   However,  the  Tribunal  would  not  wish  to  discourage
   appellants from the benefit of legal representation by imposing  an  over
   restrictive approach to Funding Orders.  The Tribunal welcomes and  would
   wish to facilitate competent legal representation in the cases before it.



Decision

34. We find that the  CLS  Regulations  required  the  Tribunal  to  make  a
   Funding Order as the appeal had  been  allowed  on  reconsideration.   We
   further find that there is no legislative basis for imposing a time limit
   to that application, albeit files need to be cleared within a three month
   period.

35. Accordingly we order pursuant to section 103D(3) of the  2002  Act  that
   the Appellant's costs  in  respect  of  the  reconsideration  proceedings
   including the preparation for and representation at  the  review  hearing
   shall be paid out of the prescribed Fund.




                                             E ARFON-JONES, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
