
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Aziz (NIAA 2002 s 104(4A): abandonment) [2020] UKUT 00084 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2020                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |................              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                 rashid aziz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. E. Nicholson, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Where a person brings an appeal under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and is then given leave  to  remain  in  the
United Kingdom, the effect of section 104(4A) is to cause the appeal  to  be
treated as abandoned (subject  to  section  104(4B)),  whether  or  not  the
appeal was pending on the date of the grant of leave.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, arrived in the United Kingdom  in
    2008, with leave to enter.  Leave to remain was given to the  appellant
    on various occasions; but on 5 May 2016,  the  appellant's  application
    for indefinite leave to remain was refused by the  respondent.   On  14
    February 2018, the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain  on
    the basis of long residence.  That application  was  also  refused  and
    generated an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on human rights grounds.

2.   In a previous application for leave, the appellant had  declared  self-
    employed income of over �12,600 from 1  October  2010  to  28  February
    2011.  Records from Her Majesty's Revenue &  Customs,  however,  showed
    that on 21 February 2017 no self-employed earnings had been declared to
    them.  The respondent did not accept the appellant's  explanation  that
    he had been under the misapprehension that his tax from self-employment
    had been paid under the PAYE system.   As  a  result,  the  appellant's
    application for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence was refused under paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules.
    The respondent also did not consider that the appellant met  the  terms
    of paragraph 276B of the Rules, or any  other  provision  thereof,  and
    that the appellant was not assisted by Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal,
    following a hearing in  Birmingham  on  5  December  2018.   The  judge
    considered it to be:-

     "a  bizarre  coincidence  that  the  one  year  that  he  inadvertently
         understated his self-employed earnings to HMRC, and the  only  time
         he had self-employed earnings, is the year that without the  higher
         figure being provided in his Tier 1 application he would  not  have
         met  the  threshold  to  achieve  the  points  necessary  for   his
         application to succeed" (paragraph 14).

4.   The judge went on to explain why he  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    explanation that the appellant considered the tax had  been  paid  from
    PAYE.  The judge noted that the appellant had used a friend to complete
    his tax return.  The friend  had  "no  formal  accountancy  experience.
    Apparently he is no longer contactable and  so  unable  to  provide  an
    explanation for his error" (paragraph 16).

5.   At paragraph 18,  the  judge  stated  that  he  was  satisfied  on  the
    evidence presented that the respondent had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof of showing the appellant was dishonest in the figures provided to
    HMRC.  The judge then turned to the issue  of  the  appellant's  family
    life.

6.   The judge noted  that  the  appellant  was  now  married  and  had  two
    children.  The  elder  child  had  health  issues,  for  which  he  was
    receiving therapy.  The judge was unpersuaded that the appellant  would
    need the support of  family  in  Pakistan,  in  order  to  re-establish
    himself there, given that he had "established himself in the UK without
    the benefit of cultural familiarity or such  support"  (paragraph  21).
    Neither the appellant nor his wife had leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Ordinarily, both children would  be  expected  to  return  to
    Pakistan, with their parents.  The judge found  that,  although  health
    provision for the appellant's son might not be to the same standard  or
    as readily available as in the United Kingdom,  the  evidence  did  not
    show that support did not exist.  The judge said he was  aware  from  a
    previous case that there was  a  centre  in  Pakistan  devoted  to  the
    condition from which the son  suffered  (paragraph  23).  Whilst  there
    would be difficulties in the appellant  and  his  family  returning  to
    Pakistan, the evidence was not  such  as  to  show  that  it  would  be
    contrary to the best interests of the child concerned for the family to
    return, to such an extent as to outweigh the  public  interest  in  the
    enforcement of immigration control (paragraph 24).

7.   At paragraph 25, the judge concluded by noting that  children  move  at
    the behest of their parents between countries and continents on a daily
    basis, with children being expected to make the necessary  adaptations.
    He found that the appellant's children could, by the same token, adapt,
    notwithstanding the health issue relating to one of the children.

8.   Permission to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  sought  on  three
    grounds.  In a decision of 17 January  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refused permission on those grounds.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not recorded in his decision  that  the  appellant's  current
    accountant had attended and given evidence, the First-tier Tribunal did
    not consider that to be material.  The accountant was  reliant  on  the
    account provided to him  by  the  appellant  and  his  evidence  merely
    demonstrated what was common ground; namely, that the appellant was now
    up-to-date with  his  tax  affairs.   The  judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant failed to provide evidence of the  absence  of  provision  in
    Pakistan for the medical condition of the elder child.  It was on  that
    basis, rather than of any specialist knowledge of the judge, that  this
    point was resolved against the appellant.  Finally, it was not arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had ignored  relevant  case  law  in
    finding that the children, including one who had lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years,  could  be  expected  to  return  to
    Pakistan with their parents.

9.   The appellant renewed his application for permission to  appeal  before
    the Upper Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal in
    a decision dated 3 April 2019.  The Upper  Tribunal  did  not  consider
    there was an arguable error in  relation  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's handling of the issue relating  to  paragraph  322(5)  and  the
    problem regarding the appellant's tax return.  Although the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had noted, in reaching his decision, that there  was  to
    his knowledge a centre in Pakistan that dealt with the medical  problem
    of the appellant's son, the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  that  it  was
    permissible for a judge to use judicial knowledge, given that what  the
    judge  said  was  correct  and  that  this  was  an  issue   concerning
    information in the public sphere, which would have  been  open  to  the
    appellant to find and produce.  Dealing with the ground  raised  before
    the Upper Tribunal to the effect that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
    not properly considered section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, the Upper Tribunal considered it  was  plain  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had reached the conclusion that it  would
    be reasonable for the elder  son,  as  a  "qualifying  child"  for  the
    purposes of Part 5A of the 2002 Act, to leave the United Kingdom.

10.  On 12 April 2019, the appellant's solicitors applied on his behalf  for
    permission to bring judicial  review  under  CPR  54.7A  to  quash  the
    refusal by the Upper Tribunal of permission to appeal against the First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   The  grounds  of  application  were
    drafted by Mr Nicholson.  They critiqued the way  in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge, who refused permission to appeal, had  dealt  with  the
    three grounds of challenge  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.  The application also contended that the Upper Tribunal Judge
    had erred in finding that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not strayed
    "outside  the  range"  of  findings  concerning  Article  8  that  were
    "reasonably available ... on the evidence".

11.  So far as concerned CPR 54.7A(7)(b), which  requires  there  to  be  an
    important point of principle  or  practice  or  some  other  compelling
    reason to hear the judicial review, Mr  Nicholson's  grounds  submitted
    that the Upper  Tribunal's  errors  constituted  "important  points  of
    principle and practice relevant to the correct approach to be taken  in
    consideration of applications for permission  to  appeal".   There  was
    also said to be a compelling reason to grant permission, which  related
    to the prospects of the appellant's son being removed from  the  United
    Kingdom in circumstances which the Court of Appeal, in a case  said  to
    be directly analogous in respect of the son's  medical  condition,  had
    considered to be "little short of catastrophic".

12.  On 7 May 2019, the respondent granted  the  appellant  and  his  family
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 7 November  2021.   We  are
    not aware it is contended on behalf of the appellant that  he  was  not
    promptly informed by the respondent of the grant of leave.    The Upper
    Tribunal became aware of the grant only upon receipt of a  letter  from
    the respondent dated 2 October 2019.

13.  On 19 July 2019, Sir Ross Cranston, sitting as  a  Judge  of  the  High
    Court, granted permission to apply for judicial review under CPR 54.11,
    54.12.  He considered that there were "reviewable errors" in the  Upper
    Tribunal's reasons for refusing permission to appeal  and  that  errors
    marred the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14.  Consequent upon the grant of permission, Master Gidden, on 3  September
    2019, made an order quashing the Upper Tribunal's  decision  to  refuse
    permission to appeal.

15.  On 13 September 2019, the  Vice-President,  unaware  of  the  grant  of
    leave to the appellant and his family, issued  a  notice  stating  that
    permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    was granted by the Upper Tribunal.  A  notice  of  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal was sent on 23 September, for a hearing  on  24  October
    2019.

16.  Following receipt of the respondent's communication of 7 October  2019,
    that leave had been granted, a Lawyer of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  acting
    pursuant to delegated authority, issued a notice  on  8  October  2019,
    stating that the appellant's appeal was treated as abandoned,  pursuant
    to section 104(4A) of the 2002 Act, and that section  104(4B)  did  not
    apply.  Section 104(4A) and (4B) read as follows:-

              "...


         (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is
             in the United Kingdom shall be treated  as  abandoned  if  the
             appellant is granted leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom (subject to subsection (4B)).


         (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far  as  it
             is brought on a ground specified in section 84(1)(a) or (b) or
             84(3) (asylum or humanitarian protection) where the appellant-


             (a)  ...


             (b)  gives  notice,  in  accordance  with  Tribunal  Procedure
                  Rules, that he wishes to pursue the appeal in so far as it
                  is brought on that ground.


         ...".


17.  The Upper Tribunal Lawyer noted that the  appellant's  appeal  was  not
    based on asylum or humanitarian protection grounds  and  that,  in  any
    case, the appellant had not provided any such notice.

18.  On 14 October 2019, the appellant's solicitors (the same  ones  as  had
    acted hitherto in the appeal and in the judicial review) wrote  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The solicitors submitted that the appellant's appeal:-

     "should not be treated as abandoned.  By the  operation  of  subsection
         104A(1)(b) our client's appeal ceased to  be  pending  on  4  April
         2019,  when  the  Upper  Tribunal  refused  his   application   for
         permission to appeal.

     The respondent's grant of leave to remain to our client on 7  May  2019
         therefore did not have any effect on our client's appeal, since  he
         did not have any appeal at the time of the  grant  of  leave.   The
         appellant's appeal only came  into  existence  following  the  High
         Court's decision of 3 September 2019".

19.  The letter made reference to the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  Saimon
    (Cart Review: "pending") [2017] UKUT 00371, in which the Upper Tribunal
    said:-

     "We should say that nothing decided here should be taken as a  decision
         as to whether an appeal is pending after a decision  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal refusing permission to appeal has been given but before it
         has been quashed in any  judicial  review  proceedings  brought  in
         respect of it.  During that time we agree with Mr Saini that it may
         be rather difficult to say that the appeal is pending: but we  make
         no decision on that" (paragraph 7).

20.  The letter of 14 October 2019 ended by submitting that,  applying  this
    dictum, "the appellant achieves access to justice and  the  opportunity
    via a fair hearing to  challenge  the  respondent's  decision  that  he
    practiced deception.".

21.  At this point, it is convenient to refer to the earlier  provisions  of
    section 104:-

         "104.    Pending appeal


              (1) An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period-




                    (a)    beginning when it is instituted, and


                    (b)    ending when it is finally  determined,  withdrawn
                        or abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).


                (2)     An  appeal  under  section  82(1)  is  not   finally
                    determined for the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while-


                    (a)    an application for  permission  to  appeal  under
                        section 11 or  13  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
                        Enforcement Act 2007 could be made or  is  awaiting
                        determination,


                    (b)     permission  to  appeal  under  either  of  those
                        sections  has  been  granted  and  the  appeal   is
                        awaiting determination, or


                    (c)    an appeal has been remitted under section  12  or
                        14 of that Act and is awaiting determination".

22.  In the light of the appellant's solicitors' letter of 14 October  2019,
    the Upper Tribunal arranged a hearing on 29 January 2020.  Mr Nicholson
    appeared on behalf of the appellant, directly instructed by the latter.
     The solicitors who had previously acted for the  appellant  apparently
    ceased to do so on 4 December 2019, the day after they had sent  an  e-
    mail to the Upper Tribunal, seeking dates to avoid, for the convenience
    of Counsel.

23.  Before us, speaking to his skeleton argument,  Mr  Nicholson  submitted
    that none of the situations described in paragraphs (a), (b) or (c)  of
    section 104(2)  applied  in  the  present  case.   At  the  point  when
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal had  been  refused  by  that
    Tribunal (5 April 2019), the appellant's appeal was no longer  pending.
    As a result, subsection  (4A)  could  not  apply  when  the  leave  was
    granted. Following the quashing by the High Court  of  the  refusal  of
    permission to appeal, the appeal again became pending.

24.  Mr Nicholson sought to rely upon the Upper Tribunal's decision in  Niaz
    (NIAA 2002 s. 104: pending appeal)  [2019]  UKUT  399.   In  Niaz,  the
    appellant had been removed from the United Kingdom by  the  respondent,
    following the refusal by the Upper Tribunal  of  permission  to  appeal
    against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   After  his   removal,
    however, the Court of Appeal granted permission to appeal  against  the
    decision of the High Court not  to  grant  permission  for  a  judicial
    review under CPR 54.7A, with  the  result  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    refusal of permission was quashed.

25.  At paragraph 29 of its  decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Niaz  made
    reference to the passage from the decision  in  Saimon,  to  which  the
    appellant's solicitors in the present case referred in their letter  to
    the Upper Tribunal of 14 October 2019:-

         "29. The second and  third  sentences  of  paragraph  7  of  Saimon
             foreshadow the conclusion we have reached in the present case;
             namely, that an  appeal  which  has  been  finally  determined
             ceases to be pending.  In  the  case  of  an  application  for
             permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal under section 11 of
             the 2007 Act, the appeal is finally determined when it  is  no
             longer 'awaiting determination', which will, of course, be the
             position once the application is, in fact, determined.   That,
             in our view, is the inexorable result  of  section  104(2)(a).
             Although section 104(2) is describing situations in  which  an
             appeal is not  to  be  regarded  as  finally  determined,  the
             corollary is that, where none of the situations  described  in
             sub-paragraphs (a) to (c) apply (and the appeal has not lapsed
             or been withdrawn or abandoned), the appeal in  question  must
             be treated as  having  been  finally  determined.   Any  other
             result would mean the respondent  could  never  safely  assume
             that the removal of an individual would not violate section 78
             of the 2002 Act.


         30.  The fact that the refusal of permission to appeal was quashed,
             as a result of the proceedings in the Court  of  Appeal  after
             the appellant had been removed, means the  appellant's  appeal
             must, from that point, be treated as again pending.  There  is
             nothing inherently problematic with the fact  that  an  appeal
             may, under the statutory scheme, become pending after a period
             during which, compatibly with that scheme, the appeal has been
             treated as finally determined."

26.  Mr Nicholson's attempt  to  pray  in  aid  Saimon  and  Niaz  is,  with
    respect, fundamentally misconceived.  The  crucial  difference  is,  of
    course, that in  the  present  case  the  respondent  has  granted  the
    appellant two years' leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  That is an
    event which section 104(4A) says, in terms, will cause the appeal to be
    treated as abandoned.  The fact that the appellant's appeal had  ceased
    to be pending at the point when leave was granted does not  mean  that,
    at the moment when the appeal again fell  to  be  treated  as  pending,
    following the High Court's quashing decision, section 104(4A) had to be
    disregarded.  On the contrary, at the very moment when the appeal again
    became pending, it fell to be treated as abandoned.

27.  Not only is that construction of section 104, in our view, mandated  by
    the statutory language; any other result would be incoherent.   Section
    84(1)(c) requires a human rights appeal to be  brought  on  the  ground
    that the removal of the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority
    not to act contrary to Human Rights Convention).  The effect,  however,
    of granting the appellant leave to remain, on the facts of the  present
    case, is that the respondent has, in effect, agreed  (by  reference  to
    the appellant's family's circumstances) that his removal would  violate
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  There is, accordingly, no statutory basis  upon
    which the appeal could proceed.

28.  Mr Nicholson submitted it cannot be right that the  appellant  is  left
    without judicial redress in respect of his contention that he  did  not
    employ dishonesty in respect of his financial affairs, contrary to  the
    decision of the respondent and the finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  As,  however,  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  observed  (Ahsan  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2009;
    Balajigari v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ
    673) there are limits to the ways in which a human rights appeal may be
    used to achieve judicial adjudication on matters of this kind.

29.  Accordingly, we find that the Upper  Tribunal  Lawyer  was  correct  to
    issue the  notice  recording  that  the  appellant's  appeal  had  been
    abandoned under section 104(4A).

30.  Mr Nicholson told us he did not feel "ashamed" that an order  had  been
    obtained from the High Court, quashing the Upper Tribunal's refusal  of
    permission.  Whilst  that  may  be  so,  it  is  of  concern  that  the
    solicitors who were acting for the appellant  in  the  judicial  review
    proceedings (Mr Nicholson having, he indicated, stepped back from those
    proceedings after he had drafted the grounds) did not inform  the  High
    Court, as soon as they  became  aware  of  the  grant  of  leave.   The
    appellant owed a duty of candour in those judicial review  proceedings.
    Even if the appellant might have been (wrongly) advised that the  grant
    of leave did not have the effect of causing his appeal to be abandoned,
    the grant was clearly  a  matter  of  profound  significance  in  those
    proceedings, since there was no longer any prospect  of  the  appellant
    and his family (in particular,  his  son  with  medical  issues)  being
    removed by the respondent to Pakistan.  Had the High  Court  been  made
    aware of that matter, it is hard to see how  it  could  have  concluded
    that the requirements of CPR 54.7A(7)(b) were satisfied.

31.  We consider it necessary to make the High Court aware of  this  matter.
    It will be for that Court to decide whether it wishes to hear from  the
    appellant's solicitors.


Decision

The appeal is abandoned.


                               Signed                     Date




                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
