

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 January, 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                             ABDUL MARTIN SHIZAD
                                                                  Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin, instructed by the Brighton Housing
Trust
For the Respondent:    Ms E O'Bryan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) Although there is a legal duty  to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal  is  determined,  those
reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole  makes  sense,
having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

(2)  Although a decision may contain an error of law where the  requirements
to give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper Tribunal would not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  1  March  1993.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2009.  An application for  asylum  was
    refused by the respondent on the  16  April,  2012  and  the  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  On the 23 July, 2012  Judge  Adio
    allowed his appeal.  The respondent  in  turn  appealed  against  Judge
    Adio's decision and leave to appeal having been granted on  3  January,
    2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun issued a determination finding an error
    of law directing that the decision be set aside and be re-made.


 2. We not that the judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  anonymity
    order.  No application has been made to us for anonymity and we make no
    such order of our own motion.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The appellant comes from the Sherzad District of Nangahar.  This  is  a
    province of Afghanistan on the eastern side of  the  country  bordering
    Pakistan.  The  provincial  capital  is  Kandahar  and  the  background
    country evidence indicates  that  it  is  an  area  of  high  insurgent
    activity. His case is that his father was  killed  by  relatives  as  a
    result of a land dispute and  his  mother  arranged  for  him  to  flee
    Afghanistan at the age of  fifteen  when  he  was  coming  of  age  and
    expected to revenge his father's death with dangerous consequences  for
    him.  He also explained that he  had  been  subject  to  pressure  from
    Taliban forces to join them in the insurgency and finally that  he  was
    at risk of ill-treatment from the  Government  Forces  because  of  the
    perception that he was a Taliban supporter.


 4. There was a dispute as to whether he appellant was fifteen  or  sixteen
    when he arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2009.  The judge  decided
    in the appellant's favour that he was fifteen.  As a result of the  age
    dispute, the appellant has given an account  of  his  circumstances  to
    Social Services in an Age Assessment Interview, the UKBA in the  asylum
    interview with an appropriate adult  accompanying  him,  and  in  three
    witness statements the earliest of which  was  dated  September,  2009.
    The appellant supported his claim to asylum by a report compiled  by  a
    well known expert on Afghanistan affairs, Dr Guistozzi, as  well  as  a
    quantity of documentary background evidence.

 5.  Having given careful consideration to  the  Home  Office  reasons  for
    doubting the claimant's credibility the judge was satisfied that he was
    a credible and reliable informant for reasons that  he  dealt  with  at
    some length between paragraphs 23 and 30 of his determination.

 6. By way of conclusions, although the judge accepted that  the  appellant
    faced the three sources of threats described  above,  he  decided  that
    relocation to Kabul (which was where the Secretary of State intended to
    return him) offered a satisfactory option of internal  relocation  away
    from his home village that precluded international protection so far as
    the threat from his relatives or the Taliban was  concerned.   In  this
    respect, the judge applied the conclusions of the  UT  in  the  Country
    Guidance case of AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  163
    (IAC).  In that determination the Upper  Tribunal  did  not  accept  Dr
    Guistozzi's  observations  about  the  safety  of  the  person  in  the
    appellant's situation in Kabul.


 7. However questions of internal relocation would be inapplicable  if  the
    appellant had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  the  basis  of
    perceived  political  opinion  because  the  governmental   authorities
    suspected that he was a supporter of the Taliban insurgency.  The judge
    accepted this aspect of the claim having examined  the  evidence  as  a
    whole.


The Secretary of State's Appeal


8.   The Secretary of State submitted a  notice  of  appeal  addressing  his
    finding in the following term:


       "It is submitted that the judge has not given any  adequate  reasons
       for this finding. The only reason why  the  judge  appears  to  have
       given for his conclusion is that there is a serious possibility that
       his brother in law may  have  given  the  appellant's  name  to  the
       authorities  when  he  was  detained...   The  judge  concluded   at
       paragraph 23 that the appellant was fifteen when he arrived  in  the
       United Kingdom.  The appellant's evidence was that he had never been
       personally involved with the Taliban.   It  is  submitted  that  the
       judge had not given any reasons as to why the appellant's brother in
       law had given a young boy's name (and in which context) who has  not
       been involved with the Taliban to the Authorities.  Furthermore  the
       judge had not adequately assessed how a mere disclosure of  a  young
       boys name several years ago would now place him at risk."


    Judge  Eshun  found  merit  in  this  ground  and  concluded   in   her
        determination:-


       "I find the judge did make an error  of  law.   He  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons for his conclusion that the respondent's brother in
       law would have given his name to the authorities as  being  involved
       with the Taliban, that he would be seen to be a insurgent the result
       of which he was at risk from the authorities throughout Afghanistan.
        The  judge's  decision  in  respect  of  the  respondent's  imputed
       political opinion cannot stand. His decision is set aside and is  to
       be re-made."


9.     None of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal suggests that  the
   judge erred in law when making his  primary  findings  of  fact  and  his
   conclusion on  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim.   In  those
   circumstances, the re-making will  take  place  on  the  basis  of  those
   primary findings of fact supplemented by  any  fresh  material  that  the
   parties seek to place before us.


10.   We would emphasise that although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a
   brief explanation of the conclusions on the central issue  on  which  the
   appeal is determined, such reasons need not be extensive if the  decision
   as a whole makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the
   judge.  Although a decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law  where  the
   requirements to give adequate reasons are not met,  this  Tribunal  would
   not normally set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal where  there
   has been no misdirection of  law,  the  fact-finding  process  cannot  be
   criticised and the relevant  Country  Guidance  is  taken  into  account,
   unless the conclusions that the judge draws from the primary data  before
   him were not reasonably open to him.

11    We have, therefore, concluded that our task  is  to  carefully  review
   the evidence before the judge relating to this basis of  the  appellant's
   claim, to determine whether it is capable of supporting  the  conclusions
   to which he came. We have also received some recent updating material  to
   examine whether there has been any significant  change  of  circumstances
   since the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12   The issue is whether he has a well -founded fear  of  persecution  from
   the Afghan authorities by reason of his imputed support for the  Taliban,
   and this assessment is conducted on the basis of a reasonable  likelihood
   or real risk of adverse treatment.

The primary evidence

13.    In his first witness statement of September 2009 the  appellant  gave
   details of his family as follows:

       "My sister is called Sharifa. ...she is nineteen years old.  She  is
       married to Aziz Rahman. ..I used to visit my sister and her husband.
        I used to go with him to the Madrassa.  He  was  an  elder  of  the
       village, a representative.  He disappeared about 2 months  before  I
       left Afghanistan, and for 2 months we did not  know  where  he  was.
       Then we received a letter from the Government Forces saying  he  was
       in prison for having worked for the Taliban.  I did not know that he
       was working for the Taliban before he went missing.   After  he  was
       taken however, the Taliban started to come to me and ask me to  join
       them... On two occasions they came to the Madrassa to talk to me but
       usually it would be in the evenings at home I would tell them that I
       did not want to join them.  This happened about 6 times.   The  last
       time they came they took me away into the woods tied up my hands and
       beat me.  They said they would release me, but they will  be  coming
       back in 2 or 3 nights to make me join them.   It  was  then  that  I
       decided that I needed to leave Afghanistan, before they came for me.
        During this time the Government Forces also requested that  I  talk
       to them when they captured my brother in law he had  given  my  name
       and others who had worked for the  Taliban  and  that  is  why  they
       wanted me.  They told us this in a letter that we received  about  2
       days after we received the letter that said that Aziz was in prison.
        I did not know why Aziz would have said that because I had not been
       working for the Taliban and they may have forced him to say that."


14.   In his asylum interview the appellant said this:-


     "My brother in law was working with the Taliban I  was  not  aware  of
       that.  When he was arrested by the  authorities  after  2  months  I
       received a letter from the authorities.  After that time my  brother
       in law went missing I faced many problems with  the  Taliban  I  was
       beaten up  they  were  trying  to  force  me  to  join  them.   They
       approached me on 6 different occasions  and  was  beaten  up  during
       these occasions.  (My brother in law was arrested in) 2008  I  can't
       remember  the  exact  date.  The  letter  (I   received   from   the
       authorities) was stating we kept your brother in law  afterwards  we
       received another letter it was stating we found  info  through  your
       brother in law that you were also working for the Taliban  you  have
       to come to the district. If I would  have  gone  there  I  shall  be
       killed."


    The appellant stated that this letter was received some 2 months  after
    his brother in      law went missing.   The  appellant  also  mentioned
    these problems in his Age Assessment Interview in August 2009 where  it
    is recorded:-


        "Abdul was asked why he left the country and  he  replied  that  he
       left because of the dangers  in  Afghanistan  and  the  enemies  who
       killed his father. Abdul carried on to explain that his  father  was
       killed because of a land dispute  when  Abdul  was  approximately  7
       years old.  Abdul further explained he used to live with his  sister
       and her husband who was a member of the Taliban.  Abdul stated  that
       someone told the Government that Abdul was part of the Taliban which
       Abdul denies."


15.   The  appellant  expanded  upon  this  account  in  a  further  witness
    statement submitted for the appeal  on  the  4  July,  2012.   Here  he
    explained at paragraph 21 that the first letter  that  his  family  had
    received was from the Red Cross that indicated that the brother in  law
    had been detained at Bagram. This was how the family came  to  discover
    this. This statement added that Aziz Rahman had a brother called  Malik
    Jaipour who carried weapons and who  attended  the  Madrassa  and  gave
    speeches about Jihad. He had heard subsequently that Malik Jaipour  had
    been killed by coalition forces.

16.   Ms Cronin attended on behalf of the appellant at  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 4 July 2012.  At that stage, in the light of
    the further details provided she was able to do some impromptu research
    about Bagram detainees.  She was able to access some press  reports  on
    the internet apparently dated the 18 June 2012  containing  photographs
    of a number of former  Afghan  detainees  who  were  released  from  US
    military custody in Jahalabad east of Kabul on the 8  May  2010.  Names
    were also given  that  included  the  name  Aziz  -u-  Rahman  and  the
    appellant identified three photographs of Aziz Rahman as his brother in
    law.  It seems this was material  that  became  publicly  available  in
    response to a freedom of information request to the  Pentagon.  Further
    supporting data reveals that on February 25,  2010  a  Detainee  Review
    Board recommended that Aziz Rahman should be transferred to the  Afghan
    National Detention Facility (ANDF) at  Pol-i-charki  Prison  Kabul  for
    participation in the rehabilitation programme.


17.  Judge Adio noted that the appellant's account given as  early  as  2009
    that his brother in law had been detained received substantial  support
    from this supporting data that had only emerged into the public  domain
    in 2010 even though there was no independent  evidence  that  the  Aziz
    Rahman identified in the press reports was the Aziz Rahman who was  the
    appellant's brother in law.

18.    Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  there  was  also  a  report  of  Dr
    Guistozzi dated the 19 May 2012 that we infer  was  before  the  judge,
    giving further details confirming Aziz Rahman's detention in Bagram had
    come to light. He said at paragraph 15 of his report which  is  in  the
    following terms:-

        "Because of his family connections to the Taliban, there is a  high
        chance that Mr Shizad could be seen as a suspect insurgent  by  the
        authorities.   The  worsening  security  situation  from  2006  has
        created the conditions for the authorities to detain large  numbers
        of people on the ground of modest or lacking evidence.   Given  the
        unsophisticated techniques still used by Afghan security  services,
        one of the most common ways of obtaining information is to imprison
        people who are suspected of holding useful information and  subject
        them to sociological and physical pressure, including torture.  For
        this reason they tend to arrest large numbers of people in order to
        interrogate  them.   The  Afghan  security  organisation   continue
        rounding up suspected  insurgents  in  the  thousands;  the  Afghan
        Ministry of the Interior alone claimed to have  arrested  5,596  in
        January to December, 2012, compared to 2956 in March 2009  -  March
        2010...  According to the ICRC, the number of detainees  is  rising
        very fast. By 20 September 2007 it stood at 12,000, up from 5000  a
        year earlier, reached 16,000 in November  2009.   Such  a  vertical
        rise must clearly be associated  with  the  insurgency.   There  is
        therefore a serious chance of mistreatment and physical harm for Mr
        Shizad".


          We  note  that  this  assessment  of  risk  is  based  on   family
    connections rather than any supposition as to what a family member  may
    have told the security forces. In support  of  this  opinion  the  next
    paragraph of Dr Guistozzi's report quotes extensively from an  American
    journalist's report of a passenger in a vehicle apparently detained and
    sent to prison, principally  because  his  uncle  was  known  to  be  a
    supporter of the Taliban.  The report continues and quotes the practice
    of arresting relatives, in order to force fugitives to hand  themselves
    over or prisoners to confess, is also  reportedly  widespread.   It  is
    typically male relatives above puberty who get arrested; never women or
    children before puberty. Torture and beatings are also commonly used as
    the Police believe that this is the only  way  to  extract  confession.
    Although the law prohibits arbitrary arrests and detention, all sources
    reckon that this remains a serious problem.  There was country material
    supporting Dr Guistozzi's observations that torture  and  ill-treatment
    at the hands of the Afghan Security Services is and was widespread.

19.   At the hearing before us, Ms Cronin relied on a  recent  report  dated
   21 January 2013 of the United Nations Assistance Mission  in  Afghanistan
   (UNAMA) entitled "Treatment of   Conflict  Related  Detainees  in  Afghan
   Custody".  In a number of places that report confirmed torture  and  ill-
   treatment of detainees by Afghan Forces. Page 19 of that report  entitled
   Transfer of Detainees to NDS,  ANP  and  ANA  by  International  Military
   Forces and ISAF Detention Monitoring Programme,  particularly  noted  the
   ill treatment of those who had been transferred by  International  Forces
   to various sections of the Afghan Security Services.  The report noted:

        "ISAF's resumption of transfers to NDS provincial  headquarters  in
        Kandahar where UNAMA found systematic torture remains pending. ISAF
        has also not resumed transfers to AMP  provincial  headquarters  in
        Kandahar where the Afghan Independent Human  Rights  Commission  an
        Open Society Foundations also identified torture. "

    At page 42 of the report evidence  of  disappearances  particularly  in
    Kandahar was noted.  There is  also  substantial  evidence  related  to
    allegations of ill-treatment of detainee's at the Bagram Airbase by the
    US Forces.


20   Ms Cronin also relied on  a  consortium  news  report  published  on  a
   website on 20 September 2012, confirming the  US  practice  of  detaining
   family and associates of known Taliban fighters and commanders to provide
   information that would make it easier for forces  to  track  such  people
   down. However, it is noted that the report suggests  that  most  civilian
   targets that were swept up in night raids  were  released  within  a  few
   days.

21    By contrast the UNAMA report at page 9 noted:

        "Of 635 detainees UNAMA interviewed, 552 were held on suspicion  or
        were convicted of offences related to the armed  conflict....  many
        of these detainees were also suspected members  of  Anti-Government
        Elements  (AGEs)  or  relatives  of  AGEs.  UNAMA  included   these
        detainees in the  sample  because  NDS  and  AMP  treated  them  as
        conflict-related detainees  and  held  them  with  other  conflict-
        related or political detainees."

22    Judge Adio accepted  (at paragraphs 31 and  32  of  the  decision)  Dr
   Guistozzi's evidence that the appellant  will  be  seen  as  a  suspected
   insurgent by the Afghan authorities, and detained and tortured, and  that
   detention  conditions  are  persecutory  and   suspects   can   be   held
   indefinitely.  He accepted other higher levels of  violence and insurgent
   attacks in Kandahar and accepted that the appellant is at risk on account
   of  his  imputed  politics  from  which  there  is  no  effective   state
   protection.

The Respondent's Submissions

23   Ms O'Bryan agreed that we had to re-make the decision on the  basis  of
   the First-tier judge's primary findings of fact.  Her core submission was
   that  it  was  not  appropriate  to  draw  the  inference  of  reasonable
   likelihood of risk to the appellant because:-


        i. There was no reason to believe that a brother in law would  have
           accused the appellant of membership of  the  Taliban  since  the
           appellant denied supporting the Taliban.
       ii. There was no reason that the Government would be interested in a
           fifteen year old male supporter of the Taliban in 2008 or 2009.
      iii. As it was reported that Aziz Rahman had been transferred from US
           Military custody to Afghan, there was no reason to believe  that
           the appellant would still be at risk of adverse attention.
       iv. If the  Afghan  authorities  had  only  sent  a  letter  to  the
           appellant asking him  to  attend  for  questioning  it  did  not
           indicate that they had significant interest in him.

The Appellant's Submissions


24   Ms Cronin had summarised the appellant's case in  a  skeleton  argument
   supplied shortly before the hearing.

25    In response to Ms O'Bryan's  submissions  she  pointed  out  that  the
   appellant had told the judge (as recorded in the determination) that  the
   authorities fear the Taliban: in particular, that they may be attacked by
   the Taliban when they came  to  his  village,  which  is  why  they  sent
   letters. She further pointed out that the fate of  Mr  Rahman  since  his
   transfer to Afghan forces is not known.  She  pointed  out  that  if  the
   appellant were to be detained for questioning by reason of  his  contacts
   he could be transferred to a prison in his  home  province  of  Kandahar,
   where documentary reports of ill-treatment were substantial.  She further
   pointed out that the process of living in Kabul required an identity card
   and that is when those of interest to the authorities may come to light.

26    As to what Mr Rahman may have said in custody, she  pointed  out  that
   if torture is used on detainees, people can make  false  implications  of
   others. The chronology of the detention and the letter  accepted  by  the
   judge indicated a strong likelihood of a  link  between  the  brother  in
   law's detention and the authorities interest expressed in the  appellant.
   He had disobeyed the request to attend for interview and was now older.

Conclusions

27   The task for  a  judge  determining  a  claim  for  asylum  or  related
   protection is an assessment of all the evidence, applying the standard of
   a reasonable degree of likelihood or substantial grounds for real risk.

28   The judge does so by assessing the individual narrative to  the  extent
   that it is found  credible  against  background  conditions  informed  by
   country reports, expert assessment and Country Guidance  case  law.   The
   nature of the task precludes full information that would enable  a  judge
   to make a precise prediction as to future events.  The  mere  possibility
   of ill-treatment or a speculative risk is insufficient to found  a  claim
   for international protection.

29   In our judgement the combination of factors identified in part  by  the
   judge in the recitation of the evidence and more thoroughly by Ms  Cronin
   in her skeleton argument  and oral  submissions  does  suggest  that  the
   combination of risks faced by this young man who left Afghanistan on  the
   threshold of manhood by local standards was more than speculative.


30   We note in particular, the following:-


        i. The appellant's home area  is  a  place  of  a  high  degree  of
           insurgency where the Taliban apparently operate  with  impunity.
           This makes it more likely, both that there is  pressure  by  the
           Taliban to  recruit  him   (as  was  the  case),  and  that  the
           authorities would perceive the inhabitants and young men on  the
           verge of manhood in  particular  as  being  more  likely  to  be
           Taliban supporters. It may well be for this reason that Kandahar
           is reported as a place where particularly repressive measures of
           detention and tortures are frequent.


       ii.  The  repressive  practices  of  the  Afghan  Security   Forces,
           particularly  in  areas  of  insurgency  actual  or   suspected,
           apparently include the detention of families of people  who  are
           assessed to be anti-government entities.  This may either be  to
           obtain information about others known to be Taliban activists or
           possibly to deter such family members following family tradition
           and joining insurgent forces.  There does not have to be primary
           facie evidence that a  person  is  a  Taliban  supporter  or  an
           admission  that  they  have  supported  the  Taliban  for   such
           detention to  take  place.   The  period  of  detention  may  be
           variable but the UNAMA  report  indicates  that  at  least  some
           relatives of anti government entities are detained  longer  than
           for the short periods that was the case with ISAF detention.


      iii. The credibility of the  appellant's  case  received  significant
           support  when  it  was  subsequently  confirmed  that  a  person
           matching the description of his brother in law had been detained
           at the Bagram  Airbase,  a  centre  for  high-profile  detainees
           operated by the US Forces, and where allegations  of  oppressive
           methods of interrogation and ill-treatment have been widespread.
           Whilst the nature of the interrogation of Mr Rahman is not known
           to the Tribunal, it is highly likely that it would have included
           details of his family's whereabouts, his local village  and  who
           he had met in the months that preceded his  detention  and  thus
           that the appellant's name would have been mentioned  by  him  in
           some context.

       iv. It is a reasonable inference from the country evidence that  the
           Security Authorities in Afghanistan would be more interested  in
           a young man from an area of insurgency who  was  a  relative  by
           marriage of, had stayed at the house of, and  had  attended  the
           Madrassa with, a high profile Taliban  supporter  who  had  been
           detained in Bagram, and  whose  own  brother  espoused  Jihadist
           sentiments and had been killed in combat.


        v. Although we see strength in Ms O'Bryan's submission that  it  is
           odd that the  Afghan  authorities  would  have  written  to  the
           appellant asking him to report; if they had have been interested
           in detaining and persecuting him, it is  nevertheless  the  case
           that the  First-tier  Judge  found  as  credible  and  true  the
           appellant's account of having received such a letter.  It  seems
           probable that the first letter he mentions  was  the  Red  Cross
           letter informing  the  sister  of  her  husband's  detention  at
           Bagram.  The finding that such a letter had been  sent  and  the
           timing of the letter in relation to the brother's  detention  do
           indeed indicate a government  interest in this appellant through
           his close links to his brother in law, with  whom  he  had  been
           staying.


31   Although these matters were not spelt out at paragraphs 31  and  32  of
   the judge's decision, with the detail that we  have  employed  above,  we
   conclude that, having regard to the totality of the material before  him,
   he was entitled to reach his conclusion.  The standard of proof does  not
   require the appellant to speculate on matters that he cannot answer, such
   as precisely what the brother-in-law may have told the authorities.

32   We again recognise there is strength in the submission  that  all  this
   was long ago in 2009, matters have moved on and  the  appellant  is  less
   likely to be of interest to the authorities now.  However, as  Ms  Cronin
   points out in reply, on the basis of the judge's findings, the  appellant
   had left his province when asked to attend for questioning and that might
   heighten suspicion against him. He is now  more  mature  in  age  and  of
   greater potential assistance to an insurgency movement.

33   Although determination of an asylum appeal continues  to  the  date  of
   the decision and the appeal process is, in part, a  continuation  of  the
   fact-finding procedure, we note that it will be unjust, if the  appellant
   should have been recognised as a refugee in 2009, to deprive him of  that
   status simply because the law only granted a right of appeal in 2012.

34   In any event, the recent UNAMA report of January 2013, relied  upon  by
   Ms Cronin, indicates that there is no fundamental change of circumstance.
   In particular, it appears that detention of relatives of  anti-government
   entities continues.  Once the primary facts were found to the  First-tier
   judge's satisfaction, he was entitled to give weight to the opinion of  a
   well known  expert  in  Afghan  affairs.   Dr  Guistozzi,  assessing  the
   appellant's account even without  the  benefit  of  the  supporting  data
   relating to the brother  in  law's  detention  at  Bagran  Airbase,  said
   "Because of his family connections to the Taliban, there is a high chance
   that Mr Shizad could be seen as a suspect insurgent by  the  authorities"
   and this would place him at risk of detention and ill  treatment  by  the
   authorities.

35   For these reasons, although inevitably there  remain  uncertainties  in
   the evidence, we conclude that the judge's conclusions were supported  by
   the evidence before him and before us.  Based on the primary findings  as
   to the credibility of the appellant's account,  there  is  no  reason  to
   reach a conclusion  other  than  that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
   persecution and should therefore be recognised as a refugee.

36    We accordingly re-make  the  decision  on  appeal  by  perfecting  the
   reasons for reaching it, as above.  The appellant's  appeal  against  the
   Secretary of State's decision is allowed.




     President of the Upper Tribunal
                                                 Immigration and Asylum
                                   Chamber

     1 February 2013

