
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 22 January 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             Laurent wa Mundeba

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rene instructed by Mountain Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr Norton, Senior Presenting Officer

     i) The exercise of the duty by the Entry Clearance Officer  to  assess
        an  application under the Immigration Rules as to whether there are
        family  or  other  considerations  making  the  child's   exclusion
        undesirable inevitably involves an assessment of what  the  child's
        welfare and best interests require.

    ii) Where an immigration decision engages Article 8 rights, due  regard
        must be had to the UN Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child.  An
        entry clearance decision for the admission of a child under  18  is
        "an  action  concerning  children...undertaken  by...administrative
        authorities" and so by Article 3 "the best interests of  the  child
        shall be a primary consideration".

   iii) Although the statutory duty under s.55 UK  Borders  Act  2009  only
        applies to children within  the  UK,  the  broader  duty  doubtless
        explains why the Secretary of State's IDI invites  Entry  Clearance
        Officers to consider the statutory guidance issued under s.55.

   iv)     Family  considerations  require  an  evaluation  of  the  child's
        welfare including emotional needs.  'Other considerations' come  in
        to play where there are other aspects of a child's  life  that  are
        serious and compelling for example where an applicant is living  in
        an unacceptable social and economic environment.  The  focus  needs
        to be on the circumstances of the child in the light of his or  her
        age, social backgrounds and developmental history and will  involve
        inquiry as to whether:-

                 a there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

                 b.  there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

                 c.  there are stable arrangements for the child's  physical
                  care;

        The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
        of circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling to require
        admission.

   v)      As a starting point the best interests of  a  child  are  usually
        best served by being with both or at least one  of  their  parents.
        Continuity of residence is another factor; change in the  place  of
        residence where a child has grown up for a  number  of  years  when
        socially aware is important: see also SG  (child  of  a  polygamous
        marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC) [2012] Imm AR 939 .


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellant, who is a minor born 14 December 1995, lives in  Kinshasa
    in the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC).   His  father,  a  soldier,
    separated from his mother in 2001/2002  and  took  with  him  both  the
    appellant  and  his  older  sister.   The  appellant's  other   sister,
    Blandine, the sponsor in this appeal, remained with  her  mother  until
    she died and thereafter came to the United Kingdom in 2005.

 2. The sponsor heard nothing further about her father  or  other  siblings
    following her arrival in the United  Kingdom.  In  March/April  2010  a
    friend of hers, Mr Lumeto, came across the appellant in an orphanage on
    one of his visits to the DRC.  The sponsor learned  on  making  contact
    with her brother that their father, the appellant and  her  sister  had
    moved to an area called Bukavu.  The appellant  became  separated  from
    them when fighting broke out some time in late  2008/early  2009.   The
    appellant had been taken from Bukavu to Kinshasa by a woman who thought
    she was bringing him to join other members of  his  family.   When  she
    realised that the mother was dead and his sister had left  Kinhasa  she
    handed him to the Girl Guides Association who have been taking care  of
    him since 13 January 2009.

 3. The sponsor, who was born on 18 July 1990, was refused  asylum  by  the
    Secretary of State in 2005  but  was  granted  leave  to  remain  on  a
    discretionary basis. It is assumed that this was because  of  her  age.
    On 30 March 2010 she and her daughter (who was born on 12 March  2007),
    were granted indefinite leave to remain on an exceptional basis outside
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. On 20 March 2011 the appellant made application for entry clearance  to
    settle with the sponsor in the United Kingdom.  This was refused on  19
    May 2011 for a number of reasons, including:

      i) An insufficiency of evidence that he was related  to  the  sponsor,
         with reference to paragraph 297(i) of the Immigration Rules.

     ii) There was no evidence such as a court order that the  sponsor  held
         sole responsibility for his care.

    iii) The appellant had  provided  no  official  verifiable  evidence  to
         confirm the statement by the sponsor that  the  appellant's  mother
         had died and that his father's whereabouts were unknown.

     iv) There was no evidence to show the sponsor had visited him  or  that
         there was ongoing contact and no evidence that  she  had  played  a
         significant part in his upbringing.   For  this  reason  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer was not satisfied  that  Blandine  had  had  sole
         responsibility  for  the  appellant's  upbringing  as  required  by
         paragraph 297(i)(e).

      v) The appellant had provided no evidence that  he  was  living  alone
         outside the United Kingdom in the most  exceptional,  compassionate
         circumstances, or that he was experiencing particular problems such
         as health or social issues.

     vi) The application had been considered  under  paragraph  352  of  the
         Immigration Rules relating to family reunion and as a sibling,  the
         appellant did not qualify. Although the sponsor  had  been  granted
         leave to remain as a refugee for five years from November 2005, she
         no longer held  refugee  status  as  she  had  since  been  granted
         indefinite leave to remain exceptionally outside the Rules.

    vii) Account had been taken of Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Act  and
         although  it  was  accepted  the   decision   constituted   limited
         interference with Article 8, it  was  a  qualified  right  and  the
         decision was  justified  and  proportionate  in  the  interests  of
         maintaining an effective immigration control.



The First -tier hearing

 5. Pausing there, it is immediately apparent that the decision was  flawed
    by a number of  errors,  both  as  the  relevant  requirements  of  the
    immigration rule that  applied  in  the  case  of  the  appellant,  his
    sister's status in the United Kingdom,  and  the  very  fact  of  their
    relationship.  These were resolved by the time  the  appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot on  23  March  2012.   On  that
    occasion the presenting officer explained that reliance was not  placed
    on the sole responsibility provisions  under  paragraph  297(i)(e)  and
    furthermore, she conceded that DNA evidence  produced  by  the  sponsor
    supported the relationship.

 6. The sponsor gave oral evidence, adopting  two  statements.   The  judge
    recorded her as having said that  she  had  been  subsequently  granted
    asylum.  That appears also to have been the understanding of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  This aspect was clarified before us by  Mr  Norton,
    who produced copies of the relevant letters from the Secretary of State
    confirming the position as stated above (paragraph [3]).

 7. The sponsor explained as recorded in her first statement how Mr Lumeto,
    who works for a charity, travels to DRC to try and help trace  people's
    relatives.  It was he who discovered that the appellant was being cared
    for by the Girl Guides Association in about April  2010.   The  sponsor
    and appellant had been in contact  since  then.   The  person  who  had
    brought the appellant from the fighting to Kinshasa  was  called  Leti.
    This had been done with a view to the appellant being reunited with his
    mother and sister.  He had been unaware that his mother  had  died  and
    his sister had left the country and so the decision was made  to  leave
    him in an orphanage run by the association.  Contact is  maintained  by
    the sponsor using a mobile phone she had bought for  him.   They  speak
    about four to five times a week and she also speaks to members  of  the
    charity to discuss his welfare.  He is very lonely and was  very  happy
    when the sponsor made contact.  He has no other family now and will  be
    able to stay with the Association until he is 18.  He does not  receive
    any education as the charity only provides him with food, accommodation
    and medical care.  He cries a lot when he speaks  to  the  sponsor  who
    sends him money through Western Union.

 8. The sponsor herself is a single parent, has a four year old  child  who
    suffers from sickle cell anaemia and she is studying health and  social
    care for which  she  undertakes  work  experience.   She  is  supported
    through income support  and  DLA  for  her  child,  living  in  Housing
    Association accommodation.  She has been unable to visit the  appellant
    as she is too scared to go back and does not believe it would  be  safe
    for her or for her young daughter who has to see a doctor regularly.

 9. Submissions made by the presenting officer argued that the letter  from
    the Girl Guides Association did not actually confirm the appellant  was
    living with them and there was no evidence  from  Mr  Lemuto.   It  was
    argued the  appellant  may  have  other  relatives  in  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo and the telephone records did not show  that  contact
    with the sponsor  was  on  a  daily  basis  as  claimed.   It  was  not
    believable the sponsor would not have gone over to the DRC to visit her
    brother.

10. By way of response Ms Wangui invited the judge to  find  the  appellant
    credible and reminded him why the sponsor had not visited  her  brother
    in the DRC, where there was no one to protect him and there was a  risk
    arising out of the recruitment of child soldiers.

11. In reaching his conclusions, the judge correctly directed himself  that
    the relevant provision was paragraph 297(i)(f) of the  Rules.   He  was
    satisfied that the sponsor and  appellant  were  in  regular  telephone
    contact and that she sends him money on a regular basis despite her own
    slender means.  He accepted that she is genuinely emotionally committed
    to her brother and wants him to join her in the United Kingdom.  He was
    also satisfied he had been given credible reasons for  her  not  having
    been to visit him in  the  DRC  since  they  resumed  contact.   Noting
    (inaccurately) that the sponsor had been granted refugee status,  there
    was no reason to doubt that she and other members  of  the  family  had
    endured very difficult circumstances against a background  of  violence
    and it was understandable that the parties would like to be reunited as
    the only surviving members of the family.

12. Thereafter,  the  judge  directed  himself  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f) will only  be  met  if  "...  there  is  sufficient
    evidence of the actual circumstances in which her brother is living  in
    DRC".  At [22] he went on to make the following points on the  evidence
    before him.

      i) The letter from the Association dated 2 March 2011 gave  only  very
         limited information, stating that the  appellant  had  lived  in  a
         situation of family "rupture" since 13 January  2009  and  that  he
         benefited from psycho-social and medical care by the Association.

     ii) The letter did not specifically confirm that he was living in their
         orphanage.

    iii) It did not clarify whether or not he was receiving education.

     iv) It did not mention whether or not there were  any  extended  family
         members taking responsibility for him.

13. The judge also observed the absence of evidence from  Mr  Lumeto.   The
    sponsor had explained to him that he lived in Bromley but she  had  not
    realised that she should produce evidence from him.

14. It was not clear to the judge what the conditions  were  in  which  the
    appellant was living in Kinshasa at the date of decision, nor as to the
    amount  of  support  and  care  he  received  from  the   Girl   Guides
    Association.  He considered he had only  been  given  a  "very  sketchy
    account of the circumstances in which he [the appellant] was brought to
    Kinshasa  and  the  Association['s]   ...[agreement]   to   take   over
    responsibility for his care".  If such further information  could  have
    been obtained from Mr Lumeto who is a friend and had been so helpful in
    locating the appellant, it is unfortunate that he  did  not  provide  a
    statement or attend a court.  This was a  matter  of  surprise  to  the
    judge.  These matters led the judge to conclude that the appellant  had
    failed to discharge the burden of proof under the Rules.

15. The judge thereafter turned to the Human Rights Convention and was  not
    satisfied based on the evidence which was lacking that  a  claim  under
    Articles 2 or 3 had  been  made  out.   Turning  to  Article  8,  after
    directing himself as to the familiar Razgar test (as well as  directing
    himself as to the relevant authorities), the judge  accepted  that  the
    relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  appellant  came  within   the
    definition of family life as understood under Article 8.  The  decision
    amounted to interference  and  was  of  sufficient  gravity  to  engage
    Article 8.  In considering proportionality, the judge noted that  there
    were clearly compassionate factors at play but reminded himself that he
    had not been given a sufficiently  clear  account  of  the  appellant's
    circumstances in the DRC to satisfy him that the decision would  amount
    to  sufficient  interference  to  outweigh  the   legitimate   aim   in
    maintaining a proper system of immigration control,  and  so  dismissed
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

16. The grounds of application for permission  to  appeal  argue  that  the
    judge had failed to take into account the sponsor's  witness  statement
    which provided the evidence that the judge had considered lacking as to
    the extent of care provided by the Girl Guides Association, the absence
    of education or of anyone to take care of the appellant apart from  the
    sponsor, and the evidence in a second statement that the appellant  had
    not had any contact with any other family members and was continuing to
    receive care from the Girl Guides Association.  It is argued  that  had
    the judge taken  into  consideration  the  witness  statements  of  the
    sponsor, whom he had found to credible,  he  would  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that there were  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which made exclusion of the appellant undesirable.  This
    was in the light of the quality of the relationship recognised  by  the
    judge.

17. The second error of law argued is that the judge  had  failed  to  give
    reasons or any adequate reasons for findings on material  matters.   He
    had failed to take into consideration the judgment in the case of Sen v
    Netherlands [2001] 36 EHRR 81, requiring the state  to  strike  a  fair
    balance between the appellant's interests  in  their  own  right.   The
    family rights of the sponsor could not be enjoyed  in  the  country  of
    origin due to the fact that there was a civil war going on.

18. Permission to appeal was granted on 11 May 2012 on the  basis  that  it
    was arguable  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  properly  engage  with
    paragraph 297(i) or (iii), had failed to make adequate findings of fact
    as to what the appellant's circumstances were and  had  overlooked  the
    sponsor's witness statement (although which is not specified).  It  was
    also arguable the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  absence  from
    paragraphs 352A-352FI of the Immigration Rules of  any  provision  that
    relaxes the requirements of paragraph 297 for a sibling sponsored by  a
    refugee.  We pause here  to  observe  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Holmes  appears  to  have   based   this   aspect   on   a   continuing
    misunderstanding that the sponsor had been granted refugee status.

19. A response has been made pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, opposing the appeal.  It  is  argued  that
    the judge had made a series of findings as to why the appellant had not
    discharged the  burden.   The  judge  had  noted  deficiencies  in  the
    evidence and the absence of clear evidence of the situation led to  the
    conclusion that  there  would  not  be  disproportionate  interference.
    Although no longer relevant, the  notice  also  deals  with  the  issue
    raised in respect of paragraphs 352A to 352F.

The hearing before the UT

20. We observed to Mr Rene that the immigration decision  did  not  address
    the maintenance and accommodation requirements of  paragraph  297.   He
    rightly observed that these had not been flagged up,  but  rather  than
    dwell on the implications of this, we  invited  argument  on  the  core
    issue raised in the first limb of the application for  permission.   In
    particular  we  asked  why  he  considered  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant, if all matters were taken into account, made  his  exclusion
    from the United Kingdom undesirable?

21. Mr Rene submitted that the answer to this question was because  of  the
    absence of relatives in Kinshasa and the fact  that  the  appellant  is
    still a child.  He referred us to paragraph [22] of  the  determination
    in which the judge identified the deficiencies in the letter  from  the
    Girl Guides Association and  the  absence  of  evidence  from  Mr  Papi
    Lumeto.  He argued that the  judge  had  not  taken  into  account  the
    statements from the sponsor.  The age of the  appellant  was  relevant,
    and he referred us to the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  which
    specifically provides that the provisions in paragraph  297(i)(f)  have
    the objective to allow a child to join a parent  or  relative  in  this
    country only where that child could not  be  adequately  cared  for  by
    parents or relatives in his own country.

22. Mr Norton  relied  on  the  rule  24  response.   He  argued  that  the
    provisions of the IDI referred  to  by  Mr  Rene  were  not  a  blanket
    assumption that somebody who was orphaned with a sibling in the  United
    Kingdom should be granted leave and referred us to paragraph 1.2 (which
    we refer to in more detail below).  He argued it was difficult  to  see
    how the appellant could succeed on maintenance grounds  as  the  income
    received by the sponsor was from the state.

23. By way of response, Mr Rene argued that the IDIs  were  not  ambiguous.
    If a child did not have  family  (in  the  country  of  origin)  and  a
    relative in the United Kingdom, that would meet the  compelling  family
    circumstances required by the Rule.

The Immigration Rules and the IDI

24.  Paragraph 297 of the Rules is in these terms:

         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled  or  being  admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:
             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
                parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:




                  (a) both parents are present and settled in the United
                Kingdom; or


                  (b) both parents are being admitted on the same occasion
              for settlement; or


                  (c) one parent is present and settled in the United
                  Kingdom and the other is being admitted on the same
                  occasion for settlement; or


                  (d) one parent is present and settled in the United
                  Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                  settlement and the other parent is dead; or


                  (e) one parent is present and settled in the United
                  Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                  settlement and has had sole responsibility for the child's
                  upbringing; or


                  (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
                  United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                  settlement and there are serious and compelling family or
                  other considerations which make exclusion of the child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for
                  the child's care; and

             (ii)     is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
                  is not a civil partner, and has not formed an  independent
                  family unit; and

             (iv)     can, and will,  be  accommodated  adequately  by  the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking  to  join
                  without recourse to public funds  in  accommodation  which
                  the parent, parents or relative the child  is  seeking  to
                  join, own or occupy exclusively; and

             (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately  by  the  parent,
                  parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
                  recourse to public funds; and

             (vi)     holds a valid  United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for
                  entry in this capacity."

25. The law is settled as to the proper approach to the construction of the
    Rules.  As observed by Lord Brown in Ahmed Mahad v ECO [2009]  UKSC  16
    at paragraph [10]:

         "There is really no  dispute  about  the  proper  approach  to  the
         construction of the Rules.  As  Lord  Hoffman  said  in  Odelola  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230,  1233
         (paragraph 4):

             'Further,  like  any  other  question  of  construction,  this
             [whether  a  Rule   change   applies   to   all   undetermined
             applications or only to subsequent applications] depends  upon
             the language of  the  Rule,  construed  against  the  relevant
             background.  That involves a consideration of the  Immigration
             Rules as a whole and the function  which  they  serve  in  the
             administration of immigration policy.'

         That  is  entirely  consistent  with  what  Buxton  LJ  (collecting
         together a number of dicta from past cases concerning the status of
         the Rules) had said in Odelola in the Court of Appeal  [2009]  1WLR
         126 and indeed, with what Laws LJ said (before the House  of  Lords
         decision in Odelola) in the present case.  Essentially it comes  to
         this.  The Rules are not to be construed with  all  the  strictness
         applicable to the construction of a statute or statutory instrument
         but, instead sensibly according to the natural and ordinary meaning
         of the words used, recognising that  they  are  statements  of  the
         Secretary  of  State's  administrative  policy.   The  respondent's
         Counsel readily accepted that what she meant in her written case by
         the proposition 'the question of interpretation  is  ...  what  the
         Secretary of State intended his policy to be' was that the  court's
         task is to discover from the words  used  in  the  Rules  what  the
         Secretary of State must be taken  to  have  intended.   After  all,
         under s.3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971, the  Secretary  of  State
         has to  lay  the  Rules  before  Parliament,  which  then  has  the
         opportunity to disapprove them.  True, as  I  observed  in  Odelola
         (paragraph 33): 'The  question  is  what  the  Secretary  of  State
         intended.  The Rules are her Rules'.  But that intention is  to  be
         discerned objectively  from  the  language  used,  not  divined  by
         reference to supposed policy  considerations.  Still  less  is  the
         Secretary  of  State's  intention  to  be   discovered   from   the
         Immigration Directorates' Instructions (IDIs) issued intermittently
         to guide immigration officers in their application  of  the  rules.
         IDIs are given pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971
         Act which provides that:

             'In the exercise of their functions under this Act immigration
             officers shall act in accordance with such  instructions  (not
             inconsistent with the immigration rules) as may be given  them
             by the Secretary of State ...' (emphasis added)."

26. We have before us the IDIs dated July 2011, chapter 8 section  5  Annex
    M.  Both Mr Rene and Mr Norton accepted that it is unlikely there would
    have been a material change to the IDIs in force earlier that year when
    the immigration decision in this appeal was made.

27. Mr Rene asked us to have particular regard to the opening paragraphs in
    part 1:

         "1.  Serious and compelling family or other considerations.

         S.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  requires
         the UK Border Agency to carry out its existing functions in  a  way
         that takes into account the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
         welfare of children  in  the  UK.   It  does  not  impose  any  new
         functions, or override existing functions.

         Officers must not apply the actions set  out  in  this  instruction
         either to children or to those with  children  without  having  due
         regard to s.55.  The UK Border Agency instruction "arrangements  to
         safeguard and promote children's  welfare  in  the  United  Kingdom
         Border Agency" sets out the key principles to take into account  in
         All agency activities.

         Out statutory duty to children includes the need to demonstrate:

         .    fair treatment which meets the  same  standard  as  a  British
             child would receive;

         .    the child's interests being made a primary, although  not  the
             only consideration;

         .    no discrimination of any kind;

         .    asylum applications are dealt with in a timely fashion;

         .    identification of those that might be at risk from harm.

         This  paragraph  relates  to  the  considerations  referred  to  in
         paragraphs 297(i)(f) ... of the Immigration Rules.

         The objective of this provision is to  allow  a  child  to  join  a
         parent or relative in this country only where that child could  not
         be adequately cared for by his parents  or  relatives  in  his  own
         country.  It has never been the intention of the Rules that a child
         should be admitted here due to the wish of or for  the  benefit  of
         other relatives in this country.

         This approach  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  internationally
         accepted principle that a child should first and foremost be  cared
         for by his natural parent(s), or, if this is not possible,  by  his
         natural relatives in the country in which he lives.   Only  if  the
         parent(s) or relative(s) in his own country  cannot  care  for  him
         should consideration be given to him joining relatives  in  another
         country.  It is also consistent with the provisions of the European
         Convention on Human Rights, and the resolution of the harmonisation
         of family unification agreed by EU members in June 1993."

28. Mr Norton reminded us of the provisions at paragraph 1.2 as follows:

         "1.2     Where the sponsor is not a parent

         If the sponsor is not a parent but another relative, e.g.  an  aunt
         or grandparent, the factors which are to be considered relate  only
         to the child and the circumstances in which he lives or lived prior
         to travelling here.  These circumstances should be  exceptional  in
         comparison with the ordinary circumstances of other children in his
         home country.  It would not, for instance, be  sufficient  to  show
         that he would be better off here by being able to  attend  a  state
         school.  The circumstances relating to the sponsors here (e.g.  the
         fact that they are elderly or infirm and need caring for)  are  not
         to be taken into account."

29. Putting the IDI on one side, we turn back to paragraph  297(i)(f).   In
    deciding what is meant by the rule the words need  to  be  given  their
    natural and ordinary meaning.  The 'serious and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations' need to be considered  only  in  the  context  of
    whether exclusion of the child is undesirable.

30. Paragraph 297(i)(f) is the last of six criteria, one of which needs  to
    be met where a child of a parent, parents  or  a  relative  is  seeking
    settlement.  Although the reference to a relative suggests  anyone  who
    is related to the claimant, the context of the rule suggests  that  the
    relative must be able to provide suitable care for the  child   of  the
    sort that a parent would.

31. In Macdonald's Immigration  Law  and  Practice  8th  Edition  there  is
    discussion at [11.97] as to what is meant  by  serious  and  compelling
    from which we quote:

         "The phrase 'compelling,  compassionate  reasons'  in  the  Refugee
         Family Reunion policy has been interpreted by the Court  of  Appeal
         to  mean  reasons  'which  would  compel,  not  merely  invite,  an
         objective decision maker to feel compassion'.  This  interpretation
         has application to  the  'serious  and  compelling  considerations'
         requirement in the Rules."

32. The footnote is a reference to Chengjie Miao v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  75
    and Senanayake v SSHD [2005]EWCA Civ 1530.  In the first case the court
    was concerned with the Home Secretary's  published  policy  for  family
    members who wished to be reunited with a person in the  United  Kingdom
    who had been recognised as a refugee.  This predated  the  introduction
    of paragraph 352A-E of the Immigration Rules.  That policy provided:

         "Only pre-existing families are eligible for family  reunion,  i.e.
         the spouse and minor children who form  part  of  the  family  unit
         prior to the time the sponsor fled to seek asylum.

         We may exceptionally  allow  other  members  of  the  family  (e.g.
         elderly parents) to  come  to  the  UK  if  there  are  compelling,
         compassionate reasons."

33. In Seynanake the court was concerned with the effect of 'compassionate'
    in the above policy and also in paragraph 317 which includes provisions
    for adult children.  'Compassionate circumstances' is not the  test  in
    paragraph 297(i)(f) and we are not persuaded that compassion has a role
    in interpretation of  this  rule.  This  does  not  exclude  however  a
    humanitarian approach being taken.

34. In our view, 'serious' means that there  needs  to  be  more  than  the
    parties simply desiring a state of affairs to obtain.  'Compelling'  in
    the context of paragraph 297(i)(f) indicates that  considerations  that
    are persuasive and powerful. 'Serious' read with 'compelling'  together
    indicate that the family or other considerations render  the  exclusion
    of the child from the United Kingdom undesirable. The analysis  is  one
    of degree and kind.  Such an interpretation sets a high threshold  that
    excludes cases where, without more, it is simply the wish of parties to
    be together however natural that ambition that may be.

35. The terms of s.55(1) and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in T  (s.55
    BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC) [2012] Imm
    AR  346, made it clear that s.55 only applies to children  who  are  in
    the United Kingdom.  The requirement therefore  in  the  IDIs  we  have
    quoted above that officers must  not  apply  actions  set  out  in  the
    instruction without having regard to s.55 inaccurately states the legal
    position, although as the Tribunal noted at  [18]  that  the  statutory
    guidance asks  "staff working overseas to adhere to the spirit  if  the
    duty and make enquiries when they have reason to suspect that  a  child
    may be in need of protection or safeguarding or present welfare   needs
    that require attention" .

36. The exercise of the duty by the Entry Clearance Officer to  assess  the
    application under the Immigration Rules as to whether there are  family
    or  other  considerations  making  the  child's  exclusion  undesirable
    inevitably involves an assessment of what the child's welfare and  best
    interests require. Where an  immigration  decision  engages  Article  8
    rights, due regard must be had to the UN Convention on  the  Rights  of
    the Child. An entry clearance decision for the  admission  of  a  child
    under   18   is    "an    action    concerning    children...undertaken
    by...administrative  authorities"  and  so  by  Article  3  "the   best
    interests of the child shall be a primary consideration".  Although the
    statutory duty under s.55 UK Borders Act 2009 only applies to  children
    within the UK, the broader duty doubtless explains why the Secretary of
    State's IDI invites Entry Clearance Officers to consider the  statutory
    guidance issued under s.55.

37. Family considerations require an  evaluation  of  the  child's  welfare
    including emotional needs.  'Other considerations' come into play where
    there are other  aspects  of  a  child's  life  that  are  serious  and
    compelling  -  for  example  where  an  applicant  is  living   in   an
    unacceptable social and economic environment.  The focus needs to be on
    the circumstances of the child in the light of his or her  age,  social
    background and developmental history and will  involve  inquiry  as  to
    whether:-

          i) there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

         ii) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

        iii) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care.

     The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination  of
    circumstances sufficiently serious and compelling to require admission.



38. As a starting point the best interests of  a  child  are  usually  best
    served by being with both or at least one of their parents.  Continuity
    of residence is another factor; change in the place of residence  where
    a child has grown up for a number  of  years  when  socially  aware  is
    important: see also SG (child of a polygamous  marriage)  Nepal  [2012]
    UKUT 265 (IAC); [2012] Imm AR 939.

Error of law

39. Our first task is to determine whether the judge erred in  law  in  his
    determination.  In essence the appellant is arguing that the judge  did
    not take all the evidence into account and, had  he  done  so,  in  the
    light of his positive findings about the relationship,  he  would  have
    found that the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) would have been met.
     It is also argued that the judge failed to make findings  on  material
    matters. As part of  the  second  ground  the  judge's  proportionality
    assessment under Art 8 is challenged on the basis  of  the  failure  to
    consider whether the family life could be enjoyed elsewhere.

40. There is nothing material in the first statement by the sponsor that is
    not referred to in the judge's summary of the evidence at [7] to  [13].
    Despite what is asserted in the grounds, the judge refers to the nature
    of the care provided by the charity and the absence of  any  education:
    [10].  There was also reference at [10]  to  the  appellant  no  longer
    having any other family.

41. As to the second witness statement, here again there is nothing new  of
    a material  nature.  The  situation  had  not  changed.   There  is  no
    indication in  the  determination  that  the  judge  had  believed  the
    evidence to be otherwise.

42. The judge reached positive conclusions as to the degree and  nature  of
    contact between the sponsor and appellant. His observations as  to  the
    limitations on the information provided by the Association  as  to  the
    appellant's  precise  circumstances  were  legitimate  and  as  to  his
    observation about Mr Lumeto,  the  judge  did  not  err  in  expressing
    reservations over the absence of evidence from this witness  who  would
    have been in a position to explain what he had seen and encountered  in
    Kinshasa when he found the appellant. The burden of proof  is  to  show
    that there were serious and compelling circumstances on the balance  of
    probabilities.

43. The criticism made of the determination is that having expressed doubts
    about aspects of the evidence, the judge did not go on to find what  he
    understood the appellant's circumstances to be. There is no  reason  to
    suggest that he found them other than as described by the sponsor,  but
    she has not been to Kinshasa herself and what she told  the  judge  was
    limited in scope. In effect what we understand the judge to  be  saying
    was that on the evidence before him there was insufficient to  persuade
    him that the serious and compelling test was met. Persuasive detail  as
    to the nature of the accommodation, the  social  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's life, his health and other needs as recorded by someone who
    has seen him in person and  in  context,  might  have  led  to  another
    outcome.

44. Our conclusion is that on the evidence before him, it was fully open to
    the judge to conclude that the threshold in paragraph 297(i)(f) had not
    been reached.  We doubt whether he could have lawfully  concluded  that
    it had been reached.  It is not the case that any 15  year  old  orphan
    who has a sister in the United Kingdom must be  admitted,  irrespective
    of his actual circumstances or  the  prior  history  of  the  relations
    between the appellant and the proposed carer.

45. Even if we had been persuaded that  the  judge  had  not  accepted  the
    sponsor's evidence on this issue and had erred on the basis alleged, we
    do not consider that this was an error that would need the decision  to
    be set aside. Taking the circumstances of the appellant at its highest,
    he is being looked after by the Girl Guides Association who are meeting
    his basic needs including, significantly, medical care which we suspect
    may not be available to many orphans displaced by the civil war in  the
    DRC.  Although the appellant is not receiving an education, we  do  not
    consider, having regard to his age at the date of application  and  his
    age now, that this of itself is sufficient  to  create  a  serious  and
    compelling consideration.  The lack of opportunities that  might  exist
    for a teenager in  the  United  Kingdom  are  unlikely  to  be  of  any
    relevance unless the  cumulative  effect  is  to  undermine  a  child's
    welfare needs. In addition he  has  a  mobile  phone  supplied  by  his
    sister, and receives regular remittances from her. Doubtless there  are
    emotional exchanges between them given their family history  and  their
    re-discovery of each other but that is  not  sufficient  to  amount  to
    serious  and  compelling  circumstances   that   make   his   exclusion
    undesirable. In so far as a comparison is made with other  children  in
    his country of origin, it is a factor (albeit  not  a  conclusive  one)
    that his circumstances  would  appear  to  be  reasonably  catered  for
    despite the loss of his parents.

46. We turn to Art 8 and the argument that the judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons why the interference was proportionate given that  the
    appellant's family life could not  be  enjoyed  elsewhere.   The  judge
    found that family life existed and that article 8 as a consequence  was
    engaged.

47. We are satisfied that the judge correctly directed himself  as  to  the
    law relating to Article 8  and  reached  a  permissible  conclusion  on
    proportionality open to him on the findings that he had made.  Although
    not referring specifically to the best interests of the child the judge
    clearly had these in mind observing at [33] with reference to  s.55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 that  "...section  55
    of the BCIA 2009 does not apply to entry clearance cases but  that  not
    dissimilar considerations should be taken into  account  under  Article
    8."

48. The judge found earlier in the determination that he was satisfied that
    the sponsor had given credible reasons for not having been to visit the
    appellant, even if the judge was under the impression that she had been
     a refugee. Having accepted that the sponsor could  not  be  reasonably
    expected to have visited the appellant there is no  reason  to  believe
    that  the  judge  did  not  have  this  in  mind  when  assessing   the
    proportionality of interference. However, this was not a case where the
    sister had previously cared for the appellant  and could not no  longer
    do so save by his being admitted to the United Kingdom. She  had  never
    cared for him; they had been separated for years;  and  they  were  now
    maintaining by electronic  means  an  active  relationship  normal  for
    siblings who lived in different countries. In any event on what we  now
    know there is no bar to the sponsor making short  visits  to  Kinshasa:
    her status will not be undermined if she does so, and the times when it
    will be unsafe to visit at all will be limited.

49.  In carrying out the proportionality exercise, the  judge  clearly  had
    all the relevant issues before him and the reasons given  for  weighing
    this against the appellant was for the same reason as under  the  rule.
    In so far as there was uncertainty as to  his  circumstances  that  was
    because a sufficiently clear and comprehensive  account  had  not  been
    provided. Where Article 8 is relied on to secure  the  admission  of  a
    child to reside with a relative who has never previously cared for him,
    whether the case is examined  from  the  perspective  of  the  positive
    obligation to respect family life or the negative one not to  interfere
    with  it  save  for  justified  and  proportionate  reasons  of  public
    interest, we doubt that Article 8 adds significantly the basic criteria
    of the family admissions rules.

50. Again, we emphasise the appellant is not being denied re-union  with  a
    previous carer, or needs admission in order to  supply  a  basic  unmet
    need of his.  The material advantages of life in the United Kingdom  is
    not the test; the loss of his cultural roots in the society in which he
    has grown up to date is a relevant factor. There is no evidence that he
    is at risk of harm where he is. There is no error of law in the judge's
    conclusions and certainly no material one as taking  the  case  at  its
    highest  we would have reached the same decision on the material before
    us.

51. By way of conclusion therefore, we are satisfied that the  decision  by
    the First-tier Tribunal judge did not contain an  error  of  law.   The
    appeal by the appellant in the Upper Tribunal is accordingly dismissed.



52. Both members of the panel have contributed to this decision.





Signed                                  Date 9 February 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

