

                                    [pic]
In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


  Bee and another (permanent/derived rights of residence) [2013] UKUT 00083
                                    (IAC)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|Heard at Laganside Courthouse,  Belfast on    |                             |
|22nd November 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                               MRS LOW POH BEE

                                      AND

                              MR YAT TUCK LEONG

                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the appellant:      Mrs O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:           Mr Buster Cox of the Law Centre (Northern
                    Ireland)

A non-EU citizen, who is residing in the  United  Kingdom  by  reason  of  a
derived right of residence (eg  as  the  primary  carer  of  an  EU  citizen
child), cannot thereby acquire  a  permanent  right  of  residence  in  this
country


                       DETERMINATION AND REASONS



Introduction

   1. This appeal is against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox,
      promulgated on 16th May 2012. The Judge allowed the appeals of Mrs Bee
      and Mr Leong and found as  a  preliminary  point  that  there  was  an
      appealable decision. His decision was that Mrs Bee and Mr  Leong  were
      entitled to permanent residence under European law.  For  convenience,
      we will refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. Mrs Bee and Mr Leong are Malaysians, married to each other. They  live
      in Northern Ireland. They have three children, twins born in 2002  and
      a son born in 2005. Their children were born in Northern Ireland at  a
      time when the Irish Constitution claimed territorial jurisdiction over
      Northern  Ireland  and  provided  Irish  citizenship  by   jus   soli.
      Consequently, their children have Irish citizenship.

   3. In 2005 the appellants were granted leave to remain, initially for one
      year and then for a further five years because of the judgment of  the
      European Court of Justice in Case C-200/02 Kunqian Catherine Zhu   and
      Man Lavette Chen v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]
      ECR I-9925 [2005] 1 QB 325, [2004] 3 WLR 1453 (hereinafter referred to
      as Chen). It was accepted their children were exercising Treaty rights
      on the grounds of self sufficiency. To give their rights of  residence
      effect, their parents,  as  their  primary  carers,  were  allowed  to
      remain.


The application

   4. On 10th November 2009 the appellants  sought  confirmation  that  they
      were entitled to reside permanently in the United Kingdom by reason of
      European law.


   5. They received a letter incorrectly referring to their asylum claim and
      granting them further leave.  They  then  received  a  further  letter
      granting them residence for a further five years  until  27th  January
      2016.

   6. Their representatives wrote to the respondent seeking  a  decision  on
      their application for permanent residence. This elicited a reply dated
      15th August 2011 which stated:

           "...It  would  appear  that  your  application   for   Permanent
           Residence was considered under the Chen ruling. Under  the  Chen
           ruling the European Court ruled that an EEA national  child  who
           holds sickness insurance would have a right  to  reside  in  the
           United Kingdom with his/her  non  -EEA  national  parents/carers
           provided that there were sufficient resources that the child did
           not become a burden on public funds. The ruling  did  not  state
           that the EEA national child's parent(s)/primary carer would have
           a right to reside as a 'family member' as defined under European
           law. In the case of Mr Chen,  as  he  did  not  come  under  the
           definition of a 'family member' under  Article  2  of  Directive
           2004/34/EC, he was  not  entitled  to  a  residence  card  under
           European legislation.


           However Mr Chen's case  was  looked  at  under  the  Immigration
           Rules. Paragraph 257C of the Immigration Rules allows for a non-
           EEA parent(s)/primary carer, and other close relatives, of self-
           sufficient EEA children to be granted leave to enter  or  remain
           in the United Kingdom.


           For this reason he would not have a right to reside as a 'family
           member' under  European  law,  and  as  your  applications  were
           subsequently decided under the Immigration Rules you  have  been
           granted 5 years leave to remain in the UK. "

   7.  The appellants appealed. Their  appeal  was  admitted  subject  to  a
      preliminary issue as to whether there was an appealable decision.


The First-tier Tribunal

   8. Immigration Judge Fox found  there  was  an  appealable  decision.  At
      paragraph 14  he stated:


           "I accept that under Section 2 of the European  Communities  Act
           1972, the Tribunal is required to apply EU Law where it applies,
           and both First-tier and Upper  Tribunals  have  jurisdiction  to
           allow appeals where the decision is not in accordance  with  the
           law. I am  therefore  satisfied  that  there  is  an  appealable
           decision made which can be heard before me today".


      At paragraph 17 he stated:


           "Regulation 26 covers appeals under the Regulations".


   9. The Judge then referred to the decisions of the Court  of  Justice  in
      Chen and C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano [2012] 2 WLR 886, [2011]  All  ER  (EC)
      491, [2012] QB 265 [ [2011] Imm AR 521  and the Upper Tribunal  in;  M
      (Chen parents: source of rights) Ivory Coast [2010] UKUT 277 (IAC). At
      paragraph 21 he continued :


           "I am therefore satisfied that the decision has been made within
           the scope of the 2006 Regulations and  the  same  relates  to  a
           right to reside/and to enter, under these Regulations."


  10. He then went on to consider whether the appellants  were  entitled  to
      permanent residency under the European provisions. At paragraph 22  he
      concluded:


           " I am satisfied that the respondent accepts that  the  children
           of the appellants  had  been  residing  in  the  UK  on  a  self
           sufficient  basis  for  at  least  six  years  .The   appellants
           themselves were granted five years leave to remain and this  was
           extended with further leave to remain until 27th January 2016."


      He further concluded at paragraphs 23 and 24:


           "I therefore find that they have acquired the  right  to  reside
           permanently in the UK -  Regulation  15  (1)  (A)  of  the  2006
           Regulations.  As  the  primary  carers  of  EEA   citizens   the
           appellants must be in a position to reside with the children  in
           the host member state for the duration of such residence.


           24. I have also considered the argument advanced by Mr Cox that,
           in  the  alternative  the  decision  to  refuse  to  grant   the
           appellants permanent residence is contrary to  the  decision  in
           Zambrano, in that the appellants do not have the right  to  work
           in the UK. I accept the argument in this case  and  that  it  is
           wrong to deny the appellants permanent residence and  the  right
           to work in the UK."


Permission to Appeal

  11. Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  been  granted  in
      relation to two issues:
                  i) whether there was an appealable decision and, if so,
                 ii) whether the  appellants  were  entitled  to  permanent
                     residency?


      At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal  both  representatives  confirmed
      these were the only two issues being argued.


Issue 1: Is there a right of appeal?

  12. Section 82 (1) of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
      gives a right of appeal in respect of an immigration decision. Section
      82(2) (a) to (h) define what is an immigration decision. None of these
      are applicable.


  13. Mr Cox accepted that the respondent's letter dated  15th  August  2011
      did not constitute an `immigration decision'  under  Section  82  (2).
      Rather, he argued that there was  a  right  of  appeal  by  virtue  of
      regulation  26(1)  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006. This provides:


            ... a person may appeal under these Regulations against an  EEA
           decision.


       Regulation 2 defines what an "EEA decision" is; namely:


           ...a decision under these Regulations that concerns  a  person's
           ...
            (b) entitlement to be  issued  with....a...document  certifying
           permanent residence...


  14. From a reading of paragraphs 17  and  21  of  the  Determination  this
      appears  to  have  been  the  basis   on   which   the   Judge   found
      jurisdictiction.


  15.  The question is whether the terms of the letter cited  at  [6]  above
      amounts to a decision concerning a person's entitlement to  be  issued
      with a document certifying permanent residence.  Mr  Cox  acknowledged
      that the terms of the letter only obliquely dealt with the appellant's
      entitlement to permanent residence but  it  should  be  a  read  as  a
      response to the request for  such  status.  A  purposive  approach  to
      regulation 26 should be adopted as to what constitutes an EEA decision
      as otherwise rights under European law could be ignored.

   Discussion

  16. The decision of M (Chen parents: Source of Rights) Ivory Coast  [2010]
      UKUT 277 (IAC) concluded that the rights of  entry  and  residence  of
      parents of EU national children identified by the  European  Court  of
      Justice in the Chen decision are rights derived  from  the  children's
      rights as a matter of EU free movement law.   They  are  therefore  EU
      rights that should be dealt with as  such  rather  than  exercises  of
      national discretion dealt with under the Immigration Rules.


  17.  The fact that there may be a  lacunae  in  the  national  legislation
      because it  had  not  been  brought  within  the  scheme  of  the  EEA
      Regulations was not decisive.  The  rights  are  directly  enforceable
      rights,  the  scope  of  which  could  not  be  reduced  by   national
      legislation and national courts are  obliged  to  recognise  and  give
      effect to them.

  18. The decision in M (Chen parents) was  not  appealed.  The  appellants'
      bundle contains the respondent's guidance to case workers  dated  21st
      February 2011. It relates to applications  by  the  primary  carer  or
      parent of a self-sufficient EEA national child following the judgement
      in M. It recognised that persons in the appellants'  situation  had  a
      directly enforceable EU right to enter and reside in the  UK  and  did
      not need leave. It was apparent the 2006 Regulations would have to  be
      amended and the Immigration Rules paragraphs 257C to 257E deleted. The
      guidance issued to caseworkers in the meantime was  that  they  should
      continue to apply the Immigration Rules to  such  cases,  as  happened
      here.

  19. The  2006  Regulations  have  now  been  amended  by  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2012. These came into
      force subsequent to the decision  under  appeal.  The  2012  amendment
      introduces a  new  regulation  15A  which  covers  derived  rights  of
      residence. Regulation 15A (2)  would  cover  the  appellants'  factual
      situation if they applied now. It provides for  derivative  rights  of
      residence to a person who is the primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national
      under the age of 18 who is residing in the UK  as  a  self  sufficient
      person and would be unable to remain if their carer was  not  present.
      The  definition  of  "EEA  decision"  in  paragraph  2  of  the   2006
      Regulations  has  been  amended  to  include  the  new   category   of
      'derivative residence card' and the appeal  rights  in  regulation  26
      amended in relation to the evidence  that must be  produced,  none  of
      which would have been disputed in this case.

  20. However, applying M (Chen parents) the fact that the respondent  chose
      to treat the right to  reside  under  the  Immigration  Rules  is  not
      decisive.  The right of residence was under EU law,  however  national
      practice chose to classify it.  Further,  the  appellants  asserted  a
      right of permanent residence under EU law. One reason for doing so was
      that they did not have the right to work at  present.  The  respondent
      did not give a formal decision but issued a letter dated  15th  August
      2011 which by implication refused to confirm the  permanent  right  of
      residence sought. Such a refusal was a  type  of  decision  that  came
      within the EEA Regulations.

  21. In our judgment, the appellants had a right of appeal under regulation
      26 at the relevant time. This has  now  been  clarified  by  the  2012
      amendments made to the  Regulations.  Their  substantive  rights  were
      directly enforceable EU rights which national courts  are  obliged  to
      recognise  and  which  national   legislation   cannot   reduce.   The
      respondent's letter, dated 15th August 2011, amounts to a decision  on
      the  appellants'  entitlement  to  a  document  certifying   permanent
      residence. This was an "EEA decision" with a  corresponding  right  of
      appeal under regulation 26(1).

Issue 2: Is there a right to permanent residence?

The position of the children

  22.  No application had been made  on  behalf  of  the  two  children  for
      permanent residence. Mrs O'Brien was not in a position to accept  they
      had permanent residency without  taking  instructions.  Judge  Fox  at
      paragraph 22 concluded the respondent had accepted  the  children  had
      been residing in the UK on a self sufficient basis for  at  least  six
      years.


  23. Regulation 15(1)(a) of the  2006  Regulations  provides  that  an  EEA
      national who has resided in accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
      continuous  period  of  five  years  acquires  the  right  to   reside
      permanently.


  24. The children did not move to Northern Ireland but were born  here.  In
      the Chen case, the Court of  Justice  rejected  the  argument  that  a
      person who has never moved from one Member State cannot  benefit  from
      Community law. Paragraph 19 states:

           "The situation of a national of a Member State who was  born  in
           the host Member State and has not  made  use  of  the  right  of
           freedom  of  movement  cannot,  for  that   reason   alone,   be
           assimilated to a purely internal  situation,  thereby  depriving
           that national of the benefit in the host  Member  State  of  the
           provisions of Community  law  on  freedom  of  movement  and  of
           residence..."

  25. In Case C-434/09 Shirley McCarthy -v- SSHD [2011] CJEU; [2011] 3  CMLR
      10, [2011] Imm AR 586 the Court of Justice examined another case of an
      Irish national; resident in the United Kingdom. Mrs.  McCarthy  was  a
      British national who had always lived in the United Kingdom.  She  was
      unemployed. She married a Jamaican national who had no  permission  to
      be here under the Immigration Rules. She applied for and  obtained  an
      Irish passport with a view to her  husband  remaining  under  European
      law. Her application for residence documentation  under  European  law
      was refused. The Supreme Court referred the following question to  the
      European Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:


           "Is a person of dual Irish and United  Kingdom  nationality  who
           has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  her  entire  life  a
           beneficiary  within  the  meaning  of  article  3  of  directive
           2004/78?"


  26. The Court of Justice considered  whether  article  3(1)  of  Directive
      2004/38 or Article 21 of the Treaty was applicable to the situation of
      a European Union citizen who has never exercised their right  of  free
      movement, who has always resided in the Member State of which they are
      a national and who is also a national of  another  Member  State.  The
      conclusion of the Court was at [57]:
           "In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question
           is as follows:
           -        Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted
           as meaning that that directive is  not  applicable  to  a  Union
           citizen who has never exercised his right of free movement,  who
           has always resided in a Member State of which he is  a  national
           and who is also a national of another Member State.
           -        Article 21 TFEU is not applicable to a  Union  citizen
           who has never exercised his right  of  free  movement,  who  has
           always resided in a Member State of which he is a  national  and
           who is also a national of another Member  State,  provided  that
           the situation of that citizen does not include  the  application
           of measures by a Member State that  would  have  the  effect  of
           depriving him of the genuine enjoyment of the substance  of  the
           rights conferred by virtue of his status as a Union  citizen  or
           of impeding the exercise of  his  right  of  free  movement  and
           residence within the territory of the Member States".
  27. The children in the present appeal  are  European  Union  citizens  as
      defined  in  Article  2  of  Directive   2004/38/EC   (the   Citizens'
      Directive). They have  the  nationality  of  a  Member  State,  namely
      Ireland. It has previously been accepted that they were  exercising  a
      Treaty right by their residence: self sufficiency.


  28. Article 3 defines the beneficiaries of the Citizens' Directive:

           This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to  or
           reside in a Member State other than that of  which  they  are  a
           national...


   29. The children were born in, rather than moved to, a Member State other
      than that of which they are a national, but  they  reside  in  such  a
      state. Unlike the situation in McCarthy the children do not  hold  the
      nationality of the host  state.  They  accordingly  fall  outside  the
      question posed by the Supreme Court  and  answered  by  the  Court  of
      Justice in the case of McCarthy. Their position is the same as that of
      the children in  the  Chen  case.  The  Court  of  Justice  has  never
      indicated that the Chen decision no longer applies.


  30. We therefore conclude that they are EU citizens residing  in  a  state
      other than that of which they are national and fall within  the  terms
      of the Directive.  We did not need to examine  the  decision  in  Ruiz
      Zambrano that is concerned with  a  different  problem.  There  is  no
      suggestion here that either the children or their parents  were  being
      required to leave the UK or the EU.


  31.  Judge Fox found they had lived here six years lawfully and  this  has
      not been disputed. Article 16 of the Citizens' Directive provides:


           1. Union citizens who have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
           period of five years in the host Member  State  shall  have  the
           right of permanent residence there...


  32. Although no application has yet been made, it appears the children are
      entitled to permanent residence in the United Kingdom.


The position of the appellants

  33.  Chapter IV of Directive 2004/38/EC deals with the right of  permanent
      residence. Article 16(2) states :


           2. Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family members  who  are  not
           nationals of a Member State who have legally  resided  with  the
           Union citizen in the host Member State for a  continuous  period
           of five years.


      The appellants have resided lawfully for at least five  years  because
      they have been granted leave for at least that  period.  However,  the
      definition of "family members" in Article 2 (2) (d) refers to:


           "the dependant direct relatives in the ascending line..."


  34. This was considered in Chen  in  relation  to  the  earlier  Directive
      90/364:

           "42  Article  1(2)(b)  of  Directive  90/364,  which  guarantees
           'dependent' relatives in the ascending line of the holder of the
           right of residence the right  to  install  themselves  with  the
           holder  of  the  right  of  residence,   regardless   of   their
           nationality, cannot confer a right of residence on a national of
           a non-member country in Mrs. Chen's situation either  by  reason
           of the emotional bonds between mother and child or on the ground
           that the mother's right  to  enter  and  reside  in  the  United
           Kingdom is dependent on her child's right of residence.

           43 According to  the  case-law  of  the  Court,  the  status  of
           'dependent' member of the family of  a  holder  of  a  right  of
           residence is the result of a factual situation characterised  by
           the fact that material support for the family member is provided
           by the holder of the right of residence (see, to that effect, in
           relation to Article 10 of Regulation  No  1612/68,  Case  316/85
           Lebon [1987] ECR 2811, paragraphs 20 to 22).

           44 In circumstances such as those of the main  proceedings,  the
           position is exactly the opposite in that the holder of the right
           of residence is  dependent  on  the  national  of  a  non-member
           country who is her carer and wishes to accompany her.  In  those
           circumstances, Mrs.  Chen  cannot  claim  to  be  a  'dependent'
           relative of Catherine in the ascending line within  the  meaning
           of Directive 90/364 with a view to having the benefit of a right
           of residence in the United Kingdom."

  35. It is clear from this that the appellants  are  not  their  children's
      dependants. As in Chen the factual situation is exactly the  opposite.
      Consequently, they do not satisfy the definition  of  "family  member"
      and so cannot benefit from the right to permanent residence in Article
      16(2).

  36. Mr. Cox has been unable to refer us to any provision in the  Directive
      or Treaty which would confer the right of permanent residency  on  the
      appellants in the circumstances.


  37.  In Chen the ECJ did not find the parents had  a  permanent  right  to
      reside. Paragraph 45 states "the carer must be in a position to reside
      with the child in the host Member  State  for  the  duration  of  such
      residence".  The  Court  did  not  say  that  the  residence  must  be
      permanent.

  38.  The respondent has  reflected  this  in  the  drafting  of  the  2012
      amendment to the Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations,  dealing  with
      permanent rights of residence.

  39. The new 15(1A) states:


           "Residence in the United Kingdom as a  result  of  a  derivative
           right of residence does not constitute residence for the purpose
           of this regulation".


      This lack of a permanent right is further reflected  in  the  new  15A
      which provides for a derivative right of residence  but  only  for  so
      long as the person  satisfies  the  criteria.  In  the  case  of  self
      sufficiency it can only relate to a person under the  age  of  18  who
      would be unable to remain in the UK if the carer had to leave.


  40. The notion of a derivative right only exists for so long as there is a
      need has been reflected in the provisions in relation to EU rights  to
      education. The Court of Justice in its judgment of 23 February 2010 in
       Case 480/08  Maria Teixeira v London Borough of Lambeth and the  SSHD
      considered the impact  of  the  child's  having  reached  the  age  of
      majority on the parent's right of residence as the person who  is  the
      child's primary carer. The Court stated that the right of residence of
      the parent who is the primary carer for a child of a  migrant  worker,
      where that child is in education in that State, ends  when  the  child
      reaches the age of majority 'unless the child continues  to  need  the
      presence and care of that parent in order to be  able  to  pursue  and
      complete his or her education'.


  41. There are other indications in the case law of the  Court  of  Justice
      that a right of permanent residence that is not expressly provided for
      in the Directives that give effect to  Treaty  rights  is  not  to  be
      implied.  In the case of C- 83/11 Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department v Islam and others [2012] 5 September the Court of  Justice
      indicated that in the absence of express words in  the  Directive  the
      subsequent residence rights of "other family  members"  who  had  been
      admitted as such under Article  3  of  the  Citizen's  Directive  fell
      outside the Directive.

  42. Since the hearing of this appeal, Advocate General Bot  has  delivered
      her opinion on a reference from the Upper Tribunal in  case  C  529/11
      Alarape v Secretary of State for the Home Department 15 January  2013.
      She has concluded that Article 16 of the Citizens Directive  does  not
      afford a right of permanent residence to a non-national parent of a EU
      national child who was receiving education in a host  state,  although
      both had rights to reside under European law to  give  effect  to  the
      child's right to receive education.  She distinguished between  rights
      of residence afforded under national law where  the  subject  in  fact
      complied with the provisions of EU law and those who did not.  If  the
      Court of Justice adopts a similar  conclusion  that  further  suggests
      that these appellants have no such rights.

  43.  We note that we are not asked to consider whether  the  condition  of
      residence prohibiting  either  appellant  from  taking  employment  is
      lawful. Nor do we have to consider whether the  appellants  should  at
      some point in the future be granted permanent residence as a matter of
      general discretion and or human rights law.  Although,  the  judge  at
      [26] referred to the refusal of a visa  as  being  a  disproportionate
      interference with human rights, we think that this was an  unfortunate
      slip. The case was not concerned with refusal of a visa but the  grant
      of permanent residence; there was no free standing human rights  point
      before the judge as no immigration decision had been made  under  s.82
      NIAA as noted above; no submissions had been  advanced  to  the  judge
      that the EEA decision was in breach of human  rights  and  no  reasons
      were given by the judge for the decision.  Human  rights  are  not  an
      issue for determination before us. We note that  the  applicants  will
      have completed 10 years lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom.   If
      their children are granted permanent residence and still  require  the
      presence of their parents to give effect to their rights of residence,
      this may well justify the grant of permanent residence  or  indefinite
      leave to remain under national law.

  44.  However, this does not mean that these appellants had  the  right  of
      permanent residence under the terms of the Citizens Directive or other
      provisions of EU law which is what the judge determined below.


Conclusion.

  45. We find that Immigration Judge Fox was correct in finding  that  there
      was an appealable decision giving the Tribunal jurisdiction.


  46. We find he materially erred in law in concluding that  the  appellants
      were entitled to a permanent right of residence on the  basis  claimed
      and we conclude that the appellants' derivative rights do not confer a
      permanent right of residence.

  47. We accordingly re-make this appeal by dismissing it.



Francis J. Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
