
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


LS (post-decision evidence; direction; appealability) Gambia [2005] UKAIT
00085

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing: 5 April 2005

                                                Promulgated: 19th April 2005

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                 Mr L V Waumsley (Senior Immigration Judge)
                Professor A Grubb (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                                                                [2005] UKAIT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms K Mustapha of K M Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.  Save in the case of appeals against decisions of the types listed  in  s
84(5) (and perhaps where the appeal incorporates a review  of  the  exercise
of a discretion) an Adjudicator or the  Tribunal  is  concerned  with  facts
both at and after the date of the decision.  2.  The terms  of  a  direction
lawfully made by an Adjudicator must be separately appealed if they  are  to
be challenged separately from a challenge to the determination.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Gambia,  applied  to  the  Respondent  for
     leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  student.   The  Respondent
     refused.  The Appellant appealed to an Adjudicator, Mr J K H  Rintoul,
     who allowed the appeal and directed  that  the  Appellant  be  granted
     leave to remain  as  a  student.   The  Respondent  applied,  and  was
     granted, permission  to  appeal  against  that  determination  to  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  Following the commencement of the appeal
     provisions of the 2004 Act, the grant of permission takes effect as an
     Order for reconsideration of the Appellant's appeal,  limited  to  the
     grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted.

  2. The Appellant's application was made on 2 April 2003,  at  which  time
     the Appellant had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  about  eighteen
     months.  The Appellant sought  permission  to  remain  in  the  United
     Kingdom for a one year full-time course ending on 30 June  2004.   The
     Respondent took  a  considerable  time  to  consider  the  Appellant's
     application, but eventually refused it on 8 March  2004.   The  reason
     for the refusal was that the Appellant had achieved only marks  graded
     as "poor failure" in all four papers taken at the end  of  the  course
     for which he had been originally admitted to the United  Kingdom,  and
     therefore the Respondent considered that he did not have  the  ability
     to follow his proposed course  of  study.   (Despite  the  Appellant's
     record of failure, the Respondent did not cite paragraph  60(v)  as  a
     reason for the refusal.)

  3. The Appellant appealed.  The appeal was heard by the Adjudicator on 20
     September 2004.  By that time, the Appellant had undertaken the course
     for which he had sought leave to remain.  He had made  good  progress,
     had passed all his exams and had been accepted for study on a  further
     (degree) course, from which he was exempted from the first year  as  a
     recognition of the diploma he had obtained from the course he had  now
     passed.   The  Adjudicator  heard   and   accepted   the   Appellant's
     explanation  that  his  failure  in  the  earlier  course   had   been
     attributable to distress at  his  father's  illness  and  death.   The
     Adjudicator considered the terms of section 85 of the 2002 Act  (which
     we set out below) and specifically took into account  not  merely  the
     requirements of paragraph 57 of the Immigration Rules but also that of
     paragraph 60(v) to which we made reference above.  He  concluded  that
     the Appellant  was  entitled  to  succeed  if,  at  the  date  of  the
     Adjudicator's consideration of the matter, he met the requirements  of
     the Immigration Rules.  The Adjudicator concluded that at that date he
     did meet those requirements.  It is a material part  of  his  decision
     that (whatever might be said about the ability that the Appellant  had
     always had, as demonstrated by his recent results) he was only able to
     meet  all  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,   including
     paragraph 60(v) because he had now passed his exams.  The  Adjudicator
     allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
     directed that he be granted leave to remain as a student, for a period
     not specified by the Adjudicator.

  4. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal,  on  the  basis  of  which
     permission was granted, are as follows:

           "It is  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  assessment  of  his
           jurisdiction to consider post-decision evidence in paragraph  15
           of the determination is flawed because:


           1. S85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("The
              Act") needs to be read in conjunction with s84  of  The  Act,
              which sets  out  the  limited  grounds  upon  which  one  can
              challenge  a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of   State.    In
              particular, in this case the only  legitimate  challenge  was
              under s84(1)(a) that the decision of the Secretary  of  State
              on 10/05/2003 to refuse to vary leave was not  in  accordance
              with the law.


           It is not in dispute that the Respondent had failed all  of  his
           exams taken in December  2002  at  the  Chartered  Institute  of
           Marketing.


           2. It is submitted that S85(4) of The Act whilst  it  gives  the
              possibility for evidence to be  considered  which  concern  a
              matter arising after the date of decision;  this is qualified
              on the basis that such evidence can only be  considered  when
              it is relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision.   It  is
              submitted that the substance of  this  case  is  whether  the
              Secretary of State in May 203 was correct under the terms  of
              the Immigration Rules to refuse to vary leave.


           It is submitted that the fact the  Respondent  had  subsequently
           studied further different courses with some  degree  of  success
           was not relevant to the substantive decision under appeal."

  5. Three separate points arose during the hearing.  We heard Mr Deller on
     all of them, but needed to call on Ms Mustapha only in respect of  the
     last.

  6. The first is the point squarely raised by the grounds.  In determining
     an appeal against an immigration decision, is the Adjudicator  limited
     to circumstances pertaining at the date of the decision, or should  he
     also take into account circumstances or facts  coming  into  existence
     after the date of  the  decision?   As  Mr  Deller  pointed  out,  the
     drafting of the 2002 Act might be regarded as not  entirely  clear  on
     that point.  We will set out the relevant provisions.

           "82   Right of appeal:  general
           (1)   Where an immigration decision is  made  in  respect  of  a
                 person he may appeal to an adjudicator.
           (2)   In this Part "immigration decision" means-
                 (a)   refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,
                 (b)   refusal of entry clearance,
                 (c)   refusal of a certificate of entitlement under section
                       10 of this Act,
                 (d)   refusal to vary a person's leave to enter  or  remain
                       in the United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is
                       that the person has no leave to enter or remain,
                 (e)   variation of a person's leave to enter or  remain  in
                       the United Kingdom if when the variation takes effect
                       the person has no leave to enter or remain,
           ...


           84    Grounds of appeal
           (1)   An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
                 decision must be brought on one or more  of  the  following
                 grounds-
                 (a)    that  the  decision  is  not  in   accordance   with
                       immigration rules;
                 (b)   that the decision is unlawful by  virtue  of  section
                       19B  of  the   Race   Relations   Act   1976   (c.74)
                       (discrimination by public authorities);
                 (c)   that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the
                       Human Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authority not to
                       act contrary to Human  Rights  Convention)  as  being
                       incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights;
                 (d)   that the appellant is an EEA national or a member  of
                       the family  of  an  EEA  national  and  the  decision
                       breaches the appellant's rights under  the  Community
                       Treaties in respect of entry to or residence  in  the
                       United Kingdom;
                 (e)   that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with
                       the law;
                 (f)   that the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
                       exercised differently a discretion conferred  by  the
                       immigration rules;
                 (g)   that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                       in consequence  of  the  immigration  decision  would
                       breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                       Refugee Convention or would be unlawful under section
                       6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being  incompatible
                       with the appellant's Convention rights.
           ...


             85. Matters to be considered
           (4)   On an appeal  under  section  82(1)  or  83(2)  against  a
                 decision an adjudicator may  consider  evidence  about  any
                 matter which he thinks relevant to  the  substance  of  the
                 decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a   matter
                 arising after the date of the decision.
           (5)   But in relation to an appeal under section  82(1)  against
                 refusal of entry clearance or refusal of a  certificate  of
                 entitlement under section 10-
                 (a)   subsection (4) shall not apply, and
                 (b)   the adjudicator may consider only  the  circumstances
                       appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse.
           ...


             86. Determination of appeal
              1) This section applies on an appeal under  section  82(1)  or
                 83.
           ...
              3) The Adjudicator must allow the  appeal  in  so  far  as  he
                 thinks that-
                 (a)   a decision against which the appeal is brought or  is
                       treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with
                       the law (including immigration rules), or
                 (b)   a discretion exercise in making  a  decision  against
                       which the appeal is brought or is  treated  as  being
                       brought should have been exercised differently.
           ...
           (5)    In  so  far  as  subsection  (3)  does  not  apply,   the
                 adjudicator shall dismiss the appeal."

  7. The present appeal is characterised as an appeal against a decision of
     the kind specified  in  s  82(2)(d)  on  the  ground  specified  in  s
     84(1)(a).  The scheme of tenses in ss 84 to 86 is, however,  very  far
     from clear.  In considering the present appeal, the Adjudicator was to
     be concerned with the ground of appeal that the  decision  is  not  in
     accordance with immigration rules, but apparently  was  to  allow  the
     appeal only if the "decision ... was not in accordance  with  the  law
     (including immigration rules)" (s 86(3)(a)).  We may note that further
     tensions of tense would arise if the ground were that specified  in  s
     84(1)(c) or (e), both of which are similarly expressed in the  present
     tense, or s 84(1)(g), which refers to the future, but all of which are
     similarly governed by s 86.  On the other  hand,  where  the  decision
     which is the subject of the appeal in itself  involved  a  discretion,
     the wording of s 84(1)(f) is, on its face at  least,  consistent  with
     the tense of s 86(3)(b).  On the other hand, despite the wording of  s
     86, it is accepted that in  determining  an  asylum  or  human  rights
     appeal, an Adjudicator is required to consider the facts at  the  date
     he decides the appeal, and must not confine himself to  the  facts  as
     they were at the date of the decision which is being appealed.  So  it
     may be that the past tense in s 86(3)(a) at any rate cannot  be  taken
     literally.

  8. It appears to us that little assistance is to be gained from a  minute
     examination of the tenses in ss 84 and 86.   We  pass  to  s  85.   Mr
     Deller readily acknowledged that there was a distinction  between  the
     process envisaged by s 85(5)  and  that  envisaged  by  s  85(4).   He
     vividly characterised s 85(5) as "stopping the clock"  in  respect  of
     the facts to be taken into account in an  appeal  against  refusal  of
     entry clearance or a certificate of entitlement.  Using the  words  of
     the grounds, he asserted  that  in  other  cases  not  concerned  with
     refugee status or human  rights,  the  words  "the  substance  of  the
     decision" in s 85(4) meant the correctness of the decision  itself  at
     the date it was made.  He was, however, unable to explain why the same
     words should be interpreted differently in the case of  an  asylum  or
     human rights claim, so as in those cases to apply not to the  decision
     at the date it was made but to its effect at the time of  the  hearing
     before  the  Adjudicator.   Nor  could  he   explain   why,   if   the
     interpretation sought by the Secretary of State was correct, the  type
     of case with which we are concerned at present  was  not  specifically
     included within s 85(5) instead of being left to be dealt  with  by  s
     85(4).

  9. In our view, the Secretary of State's argument is entirely  untenable.
     Whatever may have been the position before the 2002 Act, s 85 draws  a
     clear line between refusals of  entry  clearance  and  certificate  of
     entitlement and all other cases.  Only in the former two types of case
     does the "clock stop" so that evidence of  circumstances  appertaining
     after the date of the decision cannot be taken into account.   In  all
     other cases the Adjudicator is  under  no  such  restriction,  and  it
     follows that if an Appellant claims  that  the  decision  "is  not  in
     accordance with immigration rules", he is entitled to adduce  evidence
     as to the present position, even if it is clear (or, as in the present
     appeal, conceded) that the requirements of the Immigration Rules  were
     not met at the date of the decision itself.  (Although  evidence  that
     itself arises after the date of the decision is admissible  if  it  is
     relevant to circumstances at that date:  DR*  (Morocco)  [2005]  UKIAT
     00038.)

 10. This interpretation accords with the "one stop" approach to in-country
     appeals.  If an Adjudicator is limited to  circumstances  appertaining
     at  the  date  of  the  decision,  he  is  at  risk  of  producing   a
     determination which, however correct, is  of  no  practical  interest,
     because the Appellant's circumstances  may  have  changed  since  that
     date.  It is because s 85 gives  the  Adjudicator  the  power  in  in-
     country appeals to look at all relevant circumstances at the  date  he
     makes his decision, that the appellate process is able meaningfully to
     settle the Appellant's rights in a single process, following which, if
     the Appellant is unsuccessful, the Respondent can proceed  immediately
     to take steps to secure the Appellant's departure, without there being
     any risk that the Appellant has rights which have not been determined,
     because they arose since the date of the decision, and with which  the
     Adjudicator therefore could not be concerned.

 11. For the foregoing reasons, we reject the Secretary of State's  grounds
     of appeal.

 12. The second point raised at the hearing relates to the direction  given
     by  the  Adjudicator  and  it  is  convenient  to  record   here   the
     observations we made at the hearing.

 13. The Adjudicator's direction that the Appellant  be  granted  leave  to
     remain, with no specified period, and apparently in  recognition  that
     he had now begun a further course of study for  which  no  application
     had been made, might well cause concern.  The question is  whether  we
     could or should  consider  any  arguments  in  relation  to  it.   The
     Adjudicator's direction is akin to the order of a court,  whereas  the
     rest of his determination is akin to the judgment of a court.   If  we
     had allowed the appeal  against  the  determination,  on  the  grounds
     argued by the Secretary of State, the  direction  would  automatically
     have ceased to have effect.  That is because an Adjudicator has  power
     to make  a  direction  only  if  he  allows  the  appeal.   Where  the
     Adjudicator is not  shown  to  have  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal,
     however, the appropriateness of the direction is a separate issue.

 14. The relevant statutory provisions are as follows:

           "101. Appeal to Tribunal
           (1)   A party to an appeal to an adjudicator under section 82 or
                 83 may, with  the  permission  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
                 Tribunal, appeal to the Tribunal against the  adjudicator's
                 determination on a point of law.
           ...


             87. Successful appeal:  direction
           (1)   If an adjudicator allows an appeal under section 82 or  83
                 he may give a direction for the purpose of giving effect to
                 his decision.
           ...
           (4)   A direction under subsection (1) shall be treated as  part
                 of the determination of the  appeal  for  the  purposes  of
                 section 101."

 15. What is absolutely clear from those two sections is that  the  parties
     can appeal specifically against the terms of the direction.  In a case
     such as the present where the Secretary of State  has  chosen  not  to
     appeal against the terms of the direction the position is that if  the
     Adjudicator is not shown to have erred in  allowing  the  appeal,  the
     direction must stand in the terms in which the Adjudicator made it.

 16. The third issue which arose at  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  is  not
     mentioned in the grounds, but arises from the underlying facts.  As we
     have already indicated, the application which was the subject  of  the
     refusal, and of the Adjudicator's determination, was made on  2  April
     2003.  At that time, the Appellant had  no  leave  to  remain  in  the
     United Kingdom:  his leave had expired on 31 March 2003.   Examination
     of the Appellant's passport at the hearing confirmed that date.  There
     is no process by which leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  can  be
     granted other than in writing as required by s 4(1) of the  1971  Act.
     Nobody has pointed to any writing extending the Appellant's leave  for
     the necessary two days.  The  consequence  of  this  is  very  serious
     indeed.   Although  when  making  his  decision  in  this  case,   the
     Respondent indicated that the Appellant had a right  of  appeal,  that
     was not correct.  A refusal of leave to remain in respect of a  person
     who does not have leave at the time the decision  is  made  is  not  a
     decision appealable under s 82(2) of the 2002 Act.   That  is  because
     the lack of extant leave means that the decision is not a  refusal  to
     vary existing leave:  and, in addition, if  a  person  has  no  extant
     leave it is not the case that the "result of the refusal is  that  the
     person has no leave to enter or remain":  he had no  such  leave  even
     before the refusal.  Despite the  somewhat  lengthy  process  in  this
     case, the position is that  the  Appellant  never  had  any  right  of
     appeal.

 17. Ms Mustapha told us that she was unable to adduce any  argument  which
     might persuade us that the Appellant (as we  shall  continue  to  call
     him) should be able  to  preserve  the  effect  of  the  Adjudicator's
     determination in those circumstances.  We have nevertheless given  the
     matter considerable thought, in the light particularly of  Rule  62(7)
     of the 2005 Procedure Rules, which apparently limits  the  grounds  of
     this reconsideration.  As the Adjudicator was not hearing  an  appeal,
     we formally have no jurisdiction either:  but that has the  additional
     consequence  that  Rule  62(7)  cannot  apply  to  these  proceedings.
     Insofar as we have power to  do  so,  we  declare  that  the  decision
     against which the Appellant purported to appeal  was  not  a  decision
     carrying a right of appeal under the 2002 Act;  that  the  Adjudicator
     accordingly had no  jurisdiction;   and  that  his  determination  and
     direction can have no effect.  To  that  extent,  the  parties  should
     proceed as though the Secretary of State's appeal had been allowed  in
     full and we had substituted a determination dismissing the Appellant's
     appeal to the Adjudicator.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


                                                             Date:






