
 EA and Others (Public Funds: Housing Association housing) Nigeria [2008]
UKAIT 00084

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Glasgow                                       Date of Hearing:
11 September 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                         Immigration Judge Price OBE

                                   Between

                                     EA
                                     IA
                                     VA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE Entry Clearance Officer, Abuja
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. Ndungu of IAS
For the Respondent:          Mr. M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


Where housing is provided by a housing association it will amount to  public
funds within the meaning of para 6 of HC 395 if the housing  association  is
acting as the delegate of a local  authority  in  respect  of  the  latter's
housing obligations.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, citizens of Nigeria, appealed to the  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the respondent on 12 November 2007 refusing them  entry
    clearance as the dependent wife and children of the sponsor, who is the
    holder of a permit as a highly skilled migrant.  The Immigration  Judge
    dismissed their appeals.  The appellants sought and obtained  an  order
    for reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. The original refusal was on maintenance and accommodation grounds.  The
    Immigration Judge resolved issues of the availability and  adequacy  of
    maintenance in the appellants' favour. The only outstanding  matter  is
    therefore accommodation.  The sponsor is  a  tenant  under  a  Scottish
    Secure Tenancy. His landlord is the Glasgow  Housing  Association.   He
    took the tenancy after  he  was  given  notice  to  quit  by  a  former
    landlord.

 3. Paragraphs  195(iii)  and  197(iv)  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC  395,  which  apply  respectively  to  the  first
    appellant and the other two appellants, require them to show they would
    be accommodated adequately in the United Kingdom  without  recourse  to
    public funds.  "Public funds" is defined in Para 6 as meaning,  amongst
    other things,

      "(a) Housing under Part VI or VII of the Housing Act  1996  and  under
        Part II of the Housing Act 1985,  Part  I  or  II  of  the  Housing
        (Scotland) Act 1997, Part II  of  the  Housing  (Northern  Ireland)
        Order 1981, or Part II of  the  Housing  (Northern  Ireland)  Order
        1988".

 4. The principal statutes relating to the  provision  of  the  Housing  in
    Scotland are the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987,  to  which  reference  is
    made in para 6 of the Immigration Rules, and the Housing (Scotland) Act
    2001, an Act of the Scottish Parliament to which the Immigration  Rules
    make no reference.  Scottish Secure Tenancies are  a  creation  of  the
    2001  Act;  but  local  authorities'  powers  to  provide  housing  are
    contained in the 1987 Act.  It was for that reason that  in  KA  [2007]
    UKAIT 00081, the  Tribunal  held  that  housing  provided  by  a  local
    authority, even by means of a Scottish Secure Tenancy, must be "housing
    under... Part I or II of the Housing (Scotland)  Act  1987",  and  thus
    counted as public funds.

 5. The difference between the facts of KA and the  present  case  is  that
    whereas in KA the sponsor's landlord was the local  authority,  in  the
    present case the sponsor's landlord is the Glasgow Housing Association.
     The Glasgow Housing Association is a Registered Social  Landlord  with
    the meaning of Part 3,  Chapter  1  of  the  2001  Act.   That  chapter
    establishes the concept of Registered Social Landlords and enables both
    existing and future associations, if properly qualified,  to  register.
    There is an important connection between the social housing  provisions
    of the 1987 Act  and  the  provisions  relating  to  Registered  Social
    Landlords in the 2001 Act, for ss 5-6 of the 2001 Act  enable  a  local
    authority that has an obligation to a homeless person  under  the  1987
    Act to request a Registered Social Landlord to  provide  the  necessary
    access to housing; and the 2001 Act also amends the provisions  of  the
    1987  Act  relating  to  the  maintenance  of  housing  lists  and  the
    allocation of tenants, by treating Registered Social Landlords in  much
    the same way as local authorities.

 6. The effect of the 2001 Act in this field is that a local authority  can
    in essence discharge many of its duties in relation to housing homeless
    persons through the agency of  a  Registered  Social  Landlord;  and  a
    Registered Social Landlord can and in some cases  must  provide  houses
    according to the same criteria that a local authority would have  used.
    A local authority can effectively delegate its housing functions  to  a
    Registered Social Landlord.  We were told that in Glasgow that  has  to
    all intents and purposes  happened:  The  Glasgow  Housing  Association
    performs the functions of the local authority.

 7. Registered Social Landlords, however, do not have only the functions of
    local   authorities.    Registered   Social   Landlords   are   housing
    associations and, without forfeiting recognition as  Registered  Social
    Landlords, may function as other housing associations do, by  providing
    accommodation to their members, and doing so at a rent which is  likely
    to be lower than that on the open  market,  because  Registered  Social
    Landlords are required to operate on  a  not-for-profit  basis.   Thus,
    whereas the tenants of a local authority will  necessarily  be  persons
    who are housed under the provisions of  1987  Act,  the  tenants  of  a
    Registered Social Landlord may be persons in respect of whom a  housing
    obligation has arisen under the 1987 Act, or they may be simply private
    tenants of the housing association.  Where a sponsor is in  Scotland  a
    tenant of a local authority he will, by para 6 of the Immigration Rules
    as interpreted in KA, necessarily be regarded as  reliant  upon  public
    funds; but where a person is a tenant of a Registered Social  Landlord,
    the question whether he is reliant upon public  funds  will  depend  on
    whether  his  tenancy  derives  from  duties  of  the  local  authority
    delegated to the Registered Social Landlord, or from the activities  of
    the Registered Social Landlord as an autonomous housing association.

 8. We have set out those principles because it seems to us appropriate  to
    do so in the light of Mr. Matthews' careful submissions  to  us.   They
    are intended to be of assistance in future cases of this  nature.   The
    question whether in an individual case the sponsor's housing is  or  is
    not 'public funds' will be, as we have said, a matter of fact.

 9. In the present case Mr. Ndungu made it clear at the  beginning  of  his
    submissions that he conceded that, because the sponsor's tenancy  arose
    following his  having  been  given  notice  to  quit  by  his  previous
    landlord, it arose from the local authority's duty to house the sponsor
    as a homeless person.  The sponsor's accommodation  therefore  amounted
    to 'public funds' because it is housing under  Part  I  or  II  of  the
    Housing (Scotland) Act 1987.   It  appears  to  us  that  Mr.  Ndungu's
    concession was entirely correct.   A  person  who  is  a  tenant  of  a
    Registered Social Landlord might not be in receipt of public funds; but
    the sponsor was.

10. For the foregoing reasons we find that the Immigration  Judge  made  no
    error of law and we  order  that  her  determination,  dismissing  this
    appeal, shall stand.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT



