
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Charles (human rights appeal: scope) [2018] UKUT 00089 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           CLAUDIUS STEVEN CHARLES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood, Counsel, (Direct Access)


   (i)    A human rights appeal under section 82(1)(b) of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002")  can  be  determined
        only through the provisions of the ECHR; usually Article 8.


   (ii)   A person whose human rights claim turns on Article 8 will  not  be
        able to advance any criticism of the Secretary of State's  decision
        making under the Immigration Acts, including the immigration rules,
        unless the circumstances engage Article 8(2).

   (iii)  Following the amendments to ss.82, 85 and 86 of NIAA 2002  by  the
        Immigration Act 2014, it is no longer possible for the Tribunal  to
        allow an appeal on the ground that a decision is not in  accordance
        with the law. To this extent, Greenwood No. 2 (para 398 considered)
        [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC) should no longer be followed.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent (hereafter claimant) is a citizen  of  Grenada  who  was
    born on 29 April 1960.  On 25 June 2013, he was sentenced to 42 months'
    imprisonment for possession of Class A drugs, with  intent  to  supply.
    On 2 October 2013 the Secretary of State wrote to the claimant inviting
    him to make submissions as to why he should  not  be  deported  in  the
    light of his criminal history and latest conviction.

 2. On 26 November 2014, the Secretary of State signed a deportation  order
    in respect of the claimant.  She also issued a certificate, pursuant to
    section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The claimant commenced judicial review proceedings, which  led  to  the
    Secretary of State withdrawing the section  94B  certificate,  granting
    the  claimant  an  in-country  right  of  appeal,  and   treating   his
    application for revocation of the deportation order as a  human  rights
    claim, which the Secretary of State had rejected.




The first appeal decision

 4. The claimant's appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth  at  Nottingham  in  October  and  December   2015.    The
    claimant's position was that the Secretary of State  could  not  deport
    the claimant from the United Kingdom pursuant to  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.  He relied upon section 7 of  the  1971  Act  which,  so  far  as
    relevant, provides as follows:-

         7.   Exemption from deportation for certain existing residents

        (1)  Notwithstanding anything in section  3(5)  or  (6)  above  but
             subject to the  provisions  of  this  section,  a  Commonwealth
             citizen or citizen of the Republic of Ireland who  was  such  a
             citizen at the coming into force  of  this  Act  and  was  then
             ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom -

             (a)  ...

             (b)  shall not be liable to deportation under section 3(5)  if
                  at the time of the Secretary of State's  decision  he  had
                  for the last five years been ordinarily  resident  in  the
                  United Kingdom and Islands;]

             (c)  shall not on conviction of an offence be recommended  for
                  deportation under section 3(6)  if  at  the  time  of  the
                  conviction he had for the last five years been  ordinarily
                  resident in the United Kingdom and Islands.

         (2)  A person who has at any time become ordinarily resident in the
             United Kingdom or in any of the Islands shall not  be  treated
             for the purposes of this section as having ceased to be so  by
             reason only of his having remained  there  in  breach  of  the
             immigration laws.

         ...

         (5)  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  taken  to  exclude  the
             operation of section 3(8) above in relation  to  an  exemption
             under this section."

 5. Section 3(5) of the 1971 Act provides  that  a  person  who  is  not  a
    British citizen is liable to deportation from the United Kingdom if the
    Secretary of State deems his deportation to be conducive to the  public
    good.  Section 3(6) provides that a person who is not a British citizen
    shall also be liable to deportation if, after attaining the age of  17,
    he is convicted for an offence  punishable  with  imprisonment  and  on
    conviction is recommended for deportation by a court  empowered  to  do
    so.

 6. Section 3(8) provides as follows:-

         "(8) When any question arises under  this  Act  whether  or  not  a
             person is a British citizen, or is entitled  to  an  exemption
             under this Act, it shall lie on the  person  asserting  it  to
             prove that he is."

 7. The 1971 Act came in to force on 1 January 1973.  The  claimant's  case
    was that he had arrived in the United Kingdom in February 1972.  It  is
    common ground that the claimant cannot be deported if the claimant  was
    in the United Kingdom before 1 January 1973.  The  Secretary  of  State
    does not contend that, if the claimant was in the United Kingdom before
    that date, he may not have been ordinarily resident.  She also takes no
    point as to the application of section 7(1)(b) in the claimant's  case.
    As a result, the sole issue regarding the application of section  7  is
    whether the claimant was in the United Kingdom before 1 January 1973.

 8. Judge P J M Hollingworth heard a great deal of oral evidence  from  the
    claimant and his witnesses.  The  judge,  however,  eventually  decided
    that the Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  answer  Subject  Access
    Requests made on behalf of the claimant, with a view to securing access
    to his Home Office files.  According to the  judge,  the  Secretary  of
    State had also "failed to gather all the relevant  information  in  the
    first instance before making the deportation order".

 9. As a result, the judge decided to "allow the appeal on the  basis  that
    the [Secretary of State] has not acted in accordance with  the  law  in
    the making of the deportation decision".



Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

10. In a decision dated 19 July 2016, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  found  a
    material error of law in Judge P J M Hollingworth's decision.  She  set
    that decision aside and remitted the case to be re-decided by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

11. As Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt found, Judge P J M Hollingworth,  although
    seized with what she described  as  an  Article  8  appeal,  failed  to
    address any of the five "Razgar questions" (R (Razgar) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27 at paragraph  17).   These
    are:-

         "(1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

           (2)    If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

           (3)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

           (4)    If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedom of others?

            (5)     If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

12. At paragraph 16, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt said as follows:-

         "16. The appeal was allowed as the First-tier Tribunal purported to
             exercise a jurisdiction no longer open to it, finding that the
             respondent  acted  unlawfully  in  failing  to  obtain  proper
             information on when the appellant came to the UK before making
             a deportation order and in failing to provide that information
             when formally requested to do so  by  the  appellant  and  the
             Tribunal.  There was no statutory jurisdiction for allowing an
             appeal on that basis and in doing so the  First-tier  Tribunal
             fell into legal error."




Decision on the remitted appeal

13. The remitted appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Malone on 22
    November 2016.  He allowed the claimant's appeal.  Permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 2  June
    2017.

14. First-tier Tribunal Judge Malone heard evidence from the  claimant  and
    the claimant's two daughters, Stacey and Anne Marie.   The  judge  also
    heard oral evidence from the mother  of  Stacey  and  Anne  Marie,  the
    claimant's elder brother and the claimant's sister.

15. At paragraph 14 of his decision, Judge Malone said that the claimant -

         "resists deportation on two grounds: first,  that  his  deportation
         would be unlawful by reason of s.7 of the 1971 Act; and,  secondly,
         that his deportation would  be  unlawful  as  it  would  unlawfully
         infringe his qualified  protected  right  to  enjoy  family  and/or
         private life in the United Kingdom."

16. The judge's analysis of the evidence and conclusions thereon are to  be
    found at paragraphs 17 to 38 of the decision.  Having  heard  the  oral
    evidence of the claimant and his witnesses, he found  them  all  to  be
    "honest  and  reliable.   My  assessment  of  their  oral  evidence  is
    particularly important in this case".

17. At paragraph 18, the judge recorded the Secretary of State's concession
    that if the claimant came to the United Kingdom before 1  January  1973
    and had been ordinarily resident since that time, whether  lawfully  or
    as an overstayer, then by reason of section  7  of  the  1971  Act  the
    claimant was "exempt from deportation".

18. In his deportation questionnaire, the claimant said that he came to the
    United Kingdom in January or March 1970, when  he  would  have  been  9
    years old.  In his witness statement and  oral  evidence,  however,  he
    said that he came to the United Kingdom in 1972 when he  was  12  years
    old.

19. At paragraphs  21  and  22,  the  judge  dealt  with  written  material
    emanating from, respectively, a GP Surgery and the Ilford Chest Clinic.
     The medical notes from the GP Surgery recorded that the  claimant  had
    first attended there on 14 October 1974.  The judge observed that these
    notes "do not conflict with the [claimant's] claim that he came to  the
    United Kingdom in 1972".

20. At paragraph 22, the judge considered the letter from the Ilford  Chest
    Clinic.  This  was  dated  2  July  1975.   It  was  addressed  to  the
    claimant's GP.  The letter stated that the claimant  "came  to  England
    eighteen months ago".

21. The judge considered that this statement "does not  conflict  with  the
    [claimant's] claim".  The judge  said  that  the  expression  "eighteen
    months ago" was "inexact.  I am unable to come to a  conclusion  as  to
    how inexact it might be.  I do not know on what evidence that statement
    came to be made.  Its author did not give evidence".

22. Beginning at paragraph 24,  the  judge  examined  in  detail  the  oral
    evidence.  The appellant's elder brother had told  the  judge  that  he
    arrived in the United  Kingdom  when  he  was  14  years  old  and  had
    travelled to this country with the claimant.  There  was  nothing  more
    that he could say other than he knew he was 14 when he arrived with the
    claimant.  The witness had attended Senior  School  in  Ilford  shortly
    after arrival and the claimant went to the Junior School.

23. The claimant's sister said that she had  been  8  years  old  when  her
    brothers (one of whom was the claimant) arrived in the United  Kingdom.
    It had been a memorable occasion for her.  The brothers had joined  her
    in the United Kingdom.  She was certain that she was 8 years  old  when
    the claimant and his  brother  had  arrived.   She  had  been  born  in
    December 1963.

24. The judge considered it probable that  the  claimant  and  his  brother
    arrived in the summer  "of  whatever  year  it  was  they  arrived  in,
    enabling them to start a new  school  year  in  September  or  October"
    (paragraph 26).

25. At paragraph 28, the judge noted that he also had a letter from another
    brother of the claimant, now residing in Canada,  who  stated  that  he
    believed the claimant had come to the United Kingdom in 1972/1973.

26. The remaining findings of the judge need to be set out in full:-

         "29. Ms. Crittenden said, of the evidence  of  the  Appellant,  Mr.
             Charles and Ms. Charles, that "they would  say  that  wouldn't
             they"; ie that the Appellant had first come here in  1972.   I
             find that an unjustified submission.  At no stage was  it  put
             to any of those three witnesses that they were lying or indeed
             that they were mistaken.  As I have said above, I  found  both
             Mr. and Ms. Charles to be  impressive  witnesses.   They  gave
             their evidence with, what I  perceived  to  be,  candour.   Ms
             Crittenden asked Ms. Charles no questions at all  as  to  when
             the Appellant came to the United Kingdom.  She must  therefore
             be taken to have accepted her evidence.

           30.    The Appellant's claim is fortified, I  find  considerably,
             by  two  further  matters.   The  Appellant,  by  his  current
             solicitors, has striven to obtain school records from  Loxford
             School.  As I understand it, due to the fact that  the  school
             has moved premises, it has no records  going  back  beyond  15
             years.  In a telephone conversation between a member of  staff
             at the school and someone at the  Appellant's  solicitors,  it
             was stated that enquiries had been made of the senior staff at
             the school to see if anyone was there as at  1972.   The  most
             senior member of staff still present only started teaching  in
             the 1980's.

           31.    The other matter is that, since  the  Appellant's  current
             solicitors have taken on his case,  they  have  made  numerous
             efforts, on the Appellant's behalf, to  obtain  evidence  from
             the Home Office.   On  16  February  2015,  a  Subject  Access
             Request was made on the Appellant's behalf for  his  file.   A
             similar request was  made  for  Mr.  Charles'  file.   Further
             follow-up letters were sent  in  May  2015,  August  2015  and
             October 2015.  The Respondent failed to respond to the request
             within the 40 days  statutory  deadline  or  at  all.   On  29
             October 2015, the Appellant's solicitors submitted a complaint
             to  the  Information  Commissioner  regarding  the  delay   in
             obtaining information from the  Home  Office.   Recently,  the
             request has been answered to  the  effect  that  Mr.  Charles'
             files have been lost and producing  three  or  four  documents
             relating to the Appellant, none of which  had  any  evidential
             value.

           32.    The  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  authorised  vigorous
             approaches to be made both to his old  school  -  it  was  not
             disputed he attended there - and to the Home Office is  strong
             evidence of his bona fides on this matter.  Had he  fabricated
             his date of entry, his enthusiasm for approaching institutions
             that might have been able to produce evidence of when  he  was
             first in the  United  Kingdom  would,  I  suspect,  have  been
             minimal.

           33.    As I say, the efforts of the Appellant  authorised  to  be
             made to ascertain corroboration of his claim  as  to  when  he
             arrived here goes to his bona fides.  All the oral evidence  I
             had was to the effect that the Appellant came  to  the  United
             Kingdom in 1972.  I emphasise it was not put  to  any  of  the
             witnesses  that  they   were   lying.    The   only   document
             inconsistent with the Appellant being in the United Kingdom in
             1972 was the letter from  Ilford  Chest  Clinic.   However,  I
             treat that document  with  caution.   I  know  little  of  its
             provenance and I have no idea how the author came to  use  the
             phrase he did to  identify  the  inexact  date  the  Appellant
             entered the United Kingdom.  I do not know  on  what  material
             the statement was based.

           34.    The standard of proof the Appellant has to demonstrate  is
             that of "on the balance of probabilities".  It is not  "beyond
             reasonable doubt".  I am satisfied he has taken  all  possible
             steps to obtain corroborative evidence of his claimed date  of
             entry.  It is unfortunate that the Home Office has been unable
             to produce  any  material  evidence  relating  to  either  Mr.
             Charles or the Appellant.  The fact that the  Appellant's  old
             school has not kept records does not render his claim  weaker.
             It is a neutral factor.  As I have said above, I find the fact
             that he has energetically approached his old  school  goes  to
             demonstrating his bona fides.

           35.    After careful consideration, and taking into  account  all
             the evidence available to me, I have come  to  the  conclusion
             that  the  Appellant  has  demonstrated,  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities, that he and his  older  brother  Radix  Charles
             came to the United Kingdom in 1972, probably in the summer  of
             that year.  I find, to the same standard, that he entered  the
             United Kingdom on a British Colonies  passport.   It  was  not
             suggested that the Appellant has not been ordinarily  resident
             in the United Kingdom for the last five years.  I find that he
             has been ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom since 1972.
              He has never left this country.

           36.    I  therefore  find  that  the  Appellant  is  exempt  from
             deportation  by  reason  of  s.7  of  the   1971   Act.    The
             Respondent's decision under  appeal  refusing  to  revoke  the
             deportation order she has made in respect of the Appellant and
             the decision to make a deportation order in  the  first  place
             are therefore unlawful.  In the result, this  appeal  must  be
             allowed.

           37.    Bearing in mind my finding on the first issue is in favour
             of the Appellant, I do not intend to embark on a  lengthy  and
             complex analysis of the position of the Appellant, his claimed
             partner and his two daughters (the elder of whom has  achieved
             majority) under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.  There is no
             point in my doing so.  Were I to have done so,  I  would  have
             had to have found that the Respondent's  decision  is  not  in
             accordance with the law, when going through the steps set  out
             in Razgar 2004 UKHL 27.

           38.    This appeal is allowed as  the  Respondent's  decision  is
             unlawful.  As the decision was properly to be viewed as one of
             her "own motion",  it  is  not  a  situation  where  a  lawful
             decision remains to be made by  her  (see  Greenwood  (No.  2)
             (para. 398 considered) 2015 UKUT 629 (IAC)."



          The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal

27. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal had this to  say  about  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's paragraph 36:-

         "2.  The FTT allowed the appeal as  "otherwise  not  in  accordance
             with the law", however this was not a ground of appeal open to
             the [claimant].  This appeal fell to be considered  under  the
             appeal provisions of the 2014 Immigration  Act,  the  relevant
             decision of the SSHD being taken on 21st May  2015,  therefore
             falling  outside  the  transitional  provisions  of  the  Act.
             Therefore the only grounds available  to  the  appellant  were
             whether his deportation would be unlawful  under  s.6  of  the
             Human Rights  Act  (as  per  s.15(4)  Immigration  Act  2014).
             Therefore the  FTTJ  materially  erred  in  finding  that  the
             decision was otherwise not in accordance with the  law;  there
             was no such outcome available."

28. The remainder of the grounds took issue with Judge Malone's findings of
    fact.  It was submitted that the letter from the Ilford Chest Clinic of
    2 July 1975 had been misconstrued, in  that  the  expression  "eighteen
    months" which the judge had regarded  as  "inexact"  was  not  of  that
    character.  The grounds submitted that the statement in the letter that
    the claimant had come to the United Kingdom "eighteen months ago" had

         "obviously been a result of a consultation between  the  [claimant]
         and the chest clinic.  There was no reason to  doubt  the  evidence
         from the records obtained and in  disregarding  this  evidence  and
         failing to give  adequate  reasons  for  doing  so  the  FTT  erred
         materially in law."

29. The grounds also submitted that the  evidence  from  the  chest  clinic
    contradicted the evidence of the claimant and his  siblings,  with  the
    result that their evidence "should have been treated  with  caution  by
    the FTT".  The judge had also erred in disregarding the submissions  of
    the Secretary of State's Presenting Officer that the  evidence  of  the
    siblings "was likely to be in the [claimant's] favour".

30. The grounds further contended that the judge had erred  in  considering
    the issue of the Subject Access Request at all: "The request simply had
    nothing to do with the appellate proceedings".  The burden was said  to
    be on the claimant to show that, on the balance  of  probabilities,  he
    was exempt from deportation by virtue of section 7.

31. As for the judge's alternative finding that, had he gone on to consider
    Article 8, he would have found that the decision was not in  accordance
    with the law, when going through the "Razgar" steps, the  Secretary  of
    State submitted that this was  wrong.   Since  the  claimant  had  not,
    according to the Secretary of State, shown himself to  be  exempt,  the
    judge should have considered whether the claimant met the  requirements
    of paragraph 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules.




    Discussion

32. It is convenient to begin discussion with the  challenge  made  by  the
    Secretary of State to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings of  fact
    on the issue of when the claimant arrived in the  United  Kingdom.   We
    agree with Mr Haywood, for the claimant, that the judge's  findings  on
    this issue disclosed no legal error.

33. It is trite law that an appellate court or tribunal  will  not  lightly
    interfere with the findings of a judicial fact-finder, who has had  the
    benefit of hearing and seeing the parties and witnesses give  evidence.
    The Secretary of State's attempt to undermine the significance  of  the
    judge's findings on the oral evidence depends upon the letter of 2 July
    1975 from the Ilford Chest Clinic.  The  Secretary  of  State  contends
    that the expression "he came to England eighteen  months  ago"  is  not
    "inexact".  However, on any sensible reading of the letter, the  writer
    was not asserting, in terms, that the claimant arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 2 January 1974.   The  judge  was,  therefore,  entitled  to
    regard the expression as "inexact" and entitled  to  say  that  he  was
    unable to conclude how inexact the expression might be.

34. We agree with Mr Haywood that, contrary to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assertion in  her  grounds,  it  is  certainly  not  obvious  that  the
    statement in the letter had been made as a result of  the  consultation
    between the claimant and the person writing the letter.  In any  event,
    one can easily envisage scenarios in which, for  whatever  reason,  the
    writer of the letter may have  misunderstood  what  was  said  in  this
    regard.  The writer was,  after  all,  not  materially  concerned  with
    precisely when the claimant had arrived in the United Kingdom.

35. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was  entitled  to  place  weight  on  the
    persons who had given him oral evidence.   There  is  nothing  remotely
    perverse in his findings in this regard.  The judge was called upon  to
    consider all the evidence, both oral and written, in the round.  On any
    reading of his decision, that is precisely what the judge did.

36. There is no merit in the Secretary of State's  criticism  of  what  the
    judge had to say regarding the Subject  Access  Request  or,  for  that
    matter, the claimant's attempt to obtain school records.  The judge was
    entitled to conclude that a person who had made  vigorous  attempts  to
    obtain official documentation (which may have supported  his  case  or,
    alternatively, undermined it) had indicated "his  bona  fides  on  this
    matter" (paragraph 32).

37. There is, for these reasons,  no  valid  criticism  of  Judge  Malone's
    conclusion  that  the  claimant  had   shown,   on   the   balance   of
    probabilities, that he arrived in the United Kingdom before  1  January
    1973 and that the exemption in section 7 of the  1971  Act  accordingly
    applied in his case.

38. How, then, should the judge have given effect to that finding?   As  we
    have seen, at paragraph 36 he did so by  allowing  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that section 7  of  the  1971  Act  exempted  the  claimant  from
    deportation, with the result that "the decision to make  a  deportation
    order in the first place" was unlawful, as was the  refusal  to  revoke
    the deportation order.

39. In fact, however, as the judge had earlier recorded  in  his  decision,
    the Secretary of State's decision of 21 May  2015,  against  which  the
    claimant had appealed, was a decision to refuse a human rights claim.

40. Judge Malone referred, at paragraph 38 of his decision,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Greenwood (No. 2) (para. 398 considered)  [2015]
    UKUT 00629 (IAC).  That decision contained  guidance  on  a  number  of
    matters.  For present purposes, we are concerned with  what  the  Upper
    Tribunal had to say about the ability or otherwise  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to "remit" a matter to  the  Secretary  of  State,  under  the
    appellate regime as it is currently stands, following the changes  made
    by the Immigration Act 2014.

41. Under the heading "Remittal by the FTT to the Secretary of  State"  the
    Upper Tribunal held as follows:-

         "20. We have highlighted in [3] above the first of the  two  orders
             of the FtT, namely  "remittal"  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
             Fundamentally,  wherein  reposes  the  power  to  remit?   The
             operative statutory provision in this context is section 86 of
             the 2002  Act,  as  amended  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
             (Treatment  of  Claimants)  Act  2004,  per  paragraph  18  of
             Schedule 2, effective from 04 April 2005, and the Immigration,
             Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, per paragraph 4  of  Schedule
             1, effective from  31  August  2006.   Its  predecessors  were
             paragraph 21 of Schedule 4 to the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
             1999 and section 19 of the Immigration Act 1971.  Prior to its
             most recent amendment, section 86 provided:

             "(1) This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1), 83
                  or 83A.


               (2)    The Tribunal must determine-


                  (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or
                      not by virtue of section 85(1)), and


                  (b    any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.




               (3)    The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it
                  thinks that-
                  (a)   a decision against which the appeal is brought or is
                      treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with
                      the law (including immigration rules), or


                  (b)   a discretion exercised in making a decision  against
                      which the appeal is brought or is  treated  as  being
                      brought should have been exercised differently.


               (4)    For the purposes of subsection (3) a decision that  a
                  person should be removed from the United Kingdom  under  a
                  provision shall not be regarded as unlawful  if  it  could
                  have been lawfully made  by  reference  to  removal  under
                  another provision.


               (5)     In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the
                  Tribunal shall dismiss the appeal.


               (6)     Refusal to depart from  or  to  authorise  departure
                  from immigration rules is not the exercise of a discretion
                  for the purposes of subsection (3)(b).


         In its amended form, section 86 now provides:


             "(1) This section applies to an appeal under section 82(1).


              (2) The Tribunal must determine-


                  (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal, and


                  (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider"


         Section 85, under the rubric "Matters to be considered", provides:
             "(1) An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be
                  treated by [the Tribunal] as including an  appeal  against
                  any decision in respect of which the appellant has a right
                  of appeal under section 82(1).
               (2)    If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement
                  under section 120 the Tribunal shall consider  any  matter
                  raised in the statement  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
                  appeal of a kind  listed  in  section  84(1)  against  the
                  decision appealed against.
               (3)    Subsection (2) applies  to  a  statement  made  under
                  section 120 whether the statement was made before or after
                  the appeal was commenced.
               (4)    On an appeal under section  82(1),  83(2)  or  83A(2)
                  against a decision  the  Tribunal  may  consider  evidence
                  about any matter which it thinks relevant to the substance
                  of the  decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a
                  matter arising after the date of the decision.
              (5) But in relation to an appeal under section 82(1)  against
                  refusal of entry clearance or refusal of a certificate  of
                  entitlement under section 10-
                  (a)  subsection (4) shall not apply, and
                  (b)  the Tribunal  may  consider  only  the  circumstances
                      appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse."
         21.  We consider it clear that prior to the most  recent  amendment
             of section 86, the FtT, in determining statutory appeals,  had
             two main choices viz to allow or dismiss the appeal.  A  third
             and fourth option were also available. The third option was to
             allow an appeal and, simultaneously,  to  make  directions  in
             order to give effect to its decision, per section  87  of  the
             2002 Act as amended.   However,  this  has  been  repealed  by
             paragraph 37 of  Schedule  9  to  the  Immigration  Act  2014,
             effective from  20  October  2014.   Thus  [17]  of  Greenwood
             (Automatic Deportation: Order of  Events)  [2014]  UKUT  00342
             (IAC), which predated this statutory development, must be read
             with this adjustment.   The  fourth  possible  outcome  of  an
             appeal to the FtT, as Greenwood noted, was the following.   If
             the effect of the Tribunal's decision was to conclude that the
             decision of the Secretary of State under appeal  was  unlawful
             and the Tribunal did not substitute another decision:

             (a)  if the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  involved  a
                  determination of an application made by  the  litigant,  a
                  lawful decision remains to be made  by  the  Secretary  of
                  State - and it is preferable that the FtT say so clearly;


             (b)  alternatively, if the challenge in the appeal was  to  an
                  "own motion" decision of the Secretary of State, it  would
                  be a matter for the Secretary of State to decide whether a
                  further decision should be made in the wake of  the  FtT's
                  decision.

         This is, in effect, a declaratory decision.


         22.  As noted above, in the seemingly  interminable  merry-go-round
             of  legislative  activity,  section   86   has   undergone   a
             significant recent amendment.  This is linked to the wholesale
             reduction in  statutory  rights  of  appeal  effected  by  the
             amendments introduced by the Immigration Act  2014,  operative
             from 20 October  2014.   In  this  context,  the  exercise  of
             juxtaposing  the  new  section  82  with  its  predecessor  is
             enlightening.   This  reduction  in  appealable  decisions  is
             accompanied by a significant pruning of the permitted  grounds
             of appeal, which are enshrined in section 84.  By section  85,
             the FtT is obliged to consider certain matters.  By this route
             one arrives at section  86,  which  bears  the  cross  heading
             "Determination of Appeal".


         23.  In notable contrast with its predecessor, the new  section  86
             does not reproduce  the  two  basic  options  of  allowing  or
             dismissing the appeal.  In this respect, the drafting is  both
             surprising and  infelicitous.   However,  applying  elementary
             dogma, it is the function  of  every  appellate  tribunal  and
             court to resolve appeals, normally by allowing  or  dismissing
             them, unless directed otherwise by statute.  I  consider  that
             any reconfiguration of  this  basic  model  would,  given  the
             legislative  history,  require  clear  and   elaborative   new
             provisions.  There are none.  The new  statutory  language  is
             "determine".  I conclude that this encompasses the  two  basic
             options of either allowing or dismissing an appeal.  The third
             option - noted in [21] above -  of  allowing  an  appeal  with
             directions has clearly been  extinguished  by  the  repeal  of
             section 87 of the 2002 Act.  I  consider,  however,  that  the
             fourth option noted above, with its two dimensions,  continues
             to apply.  This has been a feature of UTIAC jurisprudence  for
             some years and, in the new  legislation,  Parliament  has  not
             taken the opportunity to interfere.


         24.  The effect of this analysis is that the answer to the question
             posed in [20] above is uncompromising: the FtT has no power to
             remit a case to the Secretary of State for any  purpose.   The
             principle which underpins this conclusion is that the FtT is a
             creature of statute and its powers are  exclusively  statutory
             in consequence.   Any  course  which  the  statute  does  not,
             expressly or by implication, permit  is  forbidden.   In  this
             respect, the FtT is to  be  contrasted  with  the  High  Court
             which, by tradition of  some  longevity,  is  acknowledged  to
             possess an inherent jurisdiction.  The FtT cannot lay claim to
             possession of comparable powers.


         25.  This analysis is consistent  with  the  limited  jurisprudence
             bearing on this subject.  In Haddad [2000] INLR 117,  the  IAT
             decided that the adjudicator had no  power  to  remit  to  the
             Secretary of State an unconsidered and undetermined claim  but
             should, rather,  determine  such  claim  as  primary  decision
             maker.  The Court of Appeal espoused the same  approach  in  R
             (Zaier) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2003]
             EWCA Civ 937.  The FtT is also  constituted  primary  decision
             maker in cases where new claims are raised by the appellant in
             response to a so-called "one stop" notice in  accordance  with
             sections 85(2) and 120 of the 2002 Act: see AS (Afghanistan) v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
             1076.  Similarly, in  circumstances  where  the  Secretary  of
             State has not made a decision on whether the appellant  has  a
             Community law right to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in
             respect of the best interests of an affected  child,  the  FtT
             must make the primary decision: see VM (Zambia) v Secretary of
             State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  521  and  DS
             (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2011] EWCA Civ 305."

42. Although the Tribunal in Greenwood (No. 2) helpfully set  out  sections
    85 and 86 of the 2002 Act, as amended by the 2014 Act, it is  important
    to set out the provisions dealing with a right of appeal in respect  of
    the refusal of the human rights claim.

43. So far as relevant for present purposes, section 82 (Right of appeal to
    the Tribunal) provides as follows:-

         "(1) A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where -

         ...

             (b)  the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
                  rights claim made by P,

             ... ."

44. So far as relevant, section 84 (Grounds of appeal) provides:-

         "(2) An appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
             claim) must be brought on the  ground  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998."

45. We find we must take issue with  the  last  part  of  paragraph  23  of
    Greenwood (No. 2).  The former ability of the Tribunal to conclude that
    a decision of the Secretary of State was unlawful, with the result that
    a lawful decision remained to be made by her, depended  upon  the  fact
    that under the version of section 86 of the 2002 Act as it  was,  prior
    to its amendment by the 2014 Act, the Tribunal was required to allow an
    appeal insofar as it thought that a decision against which  the  appeal
    was brought or was treated as being brought was not in accordance  with
    the law  (including  immigration  rules).  That  requirement  has  been
    removed from the legislation.  In this  regard,  therefore,  Parliament
    has most definitely "taken the opportunity to interfere".

46. The correct approach to adopt in a human rights  appeal  under  section
    82(1)(b) is as follows.  As  section  84(2)  makes  clear,  and  as  is
    reflected in the present notice of decision, served in compliance  with
    the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003, the decision being appealed
    is the decision to refuse the claimant's human rights  claim.   Section
    84(2) provides that the only ground upon which  that  decision  can  be
    challenged is that "the decision is unlawful under  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998".  Section 6(1) of the 1998 Act provides that  it
    "is unlawful  for  a  public  authority  to  act  in  a  way  which  is
    incompatible with the Convention rights".

47. The definition of "human rights claim" in section 113(1)  of  the  2002
    Act involves the making of a claim by a person that to  remove  him  or
    her from or to require him or her to leave the United Kingdom would  be
    unlawful under section 6.

48. The task, therefore, for the Tribunal, in a human rights appeal  is  to
    decide whether such removal or requirement would  violate  any  of  the
    provisions of the ECHR.  In many such cases, including the present, the
    issue is whether the hypothetical removal or requirement to leave would
    be contrary to Article 8 (private and family life).

49. In such a paradigm human rights appeal, therefore, we do  not  consider
    that paragraph 21 of the decision in Greenwood No 2, including its sub-
    paragraphs (a) and (b), has any purchase.  If the  decision  to  refuse
    the human rights claim would violate section 6 of  the  1998  Act,  the
    Tribunal must so find.  In such a paradigm case, we see no  purpose  in
    the Tribunal making any statement to the effect that "a lawful decision
    remains to be made by the Secretary of State".  It would  certainly  be
    wrong to conclude that, having  allowed  the  appeal,  the  appellant's
    human rights claim remains outstanding, in the sense that the Secretary
    of State must make a fresh decision on that claim.  The actual position
    will be that the Secretary of State, faced with  the  allowing  of  the
    appeal by the Tribunal, will decide whether and, if so, what  leave  to
    enter or remain she should give  to  the  appellant.   Any  deportation
    decision or decision  under  section  10  of  the  1999  Act  that  the
    Secretary of State may have made in respect of the appellant will  fall
    away.  Again, we see no need for  the  Tribunal  to  make  any  express
    statement to that effect.

50. What we have just said applies in the paradigm case where there  is  no
    discrete reason why any planned removal by the Secretary of State would
    be unlawful.  In other words,  but  for  the  Tribunal's  finding  that
    removal would constitute a disproportionate interference with Article 8
    rights, the Secretary of State would have had the power to remove.

51. In the present case, as we have seen, that was not the position.  Judge
    Malone found as a fact that the claimant was more likely than not  that
    to  have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  before  1  January   1973.
    Accordingly, the claimant was  entitled  to  the  benefit  afforded  by
    section 7 of the 1971 Act and was thus exempt from deportation.

52. The appeal before the judge was, however, a human rights appeal.  As we
    have seen, the sole ground of challenge to the decision to  refuse  the
    human rights claim is that the refusal is unlawful under section  6  of
    the 1998 Act.

53. In the circumstances, Judge Malone  was,  we  find,  wrong  in  law  to
    purport to  allow  the  appeal  on  the  freestanding  basis  that  the
    decisions to make the deportation order, and to refuse  to  revoke  it,
    were in each case unlawful.  To repeat, neither of those decisions  was
    the decision under appeal.  The judge was therefore compelled to  treat
    the section 7 issue as going to the determination of the sole ground of
    appeal; namely, whether refusal of the claim would violate  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the ECHR, by reference to Article 8.

54. At this point, it is necessary to focus on the wording of Article 8:-

         "(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

           (2)    There should be no interference by a public authority with
             the exercise of this right except such  as  is  in  accordance
             with the law and is necessary in a democratic society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

55. As  can  be  seen  from  paragraph  11  above,  the  so-called  "Razgar
    questions" of Lord Bingham at paragraph 17 of the opinions of the House
    of Lords in [2004] UKHL 27 are designed to enable judicial fact-finders
    to navigate the wording of Article 8(1) and where  appropriate  Article
    8(2), to the extent that the facts of the case so require.

56. Questions (1) and (2), if each answered positively, take  the  judicial
    fact-finder into the realm of  Article  8(2).   Questions  (3)  to  (5)
    engage sequentially with the requirements of that part of the  Article.



57. In the present case, as Judge Malone in effect found at paragraph 37  -
    and as is in any event manifest - the claimant enjoyed  the  protection
    of Article 8.  The issue, therefore, was whether the Secretary of State
    could demonstrate that a positive answer fell to be given  to  each  of
    Razgar questions (3) to (5).

58. So far as concerns the requirement addressed in question (3), that  the
    interference be "in accordance  with  the  law",  both  Strasbourg  and
    domestic authority suggests that the question is whether  the  proposed
    interference (here, deportation) has a proper basis  in  domestic  law,
    including whether that law is accessible to the  person  concerned  and
    foreseeable as to its effects (see  eg  AB  v  Her  Majesty's  Advocate
    [2017] UKSC 25, paragraph  25).   In  the  present  case,  the  law  of
    deportation under the 1971 Act, read with the UK Borders  Act  2007  in
    the case of foreign criminals, satisfies these requirements.

59. The issue, therefore, is what effect  Judge  Malone's  finding  on  the
    application of section 7 of the 1971 Act had on question (5);  that  is
    to say, on whether the interference would  be  proportionate.   As  the
    judge found, the proper application of the  law  on  deportation  meant
    that the claimant was entitled to rely upon the statutory exemption  in
    section 7.  Since, on the facts found, any hypothetical attempt by  the
    Secretary of State to deport  the  claimant  would  be  unlawful,  that
    hypothetical action on the part of the Secretary of State would,  quite
    obviously, represent a disproportionate interference with the Article 8
    rights of the claimant.

60. Accordingly, although we disagree with the conclusion in  paragraph  37
    of the judge's decision, that  Razgar  question  (3)  would  have  been
    answered in the negative, neither that finding nor, more  particularly,
    the finding at paragraph 36 constituted a material error of law.   This
    is for the simple reason that the appeal would be bound to  be  allowed
    on the basis that the answer to Razgar question (5) is: no.

61. We are fortified in our approach by the recent judgment of the Court of
    Appeal in Ahsan and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.  In that case, the Court  of  Appeal  held  that,
    provided certain conditions were satisfied (as to which, see  paragraph
    116 of the judgment), a human  rights  appeal  brought  in  the  United
    Kingdom would normally entitle the Upper Tribunal to refuse  permission
    to apply for judicial review in a TOEIC case, where  the  Secretary  of
    State had decided that a person  used  deception  in  seeking  (whether
    successfully or not) leave to remain in the United Kingdom, as a result
    of having a proxy sit a TOEIC test of proficiency in written and spoken
    English.

62. In so concluding, the Court was faced with the submission from Mr Malik
    and Mr Biggs, counsel on behalf of two of the appellants, that a  human
    rights appeal was different from an appeal against a decision to remove
    under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  (as  it  was
    before amendment by the 2014 Act):-

         "112.    Mr Malik and Mr Biggs took a more radical position.   They
             focused on the fact that any in-country appeal under the post-
             October 2014 regime afforded  by  following  Ms  Giovannetti's
             route would, necessarily, not be an appeal against the section
             10 decision itself but only against the refusal of  the  human
             rights claim, which is a different decision.  Such  an  appeal
             could not be an adequate alternative remedy to the quashing of
             the section 10 notice by way of judicial review.   There  were
             two strands to their submissions in this regard.


         113. First, Mr Biggs in particular submitted that  persons  against
             whom a finding of deception was made by the Secretary of State
             were entitled as a matter of justice to  a  judicial  decision
             about whether that finding was justified, both because of  its
             effect on  their  reputations  and  because  of  its  specific
             consequences for future applications for leave to  enter:  see
             paras.  20-21  above.   A  human  rights  appeal   would   not
             necessarily achieve that outcome.  It is true that if (a)  the
             tribunal accepted  that  the  appellant's  human  rights  were
             engaged  by  their  proposed  removal   and   (b)   the   only
             justification advanced for the removal were that they had used
             deception, then that issue would have to be  determined.   But
             one or other of those conditions might be absent.  As to  (a),
             not every person against whom a decision based on deception is
             made may have established a significant private or family life
             in this country.  As to (b), the  proposed  removal  might  be
             justified on other grounds (as in fact the Secretary of  State
             was arguing in Mr Ahsan's case - see para. 150 below)."

63. At paragraph 116, the Court set out the conditions which needed  to  be
    satisfied, if a human rights appeal could, as a general matter, be said
    to be a suitable alternative remedy to judicial review.  The  first  of
    the conditions was:-

         "(A) It must be clear that on such an appeal the FtT will determine
             whether the appellant used deception as alleged in the section
             10 notice."

64. The court explained the ambit of condition (A) as follows:-

         "117. As for (A), if in a case of this kind permission  were  given
             to apply for judicial review of the section 10  decision,  the
             applicant would obtain a judicial determination of whether  he
             or she did or did not cheat in their TOEIC test, since that is
             a matter of precedent fact on  which  the  lawfulness  of  the
             decision depends.  I regard the right to such a  determination
             as a matter of real value because  of  the  potentially  grave
             other consequences of an official finding of  that  character,
             as identified at paras. 20-21 above, even where  (untypically)
             it is not, or no longer,  central  to  any  removal  decision.
             However an appellant would prima  facie  also  obtain  such  a
             determination in a human rights appeal.  The tribunal would of
             course have to decide the deception issue  for  itself  rather
             than  simply  review  the  Secretary  of  State's  finding  on
             rationality grounds, and the appeal would to that extent be an
             appropriate alternative.  But if there is any  risk  that  the
             appeal will be determined on a basis which  does  not  require
             such a determination, e.g. for the  reasons  suggested  by  Mr
             Biggs at para. 113 above, that will not be the case.


         118. I should say, for the avoidance of doubt, that  the  reasoning
             in the previous paragraph does not mean  that  in  every  case
             where a finding of deception  is  made  the  subject  of  that
             finding is entitled to a judicial determination of  the  truth
             of the allegation.  Whether it does  so  will  depend  on  the
             legal context in which the question arises, including  whether
             it is material to a human rights claim.  That there are  cases
             where only a rationality review is available is illustrated by
             Giri (see para. 43 above).  Ms Giovannetti was  asked  by  the
             Court whether an appellant was entitled to pursue a  challenge
             to a deception finding in its own right, irrespective  of  its
             impact on  the  question  of  leave  to  remain  or  potential
             removal.  She said that in principle they would  be,  but  she
             submitted, relying on Giri, that such a challenge  could  only
             be on Wednesbury grounds.

         119. I turn to condition (B).  Mr Biggs must be  right  that  where
             the FTT on a human rights appeal finds that the appellant  did
             not cheat, that will not formally lead to the reversal of  the
             section 10 decision: that is a different  and  prior  decision
             which will not as such be  the  subject  of  the  appeal.   In
             contrast, a successful judicial review challenge would lead to
             the section 10 decision being quashed.  But I would not regard
             that difference as necessarily conclusive.  This  is  an  area
             where we should be concerned with substance rather than  form.
             I would regard the crucial question as being whether the  fact
             that the section 10 decision remained formally in place  -  so
             that leave to remain was  still  formally  "invalidated"  (see
             section 10 (8)) - would leave an  appellant  worse  off  as  a
             matter of substance than if the  decision  had  been  quashed.
             Unfortunately  this  aspect  was  not  explored  in  the  oral
             submissions as fully as it might have  been,  no  doubt  as  a
             result of the late emergence of the human rights claim  issue;
             and the guidance I can give must be rather tentative."


65. For present purposes, two points emerged from the  judgment  in  Ahsan.
    First, the Court recognised that a human rights appeal  can  provide  a
    suitable forum  for  the  adjudication  of  a  factual  matter  (there,
    deception)  which,  if  decided  in  favour  of  the  appellant,   will
    necessitate the finding that an appellant's Article 8 rights  would  be
    violated by hypothetical removal.

66. So far as this first point is concerned, there is  plainly  a  parallel
    with the present case. Here, the judicial determination of the  section
    7 issue informed the outcome  of  the  human  rights  appeal,  via  the
    application of the Razgar questions.

67. Secondly, at paragraph 117, the Court acknowledged the point made by Mr
    Biggs, as recorded at its paragraph 113(a), which was that  if  Article
    8(1) is not engaged - in other words, if a negative answer is given  to
    either of Razgar questions (1) and (2) - then  a  human  rights  appeal
    will not provide a judicial determination of what may be  an  important
    aspect of a person's complaint against a decision of the  Secretary  of
    State, such as whether that person had employed deception in his or her
    dealings with the Secretary of State.

68. That conclusion must, with respect, be correct.  The  basic  limitation
    of a human rights appeal is that it can be determined only through  the
    provisions of the ECHR; usually Article 8. A person whose human  rights
    claim turns on Article 8 will not be able to advance any  criticism  of
    the Secretary of State's decision-making under  the  Immigration  Acts,
    including the immigration rules, unless that person's circumstances are
    such as to engage Article 8(2).

69.  Although section 85 of  the  2002  Act  makes  provision  for  certain
    matters to be considered on an appeal under section 82(1)(b), we do not
    see how section 85 can expand the scope of a human rights appeal of the
    kind with which we  are  concerned,  so  as  to  require  the  separate
    judicial adjudication - outside section 6 of the 1998 Act - of  matters
    such as whether the claimant had or had not, breached  the  immigration
    rules. On the contrary, the wording of section  85(1)  makes  it  clear
    that the appeal can include only "an appeal  against  any  decision  in
    respect of which the appellant has a  right  of  appeal  under  section
    82(1)", which is limited to refusal of a protection claim or of a human
    rights claim and revocation of  protection  status.  Likewise,  section
    85(2), which concerns section 120 statements, is tied to the grounds of
    appeal under section 84.

70. Section 85(4) permits the Tribunal to consider  "any  matter  which  it
    thinks is relevant to the substance of the decision". In a human rights
    appeal, therefore, a matter will be relevant if and only if it goes  to
    the question of whether the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the
    1998 Act.

71. In our view, therefore, Ahsan underscores  the  concern  we  have  with
    paragraphs 21 and 23 of Greenwood (No. 2).  Insofar as those paragraphs
    suggest that judicial fact-finders can treat human  rights  appeals  as
    vehicles for deciding  freestanding  challenges  to  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State under the Immigration  Acts,  they  are  not  to  be
    followed.








Decision

72. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law. We decline to set that decision aside.

73. The Secretary of State's appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.





                         Signed






                         Date:  1 February 2018






                         The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                         President



