
ST (s92(4)(a): meaning of "has made") Turkey [2007] UKAIT 00085

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 15 May 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Jordan
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Miss G Brown, instructed by Irving & Co.
For the Respondent:          Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

There is no proper ground for giving s  92(4)(a)  a  narrower  meaning  that
would be suggested by the wording used.  A person who has, at  any  time  in
the past, made an asylum claim or a human rights claim (within  the  meaning
given to those phrases by s 113) has an in-country right of  appeal  against
any appealable immigration decision.

                                   RULING


 1. The appellant, as we shall call him, is a citizen of Turkey.  He issued
    a notice of appeal against the decision of the respondent on  31  March
    2006 refusing him leave to enter the United Kingdom.   The  Immigration
    Judge decided that he had no right of appeal against that decision from
    within the United Kingdom.  The appellant,  who  has  at  all  material
    times been in the United Kingdom, sought  and  obtained  an  order  for
    reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2.  These  proceedings  do,  however,   present   some   difficulties   of
    jurisdiction.  Because the Immigration Judge's view was that there  was
    no exercisable right of appeal, he was bound by rule 9, read with  rule
    2 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  (SI
    2005/230) not to accept the notice of appeal and to  do  nothing  other
    than notify the purported appellant and the respondent of the fact that
    the  Tribunal  was  not  accepting  the  notice  of  appeal.   If   the
    Immigration Judge had acted as in law he was bound to do,  there  could
    have been no reconsideration, because the provisions in ss103A-E of the
    Nationality,   Immigration   and   Asylum   Act   2002   relating    to
    reconsiderations only apply to the reconsideration  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision  on  an  appeal.   Further,  for  the  avoidance   of   doubt,
    s103A(7)(a)  specifically   excludes   "a   procedural   ancillary   or
    preliminary decision" from the  possibility  of  reconsideration.   The
    Immigration Judge did not act as he should have done under rule 9.   He
    prepared and signed a document headed "Determination and Reasons" which
    concludes as follows:

        "(a)           I find that the  appellant  does  not  have  an  in-
              country appeal in respect  of  his  fresh  asylum  and  human
              rights claim


           b) The appellant's appeal in this respect is dismissed."

 3. We do not quite understand what the Immigration Judge  thought  he  was
    dismissing, but the form of the document is  that  of  a  determination
    dismissing an appeal.  It was  presumably  for  that  reason  that  the
    Senior Immigration Judge who dealt with it was  prepared  to  entertain
    the application for reconsideration.  In the  circumstances  we  do  so
    too.  At  the  very  least,  if  the  position  is  that  there  is  no
    exercisable right of  appeal,  the  Immigration  Judge's  determination
    should be set aside and the appropriate notice should be  issued.   If,
    on the other hand, the Immigration Judge was wrong, the  appellant  has
    an appeal pending before the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal,  which
    needs to be determined, and in that case his dismissal  of  it  without
    any consideration of the merits would amount to  a  material  error  of
    law.

 4. The principal relevant facts are not in dispute.  The appellant entered
    the United Kingdom on  8  June  1998.   He  applied  for  asylum.   The
    Secretary of State allowed that claim to mature in his usual way.   The
    appellant was therefore interviewed some five years  after  his  claim,
    and on 29 August 2003  his  application  was  refused.   The  appellant
    appealed.  His appeal was dismissed by an Adjudicator in November  2003
    and an application for permission to appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal was refused.  On  25  May  2004  the  appellant  made  further
    representations, which appear not to have been fully  considered  until
    March 2006.  On 4 March 2005 the  appellant  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain as a businessman  under  the  Ankara  Agreement.   That
    application is said by the Secretary of State to have been refused on 4
    October 2005, but it is difficult  to  see  that  any  notice  of  that
    outcome was given to the  appellant  then.   On  31  March  2006  three
    documents were served on the appellant.  One was a  letter  giving  the
    reasons for the refusal of his application under the Ankara  Agreement.
    One was a letter dealing with his representations  of  May  2004.   The
    third was a refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom.  The issue of
    such a notice to a person who had been in the United Kingdom since 1998
    might cause some surprise, and little explanation is  provided  by  the
    notice itself, of which the opening part reads:

        "To: [the appellant]


        I therefore refuse you leave to enter the United Kingdom."

 5. The position is, however, that the appellant had applied for  leave  to
    enter as a refugee on his arrival in 1998 and has never had  any  leave
    to be here.  Because the  appellant's  case  has  not  been  considered
    substantively in these proceedings, we do  not  need  to  set  out  the
    letters in detail, but we do need to indicate  their  structure.   That
    relating to the Ankara Agreement refers in particular to the fact  that
    the appellant had no entry clearance as a businessman  as  required  by
    paragraph 205 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395,
    and further asserts that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements
    of paragraphs 30, 31 and 32 of the Statement of Changes in  Immigration
    Rules, HC 509, which, for reasons set out  in  the  Tribunal's  leading
    case on the Ankara Agreement SS & Others [2006]  UKAIT  00074,  is  the
    appropriate set of Immigration Rules preserved for Ankara cases by  the
    standstill clause of the Agreement.   The  letter  runs  to  some  four
    pages, some of which consist of evidently standard paragraphs.

 6. The letter dealing with the representations of May 2004  first  of  all
    records  the  fact  that  the  representations  were  made,  and   then
    summarises the appellant's immigration history and the  representations
    themselves as incorporating a  wish  to  make  a  fresh  claim  on  the
    appellant's Alevi faith, his Kurdish ethnicity, his alleged involvement
    with the PKK and his fear of returning to Turkey  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker, together with claims under Articles 3 and  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  The letter continues as follows  (some  of
    the omissions are long ones, but we wish to indicate the way  in  which
    the letter deals with the circumstances):

        "Paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395, as amended  by  HC
        1112) states that when a human rights  or  asylum  claim  has  been
        refused and any  appeal  relating  to  that  appeal  is  no  longer
        pending, the decision-maker will consider any  further  submissions
        and, if rejected, will then determine  whether  they  amount  to  a
        fresh claim.  The submissions will amount to a fresh claim if  they
        are significantly different from the material that  has  previously
        been  considered.   The  submissions  will  only  be  significantly
        different if the content had not already been considered; and taken
        together  with  the  previously  considered  material,  created   a
        realistically prospect of success, notwithstanding its rejection.


        It is noted that the issue of your Kurdish ethnicity was considered
        in the reasons for refusal letter dated 29/08/03.  ...


        Despite  this,  further  consideration  has  been  given   to   the
        [representations].  ...


        Having carefully considered your case, it is not accepted that  you
        would be subjected to any persecution in Turkey due to your Kurdish
        ethnicity or your Alevi faith, and no  further  consideration  will
        therefore be paid to either matter.


        ...


        It is noted that the issue of your alleged involvement with the PKK
        was previously considered in your reasons for  refusal  letter,  as
        well as by the adjudicator.  ...   Your  account  of  your  alleged
        involvement with the PKK has not been found credible  ...  .   Your
        case has been carefully  considered  by  two  officials  acting  on
        behalf of the Secretary of State, as well as an independent special
        adjudicator and it has been concluded that you do not have a  well-
        founded fear of persecution, either in your home area, or any where
        else in Turkey.


        The statements signed by your paternal cousins have been  carefully
        considered.  However, it has been concluded  that  neither  can  be
        treated  as  credible  supporting  evidence  of  your  account  ...
        accordingly,  no  further  consideration  can  be  paid  to  either
        statement.


        Your concerns regarding your treatment upon return have  also  been
        taken into consideration, particularly with relevance to  the  GBTS
        computer system.  ...  There will be no records  of  your  previous
        alleged detentions, and as your account of escaping from your house
        during a gunfight between the security forces and the PKK has  been
        found to be not credible, it  is  not  accepted  that  the  Turkish
        authorities have any interest in you at all.


        ...


        Having carefully considered all of the above points, in conjunction
        with your claim under Article 3 of the ECHR, it has been  concluded
        that the UK would not be in breach of its obligations under Article
        3 of the ECHR and your rights  would  not  be  breached  upon  your
        return to Turkey.  This is confirmed by the adjudicator, ... .


        The Immigration Service is satisfied that the United Kingdom  would
        not be in breach of its obligations under Article  8  of  the  ECHR
        upon your return to Turkey, nor would your rights under  Article  8
        be breached.


        Some points raised in your submissions  were  considered  when  the
        earlier claim was determined.  They were dealt with in  the  letter
        giving  reasons  for  refusal,  dated  29/08/03,  and  the   appeal
        determination of 26/11/03.


        The remaining points raised in  your  submissions,  taken  together
        with  the  material  previously  considered  in  the   letter   and
        determination, would not  have  created  a  realistic  prospect  of
        success.


        As we have decided not to reverse the decision on the earlier claim
        and have determined that your submissions do not amount to a  fresh
        claim, you have no further right of appeal."

 7. The notice of decision, however, indicates that  the  appellant  has  a
    right of appeal against the refusal of  leave  to  enter  but  that  it
    cannot be exercised while  the  appellant  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
    "because s92 of the 2002 Act does not apply".

 8. We do not need to set that section out in full, because  it  is  common
    ground that the appellant's  in-country  right  of  appeal  depends  on
    subs4(a):

      "92.       ...
      (1)   A person may not appeal under s82(1) while he is in the  United
                 Kingdom unless his appeal  is  of  a  kind  to  which  this
                 section applies.
      ...
      (4)   This section also applies to an appeal  against  an  immigration
             decision if the appellant -
            (a)  has made an asylum claim, or a human  rights  claim,  while
                 in the United Kingdom ... ."

      There are definitions in s113 as follows:

        "113.    Interpretation
        (1)      In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears -
             'asylum claim' means a claim made by a person to the  Secretary
                 of State at a place designed by the Secretary of State that
                 to remove the person from  or  require  him  to  leave  the
                 United  Kingdom   would   breach   the   United   Kingdom's
                 obligations under the Refugee Convention,
           ...
             'human rights claim' means a claim made  by  a  person  to  the
                 Secretary of State at a place designated by  the  Secretary
                 of State that to remove the person from or require  him  to
                 leave the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section  6
                 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority  not
                 to act contrary to Convention) as being  incompatible  with
                 his Convention rights,
             ... ."

 9. (Both s92 and s113 are  subject  to  amendment  by  provisions  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 that  have  not  yet  come
    into force.  The prospective amendments to s113 are of some interest in
    the context of this appeal.  The new definitions will be as follows:

        "113.    Interpretation
        (1)      In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears -
           'asylum claim' -
           (a)   means a claim made by a person that to remove him from  or
                 require him to leave the United Kingdom  would  breach  the
                 United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention,
                 but
           (b)   does not include a claim which, having regard to a  former
                 claim, falls to be disregarded for  the  purposes  of  this
                 Part in accordance with the immigration rules.
           ...
           'human rights claim' -
           (a)   means a claim made by a person that to remove him from  or
                 require him to leave the United Kingdom would  be  unlawful
                 under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (c.  42)
                 (public authority not to act  contrary  to  Convention)  as
                 being incompatible with his Convention rights, but
           (b)   does not include a claim which, having regard to a  former
                 claim, falls to be disregarded for  the  purposes  of  this
                 Part in accordance with immigration rules."


    In this appeal, however, we are concerned with the unamended provisions
    of those two sections.)

10. Put broadly, the burden of the appellant's case is that he has  an  in-
    country right of appeal because he had  an  undetermined  human  rights
    claim, based on the May  2004  representations,  at  the  time  of  the
    present decision:  or,  precisely,  that  the  present  decision  is  a
    response to representations in May 2004 that had  not  previously  been
    dealt with.  The respondent's position, as set out in the documents  to
    which we have made reference, is that the appellant has  no  in-country
    right of appeal because the representations of May 2004 do  not  amount
    to a human rights claim for these purposes.  In our  judgment,  neither
    of those positions is correct.

11. We must start with the words of the Act itself.  Looking first at s113,
    we note that the definition is  surprisingly  rich.   As  the  Tribunal
    pointed out in SS & Others Turkey [2006] UKAIT 00074,  the  requirement
    that the claim be made to the Secretary of State means that if the only
    claim is in grounds of appeal, the requirements of s113 are met if  the
    appeal was to an Adjudicator before 4  May  2005  because  the  appeals
    process was then that an in-country appeal had to be  lodged  with  the
    Secretary of State.  A claim made only in grounds  of  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal, however, is not lodged with the Secretary of State and cannot
    therefore meet the requirements of s113.  Further, as has been observed
    on a number of occasions, there do not appear to be any places formally
    designated for the purposes of s113: it seems clear, however, that  the
    various addresses that the Secretary of State makes available for those
    intending to lodge asylum or human rights claims must be considered  as
    designated for these purposes.  (The requirement that the claim  be  to
    the Secretary of State or at any particular place  is  removed  by  the
    prospective amendments to s113.)  In the present  appeal  there  is  no
    doubt that any asylum or human rights claims made by the appellant fall
    within the definitions of such claims in s113.

12. We turn then to s92(4)(a).  Is the appellant to be treated as a  person
    who "has made an asylum claim, or a human rights  claim  while  in  the
    United Kingdom"?  The literal meaning of those words would appear to be
    absolutely clear.  The literal meaning would,  however,  encompass  not
    only a person whose asylum or human rights claim is the subject of  the
    appeal, but also (1) a person who, having made such  a  claim,  chooses
    now not to pursue it but to appeal on other grounds; (2) a  person  who
    has made such a claim in the past, had it  dealt  with,  and  makes  it
    again; (3) a person who, having made such a claim in the past, does not
    make it again,  but  raises  completely  different  reasons  for  being
    allowed to stay in the United Kingdom, and appeals  against  a  refusal
    without raising asylum or human rights issues at all; and  even  (4)  a
    person who makes such a claim, leaves the United Kingdom,  returns  and
    repeats this or makes any other claim.  It may  well  be  said  that  a
    restriction on in-country rights of appeal must have been  intended  to
    have an effect narrower than  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words  in
    s92(4)(a) would suggest.  Circumstance (4) is  a  particularly  glaring
    example of the type of case that might be regarded as not justifying  a
    right to appeal from within the United Kingdom.

13. In SS & Others, the Tribunal, having  concluded  that,  on  their  true
    construction, s113(1) and s92(4)(a) attributed an in-country  right  of
    appeal to a person making a human rights claim  only  in  a  notice  of
    appeal to  an  Adjudicator,  after  a  refusal  of  claims  made  on  a
    completely different basis, said [at 91]: "We are bound to say that  we
    have reservations ... .  Whilst that seems to us  a  wholly  unintended
    consequence of the 2002 Act, we have applied the law as it seems to  us
    to be."

14. We must do the same.  There is no doubt that s92(4)(a) could have taken
    a different form.  It could have provided that s92 applies to an appeal
    made on asylum or human rights  grounds  by  a  person  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It could have provided that the section applied to an  appeal
    against an immigration decision if the appeal related, in whole  or  in
    part, to an asylum claim (for the meaning of these words see HH  [2007]
    UKAIT 00036).  It could have provided that  s92  did  not  apply  to  a
    person who had made no asylum or human  rights  claims  since  he  last
    entered the United Kingdom.  It does none  of  these  things.   In  the
    circumstances, despite the breadth that  the  literal  meaning  of  the
    words has, we see little reason to import into  them  a  meaning  which
    would require substantial re-writing, and which would have  the  effect
    of restricting an appellant's rights of appeal in a manner not  clearly
    authorised by the Statute.

15. The particular interpretation of s92(4)(a) necessarily implicit in  the
    notice of decision and accompanying letters in this  appeal  (although,
    it is fair to say, not strenuously supported by Mr Deller before us) is
    unattractive for at least three reasons.  It appears to be based on the
    provisions of paragraph 353 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is  as
    follows:

        "Fresh claims


        353.     When a human rights or asylum claim has been  refused  and
             any appeal relating to that claim is  no  longer  pending,  the
             decision-maker will consider any further  submissions  and,  if
             rejected, will then determine whether they amount  to  a  fresh
             claim.  The submissions will amount to a fresh  claim  if  they
             are  significantly  different  from  the  material   that   has
             previously been  considered.   The  submissions  will  only  be
             significantly different if the content:
           (i)   had not already been considered; and
           (ii)  taken together with the  previously  considered  material,
                 created a realistic prospect  of  success,  notwithstanding
                 its rejection.
           This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas."

    Paragraph 353 is the one paragraph in Part 12 of the Immigration Rules,
    entitled "Procedure" (and, if we have understood the effect of numerous
    changes in the Immigration Rules, Part 12 is placed, for  some  reason,
    between Part 11 and Part 11A).  Paragraph 353  does  indeed  deal  with
    procedure: it sets out the process  for  dealing  with  what  it  calls
    "further submissions".  The  starting  point  for  the  application  of
    paragraph 353 is that "a human rights or  asylum  claim  has  [already]
    been refused".  But that means that, when paragraph  353  applies,  the
    claimant must be a person who has made an asylum or human rights claim.
     It is difficult to see why the fact that there is a procedure for  not
    treating a new claim as a different claim means that the old  claim  is
    to be disregarded for the purposes of s92(4)(a).

16. The second objection to the Secretary of State's position  is  that  it
    appears to assume that the amendments made by the 2006 Act to s113  are
    already in force.  We have set out those amendments above,  and  it  is
    apparent that they exclude from the definition of  "asylum  claim"  and
    "human rights claim" any "further submissions" which are not treated as
    a "fresh claim" under paragraph 353 or any successor of that  paragraph
    introduced in connection with the coming into force  of  the  statutory
    amendments.  The fact that those  amendments  were  apparently  thought
    appropriate, ought to  require  us  to  exercise  considerable  caution
    before taking the view that the  unamended  provisions  bear  the  same
    meaning as they will when amended.  We have to observe,  however,  that
    it is very far from clear that the  prospective  amendments  will  have
    very much effect on the meaning of s92(4)(a).  The  amendments  exclude
    the possibility of a repetition of a claim being treated as  an  asylum
    or human rights claim for the purposes of that  section;  they  do  not
    exclude from consideration the original  claim  whose  existence  is  a
    precondition to the application of the Immigration Rules to which  they
    refer.

17. The third objection to the Secretary of State's position is that it  is
    unnecessary.  The 2002 Act provides, in s96, for removal of a right  of
    appeal by certification in cases where the claimant has previously been
    subject to an appealable immigration decision.   The  statutory  scheme
    preserves the possibility of preventing  clearly  unmeritorious  repeat
    appeals: but that is to be achieved by certification rather than  by  a
    tendentious reading of s92(4).

18. It does not appear to us that the Secretary of  State  has  established
    any basis for restricting  the  meaning  of  s92(4)(a)  to  a  narrower
    compass than that of the clear literal meaning of the words  used.   It
    follows that a person has, because of that section, an in-country right
    of an appeal against an immigration decision if he is a person who has,
    at any time in the past, made an asylum or human  rights  claim  within
    the meaning of that section whilst in the United Kingdom.

19. The position put by  the  appellant  emphasises  the  strength  of  the
    appellant's claim to have an in-country  right  of  an  appeal  in  the
    present case, but is, in our judgment,  unnecessary.   He  has  an  in-
    country right of appeal not because the  immigration  decision  against
    which he appeals is a response  to  the  further  representations,  but
    because he is a person who has made a human rights claim whilst in  the
    United Kingdom.

20. We need say little more.  The Immigration Judge was wrong  to  conclude
    that the appellant had no in-country right of  appeal.   The  appellant
    has such a right, and he has exercised it.  Contrary to the Immigration
    Judge's view, there was a pending appeal before him.  His dismissal  of
    it without considering the merits was a further error of law.   Because
    he did purport to dismiss it, however, he has been deprived of what  is
    essentially a level of  appeal,  because,  by  s103A(2)(b),  an  appeal
    cannot be reconsidered twice.  We shall order that this appeal  proceed
    to full hearing by way of reconsideration.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
