
                 KD (Bedoon - Destroyed documents) Kuwait [2008] UKAIT
00086

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 14 October 2008                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     KD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Appiah
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders

A Bedoon who destroys his documents does not by that reason alone become  an
undocumented Bedoon.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant was born on 13 February 1985 in Kuwait.   He  claims  to
    be an undocumented Bedoon. He claimed to have  suffered  discrimination
    as an undocumented Bedoon in Kuwait.  He entered the United Kingdom  on
    28 July 2007 and applied for asylum.  The application was refused on  8
    April  2008.   The  appellant  appealed  and  his  appeal  came  before
    Immigration Judge P J G White on 30 May 2008.

2.    The Immigration Judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant.  He
    found discrepancies and inconsistencies  and  implausibilities  in  his
    account and he rejected the  claim  that  the  appellant  had  been  of
    adverse interest to the  Kuwait  authorities  and  all  other  relevant
    aspects of the claim that the appellant had advanced.  The  Immigration
    Judge also found that the appellant was in fact a documented Bedoon  at
    the time of his departure from Kuwait.  The  appellant  had  gone  from
    Kuwait to the Czech Republic and the Immigration Judge found  that  the
    appellant was personally in possession at Prague Airport of an  Article
    17 passport validly issued to him.  The Immigration  Judge  found  that
    the appellant had destroyed the passport personally at some point after
    embarking on the flight from Prague Airport and prior to his coming  to
    the attention of the Immigration Authorities at Heathrow Airport.

3.    The Immigration Judge, however, allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  for
    the following reasons:-

         "45.     That is not  however  at  the  end  of  the  matter.   For
             whatever reason it is a fact that  the  Appellant  Article  17
             passport has been destroyed.  Mr  Dunne  argues  that  as  the
             original passport was valid until 13 May 2010 it would be open
             to the Appellant to apply to  the  Kuwait  authorities  for  a
             replacement  passport  and  accordingly  the  Appellant  could
             return  to  Kuwait  as  a   documented   Bedoon.    Mr   Dunne
             distinguishes the case of the second Appellant in the case  of
             BA & Ors [2004] UKIAT 00256 on the basis that by the  time  of
             the reconsideration of the appeal in that case the Appellant's
             Article 17 passport had expired and it was found that  it  was
             unlikely that a new passport would be issued.  Mr Dunne argues
             that in the case of the Appellant before me it would not be  a
             newly issued passport that  was  being  sought  but  simply  a
             replacement passport during the currency of  a  passport  that
             had been lost or destroyed.


         46.      Mr Appiah argues that given the  attitude  of  the  Kuwait
             authorities to Bedoon and in particular the general reluctance
             of the Kuwait authorities  to  have  Bedoons  resident  within
             Kuwait it is unlikely that the Kuwait authorities would  issue
             even a replacement passport to enable the Appellant to  return
             to Kuwait.


         47.       Neither  party  has  direct  evidence  from  the   Kuwait
             authorities  of  whether  the  Kuwait  authorities  would   be
             prepared (even as a general principle) to issue outside Kuwait
             a replacement for an Article 17 passport that had been lost or
             destroyed during its currency.


         48.      The case of  the  second  Appellant  in  the  case  of  BA
             indicates how a documented Bedoon  can  lose  that  status  by
             later actions and events (see paragraph 22 above).


         49.      In my view the objective evidence (see in  particular  the
             comments of the Tribunal in HE (Bedoon - statelessness -  risk
             of persecution) Kuwait CG [2006] UKAIT 00051 at paragraphs  28
             -  35)  indicates  a  general  unwillingness  of  the   Kuwait
             authorities to tolerate Bedoons within Kuwait.  In my view  it
             follows that there is a real risk that the Kuwait  authorities
             are  likely  to  be  obstructive  in  the  issue  of  even   a
             replacement Article 17 passport.  Accordingly I  come  to  the
             conclusion that although the Appellant has destroyed  his  own
             Article  17  passport  (see  paragraph  44  above)  given  the
             destruction of that document and the risk that it would not be
             replaced  the  Appellant  is  now  to  be   regarded   as   an
             undocumented Bedoon and accordingly would be at real  risk  of
             persecution if he were to be returned to Kuwait."

4.    Accordingly  the  Immigration  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and under Article 3.

5.    The respondent  applied  for  an  order  of  reconsideration  for  the
    following reasons:-

         "Ground 1: Failing to take into account material matters


         1. The Immigration Judge has accepted that the appellant's  account
             of having been  an  undocumented  Bedoon  who  has  previously
             suffered at the hands  of  the  Kuwaiti  authorities  was  not
             genuine (paragraph 44).  He finds that  at  the  time  of  his
             departure, the appellant was in fact a documented Bedoon,  and
             that he was personally in possession of an Article 17 passport
             validly  issue  to  him,  which  he   subsequently   destroyed
             (paragraph 44).


         2. The Immigration Judge then  goes  on  to  consider  whether  the
             appellant would be able  to  obtain  a  replacement  passport,
             concluding that there was a real risk that the passport  would
             not be replaced by the Kuwaiti authorities (paragraph 49).  In
             coming to this conclusion it is submitted that the Immigration
             Judge has materially erred in law in failing to following  the
             guidance in BA and in failing to take  into  account  material
             matters.


         3. The Immigration Judge notes at paragraph 47 that  neither  party
             had direct evidence from the Kuwaiti authorities as to whether
             they would be prepared  to  issue  a  replacement  Article  17
             passport  outside  Kuwait,  although  he  relies  upon  BA  as
             supporting the proposition that a documented Bedoon  can  lose
             that status.  It is submitted that the  circumstances  of  the
             second appellant in BA  are  significantly  different  to  the
             present appellant, the Tribunal concluding that the  appellant
             'having declined to register and  fled  the  country  ...  was
             clearly  someone  who  was  no  longer  a  documented  Bedoon'
             (paragraph 54).  It  would  appear  that  the  conclusion  was
             reached, not because that appellant's Article 17 passport  had
             expired, but because he had refused to register and had fled.


         4. Further, whilst the Tribunal accepted that where an  Article  17
             passport had expired, it was unlikely to be  replaced  outside
             Kuwait, they made no such finding that a replacement  passport
             for one lost of destroyed during its period of validity  would
             not be replaced.  At paragraph 20 of BA, the Tribunal recorded
             the expert's  evidence  that  'in  certain  circumstances  the
             Kuwaiti authorities  through  their  consulates  abroad  would
             issue emergency documents to enable persons they  accepted  as
             citizens or resident non-citizens to travel back urgently  for
             a death in the family or  matters  of  this  kind,  e.g.  when
             individuals have list documents or had them stolen'  (emphasis
             added).


         5. Further, the comments at paragraph 22 of BA  were  made  on  the
             basis that the appellant had not sought to renew his  passport
             and would be unlikely to have it renewed if he sought to renew
             it now (i.e. 3 years after it had expired).


         6. The Tribunal also commented at paragraph 39  that  whilst  there
             was evidence of Article  17  passport  being  issued  to  some
             Bedoon, 'there is no evidence to indicate that they are issued
             to Bedoon outside Kuwait who have not  been  issued  with  one
             before leaving". (emphasis added).


         7. Finally, at paragraph 78, the Tribunal note that in relation  to
             an Article 17 passport holders the authorities 'in practice do
             not, allow the holder re-entry  once  that  passport  expires"
             (emphasis added).


         8. It is therefore submitted that had  the  Immigration  Judge  had
             regard to these passages in  BA,  he  would  have  come  to  a
             different conclusion on whether it was still likely  that  the
             appellant would be able to obtain a replacement for his  still
             valid Article 17 passport and therefore would have come  to  a
             different conclusion  on  whether  the  appellant  would  face
             persecution upon return."

6.    I ordered  reconsideration  on  18  July  2008.   There  has  been  no
    challenge to the Immigration Judge's findings of fact.

7.    Mr Saunders submitted that the appellant had a  valid  passport  which
    he had destroyed and the question was whether  the  Kuwait  authorities
    would issue another.  He submitted there was no reason why  they  would
    not and referred to BA as set out in the application for the  order  of
    reconsideration.

8.    The appellant had not suffered at the hands of the  regime  in  Kuwait
    in the past.  He had got medical treatment over a long period  and  had
    found employment as an advertising designer.  There was no evidence  of
    oppressive conduct towards him.  There was no reason  to  believe  that
    the Kuwait authorities would not re-issue a passport.  The  Immigration
    Judge's conclusions should be reversed.

9.    Mr Appiah submitted that the points relied on in the  case  of  BA  at
    paragraphs 20 and 22 did not represent the Tribunal's  conclusions  but
    were just a record of the submissions made.  Further, it was  wrong  to
    speculate about what would  happen  in  the  future.   At  present  the
    appellant  was  an  undocumented  Bedoon  and  it   was   the   present
    circumstances that mattered and not what might happen  if  he  were  to
    make an application.  It would not matter if the passport was  lost  or
    stolen or if it had expired.  The point was that he would not have such
    a passport.  The Kuwait authorities discouraged returns  to  Kuwait  by
    Bedoons.

10.    Mr  Saunders  submitted  that  while  paragraphs  20  to  22  of  the
    determination in BA were not part of the Tribunal's conclusions, it was
    plain from paragraph 23 that the Tribunal found the  expert's  evidence
    helpful and reliable.  It was appropriate to take into  account  future
    circumstances in the context of appeals such as this  for  the  reasons
    given in Tecle [2002] EWCA Civ 1358 referred to in paragraphs 25 and 58
    of BA.  There was no evidence  that  the  appellant  had  attempted  to
    obtain travel documents.

11.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  determination.   I
    have carefully considered all  the  material  before  me.   I  can,  of
    course, only interfere with the Immigration Judge's decision if it  was
    materially flawed in law.

12.   The appellant left Kuwait with a valid passport  and  he  used  it  at
    Prague Airport and subsequently destroyed it.   He  left  Kuwait  as  a
    documented Bedoon and used the document for travel purposes on his  way
    to the United Kingdom.

13.   It is  submitted  that  it  matters  not  in  what  circumstances  the
    appellant has no passport.  It would, on Mr Appiah's argument, be  open
    to any documented  Bedoon  to  achieve  asylum  status  by  the  simple
    expedient of tearing up a valid passport.  Even a Bedoon who innocently
    lost his passport or who had it stolen from him, would be  entitled  to
    succeed in an asylum claim as an undocumented Bedoon.

14.   The passport that was properly issued to the appellant by  the  Kuwait
    authorities was valid until 2010.

15.   The circumstances of the appellants  in  BA  were  markedly  different
    from the circumstances of the appellant in  the  instant  appeal.   The
    appellants were not documented at the time they left the country.   The
    last sentence of paragraph 54 is of some relevance.  It reads:-

         "Moreover, we have found that at  present  neither  [appellant]  is
         reasonably  likely  to  become  a  documented  Bedoon  (principally
         because Kuwait refuses to re-admit Bedoon who have  left  Kuwait  -
         except for those who have current Art 17 passports)." [my italics]


16.   In paragraph 39 the Tribunal refer to  Bedoon  who  have  left  Kuwait
    having been issued with an Article 17 passport and find, "the  evidence
    indicates it would not be renewed once it has  expired."  [my  italics]
    There are  other  references  in  the  application  for  the  order  of
    reconsideration which I have set out above.

17.   In the case of the second appellant in  BA,  the  expert  stated  that
    while he had been granted an Article 17 passport in 1995:

         "he had not sought to renew it and he did not consider that if this
         appellant now sought to renew it, the authorities would do so.   He
         would no longer qualify."

18.   In paragraph 4 of the application for  the  order  of  reconsideration
    reference is made to the expert evidence given in BA  that  in  certain
    circumstances the Kuwait authorities through  their  Consulates  abroad
    would issue emergency documents to  enable  persons  they  accepted  as
    citizens or resident non-citizens to travel back urgently for  a  death
    in the family or matters of this kind, e.g. when individuals have  lost
    documents or had them stolen.

19.   Mr Appiah submitted that this part of the Tribunal's decision did  not
    represent its conclusions.  However, the Tribunal did make  an  express
    finding at paragraph 23 that the expert evidence closely reflected  the
    evidence  contained  in  other  background  materials  and  the  expert
    evidence was both helpful and reliable.

20.   Mr Appiah also submitted that the case should  be  determined  on  the
    material before the Tribunal and one should not speculate  as  to  what
    might happen in the future regarding the appellant's documentation.

21.   All refugee appeals, however, require  some  element  of  speculation.
    It has to be established to the required standard whether an  appellant
    will face a real risk of persecution  on  return.   In  this  case  the
    appellant had no cause to fear persecution when  he  left.   He  claims
    destroying a perfectly valid passport establishes a basis  for  fearing
    persecution when none existed previously.

22.   It was submitted that given  the  general  reluctance  of  the  Kuwait
    authorities to assist Bedoon or have them resident  within  Kuwait,  it
    was unlikely that the Kuwait authorities would issue even a replacement
    passport to enable the appellant to return to Kuwait.  The  Immigration
    Judge noted that neither party had  direct  evidence  from  the  Kuwait
    authorities of whether the Kuwait  authorities  would  be  prepared  to
    issue outside Kuwait a replacement for an Article 17 passport that  had
    been lost or destroyed during its currency.

23.   In my view it was for  the  appellant  to  establish  his  case.   The
    Tribunal in BA confirmed this in paragraph 26  of  the  decision.   The
    Tribunal considered the extent to  which  speculation  is  possible  in
    paragraphs 55ff of the decision.  The Tribunal refer  to  Tecle,  where
    the Court of Appeal reasoned that it was right to treat  the  applicant
    as a national of Eritrea because there were no serious obstacles to his
    being granted it upon application.

24.   It my view it does not entail impermissible  speculation  to  consider
    that a person with a valid Article 17 passport could obtain replacement
    or emergency documentation on request in the event of  loss  or  theft.
    This is consistent with the expert evidence which the Tribunal accepted
    in BA.

25.   Although it is said that there is a general attitude of  hostility  to
    Bedoon and that the Kuwait authorities would in effect use  any  excuse
    not to have a Bedoon without the documents back,  the  Tribunal  in  HE
    speak  of  the  recent  improvements  representing  changes  of   clear
    relevance which "may be indicative of an improving attitude on the part
    of the authorities towards the Bedoon ...".  While the Tribunal confirm
    BA as relevant country guidance, the improvements in the situation  are
    to be borne in mind in cases such as this where an appellant  has  been
    issued with a valid passport which,  so  far  as  the  authorities  are
    concerned, is still within its period of validity.  The  appellant  has
    not suffered persecution in the past and, as Mr Saunders submitted, the
    appellant was able to work and obtain medical treatment for a period of
    time.

26.   For the reasons I have given, the Immigration Judge  materially  erred
    in law in concluding that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the  Kuwait
    authorities would not issue  a  replacement  travel  document  for  the
    appellant.  Such  evidence  as  there  was  confirms  that  in  certain
    circumstances emergency documents can be issued.  The Immigration Judge
    found that the authorities were  likely  to  be  obstructive,  but  the
    question was whether the appellant had established  that  there  was  a
    real risk that appropriate documentation would not be issued.

27.   The appellant left  Kuwait  as  a  documented  Bedoon.   The  document
    issued to him is still a valid document in the eyes of the authorities,
    notwithstanding that the appellant has destroyed it.   The  Immigration
    Judge erred in concluding on the evidence before him  that  the  Kuwait
    authorities  would  not  issue  a  replacement  document.   The  Kuwait
    authorities have not acted towards the appellant in a hostile manner in
    the past according to the Immigration Judge's findings.   There  is  no
    reason to suppose that they would do so in the future.   The  appellant
    has failed to discharge the burden of proof  on  him.   Accordingly,  I
    substitute a fresh decision:

28.   The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.






Signed                                             Date 16 October 2008


Senior Immigration Judge Warr
