
AG and others (Policies; executive discretions; Tribunal's powers) Kosovo
[2007] UKAIT 00082

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 20 February 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge King TD
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                                             First Appellant
                                                            Second Appellant
                                                             Third Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the First Appellant:          Mr J Hamilton, instructed by G K
Associates
For the Second Appellant:         Ms Veloso, instructed by Edward Ismail
Solicitors
For the Third Appellant:          Mr Raja, of Independent Law Partnership
For the Respondent:               Mr M Blundell, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

(1)  If human rights are argued, they should be  determined  in  advance  of
any argument based on discretion: if the  claimant's  human  rights  entitle
him to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  any  discretionary  power  to
allow him to do so is otiose.  (2)  A policy that in all  the  circumstances
of the case would apparently be  exercised  in  the  claimant's  favour  and
contains no elements  that  genuinely  would  leave  the  decision  open  is
relevant in the assessment of proportionality because it goes to  the  issue
of the importance of maintaining immigration control in similar cases.   (3)
 If the claimant fails to establish that his human rights compel the  remedy
he seeks, but is able to show that there was at the date of the  decision  a
policy in force that governed his case but was not taken  into  account,  he
may win an appeal on the ground that the decision, having been made  not  in
accordance with published policy, was 'otherwise not in accordance with  the
law' within the meaning of s  84(1)(e).  (4)  If the policy was  taken  into
account and the claimant can show that the  terms  of  the  policy  and  the
facts of his case are such that there was no option open  to  the  decision-
maker other than to grant him the remedy he  seeks,  his  appeal  should  be
allowed with a direction.  (5) But where within the terms of the policy  the
benefit to the appellant depends on the exercise  of  a  discretion  outside
the Immigration Rules, the Tribunal has  no  power  to  substitute  its  own
decision for that of the decision-maker.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These appeals were listed for reconsideration on the same day and  were
    heard together, with a view to our  giving  guidance  on  the  question
    whether, and if so, in what circumstances the Tribunal in  entitled  or
    bound to apply policies declared by the Secretary of State.  The  issue
    is not untried: but recent experience in the Tribunal suggests that  it
    may need revisiting following the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Baig v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1246.

The three cases before us

 2. The appellant in the  first  case,  AG,  is  from  Kosovo.  He  is  now
    therefore presumably a citizen of Serbia.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 5 November 1997.  He claimed asylum then.  His wife and four
    children were with him on his arrival and their claims are dependent on
    his.  Within less than two weeks of his arrival Greece agreed  to  take
    responsibility for the  assessment  of  his  claim,  under  the  Dublin
    Convention.  His  application  was  therefore  formally  refused  on  5
    December  1997.   He  sought  judicial   review   of   that   decision,
    unsuccessfully.  He then made an application for leave to remain on the
    grounds that his human rights would be infringed by his removal.   When
    that application was refused, he appealed.  The  appeal  was  dismissed
    and the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  refused  leave  to  appeal.   He
    unsuccessfully sought judicial review of the  decision  to  refuse  him
    leave to appeal.  He then made further applications for leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom.  The present appeal is against the Secretary  of
    State's decision on 4 July  2006  refusing  leave  (and  repeating  the
    intention to remove him to Greece).

 3. Before the Immigration Judge it was accepted that the  appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   The  Immigration
    Judge noted as follows:

        "The appellant's claim rests principally on his submission that  he
        and his family meet all the requirements of the Home Office  Policy
        or concession DP5/96 in that his younger child has been resident in
        the United Kingdom for more than seven years and is still under the
        age of 18.  He also relies on the Convention on the Rights  of  the
        Child, to which the United Kingdom is a signatory,  which  provides
        among other things, in Article 3, that 'in all  actions  concerning
        children, whether undertaken by public or  private  social  welfare
        institutions,  courts  of  law,   administrative   authorities   or
        legislative bodies, the best interests of the  child  should  be  a
        primary consideration'.".

    The Immigration Judge went on to say that he regarded it  as  important
    that all the criteria set  out  in  DP5/96  were  considered.   In  his
    determination he then purported  to  consider  them  and  concluded  as
    follows:


        "For all the above reasons I have been satisfied  on  the  evidence
        that the decision of the Secretary of  State  is  contrary  to  his
        declared policy DP5/96 and  cannot  be  permitted  to  stand.   The
        appeal is therefore allowed."

 4. The appellant in the second case, EB, is a citizen of Jamaica.  He came
    to the United Kingdom as a visitor in December 2000.   He  was  granted
    leave to remain as a student until 30 September 2002  but  has  had  no
    subsequent leave.  In 2003 he married here and  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a spouse.  That application was refused and it is clear  that
    the appellant has no claim under the Immigration Rules.   The  decision
    refusing his application, dated 10 July 2006, refers to  the  Secretary
    of State's policy on marriage applications by overstayers, DP3/96,  and
    gives the Secretary of State's  reasons  for  refusing  to  apply  that
    policy in the appellant's favour.  Before  the  Immigration  Judge  the
    appellant's representative asked merely for  the  decision  to  be  set
    aside as not in accordance with the law if the  Immigration  Judge  was
    satisfied that the policy had not been correctly applied.  A Presenting
    Officer appears to have asserted, by some means after the hearing, that
    a challenge to the Secretary of State's decision in this case had to be
    by judicial review.

 5. In his determination the Immigration Judge notes that "I have  come  to
    the conclusion that both advocates were wrong in their submission".  He
    refers to s86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act as giving him jurisdiction to allow
    the appeal if  he  concludes  that  the  discretion  exercised  by  the
    respondent  should  have  been  exercised  differently.   He  makes  no
    reference to s86(6) (we set out both of these provisions  below).   The
    Immigration Judge goes on  to  refer  to  Baig  "which  appears  to  be
    authority  for  the  proposition  that   an   Immigration   Judge   has
    jurisdiction to consider the policy decision of the Secretary of  State
    and to allow an appeal  if  that  policy  has  been  misapplied."   The
    Immigration Judge then found as facts that the appellant and  his  wife
    were married; that the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting;  that  no
    enforcement action was taken against the appellant  in  the  two  years
    after  his  marriage;  that  the  appellant's  wife  had  long-standing
    commitments in this country and that it would  be  extremely  difficult
    for her emotionally, financially and practically to leave this  country
    and go to Jamaica.  He concluded as follows:

        "I find therefore that it would be unreasonable to  expect  her  to
        accompany the appellant to Jamaica.  The respondent  therefore  had
        no good reason for departing from policy DP3/96."

      He therefore allowed the appeal.

 6. The appellant in the third case, PB, is a national of Bangladesh.   She
    claims to have come to the United Kingdom illegally in  the  autumn  of
    1999.  She contracted a marriage with a British citizen who, she  says,
    had no interest in having her with him in the United Kingdom.  But  she
    is here, and their child, who is said to be a British citizen, is  said
    to have arrived here before her, in September 1999.  In March 2000  she
    submitted an application for leave to remain as the  dependant  of  her
    brother.  It is, we understand,  accepted  that  that  application  was
    misleading in that she did not mention her child.   The  appellant  and
    her husband were divorced in or about 2002.  She was awarded a lump sum
    of �200,000 and maintenance of �250 per calendar month for  the  child.
    The present appeal is against a decision on 18 December  2004  to  give
    directions for the appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom.   She
    appealed on human  rights  grounds.  But  at  the  hearing  before  the
    Immigration Judge it was asserted that the appellant  was  entitled  to
    the benefit of the Secretary of  State's  policy  DP5/96,  because  the
    child had been in the United Kingdom for seven years.

 7. The Immigration Judge's determination poses some challenges  for  those
    who, on behalf of the appellant, assert that it  is  a  sound  judgment
    containing no material errors of law.  It begins as follows:

        "1.      [The  appellant  appeals]  against  the  decision  of  the
             secretary of  state  dated  27  February  2004  to  refuse  her
             application for leave to enter on the grounds that her  removal
             would breach the UK in breach  of  its  obligations  under  the
             Human Rights Act 1998 and to refuse her leave to enter the UK.


        2. In immigration appeals the burden of proof is on  the  appellant
             and the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.  The
             relevant date is the date of decision although I may take  into
             account later evidence where  it  appertains  to  the  date  of
             decision."

 8. In the first paragraph the date of the decision and the nature  of  the
    decision are misstated; further, the decision as described  appears  to
    be a legal impossibility: leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  granted  or
    refused by immigration officers, not by the Secretary of State, save in
    cases where there has been an asylum or human rights  claim,  which  at
    that stage there had not (although the decision is said  to  have  been
    made  on  human  rights  grounds).   In  the  second   paragraph,   the
    interaction between ss85(4) and 85(5) of the 2002 Act is misstated, and
    the statement of the standard of proof is, to say the  least,  somewhat
    sweeping.  The determination concludes as follows:

      "23.  I found that the appellant's daughter had been in  the  UK  for
             the last seven years.  I am aware that the Secretary  of  State
             has a policy dealing with children and their parents  who  have
             been in the UK for seven years or more.  I understand that  the
             Secretary of State applies  the  policy  consistently  in  such
             cases; there is no evidence before me why he  has  not  applied
             the policy in this case.  I am guided  by  the  case  of  Baig,
             (Fouzia) (2005) EWCA Civ 1246  that  I  can  apply  the  policy
             directly if I wanted to.  I find that the policy does apply  in
             this case and that a failure by the Secretary of State to apply
             the policy must be disproportionate


      24.   In summary, the decision of the ECO was not in accordance  with
             the law or human rights grounds."

    Paragraph 23 is not entirely easy to understand.   The  word  "had"  is
    particularly puzzling.  At the date of the decision  the  daughter  had
    not been in the United Kingdom for seven years.  At  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the Immigration Judge she had been in the United Kingdom
    for perhaps a few weeks  more  than  seven  years,  assuming  that  the
    evidence of her undocumented arrival in  September  1999  is  accepted.
    There does not appear to have been any evidence before the  Immigration
    Judge on the matters relating to the Secretary of State's policy or its
    consistency of application.  The sentence about Baig is, on  its  face,
    unlikely to be a correct statement of law.  In paragraph  24,  we  note
    that there is no  reference  to  any  discretion;  and  the  respondent
    decision-maker has changed again.

 9. The Secretary of State sought and obtained orders  for  reconsideration
    in all these appeals.  In the first case the grounds were simply  that,
    on the basis of D S Abdi v SSHD [1996]  Imm  AR  148,  the  Immigration
    Judge ought not to have purported to exercise the Secretary of  State's
    discretion himself: if the Immigration Judge  was  persuaded  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law he should have so  decided,
    leaving the Secretary of State to make the new, lawful,  decision.   In
    the second case the same point  is  put  at  somewhat  greater  length,
    accompanied by an assertion that neither Baig nor HC v SSHD [2005] EWCA
    Civ 893 suggest anything different.  In the third case the grounds  for
    reconsideration are  similar  to  those  of  the  first  case  and  are
    accompanied by an assertion that the Immigration Judge gave no  reasons
    for allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

10. We heard submissions from Mr Blundell in all three appeals, and from Mr
    Hamilton on behalf of the appellant in the first appeal, Ms  Veloso  in
    the second and Mr Raja  in  the  third.   Reference  was  made  to  the
    decisions of the Court of Appeal in D S Abdi v SSHD [1996] Imm AR  148,
    Huang & others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 105 (see now [2007] UKHL 11),  HC
    v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  894,  Rashid  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  744,
    Tozlukaya v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 379 and HB (Ethiopia) & others  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1713, as well as Baig, and the decisions of the Tribunal in SS
    [2005] UKAIT 00167 and IA [2006] UKAIT 00082.

The legislative framework

11. Section 19 of the Immigration Act 1971 was,  so  far  as  material,  as
    follows:

      "19(1)     Subject to sections 13(4)  and  16(4)  above  [neither  of
               which is material here],  and  to  any  restriction  on  the
               grounds of appeal, an adjudicator on an appeal to him  under
               this Part of this Act -
            (a)  shall allow the appeal if he considers -
                 (i)   that the decision or action against which the appeal
                        was brought was not in accordance with  the  law  or
                        with any immigration rules applicable to  the  case;
                        or
                 (ii)  where the decision or action involved  the  exercise
                        of a discretion by the  Secretary  of  State  or  an
                        officer,  that  the  discretion  should  have   been
                        exercised differently; and
            (b)  in any other case, shall dismiss the appeal.
      (2)   For the purposes of subsection  (1)(a)  above,  the  adjudicator
               may review any determination of a question of fact on  which
               the decision or action was based; and for  the  purposes  of
               subsection (1)(a)(ii) no decision  or  action  which  is  in
               accordance with the immigration rules shall  be  treated  as
               having  involved  the  exercise  of  a  discretion  by   the
               Secretary of State by reason only of the fact  that  he  has
               been requested by or on behalf of the appellant  to  depart,
               or to authorise an officer to depart, from  the  rules,  and
               has refused to do so."

12. Paragraph 21 of Schedule 4 to the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999,
    which replaced these provisions on 2 October  2000,  was  to  the  same
    effect.

13. The present appeals provisions are those in Part 5 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The  possible  grounds  of  appeal
    against an immigration decision (as defined) are set out in  s84(1)  as
    follows:

      "84(1)     An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
                 decision must be brought on one or more  of  the  following
                 grounds -
                  a)  that  the  decision  is  not   in   accordance   with
                     immigration rules;
                  b) that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 19B
                     of the Race Relations Act 1976 (c. 74) (discrimination
                     by public authorities);
                  c) that the decision is unlawful under section 6  of  the
                     Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to
                     act contrary to  Human  Rights  Convention)  as  being
                     incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights;
                  d) that the appellant is an EEA national or a  member  of
                     the  family  of  an  EEA  national  and  the  decision
                     breaches the appellant's rights  under  the  Community
                     Treaties in respect of entry to or  residence  in  the
                     United Kingdom;
                  e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance  with
                     the law;
                  f) that  the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
                     exercised  differently  a  discretion   conferred   by
                     immigration rules;
                  g) that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom
                     in  consequence  of  the  immigration  decision  would
                     breach the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                     Refugee Convention or would be unlawful under  section
                     6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as  being  incompatible
                     with the appellant's Convention rights."

14. Section 86 of the same Act is  headed  "Determination  of  appeal"  and
    includes the following provisions:

      "...
      86(3) The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks  that
    -
                  a) a decision against which the appeal is brought  or  is
                     treated as being brought was not  in  accordance  with
                     the law (including immigration rules), or
                  b) a discretion exercised in making  a  decision  against
                     which the appeal is brought or  is  treated  as  being
                     brought should have been exercised differently.
      ...
            5) In so far as subsection (3) does  not  apply,  the  Tribunal
               shall dismiss the appeal.
            6) Refusal to  depart  from  or  to  authorise  departure  from
               immigration rules is not the exercise of  a  discretion  for
               the purposes of subsection (3)(b)."

The authorities

15. In Abdi, the appellants claimed that, in refusing them entry clearance,
    to which they were  not  entitled  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    Secretary of State had failed to take  into  account  the  terms  of  a
    published policy in which he  had  said  that  he  would  give  special
    consideration to applicants in the appellants' position.  In the course
    of the leading judgment in the Court of Appeal, Peter  Gibson  LJ  said
    this (at pp 156-157):

        "To my mind the only substantial  point  taken  on  behalf  of  the
        [claimants] was that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  was
        'not in accordance with the law' within the meaning of s19(1)(a)(i)
        in that the Adjudicator and the Tribunal found that he had  ignored
        or acted in contravention of the Somali family  reunion  policy  in
        reaching that decision.  [He then cited a passage from  the  speech
        of Lord Bridge in R v IAT ex parte Bakhtaur Singh [1996] Imm AR 352
        at 360 and continued:] These remarks are only obiter dicta  and  it
        is  not  obvious   that   Parliament   by   s19(1)(a)(i)   intended
        Adjudicators to have the power to examine the validity of the  Home
        Secretary's decision by reference to all the matters that would  be
        relevant for a judicial review of the decision.  But Mr Singh  [for
        the Secretary of State] did not suggest that Lord Bridge's  remarks
        were wrong and they are supported by similar comments by Mustill LJ
        in SSHD v Malhi [1990] Imm  AR  275  at  283.   I  shall  therefore
        proceed on the footing that if  it  can  be  shown  that  the  Home
        Secretary failed to act in accordance with  established  principles
        of administrative or common law, for example if  he  did  not  take
        account of or give effect to his own published policy, that was not
        'in accordance with the law'."

    Peter Gibson LJ went on to examine both the terms of the policy and the
    findings of fact by the Adjudicator.  He concluded his  judgment  (with
    which the other members of the Court agreed) as  follows  (at  pp  159-
    160):


        "I therefore agree with the Adjudicator and the Tribunal  that  ...
        the Home Secretary did not properly take the  policy  into  account
        and so did not give effect to it.  That was an error which made his
        decision not in  accordance  with  the  law  for  the  purposes  of
        s19(1)(a)(i).


        What follows?  I cannot accept Mr Macdonald's submission  [for  the
        claimants] that  this  is  one  of  the  rare  cases  where  it  is
        appropriate that the Court should substitute its own  decision  for
        that  of  the  decision-taker.   It  is  not  inevitable  that  the
        [claimants] will be given entry clearance.   Nor  do  I  accept  Mr
        Singh's submission that a remission  of  the  matter  to  the  Home
        Secretary  would  make  no  difference.   If  the  Home   Secretary
        reconsiders the application as one relating to  dependants  of  Mrs
        Abdi, it is not inevitable that the application  will  be  refused.
        To my mind the Tribunal was correct in saying that on  the  footing
        that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law  the  matter
        must go back to the  Home  Secretary  for  him  to  reconsider  the
        application in the light of the true facts.  It falls  to  him  'to
        consider  exceptionally  extending  the  Refugee   Family   Reunion
        Provision  to  cover  [the  claimants]'  in  accordance  with  [the
        policy]."

    Those observations by Peter Gibson LJ have been cited in a multitude of
    appeals before the Appellate Authorities and the AIT and  have  not  to
    our knowledge previously been the subject of  any  serious  questioning
    either here or in the higher courts.

16. We need next to mention Huang.  As is well  known,  in  that  case  the
    Court of Appeal decided that it was for an Immigration Judge to  assess
    all issues of proportionality in an appeal  raising  grounds  based  on
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights: that is  to  say,
    that  in  such  cases  there  is  no  area   of   the   assessment   of
    proportionality in which the executive has exclusive jurisdiction.  The
    decision of the House of Lords in the same case on this point, which is
    now available, is to the same effect.

17. Baig is a  case  in  which  the  applicant  had  a  long  and  dreadful
    immigration history, and it is  fair  to  say  that  she  found  little
    sympathy in the Court of Appeal.  In agreeing with Buxton LJ (who  gave
    the leading judgment, with which Maurice Kay LJ also  agreed)  Ward  LJ
    said "It would be scandalous not to dismiss this  application".   There
    can be no real doubt that the Court was anxious to ensure that it dealt
    in the alternative with all the points that had been raised  on  behalf
    of the applicant, in order to show that she simply had no  prospect  of
    success.  One of the arguments raised was  that  she  was  entitled  to
    succeed on the basis of what for present purposes we may  describe,  as
    the Court described it, as the seven-year policy.  That  is  a  policy,
    originally formulated in March 1996 and subsequently the subject  of  a
    number of more and less well-publicised amendments, relating to whether
    enforcement action should be taken against parents  of  young  children
    who have spent a  considerable  part  of  their  lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  At the  time  with  which  Baig  (and  also  Tozlukaya)  were
    concerned, the policy related to those parents who had children who had
    been in the United Kingdom for seven years or more, either having  been
    born here or having arrived here at an early age.

18. The Adjudicator had refused to consider any  issues  relating  to  that
    policy on  the  basis  of  the  material  that  was  before  him.   The
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal thought that he should have  considered  it
    (a position which was conceded by the Secretary  of  State  before  the
    Court of Appeal) but said that he would have dismissed the claim  under
    this head if he had been aware of the true facts.

19. After setting out that position, Buxton LJ continued as follows:

      "28.  There are, however, some  technical  difficulties  about  that.
             First, we have already noted that effectively  the  adjudicator
             declined to consider the seven-year policy at  all  because  of
             the state of the pleadings; and it is conceded that that was  a
             mistake. Secondly, I myself certainly  had  originally  thought
             that the complaint in this case and in this appeal before  this
             court was that both the special adjudicator and the Immigration
             Appeal Tribunal should, consistently with Abdi, have considered
             whether the Secretary of State had  properly  applied  his  own
             policy. Mr Drabble this morning  says  that  that  is  not  the
             point; the objection to the special adjudicator's determination
             which the Immigration Appeal Tribunal did not even  appreciate,
             let alone correct, is that under the  authority  of  Huang  the
             question of the application of such a policy to  an  individual
             case was a matter for the adjudicator and not simply  a  matter
             for review of a decision of the Secretary of State. The  latter
             error (if it was an error) - that is  to  say  the  failure  to
             consider the matter substantively - would be, in my  judgement,
             an error of public law; and it is now well decided that  errors
             of public law fall within the jurisdiction of  the  Immigration
             Appeal Tribunal, and therefore the jurisdiction of  this  court
             under section 101(1) of the 2002 Act. Any doubts on that point,
             which are ventilated at some length in the skeleton before  us,
             have been put to rest by the  decision  of  this  court  in  HC
             [2005] EWCA Civ 893.


      29.   To have dealt with that matter would have  involved  a  certain
             degree, to put it mildly, of intervention of its own motion  by
             the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, in view of the  difficulty  of
             extracting that point at all from the pleadings before it,  and
             the  almost  certainty  that  it  was  never  raised   by   the
             applicant's representative.  However  I  am  content,  for  the
             purpose of discharging this application, to assume  that  there
             was that  omission  on  the  part  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
             Tribunal, and that prima facie, therefore, the correct  remedy,
             and the remedy which Mr Drabble seeks, is for the matter to  be
             remitted to an  adjudicator  so  that  he  can  properly  apply
             himself, which so far the adjudicator  has  not  done,  to  the
             seven-year policy.


      [The policy is then identified and the relevant parts set out.]


        33.      ... .  That, then, if this matter were to be remitted,
             would be the policy that the adjudicator would have to apply.


        34.      I have no hesitation in saying that on the facts of this
             case a rational adjudicator could reach only one conclusion
             when applying that policy; that is, that it should not apply to
             this family. ...


        ...


        38.      In all these circumstances, an adjudicator could only come
             to one conclusion. Mr Drabble very fairly accepted that if that
             was this court's view the matter should not be remitted. I
             therefore would not remit it. I would not grant permission for
             this application to proceed."


20. Tozlukaya was an application by the claimant for judicial review  of  a
    decision of the Secretary of State under s93(2)(b) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  to  certify  his  claim  as  "clearly
    unfounded".  The respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal against the
    judge's quashing of  the  certification.   In  paragraph  [43]  of  his
    judgment, Richards LJ (with whom Lloyd LJ and  Buxton  LJ  agreed)  set
    out, by reference to the authorities, the test the court has  to  apply
    in such a case.  A claim is clearly unfounded  if  it  "cannot  on  any
    legitimate view succeed",  "must  clearly  fail",  or  is  "so  clearly
    without substance that the appeal would be bound to fail".  If, on  the
    other hand, there is  an  "arguable  case",  or  if  on  at  least  one
    legitimate view of the facts the claim might succeed, it should not  be
    certified.  As the purpose and effect of certification is to remove the
    right of appeal, the question at issue in Tozlukaya is  closely  allied
    to the jurisdiction and process of the Tribunal.  The quashing  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision to certify is a decision not merely about
    the substance of the claimant's claim, but necessarily  indicates  also
    that there would be available to the  claimant  arguments  which  might
    succeed on a statutory appeal.  The decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    Tozlukaya is,  therefore,  rightly  seen  as  being,  in  substance,  a
    decision about the appellate process.

21. The claimant was a Turkish national who had been in the United  Kingdom
    since 1998.  There had been an attempt to remove him to  Germany  under
    the Dublin Convention (as it then was) but that had  been  unsuccessful
    because the claimant  failed  to  report  in  accordance  with  removal
    directions.  In November 2001 there were further representations, which
    were rejected by the Secretary of State in the form  of  an  appealable
    decision.   The  claimant  appealed  to  an  Adjudicator  and  to   the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal, in each  case  without  success.   Removal
    directions were set for June 2004, but the  claimant  was  not  removed
    because of his wife's complaint of illness and her statement  that  she
    was four months pregnant.  Shortly thereafter, further  representations
    were made to the Secretary of State on  the  basis  of  the  claimant's
    wife's "mental health problems".   Further  representations  were  made
    across the summer of 2004.  On 2 September 2004 the Secretary of  State
    rejected the claimant's claims under Articles 3 and 8 and certified the
    claim as clearly unfounded.

22. In the judicial review proceedings there were  two  live  issues.   The
    first was under Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.
    The claimant's claim was based on his wife's  health  and  Richards  LJ
    records at [68] that it was common ground that the claimant himself was
    entitled for those purposes to rely on the effect  of  removal  on  his
    wife's mental health.  Richards LJ took the view  that  the  claimant's
    claim under Article  3  was  bound  to  fail  and  therefore  that  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to certify the claim in  that  respect.
    Insofar as the claim under Article 8  also  relied  on  the  claimant's
    wife's health, therefore, it too failed.

23. There was, however, a separate strand to the Article 8 claim.   It  was
    based on the Secretary of State's policy on removal  where  there  were
    children with long residence in the United  Kingdom.   In  the  present
    case the position  was  that  the  claimant's  eldest  child,  born  in
    February 1997,  had  been  here  with  her  parents  since  June  1998.
    Richards LJ said this:
        "77.     The deputy judge held that, in view of the length of  time
             they have been in the United Kingdom and  the  ties  they  will
             have established during that period, removal  of  the  children
             would arguably constitute an interference with their  right  to
             private life under article 8(1). I agree.
        78.      The Secretary of State contends that any such interference
             is justified under article 8(2) by the need  to  maintain  firm
             and effective immigration controls. This engages the  issue  of
             proportionality.  As  Lord  Bingham  expressed  it  in  Razgar,
             'decisions  taken  pursuant  to   the   lawful   operation   of
             immigration control will be proportionate in all save  a  small
             minority of exceptional cases, identifiable only on a  case  by
             case basis' (para 20)."  [Richards LJ then set out the relevant
             part of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Huang.]
        79.      In deciding whether  the  case  is  truly  exceptional  an
             immigration judge is entitled to have regard to  statements  of
             policy by the Secretary of State as  to  the  exercise  of  his
             discretion to grant leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules. If a policy tells in  favour  of  the  person  concerned
             being allowed to stay  in  this  country,  it  may  affect  the
             balance under article 8(2) and provide a  proper  basis  for  a
             finding that the case is an exceptional one. In Shkembi v  SSHD
             [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1592  the  court  allowed  an  appeal  on  a
             procedural ground but considered the relevance of a policy when
             rejecting an argument by the Secretary of State that it  should
             decline to remit the case because the claim was doomed to fail.
             The policy in question was the Secretary of State's concession,
             announced in October 2003, in respect of families who  came  to
             this country prior to October 2000. Having pointed out that the
             Tribunal has an  independent  assessment  to  make,  Latham  LJ
             stated (paras 14-15):
                 '... The consequence is that the Tribunal  in  the  present
                 case would have been  entitled  to  consider,  and  if  the
                 matter is returned to the Tribunal will have  to  consider,
                 what the true policy is and decide whether it does or  does
                 not apply to the appellant [on] the facts as we  understand
                 them ....
                 The policy does not strictly apply to  the  appellant  but,
                 nonetheless, [counsel for the appellant]  is  entitled,  it
                 seems to me, to argue that if and insofar  as  a  rationale
                 can be discerned for the policy the Tribunal  can  consider
                 whether or not as a consequence the Adjudicator  was  wrong
                 to conclude that this was merely  a  concession  which  the
                 Secretary of State is entitled either  to  depart  from  or
                 require strict adherence to, but goes further than that and
                 justifies the conclusion that his is an exceptional case'."
24. Richards LJ referred to the  difficulties,  partly  apparent  from  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Baig, in discovering  precisely  the
    terms of the policy in question.  He continued as follows:
        "88.      All  this  places  the  Secretary  of  State  in  a  most
             uncomfortable position. In 1999 the  Under-Secretary  of  State
             made in Parliament what was clearly intended to be a  statement
             of policy.  The  way  in  which  the  statement  described  the
             existing practice and the change to 7 years instead of 10 years
             strongly suggested a presumption against enforcement action  in
             such cases ('save in very exceptional circumstances', 'will not
             normally be appropriate'). Yet it is now said that none of this
             forms any part of the policy and  that  the  actual  policy  is
             limited to one under which  each  case  is  considered  on  its
             merits but a number of factors may be of  particular  relevance
             (something  which  is  barely  more   than   a   statement   of
             considerations relevant in any discretionary decision  of  this
             kind). Moreover  this  position  is  now  adopted  despite  the
             absence of any action over the intervening years to correct the
             false  impression  created  by   the   text   of   Butterworths
             Immigration  Law  Service  on  which  practitioners  will  have
             relied, and despite the concession  made  by  counsel  for  the
             Secretary of State in Baig.
          1.  All  this  is   contrary   to   basic   principles   of   good
             administration.  It  also  has  potentially   important   legal
             consequences. From the information we have  been  given  it  is
             apparent that decisions concerning children with long residence
             are taken without any regard to the Parliamentary statement  on
             the subject by the Under-Secretary of State. There is a  strong
             argument  not  only  that  the  Parliamentary  statement  is  a
             relevant  consideration,  but  that  there  is   a   legitimate
             expectation that it will be applied. If, therefore,  the  issue
             before us were a direct challenge to the decision  of  20  June
             2005  purporting  to  deny  the  family  'the  benefit  of  the
             concession', I have  little  doubt  that  the  challenge  would
             succeed.
          1. The actual issue before  us  is  of  course  different.  It  is
             whether there is an arguable case that, in  the  light  of  the
             policy and Parliamentary statement to which  we  have  referred
             and their application in the circumstances  of  the  case,  the
             Tribunal might find that this was an exceptional case in  which
             removal would be disproportionate  under  article  8.  On  that
             question the decision of 20 June 2005  would  carry  no  weight
             since  it  was  taken  without  regard  to  the   Parliamentary
             statement. The Tribunal would be entirely free to form its  own
             judgment on the matter.
        91.      I think that there is force in the views expressed by  the
             deputy judge on this question. He proceeded on the  basis  that
             the policy expressed in, or as amended  by,  the  Parliamentary
             statement "tilts in favour of the grant of leave" (para 83(4)).
             He assumed,  understandably,  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
             actual  decision  had  been   taken   by   reference   to   the
             Parliamentary statement. But even on that basis  he  considered
             there to be an arguable case... ."
    So  far  as  the  claimant's  claim  under  Article  8  was  concerned,
    therefore, the Court of Appeal agreed with the judge that the  claimant
    had an arguable case.

25. We do not need to set out in any detail the other authorities to  which
    were referred.




Discussion

26.  We  confess  to  have  had  considerable  difficulty  in  interpreting
    precisely the impact of the decisions in the Court of  Appeal  in  Baig
    and Tozlukaya on the process by which Tribunal reaches or is  to  reach
    its decisions.  It may assist if  we  begin  by  setting  a  number  of
    principles and  rules  that  we  cannot  imagine  the  Court  meant  to
    undermine.  Some of them have high authority; others are,  we  believe,
    self-evident.

27. First, a claim based on the asserted human rights of the  claimant  is,
    even if it depends on an assessment of  proportionality,  different  in
    nature from one based on an assertion that  the  claimant  should  have
    benefited from an exercise of discretion in his favour.   If  authority
    is needed for this proposition it can be found in Edore v  SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 716 at [18].

28. Secondly, although as a result of the decisions of the House  of  Lords
    in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and SSHD v Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11  the
    assessment of proportionality in human rights claims is  a  matter  for
    the Tribunal, it does not follow that the exercise of a discretion is a
    matter for the Tribunal in a case where the claimant has not shown that
    a decision adverse to him is incompatible with his Convention rights.

29. Thirdly, the Tribunal is a creature of statute and has only the  powers
    given to it by statute.  Like any other public authority its  decision-
    making is governed by the Human Rights Act 1998 but, subject  to  that,
    an Immigration Judge is bound to observe the statutory restrictions  on
    jurisdiction.  One of them is in s86(6), which we have set  out  above.
    If any were needed, the existence of that  subsection  in  the  appeals
    provisions of the 2002 Act is confirmation  that  there  are  areas  of
    discretionary judgment where  a  claimant's  search  for  a  beneficial
    outcome is not an assertion of his human rights.

30. Fourthly, as a matter of principle and logic,  claims  based  on  human
    rights ought to be assessed in priority to claims based on the hope  of
    a favourable exercise of  a  discretion.   It  makes  little  sense  to
    consider whether the Secretary of State may (or indeed ought to) choose
    to give the claimant a benefit that he already has as a right.   Having
    said that, there are of course cases where judicial  economy  allows  a
    judge to go straight to the end of a process  omitting  earlier  steps.
    And we recognise that there  are  good  grounds  in  legal  theory  for
    recognising the continued existence of a discretion even where, in  the
    circumstances of the case, it can be exercised only in  one  way.   But
    the order must generally be: rights, first then possibilities.

31. Fifthly,  within  the  category  of  rights,  issues  relating  to  the
    assessment of proportionality  ought  to  yield  priority  to  specific
    provisions of national law.  This is the thinking underlying Razgar and
    Huang.  One looks first at the legal rules that appear  to  govern  the
    case.  It is only if those rules do not give the claimant the result he
    seeks, that there is any need to consider whether his Convention rights
    are such that he is entitled to the result despite the rules.  This  is
    also the principle underlying  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights'
    jurisdiction under the Convention, as set out in Article 35.1.

32. Sixthly, the phrase "in accordance with the law" in Article 8.2 of  the
    ECHR does not import the whole of the national  legal  order  into  the
    assessment of proportionality (see MA [2005] UKIAT 00090).  The  phrase
    does not make disproportionate (and therefore a breach  of  Article  8)
    every governmental act that can be the subject of  a  successful  legal
    challenge.  Rather, the phrase  requires  that  "the  impugned  measure
    should have some basis in domestic law,  and  it  also  refers  to  the
    quality of the law in question, requiring that it should be  accessible
    to the person concerned, and foreseeable as to its effects" (Slivenko v
    Latvia 48321/99, [2003] EWHR 498 at [100], which is a  summary  of  the
    position explored in greater detail in earlier cases such  as  Klass  v
    Germany (1978) 2 EHRR 214, Silver v UK (1983) 5 EHRR 347 at  [86],  and
    Sunday Times v UK (1979) 2 EHRR 245 at [49]).

33. In the face of all this we are asked to say that, where  the  Secretary
    of State had published a policy, incorporating a discretion that may be
    exercised in favour of a person who does not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules, the Tribunal is not merely to decide whether the
    Secretary of State has acted in accordance with the law in dealing with
    the matter.  It is to go on to  make  the  discretionary  decision  for
    itself.  No clear distinction was drawn, in the submissions before  us,
    between cases in which the Secretary of State has  failed  to  consider
    whether to exercise his discretion  in  accordance  with  his  declared
    policy, and cases in which  he  has  considered  whether  to,  but  has
    decided not to.  Thus it appears to be argued that the Tribunal may  be
    the primary decision-maker  in  exercising  a  discretion  outside  the
    Rules, or may be the reviewer of the exercise of such a discretion.  It
    is further asserted that the Court of Appeal decisions to which we have
    referred provide authority for these views; and it is implied that  the
    operation of the Human Rights Act 1998 requires the Tribunal  to  take,
    or to  recognise  that  it  has,  the  jurisdiction  outlined  in  this
    paragraph.

34. This is surprising.  The argument as a whole runs counter to the  third
    principle set out above.  Section 86(3) gives no reason to suppose that
    the  Tribunal  has  power  to  exercise  a  discretion  which  has  not
    previously been exercised,  and  s86(6)  removes  from  the  Tribunal's
    jurisdiction the review of the exercise of  a  discretion  outside  the
    Rules.  The implication that a review of a discretion, or the  exercise
    of the discretion itself, by the Tribunal, is  demanded  by  the  Human
    Rights  Act  1998,  runs  counter  to  the  first,  second  and  fourth
    principles: for if the exercise of discretion in favour of  a  claimant
    is in issue at all, that must be because the  claimant  has  failed  to
    show that human rights arguments require  a  decision  in  his  favour.
    Further, the argument  that  the  investigation  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's discretion and its exercise are  inherently  matters  of  human
    rights runs counter to the first, fifth and sixth principles.   If  the
    Tribunal's jurisdiction enables or requires a decision to be set  aside
    as "otherwise not in accordance with the law"  on  the  basis  that  an
    applicable  discretion  has   not   been   considered,   human   rights
    jurisprudence requires no more: the threat of  a  human  rights  breach
    carried by the (unlawful) decision is removed,  even  if  the  claimant
    fails to show that his human rights demand a decision  in  his  favour.
    On the other hand, if  the  claimant  cannot  establish  that,  in  the
    circumstances of his case, he is entitled, as a matter of human rights,
    to remain in (or be allowed to enter) the United Kingdom, there  is  no
    reason why human rights arguments should play any further role  in  the
    analysis of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision-making.   For  these
    reasons it would appear unlikely that the decisions  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal to which we have been referred, or indeed any decisions of  that
    Court, could carry the meaning for which the appellants argue.

35. On the other hand, it is  not  difficult  to  find  in  both  Baig  and
    Tozlukaya sentiments that, at first sight and taken in isolation,  seem
    to support the appellants' submissions.  Paragraphs [28]  and  [33]  of
    Baig seem to make the exercise of a discretion outside the Rules (a)  a
    matter for the Tribunal, (b) an issue of human rights  and  (c)  to  be
    determined on Huang principles.  In Tozlukaya  Richards  LJ  recognises
    that the difficulty in identifying precisely the terms  of  the  policy
    mean that the Tribunal might have  to  decide  that  the  decision  was
    unlawful.  But he goes on to say at [90] that the result would be  that
    "the Tribunal would be entirely free to form its own  judgment  on  the
    matter"; and, moreover, this view is expressed  in  the  course  of  an
    analysis specifically limited to the discussion of issues under Article
    8.

36. The danger lies in taking these few sentences out of context.   Neither
    in Baig nor in Tozlukaya was the Court concerned to analyse a  decision
    on this issue that had actually been made by the Tribunal.  In Baig the
    Court was concerned to show that the claim could not possibly  succeed;
    in Tozlukaya it was concerned to show that it was wrong to say that the
    claim could not possibly succeed.  In such a context  of  extremes,  it
    would not be surprising if less attention  were  given  to  the  middle
    ground.

37. It is quite evident that Buxton  LJ's  judgment  in  Baig  ignores  any
    restriction that might be imposed by s86(6) or any  of  the  principles
    set out above.  To treat it as an injunction to ignore  them,  however,
    misses the point.  What the Court is doing in that case is showing  the
    claimant's difficulties on a fortiori basis.  The force of the decision
    consists in its conclusion that even ignoring any such  restraints  the
    claim  could  not  succeed;  and  for  that  purpose  it  was  entirely
    unnecessary - indeed undesirable - to set out or discuss the restraints
    that would in fact apply if the claim were to be the subject of  a  new
    hearing.  Nothing in Baig should, in our view, be treated as  authority
    on the appropriate procedure in a case which is not doomed to  failure.



38. Tozlukaya is,  as  we  have  said,  essentially  about  the  Tribunal's
    process.  But, again, it is important not to lose sight of the context.
     The question was whether the claimant's claim was to be seen,  as  the
    Secretary of State had seen it, as one which could not succeed.  It was
    not necessary (or, again, perhaps, desirable) for the Court to set  out
    exactly how it could succeed.  The process of certification meant that,
    until the Secretary of State's decision to certify  the  case  was  set
    aside, the claimant could not appeal to the appellate authorities.  So,
    of course, at the time of the Court of Appeal's  consideration  of  the
    case, there was no notice of appeal and no indication  of  the  grounds
    that would be relied on  in  any  such  appeal.   The  claimant's  case
    against certification was based on Articles 3  and  8:  that  does  not
    imply, however, that any appeal that might follow  the  quashing  of  a
    certification would be confined to Articles 3 and 8.

39. On Article 8, the claimant's claim depended in essence on the fact that
    his children (particularly the elder) had spent  a  long  time  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The claim was that in such circumstances the  family's
    removal would be disproportionate.  That is a claim about the  family's
    circumstances and about the individual rights of members of the family:
    it is not a  claim  about  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision-making
    process.  The question whether the family could be removed (or whether,
    on the contrary, removal would be contrary to their Convention  rights)
    was a matter for the proportionality  assessment  demanded  by  Razgar.
    Part of that assessment is  the  importance,  in  general  and  in  the
    individual case, of maintaining  effective  immigration  control.   All
    this is clear from paragraph [77] and [78].

40. It is in that context that a judicial decision-maker has to  take  into
    account any applicable policy, because if the policy itself  "tells  in
    favour of the person concerned being allowed to stay in  this  country"
    it is a factor that has to be incorporated into an  assessment  of  the
    argument going to the importance of immigration control.  The decision-
    maker is not said at paragraph [79] to be concerned with exercising any
    discretion under the policy.  Rather, the task is to ascertain  whether
    the terms of the  policy  tell  generally  in  favour  of  non-removal,
    because that finding, if made, has an impact on the proportionality  of
    the particular proposed removal.

41. That that is what was being said at  paragraph  [79]  is  in  our  view
    further clarified by the discussion of, and the observations about, the
    seven-year policy itself.  It is at paragraph [88] that  the  Secretary
    of State's difficulties are set out.  The dispute or doubt is precisely
    over whether the policy told (generally) in favour  of  non-removal  in
    that it "strongly suggested a presumption against enforcement  action",
    or whether it merely  set  out  the  "considerations  relevant  in  any
    discretionary  decision  of  this  kind".   At  paragraph  [89]  it  is
    recognised that the failure to make the  decision  in  accordance  with
    declared policy would cause an appeal on "not in  accordance  with  the
    law" grounds to succeed.   In  paragraph  [90],  however,  Richards  LJ
    returns to the question at issue, which is that of  proportionality  in
    the light of a policy apparently not giving the Secretary  of  State  a
    general discretion, but instead telling in  favour  of  non-removal  by
    suggesting a presumption against  enforcement  action.   And  the  last
    sentence of that paragraph is not an indication that in the absence  of
    a lawful decision under the policy it is for the Tribunal to exercise a
    discretion.  It is a statement that the Tribunal always has  to  assess
    proportionality and that, if there  is  a  policy  that  presumes  non-
    removal, a decision ignoring that policy ought not to  be  regarded  as
    setting out the Secretary of State's  position  on  the  importance  of
    maintaining  immigration  control  for  the   purposes   of   assessing
    proportionality.

42. Nobody reading the judgment of Richards LJ in Tozlukaya  would  suppose
    that it was intended to herald a dramatic change in the jurisdiction of
    the Tribunal or any inroad into the principles we have set  out  above.
    Read carefully, with an eye always to context, it is clear that it does
    no such thing.  Indeed, the principle underlying the remarks about  the
    assessment of proportionality, in a case where a declared policy  shows
    the Secretary of State's usual or presumed practice, is to be found  in
    the  judgment  of  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  chaired  by  the
    President, Ouseley J, in DM [2004] UKIAT 00024.  Albeit in the  context
    of a general view that the  appellate  authorities  have  no  power  to
    displace on proportionality grounds a decision that was  lawfully  open
    to the Secretary of State, the Tribunal said this at [28]:

        "However, when the Secretary of State, e.g.  through  a  consistent
        decision-making  pattern,  or  through  decisions  in  relation  to
        members of the same family, has clearly shown where in the range of
        reasonable responses his own assessment  would  lie,  it  would  be
        inappropriate to assess proportionality by  reference  to  a  wider
        range of possible responses than he in fact uses."

    There is no mention here of policies: but there can be no doubt that  a
    policy creating a presumption in favour of non-removal would have  been
    seen by the DM Tribunal in precisely the same light: it has the  effect
    of narrowing the range of decisions that the  Secretary  of  State  "in
    fact uses".

General conclusions on jurisdiction and process

43. For the foregoing reasons we reject the argument that the  Tribunal  is
    bound or entitled to consider or review the exercise  of  a  discretion
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Both principle and statute are  against
    it; and the decisions to which we have been referred do not support it.
     The Tribunal is bound to consider whether  a  particular  decision  is
    proportionate, and in so doing has to assess the force of the Secretary
    of State's claim that the decision is necessary in  order  to  maintain
    immigration control.  When making that assessment it takes into account
    any declared policy that incorporates a  presumption  that  immigration
    control will not be enforced against persons of a category  into  which
    the claimant falls.  The reason for taking such a policy  into  account
    is that it throws light on the needs  of  immigration  control  and  so
    helps to assess the proportionality of the decision in  the  individual
    case.  If there is no policy that creates  a  presumption,  or  if  the
    claimant is not, on the facts, entitled to a benefit of any presumption
    in a policy, the policy is not likely to be of relevance  in  assessing
    proportionality and hence the claimant's Convention rights.

44. If the claimant does not establish (whether by reference to a policy or
    otherwise) that his Convention rights prohibit his  removal,  then  the
    Secretary of State has (whether by reference to a policy or  otherwise)
    a discretion to allow him to stay: but, because of s86(6), the exercise
    of that discretion is not reviewable by the Tribunal.  Where,  however,
    the Secretary of State has declared a policy in relation to a  category
    into which the claimant falls, a decision that on  its  face  fails  to
    apply the policy may found a successful appeal on the ground  that  the
    decision "was not in accordance with the law".  In such a case (subject
    to an observation we make below) the  effect  of  allowing  the  appeal
    would not be to grant the appellant the substantive relief he seeks but
    merely to set aside the unlawful decision so  that  a  lawful  decision
    (whether in favour or against the appellant) may in due course be made.



45. Although the assessment of proportionality  under  Article  8  may  and
    often will  raise  issues  similar  to  those  to  be  considered  when
    ascertaining whether  the  Secretary  of  State  properly  applied  any
    relevant policy, it is important to keep the issues  separate,  because
    they are not the same.  Human rights are to be considered at  the  date
    of the hearing; but the argument that the decision is "otherwise not in
    accordance with the law", being an argument about  the  decision-making
    process, looks back to the time when the decision was taken, and to the
    responsibility of the person taking it then.  Between the date  of  the
    decision and the date of the hearing the facts may  have  changed,  and
    the policy may have changed.  The human rights argument has to be  made
    and  assessed  on  the  basis  of  today's   facts;   and   issues   of
    proportionality have to be determined on the basis of  the  application
    of today's policy to  today's  facts;  but  it  is  unlikely  that  the
    decision can be attacked on process  grounds  except  by  reference  to
    yesterday's policy as applied to  yesterday's  facts  (indeed  possibly
    only by reference to yesterday's appreciation of the facts).

46. There are two  further  points  we  should  add  in  the  interests  of
    completeness.  The first relates to "near misses".  We have  formulated
    our conclusions above as applying to those who come within  a  category
    to which a policy applies.  It is sometimes said that a person who very
    nearly meets the requirements of the Rules, or very nearly comes within
    the ambit of (or of the presumption-creating part of) a policy,  should
    be treated as though he did come within the Rules or the  policy.   The
    argument is that to do otherwise would be disproportionate.

47. This argument is incoherent.  It is in the nature of rules  (and  there
    is no reason why it should not be in the nature of policies relied upon
    as  creating  legitimate  expectations)  that  they  draw  distinctions
    between those who do, and those who do not, meet their requirements: KP
    [2006] UKAIT 00093 at [43]-[45].  That, as a result, some applicants or
    claimants fall outside the requirements of the rule cannot of itself be
    the basis of an attack on the rule unless  for  some  reason  the  rule
    itself is said to be unlawful (in which case  presumably  the  claimant
    would not be particularly interested in making his claim  by  reference
    to it).  Further, one cannot say that those just outside a  rule  or  a
    policy are treated disproportionately if they are not treated as though
    they were within it: if that argument were successful, it would  follow
    that those a little further outside would have the same argument on the
    ground that they only just missed being given the benefit given to  the
    first group; and so on.  As the Tribunal  has  remarked  in  KL  [2007]
    UKAIT 00044 (published since we heard argument  at  these  appeals)  in
    analysing the authorities on this point (R (Shkembi) v SSHD [2005] EWCA
    Civ 1592; Mongoto v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 751; SB  (Bangladesh)  v  SSHD
    [2007] EWCA Civ 28) at [46]:

        "... . None of them is  authority  for  the  proposition  that  the
        immigration rules or policies can be rewritten by judges.  Integral
        to each of them is the distinction between (1) cases in  which  the
        rationale for a rule  or  policy  applies  fully  to  the  case  in
        question although the rule or policy does not technically cover it;
        and (2) cases in which the rationale for such a rule or policy does
        not apply or applies only loosely. Even if a case comes within  (1)
        all three higher court decisions recognise that  at  most  a  "near
        miss" is a factor which has to be taken into account. Just  because
        a case comes within (1) does not mean that that a decision  amounts
        to a disproportionate interference  with  legitimate  public  ends.
        ... ."


48. Our second additional point is in relation to cases  where  the  policy
    does not incorporate a discretion, or where on the facts  of  the  case
    there is no proper opportunity, by the application of  the  policy,  to
    make a decision unfavourable to the claimant.  This is  not  the  usual
    position.  In SS [2005] UKAIT 00167 the Tribunal said this:

        "30.     ... .  Most published policies are  not  in  the  absolute
             terms of the Immigration Rules.  Most  policies  contain  words
             like  'normally'.   Many  policies  do  not  declare   that   a
             particular relief will  be  granted:   they  provide  that  the
             Secretary of State will  consider  whether  it  should  be.   A
             claimant who has not obtained the  substantive  grant  that  he
             seeks can succeed on the policy  only  if  he  shows  that  the
             policy itself was not (or was not properly)  applied.   If  the
             policy says that the Secretary of  State  'will  consider'  his
             case on certain terms, he cannot succeed  unless  he  can  show
             that the Secretary of State did not consider his case on  those
             terms.  If the policy says that something  will  'normally'  be
             granted, he is  likely  to  be  in  some  difficulties  if  the
             Secretary of State refers to any consideration that shows  that
             the case is less than normal.


        31.      In any event, unless the policy is expressed in terms that
             are absolute  or  have  to  be  regarded  as  absolute  in  the
             individual facts of the case, the effect of a successful appeal
             will be merely that the decision  is  found  to  have  been  an
             unlawful one, so  that  there  is  outstanding  an  application
             before the Secretary of State.  ... ."

49. That decision, however,  clearly  envisages  that  where  a  policy  is
    expressed in absolute terms, a claimant  may  be  entitled  to  succeed
    substantively.  IA [2006] UKAIT 00082 was such a case.  The one  reason
    given by the Secretary of State for refusing to  apply  a  policy  that
    would otherwise have operated in favour of the appellant was  found  by
    the Immigration Judge to be factually wrong.   For  procedural  reasons
    the Tribunal was content, on reconsideration, to affirm the Immigration
    Judge's decision to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds;  but  it
    did so only after saying that, in the circumstances  of  the  case,  it
    would have been difficult to criticise him if he had allowed the appeal
    on the ground that, given the facts, the reason for  the  decision  and
    the terms of the policy, an adverse decision  was  not  "in  accordance
    with the law".

50. For ourselves we have little doubt that - contrary to  the  submissions
    on behalf of the Secretary of State before us  -  there  are  cases  in
    which a finding that a decision is "not in accordance with the law"  on
    the ground of failure to apply a policy should lead  to  a  substantive
    decision in the claimant's favour,  with  a  direction  that  leave  be
    granted.  There will be no need to base such a decision on human rights
    grounds, because it is demanded by the more detailed provisions of  the
    2002 Act.  But the cases in question are unusual.  They  are  those  in
    which (1) the claimant proves the precise terms of  the  policy,  which
    (2) creates a presumption, on the facts  of  his  case,  in  favour  of
    granting leave, and (3) there is either nothing at all to displace  the
    presumption, or nothing that, under the terms of the policy, falls  for
    consideration.  If all those factors apply  to  the  case,  the  appeal
    should be allowed, with a direction as indicated.

51. If (2) or (3) do not apply, and if the Secretary of State has  not  yet
    considered the claim within the terms of his policy, the appeal  should
    be allowed with a direction that he do so.  But if the appellant  fails
    to establish the terms of a policy, or if the Secretary  of  State  has
    already  properly  considered  the  claim  within  the  terms  of   any
    applicable policy, then (given that none of these considerations  apply
    at all unless the appellant's removal would not breach  his  Convention
    rights) the appeal should be dismissed.

52. We now apply these principles to the individual cases before us.

AG

53. In his determination, the Immigration Judge set out a  summary  of  the
    relevant policy, which nobody has suggested was inaccurate.

        "2.      The Home Office policy DP5/96 sets out the criteria to  be
             considered when deciding whether to pursue  enforcement  action
             against the families of minor dependant children who have  been
             living continuously in the UK for seven years of more.  In such
             cases the following criteria are to be considered:


              i) The length of the parents' residence without leave.


             ii) Whether removal has been delayed  through  protracted  (and
                 often repetitive) representations by the parents  going  to
                 ground.

            iii) The age of the children.

             iv) Whether the children were conceived at a time  when  either
                 of the parents had leave to remain.

              v) Whether return to the  parents'  country  of  origin  would
                 cause extreme hardship to the children or put their  health
                 at serious risk.

             vi) Whether either of the parents has  a  history  of  criminal
                 behaviour or deception."

      The Immigration Judge's decision is not made on human rights  grounds:
    there is no suggestion in his determination that he  thought  that  the
    removal of the appellant and his family from the United  Kingdom  would
    be incompatible with their Convention rights.  He  allowed  the  appeal
    solely on the basis that the decision of the Secretary of State was, as
    he put it, "contrary to his declared policy".  He gave full reasons for
    his conclusion to that effect.


54. We do not need to set those reasons out in full.  The Immigration Judge
    observed  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  correspondence  with   the
    appellant did not show consideration of all the issues referred  to  in
    the policy.  In summary, the  reasons  for  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision not to apply the policy in  the  appellant's  favour  were  as
    follows:

        "(i)     The family has never have leave to enter or remain in  the
             United Kingdom and were informed  within  two  weeks  of  their
             arrival that  they  would  be  returned  to  Greece  under  the
             provisions of the Dublin Convention.


        (ii)     The lengthy stay of the family in the UK  has  been  as  a
             direct result of the child's parents' failure to cooperate with
             the United Kingdom's immigration authorities.  The Home  Office
             letters state that the protracted challenges to the Home Office
             decision that the family  be  sent  to  Greece  have  all  been
             dismissed and  the  appellant  could  have  had  no  legitimate
             expectation that he and his family would permitted to remain in
             the  United  Kingdom  once  the  judicial  process  have   been
             completed."

55. The Immigration Judge described the second reason as "the main reason".
     He pointed out that the parents had not at any stage gone  to  ground,
    and said he did not agree with the "submissions  of  the  Home  Office"
    that the parents had made protracted  or  repetitious  representations.
    He said "every application that they have made to the Court or  to  the
    Tribunal has been in accordance  with  the  rights  given  to  them  by
    Statute under the law of this country".  That is probably right, and we
    are not asked to disagree with the Immigration Judge's view  that  none
    of the applications was frivolous, vexatious  or  repetitive.   It  is,
    however, undoubtedly the case that the appellant had no  leave  at  the
    time he made his application for discretionary leave on 26 March  2004.
    He was at  that  time  aware  that  all  his  appeal  rights  had  been
    exhausted.  The Immigration Judge noted that the appellant applied  for
    judicial review of the decision to remove  him  to  Greece  immediately
    after that decision was made in 1997, and further  noted  that  it  had
    taken four years before the Court made its decision: "an  extraordinary
    long period", as the Immigration Judge described it.   The  Immigration
    Judge  does  not,  however,  indicate  any  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's attempts during that period to secure judgment.

56. Looking at the period of time as a whole during which the appellant had
    been in the United Kingdom without leave, the  Immigration  Judge  said
    this:

        "They have been here without leave for  nine  years.   Particularly
        having regard to the ages of all the children that, in my judgment,
        is a very long period of time."

57. It appears to us that each of these sentiments discloses  an  error  of
    law by the Immigration Judge.  It is clear, first, that  he  failed  to
    take into account the appellant's  decision  to  remain  without  leave
    after the exhaustion of his appeal remedies; secondly that he took  the
    four  years  delay  in  securing  judgment  in  the   judicial   review
    proceedings as a matter  over  which  the  appellant  had  no  control,
    without there apparently being any evidence to justify that conclusion;
    and, thirdly that he considered the question of the length of time  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom without leave  as  one  to  be
    assessed on the basis that the longer the period, the better  for  him.
    If the application of the Secretary of State's policy were a matter for
    the Immigration Judge, therefore, we should on that  basis  have  found
    that he materially erred in law in his application  of  it.   We  reach
    that conclusion without considering a number  of  other  points,  which
    were  not  the  subject  of  submissions  before  us,   including   the
    Immigration Judge's assumption that, because there is in the policy  no
    mention of the Dublin Convention, it was wrong  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to give that Convention (which is part of EU, rather than  merely
    of international, law) priority over his policy.

58. The question for the Immigration  Judge  was  whether  a  decision  was
    lawfully made under the policy, not whether he would have  reached  the
    same  decision  himself.   Because  of  the  process  adopted  by   the
    Immigration Judge, we do not know whether  he  found  that  the  policy
    tells in favour of the claimant, or in ordinary circumstances creates a
    presumption in his favour.   As  we  have  indicated,  the  Immigration
    Judge's decision should have depended on such a  finding.   If  he  had
    found that, in the appellant's own circumstances, the policy created  a
    presumption in his favour, he would need only to identify  whether  the
    Secretary of State was right in declining to apply  it  in  this  case.
    If, on the other hand, his finding was that in the circumstances of the
    case  no  presumption  in  the  appellant's  favour  arose   from   the
    application of the policy, he should have considered only  whether  the
    Secretary of State had acted in accordance with the law in his decision-
    making process.

59. We have considered whether  it  would  be  proper  for  us  to  proceed
    immediately to substitute a determination  in  this  appeal.   We  have
    concluded that it would not be right to do  so  on  the  basis  of  the
    information before us.  There are a number of reasons.  One is that  to
    which we have already referred: we do not know why the judicial  review
    proceedings took so long to resolve.  We note that in  Tozlukaya  there
    is reference to the need to establish principles by a lead case, but we
    do not know whether the same difficulty applied to the whole or part of
    the period in this case.  Secondly, we note that after the  failure  of
    the judicial review application, the claimant did not persist with  his
    asylum claim.  We do not know why that was.  It  may  be  that  if  his
    history shows a series of attempts to remain in the United Kingdom  for
    different reasons, that would be a point to be taken into consideration
    in deciding whether his applications  and  appeals  were  frivolous  or
    vexatious, and whether his removal has  been  delayed  by  "protracted"
    representations.

60. There is another factor.  After setting out his reasons for considering
    that, as he put it, "the appellant and his family do  (as  they  claim)
    meet all the requirements of  the  Home  Office  policy  or  concession
    DP5/96", the Immigration Judge points out, at paragraph  24(xiii)  that
    the respondent appears to have taken no account of  the  Convention  on
    the Rights of the Child, to which the United Kingdom  is  a  signatory.
    The application of that Convention to  an  individual  case  is  not  a
    matter for the Tribunal, but the failure to take it into account  might
    render a decision "not in accordance  with  the  law"  where  a  policy
    apparently centred around the interests and needs of  the  children  of
    the family is applied against the family by reference to the conduct of
    the parents.  We heard no argument on this particular issue.  We cannot
    say that the parents' conduct cannot be taken into account, nor that  a
    decision cannot be made by reference  to  it:  but  if  the  policy  is
    structured around the perceived needs of young children, it may perhaps
    be thought that the decision would necessarily be in influence  and  by
    those needs.

61. For the foregoing reasons we find that the Immigration Judge materially
    erred in law.  We shall adjourn this appeal for further reconsideration
    in the light of the principles set out above.

EB

62. In EB's appeal  the  relevant  policy  was  that  called  DP3/96.   The
    respondent's statement of it in the letter accompanying the  notice  of
    refusal is as follows:

        "Guidelines  have  been  laid  down  for  dealing   with   marriage
        applications from over-stayers (a document commonly referred to  as
        DP3/96).   These  guidelines  state  that  it  will   normally   be
        appropriate to consider granting leave to remain, exceptionally, on
        the basis of a marriage if we are satisfied that, (i) the  marriage
        is genuine and subsisting; and (ii) that it pre-dates  the  service
        of an enforcement notice by at least two years; and (iii)  that  it
        is unreasonable to expect the settled spouse to  accompany  his/her
        spouse on removal."

    The letter states that the appellant's case does not fall within  "this
    general rule", because the Secretary of State had insufficient evidence
    that the appellant was co-habiting with his wife or that  the  marriage
    was subsisting as claimed.  It goes on to say that even if the marriage
    is genuine and subsisting, the Secretary of State considers that "there
    are insufficient compassionate circumstances to justify a concession on
    the grounds of the marriage".  The letter continues by saying that both
    parties would have been aware that "the persistence of  their  marriage
    within the United Kingdom would, from the outset, be  uncertain".   The
    Secretary  of  State  also  states  that  the  appellant's  wife  could
    reasonably be expected to live in Jamaica and that their  child,  being
    only 1 year old, could live in Jamaica with them.  The relevant part of
    the letter concludes as follows:


        "In these circumstances we are not persuaded that the  position  of
        your client's family constitutes a sufficiently  compelling  reason
        for making an exception to the normal practice  of  removing  those
        who have remained in the United Kingdom illegally."

63. We have  to  say  that  we  find  that  letter  somewhat  difficult  to
    understand.  The policy is set out,  and  then  an  entirely  different
    policy appears  to  be  applied.   The  policy  as  set  out  gives  no
    indication that leave will only be  granted  if  there  are  compelling
    reasons.  The policy as set out gives no indication  that  there  is  a
    "normal practice of removing those who  have  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom illegally" although one might have expected to see  that.   The
    policy as set out appears to indicate that a person who shows that  the
    three numbered factors apply to him will have the benefit of  a  policy
    expressed as that it "will normally be appropriate to consider granting
    leave to remain".

64. We have already set out the process  by  which  the  Immigration  Judge
    decided that, in a case where the policy gave the Secretary of State  a
    discretion, he had a power and a duty to review the  exercise  of  that
    discretion.  For the reasons set out earlier in this determination,  he
    was wrong to take that view.  We agree with those who  appeared  before
    him that, as  expressed  in  the  letter  accompanying  the  notice  of
    refusal, the policy incorporates  a  discretion.   The  conjunction  of
    "normally" and "consider" tends to have that effect; and the additional
    element of judgment needed for the purposes of the third  consideration
    confirms rather than undermines the effect.  Even on the basis  of  the
    facts as found by the Immigration Judge, that there  was  a  valid  and
    subsisting marriage, which pre-dated enforcement action by at least two
    years, and that the appellant's  wife  had  considerable  ties  in  the
    United Kingdom, it seems  to  us  that  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant was to be removed or allowed to remain remained an  open  one
    for the Secretary of State.  Because of his declared  policy,  however,
    he was obliged to determine the appellant's application by reference to
    that policy, rather than by reference to considerations which appear to
    have no role in the policy.

65. The Immigration Judge erred in law in failing to consider first whether
    the appellant's removal  would  be  incompatible  with  his  Convention
    rights and purporting to substitute his own exercise of  discretion  in
    relation to a policy  importing  a  discretion  on  the  facts  of  the
    appellant's  case.   We  substitute  a   determination   allowing   the
    appellant's appeal on the ground that the Secretary of State's decision
    was not in accordance with the law.  The appellant's application of  16
    August 2005 accordingly awaits a lawful decision.

PB

66. In PB, the policy in question was again the seven year policy,  DP5/96.
    We have already set out the  Immigration  Judge's  conclusions  on  her
    jurisdiction.  In our view, and for the reasons we have given, she  was
    wrong to say "I can apply the policy directly if I  wanted  to".   That
    was a material error of law.

67. As we have also pointed out, it is not at all easy  to  understand  the
    precise factual basis on which she made her decision.  The  appellant's
    daughter is said to have come to  the  United  Kingdom  in  1999.   The
    decision was made on 18 December 2004.  At that  time  the  appellant's
    daughter had not been in the United Kingdom for seven years.  An appeal
    on the ground that the decision "is otherwise not  in  accordance  with
    the law" in a case of this type is an  attack  on  the  decision-making
    process and so cannot succeed except by showing that there was a  fault
    in that process.  Despite s85(4), therefore, insofar as the appeal  was
    based on the policy, it needed to be directed to the  circumstances  as
    they were at the date of the decision, because the  complaint  is  that
    the Secretary of State ought at that date to have applied the policy as
    it was on that date.  The fact that since the date of the decision  the
    child's age, and the time she has spent in  the  United  Kingdom,  have
    both increased, is not a matter  "relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
    decision" in the context of an attack on the  decision-making  process,
    and is not a matter on which any evidence could add to the position  as
    it is accepted  to  have  been  at  the  date  of  the  decision.   The
    Immigration Judge was wrong to consider that terms of  the  seven  year
    policy showed that the decision in December 2004 should  have  been  in
    the claimant's favour.  So far as the policy was concerned, she  should
    have dismissed the appeal on the grounds that, even by reference to the
    policy, the decision was not shown to have been "not in accordance with
    the law".

68. As we have noted, the grounds of appeal to the Immigration  Judge  were
    concerned with human rights.  Despite her error in her approach to  the
    policy, her determination is formally one relating to the human  rights
    grounds, as the last sentence of her paragraph 23 (which  we  have  set
    out above) indicates.  She was right to consider the existence  of  the
    policy as part of her assessment of proportionality,  for  the  reasons
    set out earlier in this  determination.   Unfortunately,  however,  she
    appears to have failed to appreciate the importance of  the  fact  that
    this case was not one in which the application of  the  policy  to  the
    facts created a presumption in favour of the appellant.  The  appellant
    entered illegally, as did  her  child.   She  made  an  application  in
    February 2000 which was deceptive in not mentioning the  child.   These
    factors are sufficient to  displace  any  presumption  created  by  the
    policy.  The result  of  that  is  that  this  was  a  case  where  the
    discretion remained with the Secretary of State: in the context of  the
    assessment of proportionality, there simply was no reason  to  suppose,
    as the Immigration Judge appears to have done, that  the  Secretary  of
    State consistently allows those with such  an  immigration  history  to
    remain in the United Kingdom under this policy.  The Immigration  Judge
    accordingly erred in her assessment  of  proportionality.   We  do  not
    think it is quite right to say, as the Secretary of State's grounds for
    reconsideration do, that the Immigration Judge has failed to  give  any
    reasons for allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  It  does  appear
    to us, however,  that  the  reasons  she  gives  demonstrate  a  flawed
    approach to her task.  Her error was material: it cannot be  said  that
    she would have been bound to reach the same conclusion if she  had  not
    made it.

69.  We  must  therefore  substitute  a  determination  of  our  own.   The
    Immigration Judge, at paragraph 18 of her  determination,  referred  to
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in R (Mahmood) v SSHD  [2000]  EWCA
    Civ 315 and said:

        "I am satisfied and it was accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
        appellant has established a family life in the UK and it  is  clear
        that her removal to Bangladesh will, albeit  perhaps  for  a  short
        time, interfere with her family life.  The question is whether that
        interference is proportionate."

    We do not understand that comment in the circumstances  of  this  case.
    The appellant's application to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependant of her brother, in which she did not mention the existence of
    her child, has been refused, and  dependence  on  her  brother  is  not
    advanced in this appeal as a reason for concluding that the appellant's
    removal to Bangladesh would be incompatible with her Convention rights.
     The child  is  a  British  citizen;  but  if  the  appellant  went  to
    Bangladesh, whether or not her child accompanied her, it  is  difficult
    to see that she would have any claim under the  Immigration  Rules  for
    readmission to the United  Kingdom  for  settlement.   This  makes  the
    present case rather different from Mahmood.  What is said is  that  the
    appellant and her child are  well-circumstanced  financially  and  that
    they now have firm links in the United  Kingdom  with  relatives  here.
    The principal submission made in the grounds of appeal is that  removal
    to Bangladesh would interfere with the appellant's private  and  family
    life: but there appears to be no dispute about that.  The  question  is
    whether any interference would be proportionate.

70. The appellant has, we understand, sole care of her daughter, who  is  a
    British citizen.  They have ample  resources  to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which would clearly be more than  ample  in  Bangladesh.   The
    only reason advanced in the grounds for supposing that the child cannot
    go to Bangladesh is that "the risk of health hazard in respect  of  the
    child is extremely high, because the child is used to adequate hygienic
    facilities in the  UK".   That  submission  is  not  supported  by  any
    relevant evidence and, in particular, there can be little doubt that  a
    wealthy child in Bangladesh  has  full  access  to  "adequate  hygienic
    facilities" there.

71. So far as the appellant is concerned, the argument that it would not be
    proportionate to remove her because of the general application  of  the
    seven year policy fails, for the reasons we have given.  She arrived in
    the United Kingdom illegally and she has always known that her presence
    here was precarious.  If she goes to Bangladesh there is, so far as  we
    are aware, no reason why her child should  not  accompany  her  and  be
    brought up by her there.  There are no factors in her case  that  would
    make it disproportionate to apply immigration policy to her; and we are
    accordingly not persuaded that her  case  is  so  strong  that  she  be
    allowed to remain despite the provisions of the Immigration  Rules  and
    immigration law generally.  For the foregoing reasons we  substitute  a
    determination dismissing her appeal.


Conclusions

72. In summary we find material errors of law in all three  determinations.
    In the case of the first appellant we direct a further hearing of  this
    reconsideration.  In the case of the second appellant, we substitute  a
    determination allowing the appeal to the extent only of  setting  aside
    the Secretary of State's decision as not having been in accordance with
    the law and directing that he make a new decision  in  accordance  with
    the law.  In the third appellant's case we substitute  a  determination
    dismissing her appeal.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
