

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

             Shahzad (s 85A: commencement) [2012] UKUT 81 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th October 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                     Mr C.M.G. Ockelton, Vice President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                              MUHAMMAD SHAHZAD
                           KUNAL UPENDRABHAI PATEL
                           KUNJAL KIRANKUMAR PATEL
                          MALIK MOHAMMED UMAIR KHAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Zane Malik instructed by Malik Law Chambers (for
                 Shahzad, Patel and  Patel) and Mr Zane Malik and Mr
                 Sheryar Khan instructed by Farani Taylor   LLP (for Khan)
For the Respondent: Mr Peter Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

On  its  true  construction,  Article  2  of  the  UK   Borders   Act   2007
(Commencement No 7 and Transitional Provisions) Order  2011  amends  s85  of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and introduces s85A in  the
2002 Act only in relation to applications made to the Secretary of State  on
or after 23 May 2011.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These appeals have been listed together,  with  the  agreement  of  the
    parties,  because  they  all  raise  the  same  issue.  Each  of  these
    appellants seeks in the appeal  to  rely  upon  additional  documentary
    evidence in support of their application under the Points Based scheme.
     In each case the respondent says that this  additional  evidence,  not
    submitted with the application, cannot  be  considered  because  it  is
    excluded by ss 85-85A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act") as amended by s 19 of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    ("the 2007 Act") now that a Commencement Order has given effect to  the
    amendment to s 85 found in s 19 of the 2007 Act.


 2. The appellants challenge the decisions of the First-tier  judges  on  a
    number of grounds. They argue that,  because  their  applications  were
    submitted before the Commencement Order  was  laid  before  Parliament,
    they could not have known that they  would  have  been  prevented  from
    relying upon post- application evidence. It is said on  behalf  of  the
    appellants that, given that the purpose of the transitional  provisions
    contained within the Commencement Order must have been to mitigate  the
    unfairness in applying the new provisions to such  an  applicant  whose
    appeal had got under way before implementation of the amendment to s85,
    and because those transitional provisions, on a literal  reading,  fail
    to achieve that, the new arrangements disclose such unfairness as to be
    unlawful.

 3. Thus the challenge raised is not to the vires of s85A  itself,  but  to
    the scope of the transitional provisions which, on their face,  do  not
    achieve what, it is said, must have been intended.

The Appellants

 4. Before identifying the legal framework  in  detail  and  examining  the
    competing submissions, it is helpful  to  set  out  the  salient  facts
    relating to each of these appellants.

 5. Muhammad Shahzad, the first appellant,  first  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in March 2004 with leave to enter as a student. This leave  was
    progressively extended, initially as a student and then  as  a  Tier  1
    (Post Study-Work) Migrant until 18 March 2011.   On  4  March  2011  he
    submitted an application for further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant. The application was refused on 20 April 2011 because
    the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant had established the
    income he claimed to have from self  employment.   His  appeal  against
    that decision was lodged on 11 May 2011.  Following  a  hearing  on  13
    June 2011, the immigration judge dismissed the appeal because he agreed
    with  the  respondent  that  the  documentation  submitted   with   the
    application in support was not sufficient and because  he  declined  to
    take account of additional evidence offered to  him  because  he  found
    that he was precluded from doing so by s85A of the  2002  Act,  in  its
    amended form.

 6. Three grounds were advanced in challenge to that determination:

        a. The immigration  judge  erred  in  excluding  the  new  material
           because, notwithstanding the terms of s85A of the 2002 Act, this
           was  a  question  of  adjudicative  jurisdiction   rather   than
           constitutive jurisdiction;
        b. The Tribunal was required to have regard to all the evidence  in
           determining the appeal in order to give effect to the  one  stop
           procedure provided by s120 of the 2002 Act;
        c. The immigration judge erred in giving no reasons for  dismissing
           the appeal on human rights grounds and so failed to engage  with
           the claim brought under article 8 of the ECHR.


 7. Kunal Patel, the second appellant, arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    September 2005 with entry clearance  as  a  student.   That  leave  was
    progressively extended and, in  February  2009,  he  also  was  granted
    further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant until  26
    February 2011.  On 19 February 2011 Mr Patel submitted  an  application
    for further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant. There was  a
    concurrent application on behalf of his wife, who had joined him in the
    United Kingdom as his dependant  in  May  2008.   The  outcome  of  her
    application, and her appeal, are dependant upon that of her husband.


 8. The respondent refused the application on  29  March  2011.   That  was
    because the  appellant  had  not  provided  with  his  application  the
    specified documents required  to  establish  his  earnings  during  the
    relevant period.   His  appeal  was  lodged  on  11  April  2011.   The
    immigration judge dismissed the appeal following a hearing  on  26  May
    2011 because, although the appellant now offered the  complete  set  of
    bank statements to support the evidence of the wage slips sent with the
    application to establish earnings, he  found  that  that  was  not  the
    position on the basis of the  evidence  the  appellant  had  chosen  to
    submit with his application.  The judge dismissed the appeal  on  human
    rights grounds also, finding that the interference with the appellant's
    private life that would arise from the refusal to grant  further  leave
    did not amount to a disproportionate interference such as  to  infringe
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 9. Permission to appeal was sought on grounds that are identical to  those
    submitted for the first appellant.

10. Malik Khan, the third appellant, first came to the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2007 with entry clearance until 31 March 2011 as student.   On
    29 March 2011 he submitted an application for further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.   That  was  refused  on  5  May
    because he had failed to submit with  his  application  some  specified
    documents that were required by Appendix A to  the  Immigration  Rules,
    namely the certificates from the colleges at which he  had  studied  to
    support what was stated in the Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies
    ("CAS"). He lodged his appeal on 17 May 2011.

11. Following a hearing on 20 June 2011 the immigration judge dismissed the
    third appellant's appeal.  That was because  the  appellant's  evidence
    was that the CAS letter stating that he had been assessed on the  basis
    of a certificate of Degree Foundation from the School of Technology and
    Management and a Certificate  of  Education  from  Westminster  College
    (which is in Islamabad) was "printed in error".  He sought to rely upon
    an amended CAS letter referring only to the qualifications  he  did  in
    fact have which, of course, was not sent with his application.  But the
    immigration judge was unable to accept that the first letter  had  been
    printed in error and held that, in any event, the  amended  CAS  letter
    could not be relied upon because it had not  been  submitted  with  the
    application.

12. The grounds for seeking permission to appeal were that:

        a. The immigration judge was wrong to refuse to have regard to  the
           amended CAS letter.  That was because the  appeal  was  "lodged"
           and therefore "instituted" before 23 May and so the transitional
           provisions applied.


        b. The judge erred in not  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
           grounds, on the basis that there  would  be  a  disproportionate
           infringement of article 8 of the ECHR.

13. In each case permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been  given
    on the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  judges
    may have applied s85A incorrectly.  It was said that the  challenge  to
    the rejection of a claim under article 8 of the ECHR, where raised, was
    not arguable but  permission  was  not  specifically  refused  on  that
    ground.

14. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Zane Malik,  appearing  for  each  of  the
    appellants,  advances  and  expands  upon   those   grounds   as   "six
    consolidated issues"  to  be  addressed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   We
    reproduce those issues, as set out in his skeleton argument:

           Issue A: Whether s85A has any  application  in  relation  to  an
           appeal which is triggered by an immigration decision made on  an
           application submitted to the Secretary  of  State  at  any  time
           prior to 23 May 2011?


           Issue B: Whether  the  question  as  [to]  which  evidence  "the
           Tribunal  may  consider  "  under  s85A(4)  is  a  question   of
           adjudicative   jurisdiction,   as   opposed   to    constitutive
           jurisdiction? If yes, what follows?


           Issue C: Whether  the  expression  "application"  in  s85A(4)(a)
           includes "additional grounds for the application" under s 120  -
           and/or whether  the  additional  grounds  under  s120  are  "the
           grounds other than those  specified  in  [s85A(3)(c)]"  for  the
           purpose of s85(4)(b)? If yes, what follows?


           Issue D: Whether s85A has any application to appeals before  the
           UT?


           Issue E: Whether, in presence of  a  provision  like  s85A,  the
           common law duty of fairness requires the Secretary of  State  to
           contact the applicants when mandatory evidence  is  missing  and
           give them the opportunity to provide it before  making  a  final
           decision?


           Issue F:  How  should  the  question  of  proportionality  under
           Article 8 be approached in a case where  an  appellant's  appeal
           under the immigration rules fails solely because of  the  effect
           of s85A?

Issue A

15. As originally enacted, but modified to reflect  the  present  appellate
    structure, sub-ss (4) and (5) of s85 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 were as follows:

        "(4)     On an appeal under section 82(1) against  a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter which it thinks
             relevant to the substance of the decision,  including  evidence
             which concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.


        (5)      But in relation to an appeal under section  82(1)  against
             refusal of entry clearance  or  refusal  of  a  certificate  of
             entitlement under section 10 -
        (a)      subsection (4) shall not apply, and
        (b)       the  Tribunal  may  consider   only   the   circumstances
             appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse"


16. The effect of those provisions is well-established.  In general, on  an
    appeal, the Tribunal  will  take  into  account  such  evidence  as  is
    available at the date that the Tribunal makes its decision, subject  to
    the requirement that it be relevant to the substance  of  the  decision
    against which the appeal is brought.  The date in respect of which  the
    evidence requires evaluation is therefore the date  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision.   In  relation  to  entry  clearance   and   certificate   of
    entitlement appeals, however, only evidence relating to the position at
    the date of the executive decision can be considered.  Evidence  coming
    into existence, or produced, later than the date of the decision may be
    admitted, but it will not be relevant unless it shows what the position
    was at the date of the executive decision.


17.  The  application  of  those  provisions  to  in-country  appeals,   in
    particular appeals against  refusals  of  application  made  under  the
    strict requirements of the Points Based Scheme, has been the subject of
    a number of decisions.  We need cite only NA and others (Tier  1  post-
    study work -  funds)  [2009]  UKAIT  00025.   At  paragraph  [74],  the
    Tribunal said this:

        "[N]othing in the  Immigration  Rules  dealing  with  points  based
        applications or in the Policy Guidance has the effect of  rendering
        section 85(4)'s potential application to Tier 1  (post-Study  Work)
        appeals nugatory.  If it had been intended  that  applicants  could
        not succeed unless they had submitted the  specified  documents  at
        the time of applying that could have been  specified;  but  it  was
        not.  The nature of the decision  concerned  (one  whose  substance
        relates in part to  an  historic  timeline)  limits  the  scope  of
        application of this sub-section, but does not exclude it  entirely.
        Neither the rules  nor  the  Policy  Guidance  stipulates  anything
        either about the reception of evidence on appeal,  which  (for  in-
        country appeals) is governed by section 85(4)."

    The reference to "an historic timeline" is a  reference  to  the  rules
    relevant to that particular case and to the  Tribunal's  interpretation
    of them; but, in general, it stands as a reference to any provision  in
    the rules requiring the facts to have been as specified on a particular
    date in the past, for example the date  of  the  application.   If  the
    rules require, for example, that at the date  of  the  application  the
    applicant be entitled to the award of a degree, showing that he  became
    so entitled after the date of his application will not  assist  him  to
    demonstrate his entitlement under the rules; but  evidence  post-dating
    the application may assist  him  to  show  that  at  the  date  of  the
    application he was so entitled and to that extent met the  requirements
    of the rules.  Those considerations led to the decision  in  NO  (post-
    Study Work - award needed by date of application) Nigeria [2009]  UKAIT
    00054.

18. By the time those decisions were made, the UK Borders Act 2007 had been
    enacted.  It received the Royal assent on 30 October 2007.  Section  19
    of that Act is headed "Points-based applications: no  new  evidence  on
    appeal" and provides for the amendment of s85 of the 2002  Act  in  the
    following way.  Sub-s85(5) was to be replaced by the  words  "but  sub-
    section (4) is subject to the exceptions in section  85A",  and  a  new
    s85A was to be inserted, as follows:

        "85A Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions
           1) This section sets out the  exceptions  mentioned  in  section
              85(5).
           2) Exception 1 is that in relation to an  appeal  under  section
              82(1) against an immigration decision of a kind specified  in
              section 82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal may  consider  only  the
              circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision.
           3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if -
                 a) the appeal is against an immigration decision of a  kind
                    specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),
                 b) the immigration decision concerned an application  of  a
                    kind identified in immigration rules as requiring to  be
                    considered under a 'Points Based System', and
                 c) the appeal relies wholly or partly on grounds  specified
                    in section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).
           4) Where exception 2 applies the Tribunal may consider  evidence
              adduced by the appellant only if it -
                 a) was submitted in support of, and at the time of  making,
                    the  application  to  which  the  immigration   decision
                    related,
                 b) relates to the appeal in so far as it relies on  grounds
                    other than those specified in subsection (3)(c),
                 c) is adduced to prove that a document is genuine or valid,
                    or
                 d) is adduced in connection with the Secretary  of  State's
                    reliance on a discretion  under  immigration  rules,  or
                    compliance with a requirement of immigration  rules,  to
                    refuse an application on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                    acquisition  of  'points'  under   the   'Points   Based
                    System'."




19. Section 19 of the 2007 Act also included provisions  for  amending  the
    power to make procedure rules under the 2002 Act.

20. Section 19 was not  brought  into  force  immediately.   Indeed,  years
    passed without it being brought into force.  On 15  February  2010  the
    Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  ceased  to  exist,  and  appeals  in
    immigration matters were transferred to a new Chamber, the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber, of the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal
    respectively: those tribunals had themselves been  established  by  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  One of the effects of that
    change was that the power to make rules fell to the Tribunal  Procedure
    Committee, so there was an amendment to the still-unimplemented s85A by
    the addition of a further sub-section as follows:


        "(5) Tribunal Procedure Rules may make provision, for the  purposes
        of subsection (4)(a), about the circumstances in which evidence  is
        to be treated, or not treated, as submitted in support of,  and  at
        the time of making, an application."


21. More than another year passed,  with,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  no
    indication that s19 of the 2007 Act would ever be brought  into  force.
    There had been a change in  Prime  Minister  since  it  was  originally
    enacted, and there was subsequently  a  change  of  government.   Those
    making applications under the Points Based Scheme continued to be  able
    to remedy defects in their original application by demonstrating, at an
    appeal, that at the date of the application, the  requirements  of  the
    rules were met.


22. Without any other notice being given so far as we are aware, on Tuesday
    17 May 2011 an Order was laid bringing s19 into force on the  following
    Monday.  The Order is The UK Borders Act 2007 (Commencement No.  7  and
    Transitional Provisions) Order 2011 (SI 2011/1293).  Article 1  of  the
    Order contains provisions as to citation.  The operative provisions are
    as follows:


        "Commencement of the UK Borders Act 2007


        2. Section  19  (Points-based  applications:  no  new  evidence  on
           appeal) of the UK Borders Act 2007 shall, subject to article  3,
           come into force on 23 May 2011.


        Transitional Provision


        3. -(1) The amendment made  to  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002 by section 19 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  will
           [sic] not have effect in relation to an  appeal  in  respect  of
           which a hearing at the First-tier Tribunal  of  the  Immigration
           and Asylum Chamber has taken place before 23 May 2011 and  which
           is still pending.


           (2) For the purposes of this article, a 'hearing' is  where  one
           or more Immigration Judges hear an  appeal  made  under  section
           82(1) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
           against a decision of the Secretary of State, at the  First-tier
           Tribunal of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber and includes case
           management review hearings.


           (3) For the purposes of this article,  an  appeal  is  'pending'
           when  it  has  been  instituted  under  section  82(1)  of   the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  but  has  not  yet
           been finally determined,  withdrawn  or  abandoned  or  has  not
           lapsed under section 99 of that Act. "


23. We may pass article 2 without comment for the moment.  Our  concern  is
    with article 3.  It is clear on a first reading of that provision  that
    the draftsman intended that the amended  provisions  of  the  2002  Act
    would apply to all pending appeals, with  the  exception  of  those  in
    respect of which there had been a "hearing" (as defined) before 23  May
    2011.  That exception is,  indeed,  the  only  transitional  provision.
    That intention is confirmed by the text of the Explanatory Note,  which
    reads as follows:


        "This  Order   brings   into   force   section   19   (Points-based
        applications: no new evidence on appeal) of the UK Borders Act 2007
        which amends section 85(5)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 2002 (c.41) as well as inserting a new section 85A.  The
        new section 85A lists the exceptions to the general rule  that  the
        Immigration Tribunal can consider any evidence that is relevant  to
        the substance of a decision, including any  evidence  which  arises
        after  the  date  of  decision.   Section  19  is  subject  to  the
        transitional provision in Article 3 which provides that section  19
        will not apply to any hearing which has already commenced prior  to
        the 23 May and which is part heard and pending,  including  appeals
        remitted to the First-tier Tribunal from  the  Upper  Tier  of  the
        Tribunal.  Appeals instituted prior to 23 May where  a  hearing  is
        yet to take place will be subject to section 19. "

24. The Note does not purport to be part of  the  Commencement  Order.   It
    leaves open the question whether  the  Order  itself  carries  out  the
    draftsman's intentions.

25. Closer inspection of article  3  of  the  Order  reveals  a  number  of
    remarkable features.  The first is that its draftsman appears  to  have
    had little knowledge of the system of immigration  appeals.   He  twice
    uses the phrase "at the First-tier  Tribunal  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber".  The use of the preposition "at" is strange;  but  the
    remaining words of the phrase are stranger still, for they describe  an
    institution which does not exist and  never  has  existed.   The  whole
    point of the reforms of the 2007 Act, to which immigration appeals were
    made subject in  2010,  is  that  instead  of  there  being  individual
    specialist Tribunals with their own individual arrangements for appeals
    to a further Tribunal, there is a  First-tier  Tribunal  and  an  Upper
    Tribunal, each of general jurisdiction but divided into Chambers.   The
    Chambers are Chambers of each Tribunal: the Tribunals are not Tribunals
    of each Chamber.  The  phrase  is  not  merely  technically  wrong:  it
    indicates a complete misunderstanding of the system.

26.  Secondly, although the draftsman goes to such lengths to  define  what
    he means by "a hearing" (a matter on which we make further observations
    below), he defines it by reference to the activities of  "one  or  more
    Immigration Judges".  Immigration Judges  comprised  some  (but  by  no
    means all) of the judiciary of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal.
    The title is still used by courtesy, for those who held such office  in
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, but it now has no statutory basis.
     On 15 February 2010 all holders of  the  title  of  Immigration  Judge
    became, instead, holders of the  title  of  "Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal".   The  draftsman  appears  to  have  been  unaware  of  this
    development.  The Explanatory Note refers to "appeals remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal from the Upper Tier of the Tribunal".  So far as we
    are aware, there has never been an "Upper Tier" of any Tribunal.  There
    is, however, an Upper Tribunal.

27. The insistence on there having been a "hearing" (as defined)  in  order
    to enable the transitional provision to have effect is also  distinctly
    odd.  It appears clear  that  the  draftsman  intended  to  distinguish
    between cases where there has been a hearing, and cases in which  there
    has not.  A "case management review hearing" counts as a  hearing;  but
    directions given by way of case  management  apparently  do  not.   The
    effect of that would be that if a case had  been  identified  from  the
    beginning as one which raised procedural  difficulties,  which  it  had
    been necessary to review at a hearing  before  23  May  2011,  the  new
    provisions would not apply to it, but if it was a straightforward  case
    which needed no directions or directions which could be made without  a
    hearing, they would.  Further, practice varies between hearing  centres
    as to whether case management matters are dealt with at  a  hearing  or
    simply on the papers.  The result would be that an appeal  assigned  to
    one centre would be caught by the new provisions,  whereas  if  it  had
    been assigned to another centre it would not.

28. The oddity of the provisions as apparently intended goes  further  than
    this.  The pressure of work at  hearing  centres  varies;  two  appeals
    instituted on the same day may have hearings on different  days  simply
    because the centres to which they were allocated have different waiting
    times for hearings.  Thus, of two identical appeals instituted on  (for
    example) 4 April 2011, one might have had a hearing before 23 May  2011
    and the other might not, not because of any act by the  appellant,  but
    simply because it was assigned to a hearing centre  where  the  waiting
    list was longer.  In the former case the appellant  would  be  able  to
    submit new evidence; in the latter he would not.

29. Many cases are determined without a hearing.  The appeal form gives  an
    option to the appellant to choose to have his appeal determined in this
    way.  If an appellant's appeal was determined  without  a  hearing,  it
    appears that even if the determination was well before 23 May 2011, and
    even if, in subsequent proceedings on appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the
    latter would determine that the decision on appeal  was  erroneous  and
    needed to be re-made, new evidence could  not  be  taken  into  account
    after 23 May 2011.   Not only does that show that the Explanatory  Note
    is to that extent  misleading,  but  it  is  worth  exploring  with  an
    example.  The example is one which is by no means  outlandish:  on  the
    contrary, it, and the timing suggested, might be regarded  as  entirely
    routine.

30. Suppose 'A' makes an application under the Points Based Scheme in April
    2010.  In July he receives a notice of refusal, on the ground that  his
    application showed that he did not meet one of the requirements of  the
    rules.  He gives notice of appeal, and indicates that his appeal may be
    decided without a hearing.  In preparation for the appeal, he  forwards
    documents establishing that he did indeed meet the requirements of  the
    rules at the date of his application.  In November  2010  the  file  is
    allocated to an Immigration Judge for determination without a  hearing.
    The Immigration Judge so determines it,  noting  in  his  determination
    that  there  is  no  material  before  him  other  than  the  documents
    accompanying the notice of appeal, and stating that there is  still  no
    evidence that the appellant met the requirements of the  rules  at  the
    date of his application.

31. The appellant applies for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    on the ground that the Immigration Judge had  clearly  failed  to  take
    into  account  the  documents  supplementing  the  notice  of   appeal.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted in January  2011,
    that ground being clearly made out.  The appeal comes before the  Upper
    Tribunal for hearing in June 2011.  That being the first  "hearing"  in
    relation to this appeal, the  transitional  provisions  do  not  apply.
    The new evidence cannot be taken into account.   That  is  despite  the
    fact that, at the time it was produced, and at the time the appeal  was
    determined by the First-tier Tribunal, s19 of the 2007 Act was  not  in
    force, and despite the fact that the reason for granting permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was failure to take the new evidence  into
    account.

32. The position would, of course be entirely different if the  appellant's
    appeal had been determined by the First-tier  Tribunal  at  a  hearing.
    That is so even if the same appeal had been determined on the same  day
    by the First-tier Tribunal, on precisely the same basis but at an  oral
    hearing at which neither party was in fact represented (a  not  unusual
    occurrence): then the transitional provisions  would  have  applied  so
    that the Upper Tribunal would have been able to have regard to the post
    application material.

33. These results are simply bizarre.  That is not a reason why they  could
    not have been intended by the Commencement Order, but it causes  us  to
    pay particular attention to the wording of the Order, to see  if  there
    is some way by which they can be avoided.  We think there is.  We  have
    considered, but are not persuaded by,  the  suggestion  that  "hearing"
    should be understood as including any intervention by a member  of  the
    Tribunal  judiciary,  whether  by  oral  process  or  not.    Such   an
    interpretation would do nothing to ameliorate the difficulties  arising
    from the denomination of the Tribunal and its judiciary.  Some  of  the
    other difficulties would be removed, but some would remain,  and  there
    would be a further one.  A case that had  been,  for  whatever  reason,
    referred to a judge to make a decision in relation to listing would  be
    one in which there had been a 'hearing', but a case where  the  listing
    had been undertaken administratively would not.  And here is a  further
    problem, because the parties would not typically know whether there had
    been judicial intervention, and if so at what date, so would  not  know
    whether s85A applied or not.  The solution, if there be one,  must  lie
    elsewhere.


34. No doubt it would be possible to challenge the legality  of  the  Order
    itself.  Mr Malik did not ask us to consider such a challenge,  and  we
    doubt whether this is the right forum for it.  We proceed to apply  the
    Order as we have it.

35. As we have indicated, the only transitional provision is the  exception
    for cases in which there has been a hearing prior to 23 May  2011.   As
    we have also observed, there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  "First-tier
    Tribunal of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber".  It follows that there
    is no case in which the transitional provision  in  article  3  of  the
    Order could apply.

36. That means, simply, that in effect article 2 of  the  Order  stands  by
    itself.  It brings s19 of the 2007 Act into force on 23 May  2011.   In
    interpreting that provision, we need to decide the extent to  which  it
    applies to appeals pending on that date, there  being  no  transitional
    provisions relating to any events that could actually happen.

37. The general rule is that a statute (or statutory instrument)  does  not
    have retrospective effect unless either it relates to  procedure  only,
    or  the  retrospective  effect  is  clearly  intended.    The   classic
    description or definition in Craies on Statute Law (6th edition,  p386)
    is that a statute is retrospective if it "takes  away  or  impairs  any
    vested right acquired under existing laws, or creates a new obligation,
    or  imposes  a  new  disability   in   respect   to   transactions   or
    considerations already past".  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the
    change in the law  introduced  by  the  Commencement  Order  imposes  a
    disability in respect  to  transactions  already  past,  where,  before
    commencement, an applicant has made, and paid for, his application.

38. The retrospective effect is clearly intended, but, for the  reasons  we
    have given, it is very imperfectly achieved.  In our  judgement  it  is
    clearly right that the Order should  be  applied  retrospectively  only
    insofar as clearly specified.  If authority for that  is  required,  it
    can be found in Re "Wonderland" Cleethorpes [1965] AC 58, 71-2.  In the
    circumstances  of  the  present  case  it  receives  support  from  the
    principle that a statute should not be  given  an  interpretation  that
    will cause real injustice, if that can be avoided:  Waugh  v  Middleton
    (1853) 8 Ex 352; and see, for  example  West  Midland  Baptist  (Trust)
    Association Inc v Birmingham City Corporation [1968] 2 QB 188, 210.

39. On its face, s19 of the 2007 Act  introduces  changes  that  relate  to
    procedure.  But we need to consider their effect  rather  more  widely.
    As we have said, the previous regime had the effect that  in  order  to
    meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  an  applicant  could
    remedy defects in his application by evidence produced on  appeal.   We
    do not think  that  it  is  a  distortion  of  language  to  regard  an
    applicant's ability to do so as a substantive right in relation to  the
    application process, rather than as merely a  matter  relating  to  the
    procedure on appeal.   Certainly  the  withdrawal  of  the  ability  to
    supplement defects in this way has an instant effect on the substantive
    rights of applicants whose appeals are  pending:  many  of  them  would
    previously have been able  readily  to  show  that  they  had  met  the
    requirements of the rules, whereas, after the  change,  the  fact  that
    they did meet the requirements of  the  rules  at  the  date  of  their
    application becomes irrelevant.


40. There are two additional factors which we think point to the conclusion
    that article 2 of the Order should be taken as a change in substantive,
    rather than merely procedural law.  First, there is the  difficulty  in
    relation to its application to pending appeals.  Without any  reference
    to a requirement to there having been a "hearing" before 23  May  2011,
    there would nevertheless be an inequity  between  those  whose  appeals
    were,  and  those  whose  appeals  were  not  determined   before   the
    commencement date, when they might have instituted appeals on the  same
    date.  Secondly, section 85A as amended itself provides  in  subsection
    (5) for amendments to procedure  rules  for  its  purposes.   That,  we
    think, is a  hint  that  it  is  not  itself  wholly  procedural.  (The
    commencement  of  s19  at  such  short  notice,  of  course,   rendered
    subsection (5) entirely ineffective: there can have been no possibility
    of the making of the appropriate procedural rules in the three  working
    days available).

41. For these reasons it appears to us that Article 2 of  the  Commencement
    Order should be construed as affecting substantive  rights  not  merely
    procedure, and that Article 3 should be interpreted narrowly.   Article
    2 should not be interpreted retrospectively save  in  relation  to  any
    cases that might be found to fall within the words of Article  3.   The
    result is that, in order  to  avoid  any  other  retrospective  effect,
    Article 2 is  to  be  interpreted  as  having  effect  only  where  the
    appellant's application to the Secretary of State was made on or  after
    23 May 2011.

42. We appreciate that our interpretation of the Commencement Order is bold
    and, in  addition,  we  have  not  reached  it  on  the  basis  of  the
    submissions Mr Malik made to us. Anyone seeking  to  defend  any  other
    interpretation, however, will have to explain why any  of  the  results
    set out in paragraphs 27 to  33  above  either  were  intended  or  are
    desirable.

43. The effect of that conclusion is that as each of these appeals  relates
    to an application made before  23  May  2011,  the  immigration  judges
    should have had regard to the evidence relied upon at the hearing  that
    was not  provided  to  the  respondent  with  the  application.  Before
    deciding the consequence of that for  the  outcome  of  the  individual
    appellants, we will deal briefly with each of the other grounds  argued
    before us.

Issue B

44. Mr Malik's second  issue  concerns  the  concepts  of  and  distinction
    between "adjudicative jurisdiction"  and  "constitutive  jurisdiction",
    articulated by Sedley LJ in Carter v Ahsan [2005] EWCA Civ 990, drawing
    upon observations of Diplock LJ in Garthwaite v Garthwaite  [1964]  and
    developed more recently in Anwar v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 567.  Mr  Malik
    suggests that the position here is analogous but, in our  view  plainly
    it is not.  There is no doubt that in these appeals  the  Tribunal  has
    both constitutive and adjudicative jurisdiction.  What is at  issue  is
    not the entitlement of the Tribunal to embark upon hearing the  appeals
    and to determine them but the evidence it may take into account when so
    doing.  Section 85A of the 2002 Act applies and the question of whether
    as a consequence the post-application evidence is excluded will  depend
    upon the applicability of  otherwise  of  the  transitional  provisions
    found in the Commencement Order we have discussed above.

Issue C

45. The third issue raised by Mr Malik concerns the  interrelationship,  as
    he identifies it, between s85 and s120 of the 2002 Act.  He argues that
    the  "application"  referred  to  in  s85A(4)(a)  includes  "additional
    grounds" tendered pursuant to s120.  He submits that it is open to  the
    appellant to make a fresh application, in response to  refusal  of  the
    application he has made and in respect of  which  he  has  received  an
    adverse immigration decision because he failed to submit  the  evidence
    required.  In his skeleton argument Mr Malik submits that:


        "it would make a nonsense of s86(2) and s120  if  an  Appellant  is
        required to put forward "all his grounds" in a  one-stop  statement
        but is barred from putting forward  any  evidence  of  support  his
        additional grounds."


    Thus, if the effect of s85A  is  that  the  appellant  cannot  ask  the
    Tribunal to  consider  the  evidence  he  failed  to  submit  with  his
    application without which it could not succeed, Mr Malik  submits  that
    the same evidence can be introduced in support of a fresh  application,
    that being permissible because the s120 route  constitutes  "additional
    grounds" being grounds other than those specified in s85A(3)(c).


46. That  approach  would  also,  of  course,  "make  a  nonsense  of"  the
    legislative intention of s85A, introduced into the 2002 Act in the full
    glare of s120.  Given what we have said about the difficulties with the
    drafting of the Commencement Order, that in itself is not sufficient to
    resolve the question.  However, Mr Malik's interpretation does lead  to
    a remarkable state of affairs.  His argument respects the intention  of
    s85A to exclude evidence not submitted with  the  original  application
    (because otherwise the s120 statement would not be necessary) but  then
    defeats it by asking for  the s120 statement to be  treated  as  if  it
    were part of the application that was unaccompanied by the evidence now
    relied upon.

47. In any event, as was submitted by Mr Deller, AS  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 1076, relied upon by Mr Malik to support his  argument,
    is not authority for the  proposition  that  the  issues  raised  in  a
    statement under s 120 are to be treated as a "fresh application" to the
    Tribunal.  The issues raised are to be considered as an  additional  or
    expanded ground of appeal.  As Moore-Bick LJ observed at  paragraph  80
    of AS:

        "That seems to me to contemplate that the statement provided  under
        section 120 will generally contain new grounds for challenging  the
        decision rather than additional evidence or material supporting the
        original grounds."


    and at paragraph 83:


        "...The whole tenor of the legislation  points  to  the  conclusion
        that the purpose of section 120 is to flush out all the grounds  on
        which the applicant may seek to rely so that they can be considered
        at the same time. Section 85(4) itself,  in  my  view,  has  little
        bearing on the present case, being concerned only with the evidence
        that the Tribunal may consider when hearing an appeal. The argument
        that an appellant will be unable by  reason  of  section  85(5)  to
        adduce evidence in support of a completely new ground of  challenge
        and that therefore the interpretation of subsection (2) favoured by
        the appellant must be wrong goes far too far. ....."


    And this is where Mr Malik's argument fails: the  very  fact  that  the
    statement under s120 relates to new evidence  that  was  not  submitted
    with the original application simply reinforces the correctness of  the
    refusal on the basis that the evidence that was required to satisfy the
    rule did not accompany the application.  What Mr Malik seeks is not the
    opportunity to raise new grounds for  challenging  the  decision  under
    appeal but to make an entirely fresh application supported by  evidence
    that did not accompany the first, thereby negating the  purpose  sought
    to be achieved by the amendment to s85 of the 2002 Act.

Issue D

48. Next, Mr Malik submits that s85 does not apply  to  proceedings  before
    the Upper Tribunal at all because it is concerned with appeals  brought
    under s82 of the 2002 Act whereas the appeal before the Upper  Tribunal
    is brought under s11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.
     This argument can be disposed of shortly.  Section 12(4) of  the  2007
    Act makes clear that if the Upper Tribunal does set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and re-make it then its power is to:


        "... make any decision which the First-tier Tribunal could make  if
        the First-tier Tribunal  were re-making the decision..."


    It is plain, therefore, that s85A does apply equally where the decision
    is remade by a judge of the Upper Tribunal. Further  support  for  that
    conclusion, if it were needed, is to be found in the words of Moses  LJ
    recently in LB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1420:


        "... it seems to me impossible to confine the construction of  what
        is meant by an appeal under section 82(1) to an appeal to the First
        Tier Tribunal..."

    Issue E


49. This argument is aimed squarely at "a provision like s85A" and not  the
    extent to which transitional provisions seek to mitigate its effect for
    those with pending appeals. Mr Malik's fifth issue is founded upon  the
    observation of Sedley LJ in Anwar that:

        "... a decision taken in defiance of basic  standards  of  fairness
        and morality may be impeached as a nullity..."

    because:


        "...a decision which is so outrageous in its defiance of  logic  or
        of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied
        his mind to the question  to  be  decided  could  have  arrived  at
        it...".

    But it must be remembered what the point under challenge on  the  basis
    of such a level of outrageous unfairness is: requiring an applicant  to
    submit with his application all the evidence that is necessary in order
    for him to meet the requirement of the immigration  rule  he  seeks  to
    satisfy in order to  qualify  for  further  leave  to  remain.   It  is
    impossible to see how such  a  requirement  is  unfair  or  outrageous.
    Indeed, even if the likely introduction of such a requirement  had  not
    been signalled well in advance of  its  implementation,  to  expect  an
    applicant to submit evidence with the application, rather than after it
    had been refused because it had not  been,  does  not  seem  to  us  to
    disclose unfairness at all, but simply to state what  might  reasonably
    be expected of any applicant  who  is  made  fully  aware  of  what  is
    required of him in order to succeed.


Issue F

50. The final issue raised by Mr Malik concerns article 8 of the  ECHR.  In
    short, his submission  is  that  because  s85A  does  not  prevent  the
    appellant relying upon post -application evidence  in  support  of  his
    article 8 claim, if this demonstrates that the appellant, when the post-
    application evidence is considered, does in fact meet  the  requirement
    of the rule, the appeal must be allowed on human rights grounds because
    it would be impossible to see how removal in consequence of the refusal
    to grant leave could be a proportionate interference in  the  protected
    rights of someone who did, after all, meet the requirements of the rule
    under which he applied.

51. That argument is simply misconceived because the whole  point  is  that
    the appellant did not meet the requirements of the rule, one  of  those
    requirements being that he submits with his  application  the  evidence
    needed to show that he satisfied its requirements.

Disposal of the individual appeals

52. Each of these appellants applied to the  Secretary  of  State  and,  in
    addition, instituted an  appeal  against  refusal  of  the  application
    before 23 May 2011 and so, on the basis  of  the  construction  of  the
    Commencement Order set out above, each is entitled to rely  upon  post-
    application evidence.  The question is,  therefore,  whether  they  now
    show that they met the requirements of the applicable rule.

53. The appeal of the first appellant, Mr Shahdaz,  was  dismissed  because
    the evidence considered by the judge did not  establish  the  level  of
    earnings from self-employment that was required.  The  judge  erred  in
    law in declining to look at the additional evidence of  those  earnings
    that was  available  at  the  hearing.   Mr  Deller  accepts  that  the
    additional evidence does establish the earnings claimed and, as that is
    in a sum sufficient to meet the requirements of the applicable rule, we
    set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  substitute  a
    fresh decision to allow the appeal.

54. The second appellant, Mr Patel, is in a similar  position.   Mr  Deller
    accepts that if the  judge  had  looked  at  the  documentary  evidence
    produced  at  the  hearing  but  which  was  not  submitted  with   the
    application, he  would  have  found  that  the  complete  set  of  bank
    statements  now  available  did  establish  that  which  was  required.
    Accordingly, we set aside that decision also  and  substitute  a  fresh
    decision to allow the appeal.  It follows  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in respect of his wife Mrs Kunjal Kirankumar Patel,
    must also be set aside and replaced with a fresh decision to allow  her
    appeal.

55. The third appellant, Mr Khan, did not at the  time  of  submitting  his
    application have the required qualification and so, plainly, could  not
    submit, with his application, evidence of having  secured  it.   It  is
    said in the grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  that
    "he should be allowed to remain here and should not be removed  because
    he has now been awarded the relevant degree".  But evidence that he now
    has something (not, incidentally, a degree) that he did not have at the
    time  he  made  the  application  cannot  establish  that  he  met  the
    requirements of the rule at the date of  the  application.   Therefore,
    even though the judge was wrong in his reason for refusing to  consider
    the post-application evidence, that  does  not  assist  this  appellant
    because it was irrelevant anyway.

56.  Secondly,  it  is  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   "had   an
    obligation... to deal with Article 8 (i.e. it is obvious) even where it
    has not been raised by an Appellant."  The grounds  assert  that  there
    was an "obvious" Article  8  point  but,  it  seems,  not  sufficiently
    obvious to lead  the  appellant's  legal  representative  who  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal to raise it.  This was not  a  "no-miss"
    appeal as asserted. The appellant failed to meet  the  requirements  of
    the rule and had been present in the United Kingdom only  a  relatively
    short period of time; so that it was entirely unsurprising that  nobody
    suggested before the First-tier Tribunal that there  was  any  arguable
    claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.  There simply was none.

57. For those reasons, despite the error by the judge in  finding  that  he
    could not look at post-decision evidence,  in  this  case  it  made  no
    difference whatever and so there is no reason to disturb  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appeal  of  Mr  Khan  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.





                                                     C. M. G. Ockelton


                                                              C M G OCKELTON



VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 27 February 2012




