
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Imran (Section 117C(5); children, unduly harsh) [2020] UKUT 00083 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2020                           |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       THE HON. MR JUSTICE CHAMBERLAIN
                 (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                     and
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD IMRAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Raza, counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors.


   1. To bring a case within Exception 2 in s.117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the 'unduly harsh' test will  not  be
      satisfied, in a case where a child has two parents, by either or  both
      of the  following,  without  more:  (i)  evidence  of  the  particular
      importance of one parent in  the  lives  of  the  children;  and  (ii)
      evidence of the emotional dependence of the children  on  that  parent
      and  of  the  emotional  harm  that  would  be  likely  to  flow  from
      separation.


   2. Consideration  as  to  what  constitutes  'without  more'  is  a  fact
      sensitive assessment.
                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  a  decision  of  F-tT
      Judge Talbot ('the judge'), promulgated on 21 October 2019,  in  which
      he allowed Mr Mohammed Imran's human rights appeal against a  decision
      of the Secretary of State on 28 March 2019 to refuse his human  rights
      claim following the making of a deportation order on 14 January 2019.


   2. The appeal proceeds pursuant to the permission of F-tT Judge  Osborne,
      given on 17 November 2019. He said this:


         'In an otherwise careful decision it is nonetheless  arguable  that
         the judge  made  an  inconsistent  and  ultimately  arguably  wrong
         finding in relation to whether the appellant represents  a  low  or
         medium risk of reoffending (see paragraphs 21 and  33).  The  judge
         recognised  that  the  appellant  represents  a  medium   risk   of
         reoffending at [21] but arguably is then materially too generous to
         the appellant at [33].


         This arguable error of law having been identified, all the  grounds
         are arguable.'

Background

   3. Mr Imran is a national of Pakistan. He was born on 16 April  1983.  He
      entered the UK on 5 September 2010, with leave to enter  valid  to  10
      November 2012. On 12 October 2012, he applied for indefinite leave  to
      remain ('ILR'), which was granted on 14 February 2013.


   4. On 12 September 2018, Mr Imran was convicted  of  assault  occasioning
      actual bodily harm ('ABH'), for which he was sentenced to  18  months'
      imprisonment and made the subject of a restraining order.


   5. Because he had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least
      12 months, the Secretary of State was obliged by s. 32(5)  of  the  UK
      Borders Act 2007, subject to the exceptions specified  in  s.  33,  to
      make a deportation order in respect of  Mr  Imran.  The  Secretary  of
      State made such an order on 14 January 2019.  In  response,  Mr  Imran
      made a human rights claim, which the  Secretary  of  State  determined
      against him on 28 March 2019.


   6. The Secretary of State accepted that Mr Imran had three children under
      the age of 18 from his relationship with NI. They were aged 8, 6 and 4
      at the date of the judge's decision.  NI  and  the  children  are  all
      British citizens. Whilst the Secretary of State accepted that Mr Imran
      had previously had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
      children, it was said that his offences and imprisonment had prevented
      him from maintaining direct and every  day  contact  with  them  in  a
      stable family unit. There was no evidence that NI had been  unable  to
      care for their day-to-day health and welfare needs in his absence.  He
      had not submitted evidence to indicate that it would be  unduly  harsh
      for his children to accompany him to Pakistan.  It  was  not  accepted
      that it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK in the care
      of their mother, who has a family network able to support her.  As  to
      s. 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  it  was
      considered that, in the light of Mr Imran's conviction  for  ABH,  his
      presence was actively detrimental to the children and his presence  in
      the family home  did  not  serve  their  best  interests.  As  to  his
      relationship with his British partner, it was  not  accepted  that  it
      would be unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK without him.  As  to
      his private life, it was  not  accepted  that  he  had  been  lawfully
      resident in the UK for most of his life or that he would be unable  to
      return to Pakistan and re-integrate there. It was  not  accepted  that
      they  were  'very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the  public
      interest in his deportation'.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   7. The judge heard oral evidence from Mr Imran, NI and her sister TI.  So
      far as concerns Mr Imran's  offending,  he  considered  the  PNC,  the
      indictment, the Recorder's sentencing remarks dated 16  October  2018,
      the restraining order of the same date, a pre-sentence report dated 19
      September 2018, and OASys report dated 28 June 2019 and a letter  from
      HM Prison Maidstone's Kitchen Department, dated 21 June 2019.


   8. At [24], the judge referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in  R
      (Agyarko) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11,
      [2017] 1  WLR  823,  in  which  Lord  Reed  noted  at  [47]  that  the
      Immigration Rules reflected the responsible Minister's assessment at a
      general level of the relevant weight of  the  competing  factors  when
      striking a fair balance under Article 8. The judge  then  set  out  or
      accurately paraphrased the relevant provisions of paragraphs  A398-399
      of the Immigration Rules.


   9. At [27], the judge noted that Mr Eaton, counsel who appeared  for  the
      Secretary of State, had not challenged the credibility of  Mr  Imran's
      evidence or  that  of  his  family  members.  This,  the  judge  said,
      reflected his own assessment of the evidence. He found  Mr  Imran  and
      his family members to be 'honest and straightforward witnesses', whose
      credibility he had no reason to doubt.


  10. At [28], the judge paid particular  regard  to  the  contents  of  the
      report from Hampshire Children's Services, which had been commissioned
      by the Secretary of State to assess the quality of Mr  Imran's  family
      life and the impact of separation from their father on  his  children.
      This report had been completed after a visit by the assessors  to  the
      family home on 12 March 2019. It included the following:


         'Both mother and the school are clear that father played  the  main
         parental role to the children before he went to  prison,  he  spent
         more time with the children when mother was  working.  Mother  says
         that the children are closer to their father than to her  and  they
         miss him very much...


         The children are emotionally affected  by  their  father's  absence
         from the family home. [One of the children] asked Father  Christmas
         to get her dad back home. The children are  now  receiving  support
         for their emotional well-being  at  school  since  father  went  to
         prison.'


    The judge said:


         'Taking all the evidence into account, there can be no  doubt  that
         the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with his three British children.'

  11. At [29], the judge referred to the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  KO
      (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53,
      [2018] 1 WLR 5273. He noted that the Supreme Court had  referred  with
      approval to the following dictum of the Upper Tribunal in  MK  (Sierra
      Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223:

         '"unduly harsh" does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable or merely difficult. Rather  it  poses  a  considerably
         more elevated threshold. "Harsh" in this context, denotes something
         severe or bleak. It is the antithesis of pleasant  or  comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb "unduly" raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher.'


    The judge noted that  it  was  necessary  to  look  for  'a  degree  of
    harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child
    faced with the deportation of a parent'.


  12. At [30], the judge noted that there was evidence that Mr Imran  had  a
      'particularly close relationship with his three  young  children'  and
      that 'prior to his imprisonment he may have actually had more  contact
      with them and the children's  mother'.  There  was,  he  said,  'clear
      evidence that there are strong and reciprocal emotional  ties  between
      him and the children, perhaps stronger than in many families where the
      father traditionally has less contact  than  the  children's  mother'.
      There was also 'clear evidence that the children suffered  emotionally
      from their father's absence when he was in prison as well as suffering
      indirectly from the increased stress (financial and emotional) put  on
      their  mother  and  the  enforced  move   to   a   new   and   smaller
      accommodation'. He accepted  the  evidence  of  the  family  that  the
      children had been noticeably happier and more emotionally stable since
      he had left prison and returned to the  family  home.  The  judge  was
      satisfied on the basis of the evidence before him  that  if  Mr  Imran
      were deported to Pakistan and the children and their  mother  remained
      in the UK, the consequences for them would meet the high threshold  of
      being 'unduly harsh'.


  13. At [31], the judge considered the likely  consequences  if  the  whole
      family were to relocate with Mr Imran to Pakistan. He pointed out that
      all three children had been born in the UK and, although young, had 'a
      very  established  life  in  the  UK,   involving   not   only   their
      school/nursery and their friendships but also their close relationship
      with a large extended family on their mother's side  who  live  nearby
      and form an important part  of  their  lives'.  An  enforced  move  to
      Pakistan would, the judge found, be deleterious for them on  a  number
      of levels. There would be disruption to their education,  given  their
      lack of fluency in Urdu or other local languages.  They  would  suffer
      financial  difficulties.  The   political   and   security   situation
      prevailing in Mr Imran's home area of Azad Kashmir was also  insecure.
      Whilst the  risks  of  serious  harm  did  not  reach  the  Article  3
      threshold, the general insecurity would undoubtedly have 'some adverse
      impact on the stability of life for the children'. Although the family
      could choose to live in another less insecure  part  of  Pakistan  the
      local connections of both parents were with Kashmir and the  practical
      and economic difficulties of establishing a life in  another  part  of
      the country without such connections would be considerable.


  14. At [32], the judge recorded his conclusion that it  would  be  'unduly
      harsh' for Mr Imran's children either to  remain  in  the  UK  without
      their father or to  relocate  with  their  parents  to  Pakistan.  The
      criteria in paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules  were  therefore
      met. So far as paragraph 399(b) was concerned, the judge was satisfied
      that  Mr  Imran's  relationship  with  his  wife  was   'genuine   and
      subsisting' and that it began  at  a  time  when  he  was  in  the  UK
      lawfully. It was less clear  to  him,  however,  whether  the  'unduly
      harsh' test could be met with respect to that relationship, given  the
      need for 'compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in
      paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM'.


  15. At [33], after reciting a number of decisions of the European Court of
      Human Rights and of domestic courts, the judge said this:


         'Although  I  accept  that  the  appellant  has  learned  from  his
         experiences and the risk of reoffending  are  relatively  low  (has
         confirmed in the OASys report), his offence was a serious  one,  as
         is made very clear in the judge's sentencing remarks, and it was an
         offence involving violence. However, despite the seriousness of his
         offence,  I  am  satisfied  that,  as  the  consequences   of   the
         Respondent's decision would be unduly harsh on his three  children,
         the public interest in his deportation is outweighed by the  effect
         on his  family  life  rights  and  the  associated  rights  of  his
         children. I  therefore  conclude  that  the  Respondent's  decision
         violates his Convention rights.'


The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal and submissions

  16. The Secretary of State advances four grounds  of  appeal.  First,  she
      contends that the judge has failed to identify how this case meets the
      'unduly harsh' threshold. She submits that the matters set out by  the
      judge at [30] do not go beyond the 'inevitable effects' of deportation
      and so do not provide a proper evidential basis  for  concluding  that
      the test is met. Reliance was placed on the decision of the  Court  of
      Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  PG  (Jamaica)
      [2019] EWCA Civ 1213.


  17. Second, it is submitted that, in the light of the approach adopted  by
      the Court of Appeal in  PG,  the  judge  failed  to  provide  adequate
      reasons for concluding that  the  'unduly  harsh'  test  was  met.  In
      particular, it is said that there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  any
      involvement from social services other than for the  purposes  of  the
      enquiries made by the Secretary of State. That being so,  it  is  said
      that the findings failed adequately to explain  why  Mr  Imran's  wife
      would not be in a position to cope in his absence, given that she  has
      the benefit of an extensive family network.


  18. Third,  it  is  submitted  that  the  judge  also  failed  to  provide
      sufficient reasons when concluding that it would be unduly  harsh  for
      Mr Imran's children to live in Pakistan. In  particular,  it  is  said
      that there was no evidence to suggest that  employment  would  not  be
      available to Mr Imran and his wife and that no adequate  reasons  were
      given for the conclusion that there would be  practical  and  economic
      difficulties in relocating to a different area of Kashmir.


  19. Fourth, the Secretary of State alleges that the  judge's  findings  at
      [33], and therefore the determination as a whole, were vitiated by  an
      error of fact in relation to the assessment of risk contained  in  the
      OASys report. At [33], the judge described the risks of reoffending as
      'relatively low', whereas in fact the  OASys  report  indicated  that,
      although Mr Imran's risk of general reoffending was low, 'whilst there
      remains an ongoing dispute and hostilities with the current  victim...
      the potential for future conflict is likely and therefore the risk  of
      offending is in fact medium'.

Discussion

  20. In PG (Jamaica), the Court of Appeal set aside a decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal that deportation would be 'unduly harsh'.  The  deportee
      in that case based his case mainly on the effect of deportation on his
      three sons with his partner SAT. By the time of the hearing before the
      Court of Appeal, the sons were aged 15, 10 and  3:  see  at  [5].  The
      First-tier Tribunal Judge found that PG was very involved in the  day-
      to-day lives of SAT and the children and played an important  part  in
      their lives; that the eldest son, R, was  going  through  a  difficult
      time and the relationship between  father  and  son  had  strengthened
      recently; that PG had expressed a wish to be a father figure who would
      prevent his sons from falling into a life of crime; and that SAT would
      be unable to cope without him, being dependent upon him for  emotional
      and practical day to day support with the children and the running  of
      the household': see at [15]. The  core  reasoning  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge was set out by Holroyde LJ (with whom Hickinbottom  and
      Floyd LJJ agreed) at [16]:

         '66.  I am satisfied that  it  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the
         children (and I include in this assessment [PG's] other children in
         the UK) for [PG] to remain in the UK to continue in his role  as  a
         father to them and to support his partner. [PG's] deportation would
         cause very serious disruption to and interference with family  life
         with particular  reference  to  [R],  given  his  age  and  present
         difficulties. I find the consequences of  [PG's]  removal  for  his
         children would be unduly harsh.


         67.  If removed [SAT] would be left alone with three boys  to  look
         after and taking into account the present difficulties that [R]  is
         facing, I find the consequence of [PG's] removal  would  be  unduly
         harsh for her. I accept that she might be able to obtain  practical
         help either through social services or by paying privately,  but  I
         am more concerned about the  emotional  and  behavioural  "fallout"
         that she would have  to  deal  with  arising  from  the  impact  of
         separation on [R], leaving aside the disruption it  would  have  to
         her own education and employment prospects. She has  no  family  in
         Jamaica and has not been there since  2002.  I  find  it  would  be
         unduly harsh to expect her to relocate there.'


  21. Holroyde LJ held at [43] that this  was  insufficient  to  enable  the
      judge properly to conclude that the 'unduly harsh' test was met.  This
      was because:

         'The evidence certainly showed that what might be regarded  as  the
         necessary  and  expected  consequences  of  deportation  would   be
         suffered by PG's family, but it cannot be  said  to  have  revealed
         harshness going beyond that level.'


  22. Hickinbottom LJ agreed with Holroyde LJ's reasons and  added  this  at
      [45]:

         'When a parent is deported, one can only have  great  sympathy  for
         the entirely innocent children involved. Even in  circumstances  in
         which they can remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their  other
         parent, they will inevitably be  distressed.  However,  in section
         117C(5) of the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its will  that,
         for foreign offenders who are sentenced to one to four years,  only
         where the consequences for the children  are  "unduly  harsh"  will
         deportation   be   constrained.   That   is   entirely   consistent
         with article 8 of the ECHR . It is important that decision-makers
         and, when their decisions  are  challenged,  tribunals  and  courts
         honour that expression of Parliamentary  will.  In  this  case,  in
         agreement with Holroyde LJ, I consider the evidence  only  admitted
         one conclusion: that, unfortunate as PG's deportation will  be  for
         his children, for none of them will it result in undue harshness.'


  23. Even more recently, in Secretary of State for the Home Department v KF
      (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA  Civ  2051,  Baker  LJ  (with  whom  the  Senior
      President of Tribunals agreed) allowed an appeal by the  Secretary  of
      State, again setting aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that
      deportation would be 'unduly harsh'. Baker LJ  set  out  at  [18]  the
      relevant part of the judge's  decision  dealing  with  the  effect  of
      deportation on the child:

         'For [their son], the adverse consequences remaining in the UK  are
         likely to be that he would be deprived  of  a  proper  relationship
         with his father. I do not accept that maintaining  a  relationship,
         while  living  on  different  continents,  via  modern   means   of
         communication is in any way a substitute  for  growing  up  with  a
         parent. The [respondent's] son is very young. This is the time when
         he would normally be bonding with his father. I think I am entitled
         to take judicial notice of the fact that being deprived of a parent
         is something a child is likely to  find  traumatic  and  that  will
         potentially have long-lasting adverse consequences for that  child.
         I take into account that in this case the  [respondent's]  son  has
         limited knowledge of his father and has the benefit of a supportive
         extended family. However in my view that is no substitute  for  the
         emotional and developmental benefits for a 3 year  old  child  that
         are associated with being brought up by  both  parents  during  its
         formative years. These benefits have been recognised by the  courts
         on numerous occasions and the consequences of  losing  them  should
         not be minimised.'

  24. This, Baker LJ said at [30], was not enough:

         'Looking at the facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal that  led
         to the conclusion that family would suffer adverse consequences  as
         a result of the deportation, and in particular the consequences for
         the respondent's son separated from his father, it is difficult  to
         identify anything which distinguishes this case  from  other  cases
         where a family is separated. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  found
         that the respondent's son would be deprived  of  his  father  at  a
         crucial time in his life. His view that "there is no substitute for
         the emotional and developmental benefits for a three-year-old child
         that are associated with being brought up by  both  parents  during
         its formative  years"  is  indisputable.  But  those  benefits  are
         enjoyed by all three-year-old children in the care of both parents.
         The judge observed that it was a "fact that  being  deprived  of  a
         parent is something a child is likely to find  traumatic  and  that
         will potentially have long-lasting adverse  consequences  for  that
         child" and that he was entitled to take  judicial  notice  of  that
         fact. But the "fact" of which he was taking  "judicial  notice"  is
         likely to arise in every case  where  a  child  is  deprived  of  a
         parent. All children should, where possible, be brought up  with  a
         close relationship with both parents. All children  deprived  of  a
         parent's company during their formative years will be  at  risk  of
         suffering harm. Given the changes to  the  law  introduced  by  the
         amendments to 2002 Act, as interpreted by the Supreme Court, it  is
         necessary to look for consequences characterised  by  a  degree  of
         harshness over and beyond what every child would experience in such
         circumstances.'


    Baker LJ noted at [31] that, as a judge with experience of  sitting  in
    the family jurisdiction, the result was 'uncomfortable', but it  flowed
    from what Parliament had decided, citing Hickinbottom LJ's  remarks  at
    [45] of PG.


  25. Like F-tT Judge Osborn, we pay tribute to the care taken by the  judge
      in this  decision.  The  reasons  he  gave  indicate  an  impressively
      meticulous approach to the assessment of the documentary materials and
      the oral evidence before him. The discussion at [29] make  clear  that
      he correctly directed himself that the  test  to  be  applied  was  an
      exacting  one.  The  reasons  at  [30]  explain  why  he  reached  the
      conclusion that the test was satisfied.


  26. It will be a rare case in which it will be  appropriate  to  interfere
      with a decision of the First-tier Tribunal in which (i)  it  is  clear
      that the correct test has been applied and (ii) the  reasons  properly
      explain the factors which led the tribunal to  conclude  that  it  was
      satisfied. But, rare though they may be, there are cases  in  which  a
      court or tribunal hearing an appeal on the ground of error of law  can
      properly conclude that, on  the  facts  found  by  the  first-instance
      decision-maker, it was not open to him or her  to  conclude  that  the
      relevant test was satisfied. PG was such a case.


  27. The judge did not refer to PG. That itself may not be  surprising,  as
      the judgment in PG was handed down on 11 July 2019  and  the  decision
      under challenge here was dated 21 October 2019. There is no indication
      that PG was cited to the judge by either side. We, however, must apply
      the ratio of that judgment. In order to identify that ratio,  we  have
      set out above, in some detail, the facts of the case. In the light  of
      those facts, we consider that PG is authority for the proposition that
      the 'unduly harsh' test will not be satisfied in a case where a  child
      has two parents by either or both of the following, without more:  (i)
      evidence of the particular importance of one parent in  the  lives  of
      the children; and (ii) evidence of the  emotional  dependence  of  the
      children on that parent and (therefore) of  the  emotional  harm  that
      would be likely to  flow  from  separation.  We  emphasise  the  words
      'without more' in the foregoing formulation. It would not be  sensible
      to attempt to set out in advance the kind of  factors  whose  presence
      would support a conclusion that the  test  was  met.  It  will  remain
      important to consider carefully the facts of each individual case.


  28. Against that background, we have carefully considered the factors  set
      out by the judge at [30] as supporting the conclusion  that  the  test
      was met in this case. We accept that there  was  evidence  that  there
      were 'strong and reciprocal ties between him  and  the  children'.  We
      accept that the ties were stronger in this case than in  many  others.
      But we do not consider that this served materially to distinguish this
      case from PG, where there was also an express finding that the  father
      played an important part in the children's lives.


  29. We accept also that there was a proper basis for concluding  that  the
      children would suffer emotionally if Mr Imran were deported.  In  this
      case, the conclusion was not merely an  inference  from  the  observed
      strength of the emotional  ties.  The  fact  that  the  children  were
      receiving emotional support at school when Mr Imran was  away  serving
      his  custodial  sentence  was  concrete  evidence  of  the  effect  of
      separation on them. That, taken together with the improvement in their
      emotional state when he returned to the family home, was a sound basis
      on which to conclude that they would indeed suffer emotional  harm  if
      Mr Imran was deported and they remained in the UK with  their  mother.
      But although there was a firmer evidential basis than in  PG  for  the
      conclusion that emotional harm was likely to be suffered, the harm  in
      question was not in our view qualitatively different from that in  PG.
      There was, for example, no evidence that it would rise to the level of
      causing any diagnosable psychiatric injury.


  30. Finally, we have considered the finding that the separation whilst  Mr
      Imran was in prison put 'increased stress (financial and emotional)...
      on their mother'. Again, we do not doubt the basis for  this  finding,
      but - having considered the observations in PG and  KF  -  we  do  not
      regard this increased stress as capable, whether on its own  or  taken
      together with the likely emotional harm to the children, of supporting
      a finding that deportation would be 'unduly harsh'.


  31. In the circumstances, we consider that - in the light of the  approach
      taken by the Court of Appeal in PG and KF - this is one  of  the  rare
      cases where, despite the careful reasons given by the  judge,  it  was
      not rationally open to him to conclude that the  'unduly  harsh'  test
      was met. His decision that it was met was, therefore, a material error
      of law.


  32. We have considered whether it is necessary to make further findings of
      fact. As we have said, we detect no flaw in  the  findings  the  judge
      made. We were referred by Mr Raza to the key parts of  the  underlying
      materials and we cannot identify any other relevant finding  that  the
      judge could have made in  Mr  Imran's  favour.  It  is  not  therefore
      necessary or appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal
      or to direct a further hearing in this  Tribunal.  Given  the  law  as
      declared by the Court of Appeal in  PG  and  KF,  there  is  only  one
      decision open: the effect of Mr Imran's deportation on his partner and
      children (assuming that they remain in the UK without him)  would  not
      be 'unduly harsh'. Neither of the exceptions in s.  117C  applies.  We
      shall therefore remake  the  decision,  dismissing  the  human  rights
      appeal.


  33. This means that it is not necessary for us to consider grounds  3  and
      4. We doubt, however, whether  either  of  those  grounds  would  have
      succeeded  had  the  first  ground  failed.  The  reasons  given   for
      concluding that it would be 'unduly harsh' for Mr Imran's partner  and
      three children (who do not speak Urdu) to have  to  uproot  themselves
      and go to Pakistan seem to us to be adequate. We  are  far  from  sure
      that there was any error at [33] in relation to the assessment of  the
      risk posed by Mr Imran as 'relatively low', given the equivocal nature
      of the OASys report and judge's own assessment at [27] of  Mr  Imran's
      own account of the causes of his offending behaviour.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

We re-make the decision by dismissing the human rights appeal.


Signed:       Martin D. Chamberlain
              The Hon. Mr Justice Chamberlain

Dated:        7 February 2020

