
FS (Service of determination) Eritrea [2007] UKAIT 00084

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 27 March 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Drabu
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Ms R Baruah, instructed by White Ryland
For the Respondent:          Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) The calculation of the time when a  determination  of  the  Tribunal  is
served on a party is governed by the Procedure Rules  of  the  Tribunal  and
not by the CPR; although decisions on the meaning of phrases in the CPR  may
be of assistance in the interpretation of the same phrases in the  Procedure
Rules.  (2)  Proof that a determination was not received on the  second  day
after posting may be by any of the usual means,  including  judicial  notice
and a statement of truth; but (save when rule 55(4) causes time to start  to
run) evidence of service on the representative is no evidence  of  the  date
of service on the party himself.  (3)  Where  the  evidence  merely  negates
the deemed date of service, service is deemed to have  taken  place  on  the
next day that the evidence does not negate.

                                   NOTICE


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea.  He appealed to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the decision of the Secretary of State on 31 May 2005  to
    give directions for his removal to Eritrea having refused asylum.   The
    Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant then applied for
    an order for reconsideration.  Reconsideration was refused by a  Senior
    Immigration Judge, but an order, whose terms we set out below, was made
    by Beatson J.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. As will also shortly become apparent, we are concerned in  this  appeal
    with the question whether the application for  reconsideration  was  in
    time.  We therefore begin by  setting  out  the  relevant  dates.   The
    hearing before the Immigration Judge was on 11 July 2005.   She  signed
    her determination on 12 July.  On 20 July it  was  transmitted  to  the
    respondent,  under  the  provisions  of  rule  23  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Under  the
    provisions of that rule, it was for the Secretary of State to serve the
    determination  on  the  appellant  and  his  representative.    It   is
    acknowledged on behalf of the appellant (in paragraph 1 of the  grounds
    for review) that that was done on 22 July 2005.  22  July  2005  was  a
    Friday.  The application for an order for reconsideration was  received
    on 2 August 2005.  It raises issues in relation to the substance of the
    Immigration Judge's determination; but it also includes  the  following
    wording:

      "1)   The Decision Is NOT out of time  according  to  the  Rules  (as
             opposed to what the Home Office/AIT allege)
      2)    The Decision is received on 26/7/05 and the grounds are  lodged
             within 5 days."

    Those words are incorporated in a Statement of  Truth  by  a  solicitor
    with White Ryland, the firm representing the appellant.

 3. The Senior Immigration Judge's  decision  on  the  application  was  as
    follows:

        "Contrary to the assertion  by  White  Ryland  at  Part  B  of  the
        Application Notice, this application was received out of time.  The
        Determination was promulgated on 22 July  2005,  as  is  stated  at
        paragraph 1 of the grounds.  The deemed date of receipt was 25 July
        2005 - the Saturday is counted, because there is postal service  on
        Saturdays.   The  deadline  was  therefore  1  August  2005.    The
        application was received on 1  August  2005,  but  only  at  18.25.
        Since it was received after 4.p.m., this means it is deemed to have
        been received the next working day - i.e. on  2  August  2005  (see
        Rule 6.7 of the CPR).   The  bare  contention  in  Part  B  of  the
        Application Notice that the Determination was only received  on  26
        July 2005, unsupported by any evidence, is not enough to prove  the
        contrary  within  Rule  55(5)  of   the   2005   Procedure   Rules,
        particularly as the Determination was sent not only to White Ryland
        but also to the Appellant.  The grounds do not  suggest  that  both
        the Appellant and White Ryland only received the  Determination  on
        26 July 2005.


        I have therefore treated  this  as  an  out  of  time  application.
        Section 103A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
        as amended by section 26 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
        of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 provides that  the  appropriate  court
        may permit an application to be made outside  the  prescribed  time
        period if it thinks  that  the  application  could  not  reasonably
        practicably be made within the prescribed period.   No  explanation
        has been provided for the  delay  in  submitting  the  application.
        Accordingly, I am not satisfied  that  the  application  could  not
        reasonably  have  been   made   within   the   prescribed   period.
        Accordingly, I do not permit the application to be made outside the
        prescribed period.


        Further, and in any event, I would  have  refused  the  substantive
        application even if it had been received in time or I had  extended
        time.  The "Voice of America" article and the Amnesty International
        Report are both dated 28 July 2005 and both post-date  the  hearing
        which took place before the Immigration  Judge  on  11  July  2005.
        These documents were therefore not  submitted  to  the  Immigration
        Judge.  Contrary to the contention in paragraph 3 of  the  grounds,
        it is clear from the Determination in the IN case that the Tribunal
        did consider whether there was a general risk to all returnees.  It
        concluded, after considering the evidence before it (including  the
        evidence relied on in paragraphs 4 onwards  of  the  grounds)  that
        returnees are not generally at real risk.  Paragraphs 4 onwards  of
        the grounds amount to no more than  an  attempt  to  re-argue  this
        issue.  The grounds disclose  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
        determination.  There is no prospect of the  appeal  being  decided
        differently on a reconsideration (Rule  26(6)  of  the  Asylum  and
        Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005)."

    That decision provoked a response by letter to  the  President  of  the
    Tribunal from the appellant's solicitors, referring to rule  2.8(4)  of
    the Civil Procedure Rules, to which we make  further  reference  below.
    The letter makes further points which may be taken as an  objection  to
    the terms of rule 23, and continues as follows:


        "We date-stamp our post as received on the morning it  is  received
        at our offices.  The deemed date of receipt is the second day after
        the date of posting unless the contrary can be proved.   Our  date-
        stamp has been dismissed as not proving the contrary by some  SIJs.
        We enclose an example as such a decision.  In a system where  there
        is room for confusion, a solicitors' received  date-stamp  (applied
        normally by a partner of the firm) should be accepted  as  reliably
        evidencing the actual date of  receipt,  legitimately  ousting  the
        deemed date of receipt, as provided for in the  deeming  provisions
        of rule 55(5) of the 2005 Procedure Rules."

 4. In fact four decisions were enclosed  with  that  letter,  all  by  the
    Senior Immigration Judge who dealt with this application.  It looks  as
    thought the same decisions must have been  included  with  the  renewed
    application to the court, for the Judge's order is as follows:

      "IT IS ORDERED that


          1. The Tribunal reconsider its decision on the appeal
          2. That the matter be listed  before  the  President  or  a  Vice-
             President of the Tribunal


        Reasons: Although the argument that the findings in IN were applied
        irrationally and unreasonably by the Immigration Judge in this case
        is tenuous in view of the statement in paragraph 44(ii) of IN  that
        'if someone is eligible for call up over a significant  period  but
        has not been called up, then ... there will normally  be  no  basis
        for a finding that he or she would be regarded as a draft  evader',
        the evidence that the Libyan returnees were all detained on arrival
        means it is not unarguable in the case of a person only five  years
        older than IN.  Were this the only concern in this case in view  of
        rule  26(6)(b),  I  might  not  have  ordered  that  the   Tribunal
        reconsider its  decision.   However,  the  issue  of  whether  this
        application was out of time raises general  issues  as  to  whether
        Saturday counts in  calculating  the  deemed  day  of  receipt  and
        whether a statement of truth signed  by  a  solicitor  suffices  to
        support facts stated in support of an application for an  extension
        of time.  It is arguable that the Senior Immigration Judge erred in
        law in concluding that the application was out of time.  In view of
        the other cases in which this Senior  Immigration  Judge  has  made
        similar findings the matter should be listed before  the  President
        or a Vice-President  of  the  Tribunal  so  that  an  authoritative
        determination can be given."

 5. The terms of that Order put us in some difficulties,  because  although
    it is on its face an order for reconsideration of  the  appeal,  it  is
    apparent from its terms that Beatson J intended that the Tribunal reach
    a view on whether the application was to be treated as out of time.  If
    it is out of time, then unless time could lawfully be  extended,  there
    can be no reconsideration.  It is evident that the Judge  thought  that
    the matter was "arguable" and that he did not seek himself to  reach  a
    final decision on it.  We have therefore taken  the  Judge's  order  as
    amounting to an  order  that  we  first  consider  whether  the  Senior
    Immigration Judge's calculation of time was correct.  If it was,  then,
    subject to any questions as to whether time should be extended, that is
    the end of the matter.

 6. The time limit for making an application for reconsideration is, rather
    surprisingly,  in  primary  legislation.   Section   103A(3)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is as follows:

      "An application under subsection (1) must be made -
      (a)   in the case of an application by the appellant made while he  is
             in the United Kingdom, within the period of  5  days  beginning
             with the date on which he is treated, in accordance with  rules
             under section  106,  as  receiving  notice  of  the  Tribunal's
             decision,
      (b)   in the case of an application by the appellant mad while  he  is
             outside the United Kingdom, within the period 28 days beginning
             with the date on which he is treated, in accordance  with  rule
             106, as receiving notice of the Tribunal's decision, and
      (c)   in the case of an application brought by a party to  the  appeal
             other than the appellant, within the period of 5 days beginning
             with the date on which he is treated, in accordance with  rules
             under  rule  106,  as  receiving  notice  of   the   Tribunal's
             decision."

 7. The Rules made under s106  are  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005, to which we have already referred.  In the case
    of an in-country appeal relating "in whole or  in  part  to  an  asylum
    claim", rule 23 requires the Tribunal to serve the determination on the
    respondent  and  rule  23(5)  requires  the  respondent  to  serve  the
    determination on the appellant and notify the Tribunal on what date and
    by what means it was served.   In  all  other  cases  the  Tribunal  is
    required to serve the  determination  on  both  parties.   Rule  55  is
    entitled "Filing and service of documents".  The relevant parts  of  it
    are as follows:

        "55 -    (1)   Any document which is required or permitted by these
                 Rules or by a direction of the Tribunal to  be  filed  with
                 the Tribunal, or served on any person may be -
                 (a)   delivered, or sent by post, to an address;
                 (b)   sent via a document exchange to a document  exchange
                     number or address;
                 (c)   sent by fax to a fax number; or
                 (d)   sent by e-mail to an e-mail address,
                 specified for that purpose by the Tribunal  or  person  to
                 whom the document is directed.
            ...
            (3)  Where a person has notified the Tribunal that he is acting
                 as the representative of an  appellant  and  has  given  an
                 address for  service,  if  a  document  is  served  on  the
                 appellant, a copy must also at the same time be sent to the
                 appellant's representative.
            (4)  If any document is served on a person who has notified the
                 Tribunal that he is  acting  as  the  representative  of  a
                 party, it shall be deemed  to  have  been  served  on  that
                 party.
            (5)  Subject to paragraph (6) [which has  no  bearing  on  this
                 appeal], any  document  that  is  served  on  a  person  in
                 accordance with this rule shall,  unless  the  contrary  is
                 proved, be deemed to be served -
                  (a)  where the  document  is  sent  by  post  or  document
                     exchange  from  and  to  a  place  within  the  United
                     Kingdom, on the second day after it was sent;
                  (b)  where the  document  is  sent  by  post  or  document
                     exchange  from  or  to  a  place  outside  the  United
                     Kingdom, on the twenty-eighth day after it  was  sent;
                     and
                  (c)  in any other case, on the day on which  the  document
                     was sent or delivered to, or left with, that person.
            ... ."

      Rule 57 is headed "Calculation of time" and is as follows:

            "57 - (1)   Where  a  period  of  time  for  doing  any  act  is
                 specified by these Rules or by a direction of the Tribunal,
                 that period is to be calculated -
                       (a)   excluding the day on which the  period  begins;
             and
                       (b)   where the period is 10 days or less,  excluding
                     any day which is not a business day (unless the period
                     is expressed as a period of calendar days).
                 (2)   Where the time specified  by  these  Rules  or  by  a
                 direction of the Tribunal for doing any act ends on  a  day
                 which is not a business day, that act is done in time if it
                 is done on the next business day."

    The Civil Procedure Rules deal with applications  under  s103A  of  the
    2002 Act at 54.28 and following.  By rule 54.28(4), rule 2.8  (that  is
    the rule about the calculation of time) applies to the  calculation  of
    the period of time specified in s103A(3) of the 2004  Act  and  to  the
    period for renewing an application to the Court if it has been  refused
    by a Senior Immigration Judge under paragraph 30(5)(b) of Schedule 2 to
    the 2004 Act.

 8. The dispute  in  the  present  case  relates  to  the  service  of  the
    determination by the Tribunal.  That is a matter governed  entirely  by
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  It is only
    after the "date [the appellant] is  treated,  in  accordance  with  the
    Rules under s106, as receiving notice of the Tribunal's decision"  that
    the periods of five or twenty-eight days limited by s103A  run.   Those
    periods are governed by the  Civil  Procedure  Rules,  as  provided  in
    paragraph 54.28 of those Rules.  But nothing in the CPR can affect  the
    operation of the Tribunal's Procedure Rules in regard to service of the
    Tribunal's documents.

 9. So far as the Tribunal's Procedure  Rules  are  concerned,  service  of
    determinations and all other documents is governed by  rule  55.   Rule
    57, which for completeness we have set out above, has no bearing on the
    service of documents, because rule 55 does not  provide  "a  period  of
    time for doing any act".  It simply provides that "unless the  contrary
    is proved" a thing (service) shall be deemed to have  happened  on  the
    second day after something  else  (posting)  happened.   For  the  same
    reasons, even if rule 2.8 of the CPR applied to the service of Tribunal
    determinations (which, as  we  have  said  above,  it  does  not),  the
    reference  to  paragraph  2.8(4)  in  the  solicitors'  letter  to  the
    President would be inapposite, because rule 2.8 is also concerned  with
    the calculation of "any  period  of  time  for  doing  any  act".   The
    reference to rule 2.8 in that letter is particularly surprising  as  it
    appears to ignore the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  the  leading
    case, Anderton v Clwyd County Council [2002] EWCA Civ 933; [2002]1  WLR
    3174.  At [37]-[45] the Court  takes  exactly  the  same  view  of  the
    interpretation of CPR rule 2.8 and its non-application  to  the  deemed
    service rule, rule 6.7(1), as we have taken in relation to rules 57 and
    55 of the Tribunal's  Rules,  despite,  in  the  case  of  the  CPR,  a
    parenthetical reference to rule 2.8 in rule 6.7(1).

10. The position is therefore that, the determination having been sent  out
    on Friday, 22 July 2005, it is deemed for the purposes of s103A to have
    been served on 24 July 2005 unless the contrary  is  proved.   24  July
    2005 was a Sunday.

11. In Anderton v Clywd the Court was faced with exactly this problem,  but
    in a slightly different context.  The deeming provisions  of  CPR  rule
    6(7) were, as the Court held in that  case  (following  on  this  point
    Godwin v Swindon Borough Council [2001] EWCA Civ  1478;  [2002]  1  WLR
    997) not rebuttable by evidence.  In that context the Court noted  that
    service might be deemed to take place by post on a day on  which  there
    was no post.  In setting out its comments at [44] the Court  noted  the
    potential disadvantage to the defendant:

        "Saturday is a 'day' and so is Sunday.  The fact that there is,  or
        may be, no postal delivery to the defendant or to his legal adviser
        on either of those days or that there may be no one at the premises
        of the defendant or of his legal adviser  to  deal  with  documents
        that are delivered on those  days  is  legally  irrelevant  to  the
        operation of the fiction  of  deemed  service  of  the  claim  form
        selected by the claimant: they are not dependent on the  particular
        circumstances of the defendant to whom  the  claim  form  has  been
        posted."


12. In R (Saleem) v SSHD [2001] 1 WLR 443 the Court of  Appeal  held  ultra
    vires  a  rule  governing  the  service  of  immigration   and   asylum
    determinations that provided for deemed service with no opportunity  to
    prove that  service  had  not  taken  place  as  deemed.   The  present
    provisions, in rule 55, therefore provide for service to be  as  deemed
    "unless the contrary is proved".  There is no specific  restriction  on
    the mode of proof.  The Tribunal takes judicial notice  that  there  is
    not usually a postal delivery in the United Kingdom on a Sunday.   That
    is sufficient to prove that service did not take place, as  deemed,  on
    24 July 2005.

13. Does rule 55 then have any application at all?  A literal reading might
    suggest not.  It is expressed to apply only "unless"  the  contrary  is
    proved; and as it has been shown in the present case that the  document
    was not served on the second day after posting, the contrary  has  been
    proved.  But it would make a nonsense of this and every  other  similar
    provision (and there are many, in  legislation  and  in  standard  form
    contracts) where evidence is admissible, if a party could require proof
    of actual service by the simple technique of disproving the deemed date
    of service and doing no more.  Besides, the legislator must be supposed
    to have the same knowledge of the  postal  service  that  the  Tribunal
    does, and cannot rationally be thought to have been making arrangements
    for documents posted on Fridays that were radically different from  the
    arrangements for documents posted on other days.  Miss Baruah  did  not
    suggest that the rule should be read in a manner  different  from  that
    which we suggest below.

14. Whatever the date of  posting,  the  phrase  "unless  the  contrary  is
    proved" gives an opportunity for the adduction of evidence of an actual
    date of service different from the deemed  date.   When,  however,  the
    only effect of the evidence (or other material of  which  the  Tribunal
    takes notice) is to  exclude the deemed date (rather than also offering
    another date), the obvious solution is  to  read  rule  55  as  deeming
    service to have taken place on the  next  day  that  is  not  excluded.
    That, in the circumstances of the present appeal, was 25 July 2005.

15. On that day, unless the  contrary  is  proved,  the  determination  was
    served on the appellant and on his solicitor.  Time runs, according  to
    s103A, from the date of service on the appellant.  There is and was  no
    evidence  that  the  appellant  did  not  receive  his  copy   of   the
    determination on 25 July 2005.  Time therefore runs from that date.

16. For that reason, the question of the date of service on the  solicitors
    is largely irrelevant.  If service on them had preceded service on  the
    appellant, he would have been fixed with a  period  of  time  beginning
    with the service on them, because of rule 55(4).  But that is not  said
    to have been the position here.  What is clear is  that  time  for  the
    appellant cannot be extended by later service (or  deemed  service)  on
    the representatives, as the solicitors appear to have assumed  in  this
    case.

17. We note the information given in the solicitors' letter that,  in  that
    particular firm, the date-stamping is done  by  partners.   We  beg  to
    leave to doubt whether that is  a  universal  practice  in  solicitors'
    firms.  But it is clear that a Statement of Truth by a solicitor  could
    amount to evidence proving the contrary for the purposes of rule 55(5).
     What was before the Senior Immigration Judge  was  not,  however,  the
    circumstantial account given by the solicitors in their letter  to  the
    President of the Tribunal.  It was simply the assertion in two numbered
    paragraphs which we have set out earlier in this  determination.   That
    appears to be an allegation about the calculation of the deemed date of
    service, rather than an allegation about actual service in the  present
    case.  Despite what  the  solicitors  say  about  their  practice,  the
    documents sent with the application for a reconsideration order do  not
    include any document date-stamped by them on 26  July:  in  particular,
    the determination itself bears only the stamp of  "22  JUL  2005",  the
    date it was sent  to  them.   Even  if  the  date  of  service  on  the
    solicitors  had  been  relevant  for  the  purposes  of  this   appeal,
    therefore, it is difficult to see  why  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    should have thought that she  was  being  asked  to  consider  evidence
    proving that the determination had not been served on 25 July 2005.

18. For the foregoing reasons, the appellant  had,  beginning  on  25  July
    2005, the five days limited by s103A(3), calculated in accordance  with
    CPR rule 2.8, within which to make  an  in-time  application.   As  the
    Senior Immigration Judge noted, the application, which was dated by the
    solicitors "1/8/05", was sent by fax at 18:25.  As she correctly noted,
    CPR rule 6.7(1) applies to that service, which is accordingly deemed to
    have taken place on the business  day  after  transmission.   That  was
    Tuesday, 2 August 2005.

19. Applying the provisions of CPR  rule  2.7,  the  period  of  five  days
    limited by s103A(3) is to be computed as "clear days", that is  to  say
    ignoring the day on which the period begins (rule 2.7(2)(iii)).  As the
    period is five days or less, Saturdays and Sundays do not  count  (rule
    2.7(4)).  A period of five days beginning on Monday 25 July 2005 ended,
    according to those Rules, on Monday 1 August 2005.  Service on 2 August
    was out of time.

20. There was no application to extend time, because  the  application  was
    asserted to be in time.  Nevertheless, in the circumstances,  we  ought
    to consider this issue.  Extension of time is also governed by  primary
    legislation.  Section 103A(4)(b) is as follows:

        "The [Tribunal] may permit an application ... to  be  made  outside
        the period specified in subsection (3) where  it  thinks  that  the
        application could not reasonably practicably have been made  within
        that period."

21. Whether or not the solicitors received their copy of the  determination
    only on 26 July 2005, there is nothing which would found  a  conclusion
    that the application  for  an  order  for  reconsideration  "could  not
    reasonably practicably" have been made in time.  There is therefore  no
    basis for extending time.

22.  The  result  of  the  foregoing  is  that  the   application   for   a
    reconsideration order was made out  of  time;  the  Senior  Immigration
    Judge was right to conclude that it had been made out of time; and that
    the arguments  identified  by  Beatson  J  as  possibly  leading  to  a
    different conclusion must be rejected.

23.  It  follows  from  that,  and  from  what  we  said  earlier  in  this
    determination,   that   although   Beatson   J   appeared   to    order
    reconsideration on the  merits,  the  matter  is  not  before  us.   No
    reconsideration order could be made  by  either  the  Tribunal  or  the
    Court, because no in-time application had been received; no ground  had
    been given for the extension of time; and, in any event, time  has  not
    been extended.  We therefore conclude that the  appellant's  appeal  is
    not pending before the Tribunal and that no further decision on  it  is
    required: the Immigration Judge's determination stands unchallenged.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
