
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Birch (Precariousness and mistake; new matters) [2020] UKUT 00086 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decisions & Reasons sent out  |
|                                              |on                            |
|On 29 January 2020                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                             KAREN RICKEL BIRCH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Selwood, instructed by Wilson Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


   1. The observations about a person's misapprehension, found in  paragraph
      [53] of  Agyarko  are,  despite  their  context  in  a  discussion  of
      precariousness, capable of being applicable also to a person  who  has
      no leave.

   2. The prohibition on considering new matters in s 85  of  the  2002  Act
      does not apply to proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a national of Jamaica now aged 43, appeals  against  the
    decision of Judge Carroll in the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent on 18 April 2018 refusing
    her application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.   She  has
    permission to appeal, granted by this Tribunal following  the  quashing
    by the High Court of an earlier refusal.


 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in May 1999 with  a  visitor's
    visa and was granted leave to enter for one  month.   She  subsequently
    applied for, and was granted, leave to remain as a student; following a
    renewal, that leave expired on 30 September 2001.  She has remained  in
    the United Kingdom without leave since then.


 3. In 2007 or 2008 she was introduced to somebody posing as an Immigration
    Officer and was persuaded to pay �3,000 to regularise her position  and
    obtain a grant of leave.  She gave the person her passport,  which  was
    returned with a stamp  appearing  to  grant  her  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, and a letter confirming the grant.  She maintains, and,  it  is
    important to note, the  respondent  accepts,  that  she  was  genuinely
    deceived and that she thought that she did  have  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.


 4. In 2015 the appellant applied for a driving licence.  She had  to  send
    her passport to the DVLA, who sent it to the respondent.  It appears to
    have been mislaid.  Her representatives sent a copy of the ILR  letter,
    which was confirmed as counterfeit. After an interview she  was  served
    with notice that she was liable to removal.  She then applied for leave
    to remain on human rights grounds.  Her  application  was  refused  and
    certified as clearly unfounded.  A judicial review  challenge  to  that
    assessment was withdrawn by consent on the respondent's undertaking  to
    reconsider, taking further material into account.  The  reconsideration
    led to the refusal now under appeal.


 5. The grounds of the appellant's human rights  claim  are  based  on  her
    relationship with her own family members and with a man with  whom  she
    has had a long-term relationship, together with her continuous presence
    in the United Kingdom for many years.


 6. The  appellant  lives  with  her  half-sister,  who  has  children  and
    grandchildren.  The appellant claims that she  is  very  close  to  her
    nephews, and her half-sister says that she has been a huge  support  in
    raising the children and grandchildren.  But there was no evidence from
    any of the nephews, and Judge Carroll concluded that there was no basis
    for a finding that there was anything more than  the  normal  affection
    between family  members.   The  appellant's  living  arrangements  fell
    nevertheless to  be  considered  as  part  of  her  family  life.   The
    appellant has family members in Jamaica, including her parents (who are
    separated) and her children: she is in contact with all of  them.   She
    has numerous other family members in Jamaica, including  a  brother,  a
    half-brother and three half-sisters, and nephews and nieces.


 7. Since 2007 the appellant has had a relationship  with  a  man,  who  is
    married with children and does not propose to leave his wife  for  her.
    They see each other during the week  and  sometimes  at  weekends.   He
    provides financial support for her, and her children  in  Jamaica.   He
    gave evidence in support of the appellant's appeal but,  as  the  Judge
    noted, that evidence left it far from clear whether he  would  continue
    any support if the appellant returned to Jamaica.  He  would  certainly
    have no intention of following her there.   The  Judge  concluded  that
    although the relationship was limited, it had  elements  going  to  the
    appellant's family life and her private life.


 8. The appellant has, it appears, been in the United Kingdom  continuously
    since her first arrival.  There is no evidence of her having  left,  or
    that she would have been able to return on the documents  available  to
    her after her leave  expired  in  2001.   The  respondent's  letter  of
    refusal appears to accept her continuous presence.


 9. The respondent had refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in any
    category, and that her circumstances were not such as  to  give  her  a
    right to remain despite not meeting the requirements of the Rules.  The
    Judge considered the grounds of appeal, which were to the  effect  that
    the appellant's removal would be a disproportionate  interference  with
    her Convention rights, cited s 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002, noted that the appellant  has  relatives  in  Jamaica,
    where  employment  might  well  be  available  to  a  person  with  the
    appellant's experience and training, and concluded  that  the  decision
    was not disproportionate.


10. The grounds of appeal to this Tribunal  asserted  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to follow what the grounds described as a "structured  approach"
    to applying the Rules and the possibility of success outside them,  had
    failed to apply guidance from the Supreme Court decision in  Agyarko  v
    SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [53], had failed to  consider  all  the  factors
    relevant under s 117B, and had failed to strike a fair balance  between
    the individual rights affected and the public  interest.   We  had  the
    benefit of a full  rule  24  response  from  the  respondent  and  oral
    submissions from Mr Selwood and Mr Melvin.


11. We think nothing of the grounds apart from that based on  Agyarko.   In
    particular, it appears to us that the Judge's decision  has  sufficient
    structure for its purpose: it considers the potential  case  under  the
    Rules properly within the context of an appeal on human rights  grounds
    only, and reaches a conclusion amply open to the judge on its own terms
    (that is to say, disregarding for the moment the Agyarko point).  There
    is nothing in s 117B that the judge should have considered and did not:
    in particular, the points raised in relation to subsections (2) and (3)
    could not assist her case: see Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 at  [57],
    firmly summarised in SC (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2019]  EWCA  Civ  3069  at
    [32]:

             "[I]n Rhuppiah the Supreme Court endorsed the approach  in  AM
             (Malawi) and it is now established that  section  117B(2)  and
             (3) do not require the Tribunal to take into  account  fluency
             in English and  financial  independence  as  factors  in  [an]
             Article 8 appellant's favour."

12. We turn then to Agyarko.  This is  a  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court
    considering issues in relation  to  applications  for  leave  based  on
    article 8 as applied in Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules,  and  the
    reasons for recognising article 8 rights outside the Rules.   It  makes
    no reference to s 117B, probably because each of the appellants  before
    the Court was challenging a decision made in 2013, before the enactment
    of s 117B, which was introduced by the Immigration Act 2014.   But  the
    decision is still relevant because of its treatment of  the  notion  of
    "precariousness".


13. Sections 117A-B read, so far  as  relevant  for  present  purposes,  as
    follows:

            "117A
              1) This Part [i.e.  ss  117A-D]  applies  where  a  court  or
                 tribunal is required to determine whether a decision  made
                 under the Immigration Acts-
                 a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and
                    family life under Article 8, and
                 b) as a result would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.
              2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
                 tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
                 a) in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section
                    117B, and
                 b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation   of   foreign
                    criminals, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
                    117C.
              3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
                 the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                 right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                 under Article 8(2).


                117B
                ...
                (4) Little weight should be given to-
                  (a) a private life, or
                  (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                is in the United
                  Kingdom unlawfully.
                (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
             established by a person at a
                      time  when  the   person's   immigration   status   is
             precarious."


14. In  Agyarko  the  Supreme  Court  had  the  task  of  working  out  the
    implications of precariousness with little assistance other  than  that
    to be derived from  the  decision  of  the  ECtHR  in  Jeunesse  v  The
    Netherlands [2014] ECHR 1036.  In  that  case  the  Court,  in  working
    through the principles in the light of  its  previous  decisions,  said
    this at [108]:

             "Another important consideration is whether  family  life  was
             created at a time when the persons involved  were  aware  that
             the immigration status of  one  of  them  was  such  that  the
             persistence of that family life within the  host  State  would
             from the outset be  precarious.    It  is  the  Court's  well-
             established case-law that, where  this  is  the  case,  it  is
             likely only  to  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of Article 8."

15. Lord Reed's judgment (with which the other members of the Court agreed)
    set out various possibilities and at [53] said this:

             "[T]he reference in the [Home  Office]  instruction  to  "full
             knowledge that their stay here is unlawful or  precarious"  is
             also consistent with the case law of the European Court, which
             refers  to  the  persons  concerned  being  aware   that   the
             persistence  of  family  life  in  the  host  state  would  be
             precarious from the outset (as in  Jeunesse,  para  108).  One
             can, for example, envisage circumstances in which people might
             be under a reasonable misapprehension as to their  ability  to
             maintain a family  life  in  the  UK,  and  in  which  a  less
             stringent approach might therefore be appropriate."

16. As we have seen, s 117B(5)  introduces precariousness  as  a  statutory
    concept applicable in cases where a person  has  leave  (so  contrasted
    with cases where the person has no leave, governed by  s  117(4)):  the
    meaning of precariousness in this context is settled by Rhuppiah.   But
    the introduction of the statutory notion in the case of  a  person  who
    has leave does not of itself  remove  the  applicability  of  any  non-
    statutory notion, given the same name, in the case of those who do  not
    have leave. The sentiment in paragraph 108 of Jeunesse does not  appear
    to be limited to those who have some sort of permission to  be  in  the
    country in question; and the notion of mistake  embraced  in  paragraph
    [53]  of  Agyarko  is  precisely  a  mistake  about  whether  there  is
    permission or not.  In our judgment it would be quite wrong to  confine
    that notion to cases where a person in fact has some leave  and  refuse
    to apply it to a person who in fact has no leave.


17. Between 2007 or 2008 and 2015 the appellant thought she had  indefinite
    leave to remain.  That was the period when the appellant was  beginning
    and  developing  her  relationship  with  her  partner,  and  forms   a
    considerable part of the time that she was establishing herself in  the
    United Kingdom.  In considering  the  "public  interest  question"  the
    Judge ought to have  taken  into  account  whether  a  "less  stringent
    approach might be appropriate".  Judge Carroll took no  notice  of  the
    Agyarko approach despite its  having  been  cited  on  the  appellant's
    behalf: paragraph 23 of the Judge's decision notes the period of  time,
    the mistake, and the respondent's acceptance of  it,  but  in  the  end
    states simply that "It remains the case that the appellant had no valid
    leave to remain from 2001".


18. That was an error of law.  The Judge should  have  treated  the  period
    during which the appellant thought she had leave differently  from  the
    periods in which she knew she had no leave.  Given the  extent  of  the
    former, and the relationships and  the  conduct  of  her  private  life
    during it, it is impossible to say that the result in general,  and  in
    the application of s 117B, would or should have been the same  if  this
    factor had been taken into account.  The Judge's decision must  be  set
    aside.


19. We proceed, therefore, to re-make the decision on the appeal.  There is
    no further evidence as such, but there has been a development  of  some
    importance.  At the date of the hearing before us on 29  January  2020,
    the appellant had been in the United Kingdom, albeit for the most  part
    without leave, for a period in excess  of  twenty  years  continuously.
    There being no known matters to the contrary, she would  apparently  be
    entitled on application to a grant of leave under paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.


20. Before the  hearing  the  appellant's  representatives  had  attempted,
    without success, to persuade the respondent that leave  should  now  be
    granted for that reason.  At the hearing Mr Melvin's position was  that
    the appellant's current position as a person who had spent twenty years
    in the United Kingdom was a "new matter", which we were not entitled to
    consider unless he gave us permission to do so.  He relied on s  85(4)-
    (6) of the 2002 Act:

          "(4) On an appeal under section 82(1) against a decision the
             Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks relevant to
             the substance of the decision, including a matter arising
             after the date of the decision.
          5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the
             Secretary of State has
              given the Tribunal consent to do so.
          6)  A matter is a "new matter" if-
                a) it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
                   section 84, and
                b) the Secretary of State has not previously considered the
                   matter in the context of-
                      i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or
                     ii) a statement made by the appellant under section
                         120."

21. Mr Melvin's argument would,  we  think,  have  some  purchase  if  this
    question had arisen before the First-tier Tribunal, or if  we  were  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be  re-
    made.   While  the  matter  remains  in  this  Tribunal,  however,  the
    prohibition on the consideration of "a new matter" does not apply.


22. The reason for that is that in s 81 of the 2002  Act  the  phrase  "the
    Tribunal" is defined for the purpose of the ensuing Part  (including  s
    85) as meaning the First-tier Tribunal.  The phrase  specifically  does
    not apply to the Upper Tribunal.   No other legislation  to  which  our
    attention has been drawn suggests that the  Upper  Tribunal  is  to  be
    considered as falling within that definition, even when determining  an
    appeal begun under s 82 (which continues in the Upper  Tribunal  as  an
    "appeal under s 82", rather than under the appeals  provisions  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007: see  LB  (Jamaica)  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ).  The provisions of s 84(4) are not needed  to  enable
    the Upper Tribunal, a  superior  court  of  record,  to  take  relevant
    matters into account, so it cannot be said that without acceding to the
    restriction in subsection (5) this Tribunal  could  not  take  anything
    into account at all.


23. Furthermore, it is clear that in general  procedure  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is not identical to that before the First-tier Tribunal: there
    are two different sets of Procedure Rules; and the Upper Tribunal alone
    has the powers given by s 25 of the 2007 Act.  Although s  12(4)(a)  of
    the 2007 Act provides that on an appeal the Upper Tribunal may make any
    decision  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  could  make,  there  is   no
    suggestion that the route  to  a  decision,  or  the  reasons  for  the
    decision, are confined to those that would be open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal; and paragraph (b) of that  subsection  specifically  provides
    that the Upper Tribunal may make "such findings of fact as it considers
    appropriate".


24. We therefore reject the argument that we cannot  take  the  new  matter
    into consideration.  The passage of time is  clearly  relevant  to  the
    determination of this appeal as it  now  stands  before  us.   Whatever
    might have been the substantive merits of the appellant's  case  before
    the expiry of twenty years since her arrival in the United Kingdom, the
    position now is that she meets  the  substantive  requirements  of  the
    Rules entitling her to a grant of leave.  For  that  reason,  and  that
    reason only, we consider that in her case it would not be proportionate
    to remove her from the United Kingdom.


25. We therefore allow the appellant's appeal.





                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 11 February 2020
