


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


   MP [Trafficking - Sufficiency of Protection] Romania [2005] UKIAT 00086


                               Date of hearing: 21 February and 2 March 2005
                                  Date Determination notified: 21 April 2005





   Before

                     Mr. P. R. Moulden (Vice President)
                       Mr. P. R. Lane (Vice President)
                                Mr. R A McKee





   Between





                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1) The Appellant is a citizen  of  Romania.   In  these  proceedings  both
    parties have been given permission to appeal against the  determination
    of an Adjudicator, Mr. John S. Law.  Throughout this  determination  we
    will refer to the claimant as the appellant and the Secretary of  State
    as the respondent.  The  respondent  refused  to  grant  the  Appellant
    asylum and gave directions for her removal from the United  Kingdom  as
    an illegal entrant.  The Adjudicator dismissed the  appeal  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds but allowed it on human rights grounds.


 2) Mr. D H Southey of Counsel, instructed by  the  Refugee  Legal  Centre,
    appeared for the Appellant.  Miss J. Richards of Counsel, instructed by
    the Treasury Solicitor, appeared for the respondent.

 3) Immigration history


 4) The Appellant entered the United Kingdom hidden in a lorry on about  19
    June 2003.  She was arrested and claimed asylum.  The notice containing
    the decision against which she appeals is  dated  12  July  2003.   The
    Adjudicator heard the appeal on 4 May 2004 and  his  determination  was
    promulgated on 19 May 2004.  The appellant was  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 19 July 2004 and the respondent  on  29  November  2004.   We
    heard the appeal over two days, on 21 February and 2 March 2005.


 5) The facts


 6) The appellant claimed that she was an orphan who lived in an  orphanage
    until she was approximately 18 years of age.  After that she  lived  in
    rented accommodation in Borsec, not far from the orphanage. She  had  a
    full-time job.  She has no known relatives.  One  evening  in  December
    2002 she was kidnapped in the street and at knifepoint  by  a  gang  of
    gypsies who took her by car to Bucharest.  There  she  was  kept  in  a
    locked room, raped by her captors and forced into prostitution.   After
    about two and a half months she managed to escape and take a train back
    to Borsec.  She returned to her accommodation, locked herself  in,  and
    only ventured out after about a week when she went  to  the  police  to
    report what had happened.  They took no action and she  went  back  the
    next day.  A police officer told her that the  gypsies  had  money  and
    influence and it would not be in his interest to pursue her  complaint.
    She decided to move and went to Timisoara to  seek  employment.   After
    about two days she bumped into the gypsies who had abducted her in  the
    street.  She screamed and ran away, but they caught her  and  took  her
    back to Bucharest.  She was beaten, raped  and  then  sold  to  another
    gypsy group who took her to Italy, where she was treated  in  the  same
    way.  While she was there another girl managed to escape and go to  the
    police, but while she was at the police station her  captors  came  and
    took her back by force.


 7) In June 2003 the appellant was able to escape.  Rather  than  going  to
    the Italian authorities she found a lorry park and persuaded  a  driver
    to carry her to the  United  Kingdom.   In  London  the  appellant  met
    another Romanian asylum seeker who helped her.  They  were  stopped  by
    the police and she claimed asylum at the police station.

 8) The hearing before the Adjudicator and his determination


 9) Both parties were represented at the hearing before the Adjudicator and
    the appellant gave evidence.  The Adjudicator had concerns  about  some
    aspects of her credibility but, after  assessing  these,  accepted  her
    account of events.  The respondent no longer disputes her  credibility.
    The Adjudicator found that in Romania there was a system of protection,
    although this had "inherent difficulties for historical reasons".   The
    appellant did not fall within a particular social group and  there  was
    no other Convention reason.  It was the lack  of  a  Convention  reason
    that caused the Adjudicator to reject the Refugee  Convention  grounds.
    The Adjudicator makes mention of the "European Convention"  but,  taken
    in context, he must have intended to refer to the Refugee Convention.

10) In relation to the Article 3 grounds the Adjudicator  took  a  holistic
    approach, taking into account the appellant's mental health,  including
    the risk that she would commit suicide, and the risk of further inhuman
    and degrading treatment from the gangs who ill treated her in the past,
    before finding there was a real risk that her Article  3  human  rights
    would be infringed.  In this context there is  a  tension  between  the
    Adjudicator's findings in paragraph 25 of the determination  and  those
    in paragraph 28.  The Article 3 risks in paragraph 28  are  limited  to
    those she faces at the hands of the gangs, whilst in paragraph  25  the
    Adjudicator spreads his net wider.

11) In relation to the Article 8 grounds the Adjudicator  appears  to  have
    accepted that the appellant had  established  a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom and that there would be an interference with  her  right
    to physical and moral integrity.  He included  in  his  assessment  the
    risks to her physical and mental health.  He found  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to return her to Romania.  He allowed  the  appeal  on
    both Article 3 and Article 8 human rights grounds.


12) Grounds of appeal


13) The appellant's grounds of appeal submit that the Adjudicator erred  in
    relation  to  his  consideration  of  sufficiency  of   protection   by
    concentrating on systems of protection without addressing  the  ability
    of  the  systems  to  protect,  failing  to  consider  sufficiency   of
    protection in the context  of  the  appellant's  individual  needs  and
    concluding that there was no Convention reason. It is argued that in so
    far as the Adjudicator found that the appellant did  not  have  a  well
    founded fear of persecution, he was saying that she did not have such a
    fear for a Convention reason.  If not, and the finding  is  interpreted
    as a conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  no  well  founded  fear  of
    persecution at  all,  then  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  reaching  this
    conclusion.   The  grounds  argue  that  these  are  material   errors,
    presumably of law.


14) The respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  argue  that,  on  the  objective
    information before  him,  the  Adjudicator  should  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that the Romanian authorities would  provide  the  appellant
    with a sufficiency of protection.  In relation to Article 8,  they  say
    that the Adjudicator has not had sufficient  regard  to  the  objective
    evidence as to the availability of medical care in Romania and that  he
    speculated as to the lack of appropriate facilities.  It is  said  that
    it would not be disproportionate to remove the appellant to Romania. It
    is argued that, in paragraph 19 of the determination,  the  Adjudicator
    erred by speculating on the increase in human  trafficking  as  Romania
    had become part of the EU.  There were grounds of appeal in relation to
    the Adjudicator's positive credibility  finding  which  are  no  longer
    pursued.

15) The authorities and documents before us


   The representatives have submitted the following authorities:


    a) CA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.


    b)  Bagdanavicius  and  another  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605.


    c) Michael Atkinson v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]
       EWCA Civ 846.


    d) Ivanauskiene v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] INLR
       1.


    e) Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
       840.


    f) Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] 2 AC 368.


    g) Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 1 AC 489.


    h) Sefer Djali v the Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2003] EWCA Civ 1371


    i) Bensaid v the United Kingdom ECHR (2001) 33 EHRR 205.


    j) R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Shah and Islam [1999]  ImmAR
       283.


16) The appellant's representatives have submitted the following material:


    a) UNHCR letter relating  to  victims  of  human  trafficking  dated  17
       February 2005.


    b) Expert report from Carmina Drace-Francis dated 18 August 2003.

    c) Medical report from West Sussex  Health  and  Social  Care  dated  19
       August 2003.

    d) Medical report from the Medical Foundation following  an  examination
       on 1 September 2003.

    e) Further medical report from West Sussex Health and Social Care  dated
       2 September 2003.

    f) Psychiatric report from Dr Peter Pierzchniak dated 5 November 2003.

    g) Addendum to psychiatric report from Dr  Peter  Pierzchniak  dated  19
       December 2003.

    h) Expert report from Shivaun Scanlan (undated).

    i) Addendum to expert report from Shivaun Scanlan dated 26 April 2004.

    j) Expert report from Professor Tom Gallagher dated 17  April  2004  (we
       note that this was produced  for  the  same  representatives  but  in
       relation to another claimant and our attention has not been  directed
       to any written permission from the author for it to be used  in  this
       appeal).

    k) Expert report from Paul Cristian Radu dated 18 April  2004  (we  note
       that this was produced for the same representatives but  in  relation
       to another claimant and our attention has not been  directed  to  any
       written permission from the author for it to be used in this appeal).

    l) US Department of State Trafficking in Persons Report dated June 2003.


17) The respondent's representatives have submitted the following material:


    a) Home Office Operational Guidance Note - Romania June 2003.


    b) Romania CIPU Report April 2004.


    c) Romania Country Information Bulletin November 2004.


    d) Letter from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office dated 3 February 2005


      enclosing information received from the British Embassy  in  Bucharest
      relating to         people trafficking  in  Romania  together  with  a
      translation of the Romanian Witness Protection Act and a list  of  NGO
      Partners.


    e) US Department of State Trafficking in Persons report  dated  14  July
       2004.


    f) US Department of State  Country  Report  -  Romania  -  Human  Rights
       Practices 2003, dated 25 February 2004.


    g) Extracts from the International  Organisation  for  Migration  Report
       entitled "Who  is  the  next  victim"  and  "vulnerability  of  young
       Romanian women to trafficking in human beings".


    h) International Organisation for  Migration  Press  Briefing  Notes  13
       April 2004 Entitled "Romania - How Effective Is Assistance to Victims
       of Human Trafficking?"


    i) International Catholic Migration Commission's first annual report  on
       victims of trafficking in southeast Europe, front-page and section on
       Romania.


    j) American Bar Association, significant legal developments  in  Romania
       dated May 2003.


    k) The Protection Project 2003, Human Rights Report - Romania.


    l) World Health Organization Information on Mental Health  Resources  in
       Romania.


    m) International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights -  information  on
       appointment of Monica Macovei as Romanian Minister of Justice.


    n) Information on Borsec.


    o) Press release "Judge sued" re Aurelia Bunea.


    p) American Bar Association significant legal  developments  in  Romania
       dated July 2004.


    q) Central European and Eurasian Law Initiative  report  on  significant
       legal developments in Romania dated May 2003.


18) Both Counsel have submitted skeleton arguments.

19) It is common ground that these appeals to the Tribunal are governed  by
    the provisions of section 101 (1) of the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  An appeal can only be brought on a point of law  and,
    in the light of the judgement of the Court of Appeal in CA v  Secretary
    of State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1165,  we  must
    determine whether there is a material error of law.

20) In paragraph 15 of the determination the Adjudicator refers to the well-
    known passages in Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    from the judgements of Lord Justice Stuart Smith in the Court of Appeal
    and Lord Clyde in the House of Lords.  We will not  repeat  them  here;
    they are set out later in this determination.

21) Errors of law

22) The Adjudicator concluded;


      "The objective evidence that has been made  available  indicates  that
      there is a police force that  is  receiving  sufficient  attention  to
      remove some of the old corrupt practices  and  that  there  is  a  law
      enforcement agency that will put into effect the  recent  changes  and
      sentencing  guidelines  with  regard  to  the   heinous   offence   of
      trafficking of humans.  To that end it must be accepted that there  is
      a system of protection within Romania even though the  same  may  have
      inherent difficulties for historical reasons."


23) We find that there are material errors  of  law  in  the  Adjudicator's
    reasoning as  to  sufficiency  of  protection.   First,  he  reached  a
    conclusion in relation to only part of the required test by considering
    the existence of systems of protection  but  not  the  ability  of  the
    systems to protect. Second, the Adjudicator failed to consider and make
    findings as to whether,  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  particular
    needs,  the  authorities  would  provide  her  with  a  sufficiency  of
    protection.  Third, he failed to consider sufficiency of protection  in
    the context of the Article 3 grounds.  We agree with Miss Richards that
    both a Refugee Convention and an Article 3 human rights claim will fail
    if there  is  a  sufficiency  of  State  protection  available  to  the
    individual.  The authority for this, in relation to an Article 3 claim,
    is Bagdanavicius  and  another  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605 at paragraph 55.

24)  Fourth,  the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  in  paragraph  20   of   the
    determination are not clear.  It is likely that  in  referring  to  the
    "European Convention" he meant the Refugee Convention.  Clarity is  not
    aided by the fact that  the  Adjudicator's  reasoning  in  relation  to
    credibility, sufficiency of  protection,  and  Convention  reasons  are
    intermixed.  We find  that,  whilst  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the
    appellant did not fall within a particular social group, he  failed  to
    come to a clear conclusion as to whether she had a well founded fear of
    persecution.

25) The respondent has not made out the alleged error of law in his  ground
    of appeal which argues that, on the objective information  before  him,
    the Adjudicator should have come to the conclusion  that  the  Romanian
    authorities  would  provide  the  appellant  with  a   sufficiency   of
    protection. The error occurred earlier in the  reasoning  process  when
    the Adjudicator considered the existence of systems of  protection  but
    not the ability of the systems to protect.  Fifthly, the respondent has
    made  out  the  material  error  of  law  in  paragraph   19   of   the
    determination.  The Adjudicator erred by speculating on the increase in
    human trafficking  in  Romania,  apparently  because  he  thought  that
    Romania was already part of the EU. It is not.  In his summary  of  the
    refusal letter at paragraph 4 (v) the Adjudicator said, "The respondent
    has also referred to the fact that Romania is now a full member of  the
    EU..."  In paragraph 19 he developed his thinking in the light of  this
    assumption and speculated as to the consequences  of  full  membership.
    This is an error of fact which taints his reasoning.

26) The respondent's grounds of appeal in relation to Article 8  are  badly
    drawn.  They only touch on the crux of the problems, which  are  better
    identified in Miss Richards' skeleton argument,  that  the  Adjudicator
    did not  set  the  correct  thresholds  for  Articles  3  and  8,  made
    assumptions about the care and treatment which might  be  available  in
    Romania which were not  consistent  with  the  objective  evidence  and
    failed to take into  account  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant was receiving in  the  United  Kingdom  the  counselling  and
    ongoing treatment which it was suggested she required.  Furthermore, we
    find that the Adjudicator's reasoning in relation to the Article 3  and
    8 grounds is insufficiently clear.  These are further  material  errors
    of law.

27) Sufficiency of protection - the legal framework

28) In Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 1 AC 489
    Lord Hope explained that the failure of State protection  was  integral
    to the system  introduced  by  the  Refugee  Convention.   The  general
    purpose of the Convention was "to enable the person who no  longer  has
    the benefit of protection against persecution for a  Convention  reason
    in his  own  country  to  turn  for  protection  to  the  international
    community." (Page 495 C-D).

29) The well-known passage from the judgement of Lord Justice Stuart  Smith
    in the Court of Appeal (Horvath v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2000] INLR pp 15 and 26), endorsed by  Lord  Clyde  in  the
    House of Lords, states,


      "In my judgement there must be in force in the country in  question  a
      criminal law which  makes  the  violent  attacks  by  the  persecutors
      punishable by sentences commensurate with the gravity of  the  crimes.
      The victims as a class must not be exempt from the protection  of  the
      law.  There must be a reasonable willingness by  the  law  enforcement
      agencies, that is to say the police and courts, to  detect,  prosecute
      and punish offenders."


30) Lord Clyde went on to say;


      "And in relation to the matter of unwillingness he  pointed  out  that
      inefficiency and incompetence is not the same  as  unwillingness,  and
      that there may be various sound  reasons  why  criminals  may  not  be
      brought to justice, and that the corruption, sympathy or  weakness  of
      some individuals in the system of justice does not mean that the State
      is unwilling to afford protection. It  will  require  cogent  evidence
      that the State which is able to afford protection is unwilling  to  do
      so, especially in the case of a democracy.  The formulation  does  not
      claim to be exhaustive or comprehensive,  but  seems  to  me  to  give
      helpful guidance."


31) In Bagdanavicius  and  another  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605 at paragraph 55  the  Court  of  Appeal
    held that,


      "Sufficiency of State protection, whether from State  agents  or  non-
      state actors, means a willingness and  ability  on  the  part  of  the
      receiving State to provide through its legal system a reasonable level
      of protection from ill-treatment of which the claimant for asylum  has
      a well founded fear.


      The effectiveness of the system provided is to be judged  normally  by
      its  systemic  ability  to  deter  and/or  to  prevent  the  form   of
      persecution of which there is a risk, not just punishment of it  after
      the events.


      Notwithstanding  systemic  sufficiency  of  State  protection  in  the
      receiving State, the claimant may still have a well  founded  fear  of
      persecution if he can show that the authorities know or ought to  know
      of circumstances particular to his case giving rise to his  fear,  but
      are unlikely to  provide  the  additional  protection  his  particular
      circumstances reasonably require.

     The same principles apply to  claims  in  removal  cases  of  risk  of
     exposure to   Article 3 ill-treatment in the receiving State.


      Sufficiency of State protection is not a guarantee of protection  from
      Article 3 ill-treatment any more than it is a guarantee of  protection
      from an otherwise well founded fear of persecution in asylum  cases  -
      nor, if and to  the  extent  that  there  is  any  difference,  is  it
      eradication or removal of risk of exposure to Article 3 ill-treatment.


      Where the risk  falls  to  be  judged  by  the  sufficiency  of  State
      protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according  to  whether  it
      would eradicate the real risk of the relevant harm, but  according  to
      whether it is a reasonable provision in the circumstances.
      Notwithstanding such systemic sufficiency of State protection  in  the
      receiving State, the claimant  may  still  be  able  to  establish  an
      Article 3 claim if he can show that  the  authorities  there  know  or
      ought to know of particular circumstances likely to expose him to risk
      of Article 3 ill-treatment."


32) None of this is inconsistent with the passage relied on by Mr.  Southey
    in Michael Atkinson v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]
    EWCA Civ 846 where, at paragraph 22, Scott Baker LJ said,


      "In the present case, therefore, the question is whether the state  of
      Jamaica is both willing and able to provide reasonable  protection  to
      the appellant.  The evidence does  not  raise  any  real  doubt  about
      willingness to provide such protection:  the  real  focus  is  on  its
      ability to do so.  The difficult question is where to  draw  the  line
      that defines what is an appropriate standard.  It is not  enough  that
      some individuals will  be  failed  by  the  State's  criminal  justice
      system, not enough that the State has not been effective  in  removing
      risk.  There has in my judgement to be a systemic failure that relates
      at the very least to a category of  persons  of  whom  the  individual
      under consideration is  one.   In  this  case  the  focus  is  on  the
      informers or perceived informers or those who  in  some  way  are  the
      target of the gangs or the dons who head them.  In my view  it  is  no
      answer that a State is doing its incompetent best if  it  nevertheless
      falls below the appropriate standard.  One  has  to  ask  whether  the
      State is failing to perform  its  basic  function  of  protecting  its
      citizens.  Does the writ of law run or not?"


33) And, at paragraph 33,


      "The issue is not in my view however whether the Jamaican  authorities
      have a willingness to deal with the  problem  but  whether  they  have
      shown the ability to do so...."


34)  Sufficiency  of  Protection:  Country  information  points  from   the
    Respondent's skeleton argument

35) Romania is approximately the same size as the UK, with a population  of
    approximately 22� million people.  It  is  a  constitutional  democracy
    with  a  multiparty  bicameral  parliamentary  system.   The  US  State
    Department country report on human rights practices 2003  records  that
    the Romanian government generally respects  the  human  rights  of  its
    citizens.

36) It is accepted that Romania is a  country  of  origin  for  victims  of
    trafficking in  human  beings.   Research  suggests  that  victims  are
    usually young between the ages of 18 and 24 (on return to Romania): see
    e.g. the International Catholic  Migration  Commission's  First  Annual
    Report on Victims of  Trafficking  in  Southeastern  Europe  (published
    December 2003), the ICMC report concluded that:


      "The vast majority of trafficked victims  throughout  the  region  are
      willing to leave their home country because they believed and accepted
      a false offer of employment abroad" (page 16)


37) Specifically in relation to Romania, the report recorded  at  page  102
    that;


      "Victims are most often recruited by  acquaintances.   Recruiters  are
      paid for each recruit and may also provide transportation  to  transit
      locations.   In  most  other  cases,  victims   reply   to   newspaper
      advertisements."


38) These conclusions are echoed  in  the  International  Organisation  for
    Migration's (IOM) publication "Who is the next victim?"   (2003).   The
    IOM's  research,  conducted  between  April   and   August   2003   and
    specifically concerned with Romanian trafficking  victims,  found  that
    the majority of victims are between 15 and 25  (those  at  the  extreme
    ends of this cohort  being  described  as  "at  less  of  a  risk  than
    others").  The IOM records that:


      "Vulnerability to trafficking is primary shaped by a strong desire  to
      seek a job abroad and also from a propensity  to  break  official  and
      informal rules"


      and


      "Trafficking is essentially linked to migration.  People  are  looking
      for jobs, higher wages, opportunities for  personal  fulfillment,  and
      they do not only look around their neighbourhood..... When there is  a
      high demand for jobs, several suppliers will  soon  crowd  to  satisfy
      people's dream.  But not all suppliers are bona fide merchants.   Some
      of them are in the right place at the right time to take advantage  of
      the dreamer.  They do not sell jobs, but human beings.   They  promise
      young women to fulfill their dream  of  a  well-paid  job  in  a  rich
      country abroad."


39) Over recent years the Romanian authorities  have  shown  an  increasing
    commitment to tackling the problem of human trafficking.   One  of  the
    most important steps taken by the Romanian  authorities  has  been  the
    introduction of a legal code for  the  prohibition  and  prevention  of
    trafficking: Law  678/2001  ("Law  on  the  Prevention  and  Combat  of
    Trafficking in Persons").  Its provisions include;  the  imposition  of
    obligations  on  a  wide  variety  of  Public  Authorities,  Government
    Departments and NGOs to take action to prevent trafficking  in  persons
    (Chapter II); the creation of various criminal offences arising out  of
    trafficking  activities  (Chapter  III),   with   penalties   including
    imprisonment up to 25 years for  certain  violations  as  well  as  the
    forfeiture of assets obtained from the commission of the offences;  and
    measures for the protection and assistance of  victims  of  trafficking
    (Chapter V) including  the  requirement  that  victims  of  trafficking
    should have their privacy and identity  protected  and  that  they  are
    entitled to physical, social and psychological assistance.

40) The Romanian authorities have also introduced a law  allowing  for  the
    protection of witnesses: Law 682/2002 which  came  into  effect  on  19
    December 2002.  This provides for, inter alia, the  protection  of  the
    witness's identity,  change  of  identity  and  appearance,  change  of
    domicile,  change  of  employment  and  the  payment  of  money   until
    alternative employment is obtained.  The American Bar Association noted
    in July 2004 that 11 witnesses  who  had  provided  investigators  with
    information leading to the discovery of dangerous criminal networks and
    their families had been placed in protection programs.

41) The US State Department report for 2003 records, inter alia, that


    a) The government had increased its efforts against trafficking
    b) Police officers continued to pursue cases via their Human Trafficking
       Task Force
    c) Police had assigned 15 officers at headquarters in Bucharest and over
       87 officers (of whom 42 were women) were assigned to 15 zonal centres
       across the country to investigate trafficking.
    d)  In  the  first  six  months  of  2003  488  individuals  were  under
       investigation for violations connected with trafficking, 130 suspects
       had been arrested and 184 trafficking networks dismantled.
    e) The government reported 50 anti trafficking  convictions  during  the
       year.
    f) During September 2003 the government participated in  the  launch  of
       the SECI Regional Anticrime Centre's Operation Mirage 2003 (following
       the success of an earlier operation in the summer of 2002).
    g) During the  operation  police  in  Romania  checked  5920  controlled
       places, identified 463 victims, initiated 319 criminal procedures and
       arrested or charged 207 traffickers
    h)  Border  crossing  checks  were  undertaken,   with   border   police
       questioning victims and attempting to identify traffickers.


42) The US State Department  Trafficking  in  Persons  Report  2004  places
    Romania in Tier 2 with, for example Finland,  Israel  and  Switzerland.
    Although the Romanian authorities did not, according  to  this  report,
    fully comply with all of the minimum standards for the  elimination  of
    trafficking, the US State Department recorded that the government  "was
    making significant efforts to do so.  This report recorded  inter  alia
    that:


    a) There was  a  significant  increase  in  the  number  of  trafficking
       convictions.
    b) Romania's Law on trafficking specifically  covered  both  sexual  and
       nonsexual exploitation with penalties that are sufficiently severe.
    c) The government reorganised the police unit  for  combating  organised
       crime to provide more personnel for trafficking issues.
    d) In August 2003 over 100 officers (including 42 women)  were  assigned
       to trafficking in  persons  and  all  of  them  received  specialised
       training in trafficking in persons.
    e) In 2003 the police dismantled 283 criminal trafficking networks.
    f) The Public Administration Ministry assigned  several  prosecutors  to
       pursue trafficking cases.
    g) The government took steps to reduce corruption amongst border  police
       by psychological testing, ethics briefings,  the  introduction  of  a
       best practice manual, the issue of  standard  identification  badges,
       random integrity tests and checks  of  personal  belongings  and  the
       introduction of a hotline for  travellers  to  report  corruption  by
       border officials.
    h) The police unit initiated a database in 2003 with the support of  the
       UK to track trafficking in persons.
    i) The Ministry of Education and Research ran a  number  of  educational
       programmes on trafficking in 2003,  school  directors,  teachers  and
       educational counsellors received instructions on how to provide  anti
       trafficking guidance to students during tutorial classes and  parents
       during teacher-parent conferences and regional education  commissions
       monitored  teachers'   implementation   of   trafficking   prevention
       provisions.


43) According to the US State  Department  2003  report,  police  generally
    follow the law and internal procedures.  Corruption is reported to be a
    continuing problem, but:


   "The government addressed these problems by increasing training to create
   a more professional police force and by punishing corruption.  During the
   year, 1627 policemen (of whom 459 were officers  and  1175  were  agents)
   were found to have engaged in misconduct, resulting in 1715 sanctions  to
   491 officers and 1244 agents.  At year's end, 30  policemen  (5  officers
   and 25 agents) were undergoing criminal prosecution for  abusive  conduct
   and abuse of office, and 12 policemen (3  officers  and  9  agents)  were
   under criminal investigation for acts endangering life and health.


   In June, 50 police  officers  were  transferred  for  six  years  to  the
   National   Anti-corruption   Prosecutors   Office   to   strengthen   the
   institutional framework for fighting corruption and ensure the  efficient
   functioning of the office.  The office sought to recruit an additional 10
   police officers."


44) And in relation to the judicial system:


   "The government has taken measures  to  fight  systemic  corruption.   In
   April, it passed an anti-corruption package of laws that defined conflict
   of interest more clearly and more extensively for public officials.   The
   National  Anti-corruption  Prosecutors  Office  (PNA)  is  authorised  to
   investigate charges of corruption by high officials  or  corruption  that
   involve more than approximately 100,000 US dollars (3.5 billion  lei)  or
   seriously disturbed the activity of public authorities.  Since  September
   2002, the PNA reportedly investigated or  prosecuted  32  judges  and  12
   prosecutors.  5 judges and 2 prosecutors were convicted  for  corruption;
   the trial of 12 judges and 4 prosecutors  were  in  the  final  phase  of
   appeals.  34  notaries  and  40  court  enforcement  officers  were  also
   investigated, and 12 notaries and 4 court enforcement  officers  sent  to
   trial".


45) The government has also recently appointed Monica Macovei,  the  former
    chair of the Romanian Association for the Defence of  Human  Rights  in
    Romania, as the new Minister  of  Justice.   Ms  Macovei,  who  is  not
    affiliated to any political  party,  is  a  longstanding  human  rights
    campaigner who has stated that combating corruption must be a  priority
    for the National Anticorruption Prosecution Office.

46) There is an Ombudsman's office which works  to  protect  citizens  from
    abuse by public  officials.  Between  January  and  September  2003  it
    received 5400 complaints.

47) There are a number of domestic and  international  human-rights  groups
    operating within Romania freely without government interference.

48) The law within Romania provides for  freedom  of  movement  within  the
    country and the US State Department report for 2003  records  that  the
    government  generally  respects  this  right  in  practice.    Romanian
    citizens have the right to change their residence to any place  in  the
    country in accordance with law 105/1996 on population  records  and  ID
    cards.

49) IOM Press Briefing Notes (13 April 2004) "Romania -  How  Effective  Is
    Assistance to Victims of Human Trafficking?" records the results  of  a
    research study into the effectiveness of  assistance  to  sex  industry
    victims of human trafficking who had returned to Romania.   It  records
    that "perhaps the most important conclusion of the study is  that  many
    victims  can  be  successfully  reintegrated,  achieving  both   social
    rehabilitation and social  independence".   This  study  examining  the
    professional and social reintegration of 113  trafficking  victims  who
    were assisted by IOM Bucharest and its NGO partners in 2002.   In  2002
    IOM helped 210 victims of trafficking returned to Romania of  whom  144
    accepted referral to a partner NGO for assistance.  It found  that  the
    average duration of assistance provided to victims was six months  (61%
    were assisted for six months or  longer);  that  94%  of  the  victim's
    received  psychological   counselling;   that   95%   received   social
    assistance, and that 46% received medical assistance.

50) Some of the assistance available to victims  of  human  trafficking  is
    described in the ICMC report.  This records, for example, the existence
    of six shelters for  trafficked  victims  in  Romania.   One  of  these
    shelters, in Pitesti, offers long-term shelter  (lodging  and  services
    for up to  two  years);  the  others  provide  short-term  and  midterm
    shelter.  Each shelter provided voluntary,  confidential  and  free  of
    charge  medical  care  for  trafficked  victims.   Each  also  provides
    psychological counselling (most trafficking victims show signs of  PTSD
    according to the ICMC).  The report  records  that  "Service  providers
    have not reported any difficulties in obtaining  psychiatric  care  for
    beneficiaries"  (page  106).   Shelters  also  arrange  for  vocational
    training and employment assistance (page 107).

51)  Sufficiency  of  protection:  Country  information  points  from   the
    Appellant's skeleton argument

52)  The  scale  of  people  trafficking  in  Romania  is  enormous.    The
    International Organisation for Migration  estimates  that  as  many  as
    20,000 women are trafficked from Romania each year.

53) In contrast it appears that there are very few cases of  police  action
    against traffickers resulting in a conviction.   In  particular  recent
    statistics also suggest a small number of convictions.  For example, it
    appears that although in 2003 there were  individuals  sentenced  under
    anti trafficking laws, there were only 49 such cases.  That low  number
    of prosecutions is consistent with the fact that there is a significant
    problem with the enforcement of laws in Romania.  In particular the  UK
    embassy has confirmed that there are problems with  the  implementation
    of anti trafficking law.

54) The statistical evidence cited in the two subparagraphs above indicates
    that the Romanian authorities failed to  deter  people  traffickers  as
    traffickers appear to act with almost complete impunity.  That  is  not
    surprising in light  of  the  difficulties  in  enforcing  the  law  in
    Romania.

55) One factor that is relevant to the issue of sufficiency  of  protection
    is  the  corruption  that  undermines   police   efforts   to   prevent
    trafficking.   Significantly,  the   Secretary   of   State's   country
    assessment  cites  evidence  suggesting  that  this  has  not  reduced.
    Corruption is relevant  to  the  deterrent  provided  by  a  system  of
    protection as it means that the deterrent effect of the system  of  law
    and order is undermined if traffickers know that they will be  able  to
    avoid liability by paying a bribe.

56) Some of the most significant steps intended to protect women have  only
    been taken relatively recently.  For  many  years  after  the  fall  of
    Communism there were no serious attempts to address  trafficking.   For
    example, it was  only  in  December  2001  that  a  law  for  combating
    trafficking in human beings was introduced.  Similarly, it was only  in
    November 2001 that the Romanian government began to allocate  space  in
    shelters to victims.  As a consequence even the Secretary of State says
    that current protection efforts are "limited".  The Secretary of  State
    also says that the police have "begun" to recognise that Romania  is  a
    country of origin for trafficking implying  that  the  process  is  not
    complete.

57) The fact that the Romanian authorities have only  recently  started  to
    take steps to address trafficking is shown by the fact that  specialist
    prosecutors have not yet been appointed.   In  addition  flaws  in  the
    judicial system must still to be addressed.

58) The progress has been sufficiently slow that  the  Secretary  of  State
    acknowledges that trafficking is a "problem" although  he  also  states
    that steps have been taken to address it.  It is not surprising that it
    is a problem as criminals in Romania are often  better  organised  than
    the law enforcement system.

59) The lack of progress with changing attitudes to trafficking is shown by
    the fact that victims of trafficking may still be fined for leaving the
    country illegally.

60) Oral evidence from expert witness

61) We heard oral evidence from  an  expert  witness,  Miss  Scanlan.   The
    Appellant's bundle contains her original undated report and an addendum
    dated 26 April 2004.  Miss Scanlan is currently employed by OSCE as  an
    expert in the coordination of a jointly funded  research  programme  by
    OSCE, UNICEF, USAID and the British Council  on  trafficking  from  the
    Ukraine.  She also works for the International Labour  Organisation  in
    Geneva as a research coordinator for trafficking in Central and Eastern
    Europe including a rapid  assessment  study  on  trafficking  of  human
    beings into labour  and  sexual  exploitation  from  Moldova,  Ukraine,
    Romania and Albania.  She is currently based  in  Warsaw  as  a  senior
    adviser  on  anti  trafficking  issues.   Her  current  focus   is   on
    southeastern Europe including Romania and the Ukraine.

62) Miss Scanlan adopted her original report and its  addendum,  confirming
    these, save that with the advantage of subsequent  research  she  would
    give more serious consideration to the risk of  re-abduction  faced  by
    the Appellant.  She accepted that there  was  very  little  information
    from Romania about  re-trafficked  victims.   She  had  not  wished  to
    overstate the position in her original report.  Since the first  report
    was written, specialist anti trafficking police squads had been set up.
     There was still  much  corruption  in  the  local  police  and  little
    training of the judiciary and procuracy about the new anti  trafficking
    laws.  The government was not directly involved in  providing  shelters
    for  returned  trafficked  victims,  although  NGOs  did   offer   some
    protection.  We note that  this  was  not  consistent  with  her  later
    evidence that the government  had  opened  three  shelters.   The  main
    changes since her report were that the  anti  trafficking  squads  were
    more active in investigating and arresting but there were fewer changes
    in  relation  to  adequate  convictions  and  sentencing.   There  were
    training programmes for prosecutors but it was too early to say whether
    there was an adequate impact.

63) Miss Scanlan accepted that the anti trafficking squads had a reputation
    for being relatively corruption free, but this was not  the  case  with
    local law enforcement agencies.  She considered that  conviction  rates
    were  still  appallingly  low  against  the  number  of  people   being
    trafficked.  Sentencing was often inadequate.   Romanian  law  provided
    for sentences in excess of three years  but  many  of  those  convicted
    received sentences of less than a year or suspended sentences.  She did
    not consider that the current legal system provided a deterrent against
    trafficking.  This  was  because  the  legal  systems  were  not  fully
    implemented and did not provide  a  sufficient  deterrent.   The  state
    needed to  take  other  measures  to  address  the  root  causes.   She
    considered that the root causes were inequality between men  and  women
    in the labour market, and poverty and social exclusion  for  particular
    groups (particularly people in government institutions).

64) Miss Scanlan said that if she had to name the main problems they  would
    be  the  lack  of  involvement  of  the  judiciary  and  procuracy  and
    corruption in local law enforcement, usually the first  port  of  call.
    Even assuming that all levels in the  criminal  justice  system  became
    properly trained, the accused trafficker was often only a minor link in
    the network.  Often successful prosecutions did not dissuade wealthy or
    powerful people involved in  the  trafficking  rings.   Low  conviction
    rates and short sentences were factor leading to inadequate deterrence.



65) Miss Scanlan did not  believe  that  the  Appellant  fell  outside  the
    typical age spectrum of those trafficked.  Her own  research  indicated
    that the age profile of those trafficked depended  on  the  destination
    country.  The very young tended to go to the Balkans,  perhaps  with  a
    cutoff age of 25, whereas to Western Europe individuals could  be  into
    their thirties.  She accepted that abduction was relatively  rare,  but
    not unheard of.  Given the circumstances of the  Appellant's  case  she
    considered there was a risk that this might happen again.  The relevant
    circumstances were that she  had  been  trafficked  on  two  occasions.
    There was another risk, that the traffickers  would  threaten  or  even
    injure the Appellant  to  dissuade  her  from  collaborating  with  law
    enforcement agencies.

66) It would be possible for the Appellant to move within Romania, but  her
    past experiences indicated that she was found  even  outside  her  home
    area.  She would have to carry a valid identity card which depended  on
    registration with the local police.  They could be corrupt and  in  the
    pay of organised trafficking rings.  If she did not carry  an  identity
    card she could not access health care or employment.  The  lack  of  an
    identity card or carrying an invalid identity card put her at  risk  of
    being fined and, if she did not pay the fine, of prison.  If she had an
    identity card with an address in one town she could not access services
    in another.  If she went to a shelter many of them offered only 10 days
    residency.  Thereafter, most  of  them  did  not  provide  any  housing
    assistance.  A shelter might help her obtain a valid identity card, but
    only in Bucharest.  They might give her six-month  housing  assistance.
    The government shelters only provided 10 days accommodation unless  the
    individual was continuing  to  collaborate  with  the  law  enforcement
    agencies.  It was rare for any shelter  to  provide  accommodation  for
    more than three months.  She knew of  one  shelter  that  had  provided
    accommodation for approximately a year.

67) Miss Scanlan thought that those who trafficked  the  Appellant  in  the
    past might well have access to information as to her return  and  might
    try and trace her.  Miss Scanlan did not exclude the  possibility  that
    the traffickers were waiting to see  whether  the  Appellant  returned.
    Were they to do so their motives would be to prevent her  collaborating
    with law enforcement agencies, discourage others  from  escaping  their
    clutches, harm her as a deterrent to others or to re-traffic her.  Miss
    Scanlan was asked whether the attitude of the authorities would be  any
    different because those who trafficked the Appellant  were  Roma.   She
    was  aware  of  the  allegations  that  Roma  gangs  were  involved  in
    trafficking and thought that the authorities might target Roma who were
    not involved because of discriminatory  attitudes.   The  police  could
    also be afraid that the Roma gangs were organised and dangerous.  There
    was no indication that Roma gangs were any smarter than their non  Roma
    counterparts.

68) In cross-examination Miss Scanlan was shown  the  Respondent's  bundle.
    She said she was familiar with items 3 to 12 but not the rest.  She was
    aware that 42 specialist police  officers  had  been  trained  in  anti
    trafficking but not, as appeared in the 2003  US  Department  of  State
    report (page  143),  that  in  all  over  100  officers  were  involved
    including 42 women.  She conceded that her recollection of the  numbers
    was incorrect and that  all  those  involved  had  at  least  a  week's
    training.  She was referred to page 143 of the Appellant bundle  and  a
    maximum sentence of seven years for trafficking offences.  Miss Scanlan
    accepted that her research as to inadequate sentences  related  to  the
    preceding year.  She said she had access to data  on  sentencing  which
    those who prepared the State Department report did  not.   Furthermore,
    sentences were often reduced on appeal.  She accepted that there was no
    other data of which she was  aware.   She  said  there  were  not  many
    sentences as long as seven years; few were in excess of one year.  When
    asked what was the most recent hard  data  on  which  she  relied  Miss
    Scanlan said that it was the State Department  report  and  information
    from NGOs.

69) Miss Scanlan's attention was drawn to the IOM briefing at page  160  of
    the Respondent's bundle and  the  statement  that,  "perhaps  the  most
    important  conclusion  of  the  study  is  that  many  victims  can  be
    successfully reintegrated, achieving  both  social  rehabilitation  and
    social independence".  She said she did not agree with this.   She  did
    not believe that IOM had any policy of keeping in touch with those  who
    left their shelters.

70) Miss Scanlan was referred to the  IOM  briefing  at  page  160  of  the
    Respondents bundle and the passage which states,

      "The average duration of assistance provided to the  victims  was  six
      months.  39% received less than six months, while  61%  were  assisted
      for six months or longer.  58% of  the  victims  kept  in  touch  with
      assistance staff after the formal assistance ended. 94% of the victims
      received psychological counselling, 95% social assistance,  51%  legal
      assistance and 46%  medical  assistance.   46%  of  the  victims  were
      diagnosed as having sexually transmitted diseases and 6% were pregnant
      at the time of their return."


71) It was put to Miss Scanlan that this conflicted with her evidence.  She
    said that most of those who returned stayed in shelters for only a  few
    nights.  Only a minority would stay  longer.   The  report  could  only
    refer to a few clients.  It was pointed out to her that the  study  was
    of 113 victims carried out in 2002 and suggested that she was  painting
    too bleak a picture.  Miss Scanlan did not agree.  A lot of people  did
    not accept shelter because they did not want to  be  stigmatised.   She
    agreed that good-quality assistance was provided.  IOM had one  shelter
    in Bucharest.  Other organisations would provide  shelter  for  shorter
    periods.  She accepted that not every victim would  want  shelter.   If
    the Appellant went to a shelter she would, with the  exception  of  one
    place, have to cooperate with law enforcement agencies if she wanted to
    remain for more than a short time.  Cooperation  involved  speaking  to
    the police, making statements and perhaps giving evidence.  When it was
    put to Miss Scanlan  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  Romanian
    authorities to help without such cooperation, she said that they should
    provide assistance without strings.  If  there  were  no  preconditions
    individuals would be more  likely  to  want  to  help.   Some  of  them
    believed  that  helping  the  authorities   could   lead   to   further
    trafficking.  In reply to the suggestion that  she  was  mistaken  that
    cooperation was a precondition of admission to all refuges bar one  and
    that the authority's goal was to reduce trafficking, Miss Scanlan  said
    that they could go about it in another way.

72) Miss Scanlan said that the time of her report there were four  shelters
    run by IOM.  Currently there are five.


73) It was  put  to  Miss  Scanlan  that  paragraph  6.12  of  the  Country
    Information Bulletin of November 2004 said,

      "When registering at a new address, the police  are  not  required  to
      contact police in the original area of residence.   Police  will  only
      contact colleagues in the original area if they  wish  to  obtain  the
      criminal records of that  person.   It  is  the  view  of  Alternative
      Sociale that the victim's fear of registration with the police leading
      to  traffickers  discovering  their  new  location   is   unjustified.
      Alternative Sociale also stated that victims of  trafficking  who  had
      been  returned  to  Romania  with  the  help  of   the   International
      Organisation for Migration  were  interviewed  by  the  Border  Police
      together with a social assistant  and  a  psychologist.   Victims  are
      returned to their original area only if there  is  no  risk  involved.
      Otherwise they are sent to shelters in Bucharest or in  Iasi.   Whilst
      Alternative Sociale were unable to guarantee the integrity of  regular
      policeman, they did state that  their  view  of  the  Organised  Crime
      Brigade was positive."


74) Miss Scanlan accepted that the Appellant would be able to  register  in
    another area and that a shelter would help her.  However, local  police
    could act as informers and could be approached by traffickers  to  whom
    information was sold.  She accepted that there were  sanctions  against
    corrupt police officers and that 30 were convicted in 2003.  There  was
    training for anti-corruption officers.  She accepted that  judges  were
    also prosecuted, on a small scale.  It was early  days  to  assess  the
    impact.  She accepted that the new Minister of Justice  was  an  active
    human rights campaigner but had not been aware of her appointment.

75) Miss Scanlan was asked about the risk that the Appellant might  be  re-
    trafficked.  Her view was that it was  not  just  chance  that  led  to
    traffickers to find the Appellant in Timisoara.  She thought it  likely
    that they had information and had been looking for her.   She  accepted
    that most trafficking was as a result of individuals  seeking  economic
    betterment,  the  government  was  seeking  to  address  this   through
    education and it was unlikely that a victim who had been duped  in  the
    past would be duped again.  She accepted that  there  was  no  evidence
    specific to the Appellant to show that the traffickers were looking for
    her but she thought that in practice the majority of  those  trafficked
    who returned to Romania were pursued by those who trafficked them.  The
    shelters needed to have security arrangements to protect  those  living
    there.  Her experience was that there  was  no  significant  number  of
    revenge attacks or abductions of those  living  in  shelters,  probably
    because of the security arrangements they had put in place.  There  was
    little evidence available as to what happened to individuals after they
    left the shelters, although  some  evidence  that  some  had  been  re-
    trafficked.  Some shelters said that 30 to 40% of those who  left  them
    were re trafficked.  Asked for evidence to support this assertion, Miss
    Scanlan thought it might be in an HCHR or an  UNICEF  report,  although
    she did not have these.

76) It was  put  to  Miss  Scanlan  that  if  20,000  Romanian  women  were
    trafficked each year, what interest would the traffickers have  in  the
    Appellant were she to return.  Miss Scanlan thought that their interest
    would be to persuade her not collaborate and to make an example of  her
    to preserve their  own  credibility.   Miss  Scanlan  agreed  that  the
    Appellant was not likely to be at risk while she stayed in  a  shelter,
    but the witness protection programme  would  not  help  her  after  the
    conclusion of any proceedings.  She accepted that the US Department  of
    State Trafficking in Person's Report  (page  124  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle) did refer to physical protection being provided to five victims
    of trafficking in the witness protection programme and this was  likely
    to be correct.

77) Conclusions in relation to the evidence of the expert witness

78) We find that Miss Scanlan has an expertise in relation to  trafficking,
    including trafficking of women  for  the  purpose  of  prostitution  in
    Central and Eastern Europe.  Currently she is  working  on  a  research
    programme on trafficking from Ukraine.  From  May  2002  she  has  been
    involved in a rapid  assessment  study  on  trafficking  from  Moldova,
    Ukraine, Romania and Albania. She does not  appear  to  have  lived  or
    worked in Romania for any length  of  time  or  been  involved  in  any
    project which concentrated exclusively on  the  problems  arising  from
    trafficking from Romania.  Her evidence has been helpful  but,  as  she
    admitted, in some areas is not as up-to-date or detailed as some of the
    other material before us.   There  were  some  inconsistencies  in  her
    evidence, but not sufficient to cast  serious  doubts  over  her  broad
    expertise.  We accept  her  evidence  as  a  helpful  overview,  whilst
    concluding that there is, in a number of important areas,  more  up-to-
    date and detailed information in the other material before us.

79) Sufficiency of protection - conclusions

80) The International Organisation for Migration estimates that as  many  as
   20,000 women are trafficked from Romania each year.  It is not clear  how
   they arrive at this figure.  It is referred to in  the  April  2004  CIPU
   report at paragraph 6.59.  However, it  is  clear  that  many  women  are
   trafficked for the purposes of prostitution.  This is  in  a  country  of
   approximately 22 � million people.

81) Women trafficked for prostitution usually fall within  the  ages  of  18
   and 24 (the International Catholic Migration Commission)  or  15  and  25
   (The International Organisation  for  Migration).   The  first  of  these
   reports refers to age on return to Romania and the latter describes those
   at each end of the spectrum as being less at risk.  All but very few  are
   deceived on hopes and promises of a better and sometimes  more  glamorous
   job and life in another country, rather than forcibly abducted.  Most are
   also recruited by somebody they know.

82)  We  find  that  the  Romanian  authorities  have  shown  an  increasing
   commitment to tackling the problem of human trafficking.  The Law on  the
   Prevention and Combat of Trafficking in Persons came into force in  2001.
   It imposed obligations on Public Authorities, Government Departments  and
   NGOs to take action to prevent  trafficking  in  persons.   New  criminal
   offences were created relating to trafficking activities  with  penalties
   including imprisonment up to 25 years and  the  confiscation  of  assets.
   Victims of trafficking were to have their privacy and identity  protected
   and be entitled to  physical  social  and  psychological  assistance.   A
   witness protection law with wide-ranging provisions came into  effect  in
   December 2002.  The American Bar Association Report shows that  witnesses
   have been placed in protection programs.

83) Mr. Southey suggests that there are very  few  cases  of  police  action
   against traffickers resulting in conviction and  that  recent  statistics
   suggest a small number  of  convictions.   He  refers  to  only  49  anti
   trafficking cases in 2003. We do not agree, and  prefer  the  information
   contained in the US State Department report for 2003 which shows 50  anti
   trafficking convictions (our emphasis).  Doubtless there are likely to be
   problems with the implementation of anti  trafficking  laws,  as  the  UK
   embassy suggests.  However, the same US  State  Department  report  shows
   that  the  government  increased  action  against  trafficking  and   the
   existence of a Human Trafficking Task Force  with  15  Staff  at  in  its
   headquarters in Bucharest and more than 87  officers,  of  whom  42  were
   women, assigned to 15 centres across  the  country.   In  the  first  six
   months of 2003 488 individuals were under  investigation  for  violations
   connected  with  trafficking,  130  suspects  were   arrested   and   184
   trafficking networks dismantled.   During  the  SECI  Regional  Anticrime
   Centres Operation Mirage in September  2003  which  followed  an  earlier
   operation in 2002, 5920  controlled  places  were  checked,  463  victims
   identified,  319  sets  of  criminal  proceedings   initiated   and   207
   traffickers charged.  Border crossing checks were undertaken with  border
   police questioning victims and attempting to identify traffickers.

84) It is significant that the US State Department  Trafficking  in  Persons
   Report for 2004 places Romania in the same category  as  Finland,  Israel
   and Switzerland.  Although it does not  fully  comply  with  all  of  the
   minimum  standards  for  the  elimination  of  trafficking,  the   report
   expresses the view that the government "was making significant efforts to
   do so". It records a significant increase in the  number  of  trafficking
   convictions, describes the relevant  penalties  as  sufficiently  severe,
   records the reorganisation of the police  unit  for  combating  organised
   crime and the increased resources provided to this unit and the increased
   number  of  283  criminal  trafficking  networks   dismantled.    Special
   prosecutors have been assigned to pursue anti trafficking cases.

85) Clearly, not all people traffickers have  been  deterred.   However,  in
   the light of much increased government activity it can no longer be said,
   as Mr. Southey  argues,  that  traffickers  appear  to  act  with  almost
   complete impunity.

86) The  government  has  taken  action  and,  in  2003,  ran  a  number  of
   educational programmes to provide anti trafficking guidance  to  students
   and their parents.

87) Corruption is still a problem in Romania, particularly at  local  police
   level.  However, it has not been suggested that corruption is  a  problem
   with the anti trafficking task force.  The government has taken steps  to
   reduce corruption amongst border police by psychological testing,  ethics
   briefings, the introduction of a  best  practice  manual,  the  issue  of
   standard identification badges, random  integrity  tests  and  checks  of
   personal belongings and the introduction of a hotline for  travellers  to
   report corruption by border officials.  In  2003  the  police  set  up  a
   database to track trafficking in persons, with the  support  of  the  UK.
   Increased training is being provided for the police force  generally  and
   action taken to punish corruption.  The US State  Department  report  for
   2003 reports a substantial number of investigations and  sanctions  taken
   against police officers and 42 criminal investigations  and  prosecutions
   in progress.  50 police  officers  were  transferred  to  strengthen  the
   National Anti-corruption Prosecutors Office.

88) There have been problems with  systemic  corruption  in  the  judiciary.
   The reports show that the government is taking steps to fight this.   The
   government has implemented an anti-corruption package  of  laws  and  the
   National Anti-Corruption Prosecutors Office has been set up.   32  judges
   and 12 prosecutors have been investigated or prosecuted and 5 judges  and
   2 prosecutors  convicted  for  corruption.   34  notaries  and  40  court
   enforcement officers have been investigated and 12 notaries and  4  court
   enforcement officers sent to trial.

89) The government has appointed a  non  politically  affiliated  and  well-
   known human rights activist as the new Minister of Justice.  There is  an
   Ombudsman's Office which, between January and  September  2003,  received
   5400 complaints.  Domestic and international human-rights groups  operate
   within the country without  government  interference.   Citizens  have  a
   right to change their place of residence within the country.

90) The IOM press briefing note of 13  April  2004  records  the  result  of
   research into the effectiveness of assistance to sex industry victims  of
   human trafficking who have returned to Romania.  It states, "perhaps  the
   most important conclusion of the  study  is  that  many  victims  can  be
   successfully  reintegrated,  achieving  both  social  rehabilitation  and
   social independence".  The  report  examined  the  reintegration  of  113
   trafficking victims who were  assisted  by  IOM  Bucharest  and  its  NGO
   partners in 2002.  In 2002 IOM helped 210 victims of trafficking returned
   to Romania.  The average duration of assistance provided was six  months.
   61% were assisted for six months or longer, 94% of the  victims  received
   psychological counselling, 95% received social assistance and 46% medical
   assistance.

91) At the date of the information provided to us there  were  six  shelters
   for trafficking victims in Romania one of which offered shelter for up to
   two years.  The others provided short-term and midterm shelter.  All  the
   shelters provided voluntary confidential and free medical  care  together
   with psychological counselling.  The report records that the shelters had
   not  reported  any  difficulties  in  obtaining  psychiatric   care   for
   beneficiaries.  They also arranged  vocational  training  and  employment
   assistance.

92) Mr. Southey accepts that there have been significant steps  intended  to
   protect women, but argues that these  have  only  been  taken  relatively
   recently.  We accept that most steps appear to have  been  taken  in  the
   last five years with levels of activity increasing  during  that  period.
   He has not been specific as to what flaws in the judicial system remained
   to be addressed.  Trafficking is still a problem but it is clear that the
   Romanian authorities have taken wide ranging steps to  address  not  only
   the immediate problem but related problems such as  police  and  judicial
   corruption

93) Convention reason: particular social group

94) In R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Shah and Islam [1999]  Lord
    Steyn said,

      "Generalisations about the position of women in  particular  countries
      are out of place in regard to issues of  refugee  status.   Everything
      depends on the evidence and findings of fact in the particular case."


      and


      "The distinctive feature of this case is that in  Pakistan  women  are
      unprotected by the state: discrimination against women in Pakistan  is
      partly tolerated by the state and  partly  sanctioned  by  the  state.
      Married women are subordinate to the will of their husbands.  There is
      strong discrimination against married women, who have been  forced  to
      leave the matrimonial home or have simply decided to leave.   Husbands
      and others frequently bring charges of adultery  against  such  wives.
      Faced with such  a  charge  the  woman  is  in  a  perilous  position.
      Similarly, a woman who makes an accusation of rape is at  great  risk.
      Even Pakistan statute law discriminates against such women."


95) In his skeleton argument Mr. Southey argued  that,  in  relation  to  a
    Convention reason, and contrary to the Adjudicator's conclusion that no
    such reason existed, the Appellant  belonged  to  a  particular  social
    group.  The social group was "people who  had  been  trafficked".   The
    required immutable characteristic, which could not be changed, was  the
    fact that she had been trafficked.  It was because she was a member  of
    that social group that she would be targeted.  Alternatively, causation
    was made out because she  would  be  denied  the  protection  generally
    available in Romania because she was someone who had  been  trafficked.
    We note that he did not seek to  argue  that  there  was  a  particular
    social group of "women in Romania" or even "women in Romania  who  have
    been trafficked".  We find that the Adjudicator was right  to  conclude
    that the Appellant did not  fall  within  a  particular  social  group.
    Firstly, "people who have been trafficked" falls foul of the  principle
    that the group must exist independently of the  persecution  it  fears.
    Such a group is defined by no more  than  the  persecutory  element  of
    trafficking.   Secondly,  for  reasons  to  which  we  will  return  in
    connection with sufficiency of protection, the country material  before
    us does not  establish  discriminatory  treatment  of  the  victims  of
    trafficking by the  Romanian  state  analogous  to  that  of  women  in
    Pakistan.

96) Is the Appellant at risk on return from traffickers?

97) We must consider whether  the  Appellant  still  at  risk  from  people
    traffickers either generally or from those who trafficked  her  in  the
    past.

98) We find that  the  Appellant  does  not  face  a  real  risk  of  being
    trafficked either by those who trafficked her in  the  past  or  anyone
    else.  The country information is clear that the vast majority of those
    who are trafficked go willingly, hoping for a better job and  a  better
    life in a different country.  They are deceived as to what will  happen
    to them.  The Appellant has not suggested that she could be deceived in
    this way.  She was not deceived in the past and, knowing what she knows
    now, it is inconceivable that she could be duped in  the  same  way  as
    most victims of traffickers.  We cannot find any information as to  the
    number of women who have been kidnapped as opposed to going  willingly,
    but the country information shows that the numbers  are  likely  to  be
    small.  When the Appellant was first kidnapped it may be that she was a
    random target of opportunity, spotted on the street whilst going  about
    her normal business.  She has not suggested that she was identified  or
    targeted in any other way.  It is, we accept, speculation, but it would
    not be surprising if the traffickers targeted her because they knew she
    was a single woman living on her own and perhaps also a person who  had
    lived in an orphanage and was not likely to  have  close  family.   She
    comes from a small town.  Page 212 of the Respondents bundle shows that
    Borsec has a population of only 2864.

99) The country information shows that after the Appellant escaped  on  the
    first occasion, returned to Borsec, and then moved  to  Timisoara,  she
    had the misfortune, unbeknown to her, to move to an area notorious  for
    the activities of traffickers.  Against this background it may be  that
    it was less than pure mischance when she  bumped  into  those  who  had
    trafficked her.  The Appellant has not said that she has  any  evidence
    that the same traffickers were looking for  her  in  Borsec,  when  she
    moved to Timisoara, or since her arrival in the United Kingdom.

100) The country information  does  not  support  the  contention  that  the
    Appellant now falls  within  the  profile  of  the  majority  of  women
    trafficked for prostitution.  The majority of victims  are  between  18
    and 24.  She is nearly 28 years of age and,  although  we  accept  Miss
    Scanlan's evidence that this does  not  put  her  totally  outside  the
    danger zone, it is a risk reducing factor.

101) The country information does not support the contention that those  who
    trafficked the Appellant are likely to be looking for her in  order  to
    take revenge, because she managed to escape on two occasions, either as
    an example to deter others or to prevent her  giving  evidence  against
    them.  If the Appellant returns to Borsec it is not likely  that  those
    who trafficked her in the past are looking for her, will ill treat  her
    or attempt to re-traffic her.  If she decides to go to the  police  she
    might  be  well  advised  to  approach  one  of  the  specialist  anti-
    trafficking squads rather than the local police.  If she does  approach
    them, and fears for  her  safety,  there  are  now  witness  protection
    programmes to help her. There is no evidence to show that, even if some
    of the police in Borsec are corrupt, they  would  have  any  reason  to
    think that it would be profitable to pass  on  information  about  her.
    She went to the  police  in  Borsec  when  she  escaped  on  the  first
    occasion.  She was living at the same address and did  not  claim  that
    the traffickers traced her, with  or  without  the  assistance  of  the
    police, although we accept that she did not stay long.

102)  If the Appellant chooses not to go to Borsec or to  a  refuge  but  to
    another part of Romania she will have to register with the  authorities
    in order to work and access health care.  The country information  does
    not show that the police in  Borsec  will  be  informed  that  she  has
    registered in another area.  The evidence does not show that,  even  if
    some of the police in the new area are corrupt,  they  would  have  any
    reason to think that it would be  profitable  to  pass  on  information
    about her to traffickers.

103) If the Appellant prefers to go to a  refuge,  there  are  a  number  of
    refuges for trafficked women. Some are run by the government  and  some
    by NGOs.  There is no information which shows that those who  seek  and
    need refuge are turned away.  We are not persuaded that all  those  who
    enter refuges have to make statements or attend court to give evidence.
     It is likely that many will be required  to  make  statements  to  the
    authorities, but it is not clear what proportion will then be  required
    to attend court to give evidence. The country information,  with  which
    Miss Scanlan agreed, shows that, because of the  security  arrangements
    which the refuges have put in place, the Appellant is likely to be safe
    even without calling on a witness protection programme.  The  Appellant
    may not wish to remain in a  refuge  for  more  than  a  short  period.
    However, if she needs to stay longer, there  is  at  least  one  refuge
    where she can do so, for at least a year.

104) We find that  the  Appellant  does  not  face  a  real  risk  of  being
    trafficked by different traffickers.  She would not go willingly.   She
    is outside the high risk age-group profile. Because of her  experiences
    she is more likely to be risk conscious.  What happened to her  in  the
    past is not likely to be readily apparent.  Although she  is  a  single
    woman and notwithstanding her past experiences the country  information
    does not suggest that all or a significant proportion of  single  women
    in Romania face a real risk of forced kidnapping and trafficking.

105) Sufficiency of protection on the facts in this appeal

106) Having found that the Appellant is not at risk  on  return  to  Romania
    either from those who trafficked her in the past or any other group, it
    is not reasonably likely that she  will  require  protection  from  the
    authorities.  However, should she need  protection,  we  are  persuaded
    that a sufficiency of protection will  be  available  to  her.  In  the
    particular circumstances of  the  Appellant's  case  there  is  both  a
    willingness and an ability on the part of the state to provide her with
    a reasonable level of protection.  We also  find  that,  as  a  general
    rule, the authorities have both a willingness and an ability to provide
    a reasonable level of protection for victims of trafficking in Romania.
     This conclusion may  be  displaced  if  there  is  compelling  current
    country information which was not before us or new country  information
    emerges. We are grateful to Counsel for  their  detailed  and  thorough
    research.  We do not rule out the possibility of  an  exceptional  case
    where, because of particular circumstances, the individual could be  at
    risk and might not be able to access a sufficiency of protection.

107) Article 3

108) The psychological report dated 19 August 2003 from West  Sussex  Health
    and Social Care Trust suggest that the Appellant is suffering from post-
    traumatic stress disorder and has some symptoms of  mood  disorder.  It
    recommends that she  be  released  from  detention.   The  report  says
    nothing about the impact of any return to Romania on her mental health.
     The short follow-up report adds nothing material except  to  reiterate
    that she should be released from detention.  At one stage the Appellant
    was detained, but that is no longer the case.

109) The report from Dr Granville Chapman is undated  but  is  based  on  an
    examination on 1 September 2003.  Dr Granville Chapman does not  appear
    to be a psychiatrist or to  have  specialist  psychiatric  training  or
    experience.  She suggested that the  Appellant  might  need  specialist
    counselling, recommended release  from  detention,  and  expressed  the
    opinion that removal to Romania would have "negative consequences"  for
    the Appellant's well-being and that there was  "a  risk"  that  removal
    would "aggravate her current symptoms of PTSD and cause  a  decline  in
    her mental state".  We agree with the submissions  from  Miss  Richards
    that it is unclear whether this was an assessment  which  Dr  Granville
    Chapman was equipped to make.

110) In a psychiatric report dated 5 November 2003 and an addendum dated  19
    December 2003 Dr Pierzchniak concluded that the Appellant was suffering
    from PTSD and depressive illness. The depression was evidenced  by  low
    mood, anxiety, lethargy, poor sleep, poor concentration,  poor  memory,
    hopelessness and suicidal  ideation.  He  considered  that  she  should
    remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  removal  to  Romania  would
    adversely  affect  her  mental  state.   He  suggested  that  the  main
    treatment for PTSD was removal from the stimulus and he  regarded  that
    stimulus as "Romania".   His  report  also  said,  "Given  her  current
    suicidal ideation and her previous attempt she would be at high risk of
    completing suicide". He said that she required treatment, but  we  have
    no evidence that she has received any such treatment.  He  provided  no
    information as to her previous attempt to commit suicide.

111) We asked Mr. Southey whether there was any information before us  which
    would shed any light on Dr Pierzchniak's observation that the Appellant
    had made a previous attempt to commit suicide.  He said that he was not
    aware of any information other than that which appears at page  I-4  of
    the Appellant's bundle (the West Sussex Health and  Social  Care  Trust
    report) which states, "after her first escape in Romania  she  took  an
    overdose of sedatives, intending to  kill  herself,  but  overestimated
    their strength and woke up".  The same passage  goes  on  to  say,  "In
    Italy she would have killed herself, but was unable to find  the  means
    because of her close confinement.  She did not speak about any  current
    suicidal ideation, and still has hopes that current efforts to  support
    her case will succeed."  There is no evidence that  she  has  made  any
    attempt to commit suicide since she arrived in United Kingdom  in  June
    2003.

112) In R v. Special Adjudicator (Respondent) ex parte Ullah [2004] UKHL  26
    Lord Bingham of Cornhill said at paragraph 107,

      "While the Strasbourg jurisprudence  does  not  preclude  reliance  on
      articles other than article 3 as a ground for resisting extradition or
      expulsion, it makes it quite clear that  successful  reliance  demands
      presentation of a very strong case. In relation to article  3,  it  is
      necessary to show strong grounds for believing  that  the  person,  if
      returned, faces a real risk  of  being  subjected  to  torture  or  to
      inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment: Soering,  paragraph  91;
      Cruz Varas, paragraph  69;  Vilvarajah,  paragraph  103.  In  Dehwari,
      paragraph 61 (see paragraph 13 above) the Commission doubted whether a
      real risk was enough to resist removal  under  article  2,  suggesting
      that the loss of life must be shown to be  a  "near-certainty".  Where
      reliance is placed on article 6 it must be shown  that  a  person  has
      suffered or risks suffering a flagrant denial of a fair trial  in  the
      receiving state: Soering, paragraph  113  (see  paragraph  10  above);
      Drodz, paragraph 110; Einhorn, paragraph 32; Razaghi v Sweden; Tomic v
      United Kingdom. Successful reliance on article 5 would have to meet no
      less exacting a test. The lack of success  of  applicants  relying  on
      articles 2, 5  and  6  before  the  Strasbourg  court  highlights  the
      difficulty of meeting the stringent test  which  that  court  imposes.
      This difficulty will not be less where reliance is placed on  articles
      such as 8 or 9, which provide for the striking of  a  balance  between
      the right of the individual and the wider interests of  the  community
      even in a case where a serious interference is shown. This  is  not  a
      balance which the Strasbourg court ought ordinarily to strike  in  the
      first instance, nor is it a balance which that court is well placed to
      assess in the absence of representations by the receiving state  whose
      laws, institutions or practices are the subject of criticism.  On  the
      other hand, the removing state will always have what will  usually  be
      strong grounds for justifying its own conduct: the great importance of
      operating firm and orderly immigration control in an  expulsion  case;
      the great desirability of honouring  extradition  treaties  made  with
      other states. The correct approach in cases involving qualified rights
      such as those under articles 8 and 9 is in my opinion  that  indicated
      by the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  (Mr.  C  M  G  Ockelton,  deputy
      president, Mr. Allen and Mr. Moulden) in  Devaseelan  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home  Department  [2002]  IAT  702,  [2003]  Imm  AR  1,
      paragraph 111:


        "The reason why flagrant denial or gross violation is to  be  taken
        into account is that it is only in such a case -  where  the  right
        will be completely denied or nullified in the destination country -
        that it can be said that removal will breach the treaty obligations
        of  the  signatory  state  however  those  obligations   might   be
        interpreted or whatever might be  said  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
        destination state".


113) In Sefer Djali v the Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2003] EWCA  Civ  1371
    Simon Brown LJ said, at paragraph 30,

      "That case ("N") and others like it fall for consideration only  under
      Article 3 and will succeed only in the  most  extreme  in  exceptional
      circumstances.  It would seem to  me  very  odd  if  a  markedly  more
      generous approach were brought to bear in respect of  those  suffering
      mentally rather than physically."


114) We have found that  the  respondent  is  not  at  risk  of  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment from those who trafficked her in  the
    past or similar treatment from anyone else.  Even if there was  such  a
    risk,  the  authorities  would  provide  her  with  a  sufficiency   of
    protection.  In these circumstances the Article 3 grounds turn on  what
    will happen to her physical and mental health if  she  is  returned  or
    there is an attempt to return her to Romania.  We find that she has not
    established a real risk that she will attempt or  commit  suicide.   It
    cannot be said that she will receive inferior medical treatment for her
    mental ill-health in Romania because she is not receiving any treatment
    in the United Kingdom.  If she does need treatment in Romania, we  have
    not been referred to any material which indicates that it will  not  be
    available from that country's health services or that she will not have
    access to those services if she registers in  the  area  in  which  she
    lives. Normally individuals have to pay  contributions  to  the  social
    health insurance fund.  It is not clear whether the  contributions  the
    respondent has paid in the past will be sufficient or whether, if  they
    are not, she comes within  one  of  the  excepted  categories  who  can
    receive  treatment  without  sufficient  contributions.   She  has  not
    established that treatment will not be  available  to  her.   There  is
    positive information that if she goes to stay in a refuge she  will  be
    provided with appropriate health care.

115)  The  respondent  does  not  face  the  most  extreme  and  exceptional
    circumstances.  In the context of Article 3  it  cannot  be  said  that
    there is likely to be a flagrant  denial  or  gross  violation  of  her
    rights.  There is no real risk of a violation of her Article 2 rights.

116) Article 8

117) In R v. Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ex  parte  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 Lord Bingham of Cornhill said at paragraph 17,

      "In considering whether  a  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to remove a person must clearly  fail,  the  reviewing  court
      must, as it seems to me, consider how an appeal  would  be  likely  to
      fare before an Adjudicator, as the tribunal responsible  for  deciding
      the appeal if there were an appeal.  This  means  that  the  reviewing
      court must ask itself essentially the questions which would have to be
      answered by an Adjudicator. In a case where  removal  is  resisted  in
      reliance on article 8, these questions are likely to be:
           1. Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
           2. If so, will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
           3. If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
           4. If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
           in the interests of national  security,  public  safety  or  the
           economic well-being  of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
           5. If so, is such interference proportionate to  the  legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?"


      And, at paragraph 20,


      "The answering of question (5), where that question is  reached,  must
      always involve the striking of a fair balance between  the  rights  of
      the individual and the interests of the community which is inherent in
      the whole of the Convention. The  severity  and  consequences  of  the
      interference will call for  careful  assessment  at  this  stage.  The
      Secretary of State must exercise his judgment in the  first  instance.
      On appeal the Adjudicator must  exercise  his  or  her  own  judgment,
      taking account of any material which may  not  have  been  before  the
      Secretary of State. A reviewing court must assess the  judgment  which
      would or might be made by an Adjudicator on appeal.  In  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department v Kacaj [2002] Imm AR 213, paragraph 25,
      the Immigration Appeal Tribunal (Collins J, Mr. C M G Ockelton and Mr.
      J Freeman) observed that:


        "Although  the  [Convention]  rights  may  be  engaged,  legitimate
        immigration control will almost certainly mean that derogation from
        the rights will be proper and will not be disproportionate."


      In the present case, the Court of Appeal had no doubt (paragraph 26 of
      its judgment)  that  this  overstated  the  position.  I  respectfully
      consider the element of overstatement to  be  small.  Decisions  taken
      pursuant to the  lawful  operation  of  immigration  control  will  be
      proportionate in all save  a  small  minority  of  exceptional  cases,
      identifiable only on a case by case basis."


118) As we have already mentioned, in relation to the Article 8 grounds  the
    Adjudicator appears to have accepted that the appellant had established
    a private life in the United Kingdom and there would be an interference
    with her right to physical and moral integrity.  He  included  this  in
    his assessment of the risks to her  physical  and  mental  health.   He
    found that it would be disproportionate to return her  to  Romania.  It
    has not been suggested that the respondent has a  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  We accept that she has a private  life.   The  factual
    elements which are relevant to the Article 3 grounds also  fall  to  be
    considered in relation to Article 8. We find that the proposed  removal
    would constitute interference by a public authority with  the  exercise
    of the Appellant's right to respect for her private life.  We find that
    such interference would  not  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.  If we  are  mistaken
    in this regard, then such interference would be in accordance with  the
    law, necessary in a democratic society in  the  interests  of  national
    security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country,  for
    the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of  health  or
    morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others  and
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

119) Reasons for reporting

120) This determination is reported for our reasoning and conclusion that  a
    sufficiency of protection is available to the victims of trafficking in
    Romania.  As a general rule, on the evidence before us, there  is  both
    ability and  willingness  on  the  part  of  the  state  to  provide  a
    reasonable level of protection. We do not rule out the  possibility  of
    an exceptional case where,  because  of  particular  circumstances,  an
    individual could be  at  risk  and  might  not  be  able  to  access  a
    sufficiency of protection.

121) Conclusion

122) We dismiss the appeal of the appellant and  allow  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (the Secretary of State).










P R Moulden
Vice President
