
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Elsakhawy (immigration officers: PACE) [2018] UKUT 00086 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 and 17 November 2017                    |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                     Mahmoud ahmed abdel-samia elsakhawy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms J E Norman, instructed by Sterling Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms S Broadfoot QC, instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department


1. The  respondent's  instructions  and  guidance  to  immigration  officers
correctly reflect the operation of sections 66 and  67  of  the  Police  and
Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) and of  the  Immigration  (PACE  Codes  of
Practice) Direction 2013, in drawing a  distinction  between  administrative
enquiries and formal criminal enquiries. The fact that immigration  officers
have powers of investigation,  administrative  arrest  and  criminal  arrest
does not require them to follow the PACE codes of  practice  concerning  the
giving of  a  "criminal"  caution,  when  questioning  a  person  whom  they
reasonably  suspect  of  entering  into  a  marriage  of   convenience,   in
circumstances  where  the  investigation   is   merely   into   whether   an
administrative breach has occurred.

2.  Section 78 of PACE, which gives a criminal  court  power  to  refuse  to
allow evidence which, if admitted, would have such an adverse effect on  the
fairness of the proceedings that the  court  ought  not  to  admit  it,  has
little to say about the task facing a Tribunal, in civil  proceedings  under
the EEA Regulations.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the decision of  the  Tribunal,  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed. The appellant appeals against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Millar promulgated  on  31  March  2016,  in  which  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision  to  give  directions  for  his
    removal under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on  the
    basis of abuse of rights under regulation  21B(2)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations") dated
    27 February 2015 was dismissed.

 2. The appellant is a national of Egypt, born on 13 January 1987, who came
    to the United Kingdom briefly as a visitor in 2011  and  entered  again
    with entry clearance as a visitor in early  2012.   Save  for  a  brief
    visit to Egypt, he has remained in the United Kingdom since 2012, being
    granted an EEA Residence Card as the family member of an  EEA  national
    (Ewelina Wrzesniewska, whom he married on 28 March 2013) on 15  January
    2014.

 3. On 27 February 2015,  the  appellant  was  encountered  by  Immigration
    Officers at  Denzil Road (who attended the premises to investigate  the
    marriage of Mr Osaa Said Fetouh  Hefnawy,  an  Egyptian  national  also
    married to a Polish national), which led to respondent's decision.

 4. The respondent set removal directions for the appellant  under  section
    10 of  the  1999  Act  on  the  basis  that  his  marriage  to  Ewelina
    Wrzesniewska (his "wife") was a sham.

The appeal

 5. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision on the basis that  the
    appellant did not enter into a marriage of convenience and it  was  not
    for him to prove that he did not, the burden  of  proof  being  on  the
    respondent who has failed to give adequate  reasons  for  the  decision
    made.  The decision was further appealed on the basis that the decision
    was in breach of the rights of the appellant and  his  wife  under  the
    Community  Treaties  and  in  breach  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 6. Although not forming part of the written grounds of  appeal,  an  issue
    raised  by  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  the
    admissibility of evidence (or at least the weight  to  be  attached  to
    such evidence) obtained during the questioning of the appellant  on  27
    February 2015 on the basis  of  whether  or  not  the  questioning  was
    properly conducted in accordance with the Immigration  (PACE  Codes  of
    Practice) Direction 2013 ("PACE") (or whether it needed to be so).

 7. Judge Millar dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 31 March
    2016 on all grounds.   Judge  Millar  found  that  the  respondent  had
    reasonable grounds to suspect a  sham  marriage  and  it  was  for  the
    appellant to rebut those allegations and  he  did  not  do  so  on  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Permission to appeal was sought on the  basis  that  Judge  Millar  had
    failed to deal with the appellant's submissions on PACE; failed to give
    adequate reasons; failed to apply the correct test for  a  marriage  of
    convenience and made various errors of fact.  Permission to appeal  was
    granted by Judge Lambert on 23 August 2016 on all grounds.

 9. In a decision promulgated on 7 October  2016  (attached  as  the  first
    Appendix to this decision), Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  found  an
    error  of  law  in  Judge  Millar's  determination,  further  to  which
    directions were issued on various dates to the  parties  for  this  re-
    making of the decision.

Findings and reasons

The Law

 1. Regulation 21B of the EEA Regulations provides, so far as  relevant  to
    this appeal:


    1) The abuse of a right to reside includes -
        a) engaging in conduct which appears to be  intended  to  circumvent
           the requirement to be a qualified person;
        b) ...
        c) entering, attempting to enter  or  assisting  another  person  to
           enter or attempt to enter, a marriage  or  civil  partnership  of
           convenience;
        d) fraudulently obtaining or  attempting  to  obtain,  or  assisting
           another to obtain or attempt to obtain, a right to reside.

 2. A marriage of convenience is defined in a  Council  Resolution  of  the
    Council of the European Union  dated  4  December  1997  and  has  been
    approved repeatedly by the domestic courts.  A marriage of  convenience
    is:

      "a marriage concluded between a national of a member state or a third-
      country national legally resident in  a  member  state  and  a  third-
      country national, with the sole aim  of  circumventing  the  rules  on
      entry and residence of third-country nationals and obtaining  for  the
      third-country national a residence permit or authority to reside in  a
      Member State."

 3. The legal burden of proof of  a  marriage  of  convenience  is  on  the
    respondent, however the evidential burden shifts to the appellant  once
    the  respondent  evidences  reasonable  suspicion  of  a  marriage   of
    convenience: Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) and Rosa v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] 1 WLR 1206.



Evidence on behalf of the appellant

Appellant

 4. In his written statements signed and dated  20  September  2017  and  2
    October 2017, the appellant set out his background and details  of  how
    he met his wife and how their relationship  started.   He  stated  that
    they began living together after their Islamic  marriage  on  28  March
    2013.

 5. The appellant's wife went to visit her family in Poland for three weeks
    in February 2015 as her mother  was  sick.   The  appellant  could  not
    travel with her as he did not  have  any  annual  leave  remaining  and
    during that time he stayed with a friend for company.  It was  at  that
    friend's address that Immigration Officers visited on 27 February 2015.
     The appellant described his experience of that  visit,  in  particular
    stating that he was treated in a very rude manner; that he requested an
    interpreter but was not offered one; that he asked to call  his  lawyer
    but was not permitted to do so and that he was questioned when  he  had
    not even properly woken up.  He also disputed a number of points of the
    record from the interview, in particular that he gave his full  address
    in New Eltham and it was only the postcode that he could not  remember.



 6. The  appellant  went  on  to  describe  what  had  happened  since  the
    respondent's decision, the impact it has had on his relationship and on
    his life more generally.  He stated that his relationship with his wife
    started breaking down in October 2015  but  that  his  wife  was  still
    prepared to support him in his  appeal  up  until  the  adjournment  in
    January 2016 when she said she could not handle the pressure any  more.
    The  appellant's  wife  refuses  to  communicate  with  him  until  his
    immigration status is resolved, fearing  for  her  own  future  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 7. In the second witness statement, the appellant responded in  detail  to
    the written evidence of IO Hale and Mr  Toleman.   In  particular,  the
    appellant did not recall being cautioned at any  point  by  Immigration
    officers; he never claimed to be on holiday  from  Egypt;  he  did  not
    willingly show IO Hale texts on his  phone  and  that  his  wife's  new
    number was stored under the contact "Ewelina Lovely#".   The  appellant
    stated that they called and texted each other as well as using Whatsapp
    and Viber to stay in touch but records of contact were  lost  when  his
    phone broke about 2 years ago.  The appellant was not asked to  contact
    his wife or show any further evidence of contact with her.

 8. In relation to a suitcase found at Denzil Road during  the  enforcement
    visit by the respondent's immigration officers,  the  appellant  stated
    that it had been there for about six months and left  with  his  friend
    because the appellant had used it to bring back items  from  Egypt  for
    his friend.  The appellant's documents were in a small bag  within  the
    suitcase which he kept with him when staying with his friend because he
    was moving address at the time and wanted to keep them safe.

 9. In relation to his wife's travel movements, the appellant  stated  that
    she travelled to and from Poland in October  2014,  February  2015  and
    attended a wedding in May 2014 in Poland.  She  has  been  continuously
    living in the United Kingdom.

10. The appellant could not explain why his wife's brother-in-law  referred
    in his marriage interview to his wife coming to visit  her  sister  and
    brother-in-law  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  baby   and   noted
    discrepancies within that marriage interview.  Further,  the  appellant
    did not recognise the Facebook page referred to by the  respondent  nor
    all of the photographs within it.  He did recognise  the  name  of  his
    wife's sister and brother listed on the Facebook page but  not  any  of
    the other friends.  He denied that his wife was single and that she had
    any children.  The appellant did not know who the man in  many  of  the
    photos was and he could not confirm when the photographs were taken.

11. The appellant attended the oral hearing, confirmed his details, adopted
    his written statements and gave oral evidence through a court-appointed
    Arabic interpreter.  The appellant confirmed that he first came to  the
    United Kingdom in 2011, staying  for  four  days  before  returning  to
    Egypt.  He returned to the United Kingdom in February 2012  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor for six months which expired in July 2012.   The
    appellant did not return to Egypt before the expiry of his visa on  the
    basis that he would prefer to stay in the  United  Kingdom  considering
    the economic and political situation at the time in  Egypt.   From  the
    first moment he came to the United Kingdom he said that  he  wanted  to
    spend the rest of his life here and have a family here.  In 2011 he was
    checking things out in the United Kingdom for this purpose. When he had
    returned to the United Kingdom in 2012, in possession of a visit  visa,
    it had been with the intention of remaining here  permanently.  He  had
    therefore brought with him a sum of money to cover his living  expenses
    until such time that he could work.  The appellant applied for a  visit
    visa because entry as a visitor or entry as a  student  were  the  only
    options available to secure entry to the United Kingdom. The  appellant
    accepted that he knew his visa was granted on the basis of a visit only
    and that he lied to secure entry.

12. After about 3 months in the United Kingdom, the appellant asked  around
    and was advised that the only  lawful  means  of  staying  were  if  he
    married or studied.  He could not afford to study due to the  cost  and
    would in any event have had to return to Egypt to make  an  application
    to do so from there.  He therefore decided that he  had  to  marry  and
    find a lady to spend his life with in the United Kingdom.

13. The appellant was asked about his Islamic marriage certificate dated  5
    April 2013, as there was no translation of it available in the  hearing
    bundle.  The appellant clarified that he was married in the Islamic way
    in a mosque and after that on a different date  went  to  the  Egyptian
    Consulate to certify the marriage, on 5 April 2013.   That  certificate
    contains three references to  George's  Drive  in  Pimlico,  which  the
    appellant  said  was  the  address  that  he  and  his  wife  used  for
    correspondence. It was his  sister-in-law's  address  and  was  a  more
    secure one to use.  The appellant and his wife  were  not  sure  of  an
    address where they would settle as husband and wife and so used this as
    an alternative.  The three  questions  on  the  certificate,  to  which
    "George's Drive" was answered, were for the  appellant's  address,  the
    appellant's correspondence address and the address where the  appellant
    and his wife were going to live.  When asked why this address was given
    for all answers when it  was  to  be  used  only  as  a  correspondence
    address, the appellant  stated  that  the  same  was  used  to  prevent
    anything being mixed up.

14. The witnesses at the appellant's marriage were  a  friend  of  his  and
    Hussain Ahmed Sayed Ali, his wife's brother-in-law, whom the  appellant
    met for the first time at the wedding.

15. The appellant stated that he had never lived at  Denzil  Road,  but  he
    had a friend who lived at this address and used it when he  first  came
    to the United Kingdom, to open a bank account and  for  correspondence.
    He could not remember what documents he had used to prove he was living
    there, so as to be able to open a bank account showing that address. He
    thought he might have had "a letter or something".

16. The appellant was asked about his work history and also  about  meeting
    his wife.  They met at a birthday party and  friends  mediated  between
    them so that they could communicate as  the  appellant  did  not  speak
    Polish and his wife did not speak any Arabic.  A friend introduced  the
    appellant's  wife  and  explained  his  feelings  for  her;  then   the
    relationship started.  After the birthday party they saw each  other  a
    week to 10 days later and then every three or four days on  an  ongoing
    basis.  The appellant's wife knew that he was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without lawful leave to remain and knew that he needed to find  someone
    to marry to obtain a visa.

17. The appellant proposed to his wife around the middle of February  2013.
    He did so in English but did not need to say very much because his wife
    had been prepared in advance by a friend about what  he  was  going  to
    say.  When the couple met, the appellant stated that they  didn't  need
    to talk much and instead used body language to express their feelings.

18. After the wedding, the appellant and  his  wife  moved  to  Stonebridge
    Park.  The appellant used the address on Denzil Road in  November  2014
    to apply for a driver's licence as his friend offered him advice to use
    this address on his application as it was an important document and  he
    had had problems receiving mail at his own address.  He  accepted  that
    he received bank statements at his home address but said  that  it  was
    easier to get replacement bank statements if needed than it would be to
    get a replacement driving licence, if not received.

19. At the end of 2014 or the beginning of 2015,  the  appellant  moved  to
    Inca Drive.  He stated that, when interviewed by  immigration  officers
    in February 2015, he did know that address, but not its postcode.

20. The appellant had converted one of his bank accounts into a joint  bank
    account after his marriage, but could not remember  exactly  when  this
    happened.  It was a joint account that he said both of them paid  into.
    He could not explain who paid in different sums to the account, nor who
    could he initially explain payments out of significant  sums  of  money
    (�3500 and �7500). He then said they were made to his brother  who  was
    in financial trouble in Egypt.  He borrowed  the  money  from  a  large
    group of friends.  The appellant had other accounts in his  name,  some
    of which were inactive. He denied having multiple accounts  to  prevent
    someone tracing his finances.

21. In relation to his wedding, the appellant stated that he did  not  know
    that an Islamic marriage  was  not  a  legal  marriage  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant stated  that  there  were  photographs  of  his
    wedding which were submitted to the respondent with his application for
    an  EEA  Residence  Card,  and  which  were  returned  to  him  by  the
    respondent.  No explanation was given as to why none were available  in
    the course of this appeal.

22. The appellant was asked about the Facebook evidence  submitted  by  the
    respondent and evidence regarding his wife's travel  to  and  from  the
    United Kingdom.  He did not necessarily agree  with  information  about
    the first  flight  his  wife  took.   He  accepted  that  there  was  a
    photograph of his wife taken outside the Egyptian Consulate on the  day
    that their marriage was registered there.  He called this their wedding
    as well on the basis that at the Egyptian embassy you had to repeat the
    marriage ceremony.  The appellant was able to positively  identify  his
    wife in a number of the Facebook photographs but did not recognise  all
    of the other people in them and could not be certain that some of  them
    were his wife.  He did not accept that these photos were  accurate  and
    said that anyone could  use  Photoshop  and  put  them  on  a  Facebook
    account.  He did not accept any information about his  wife  suggesting
    that she had three children.

23. Overall, the appellant stated that he did not  recognise  the  Facebook
    account as belonging to his wife and stated that someone had fabricated
    all of it.

24. The appellant's wife moved out in March 2016, after his appeal  hearing
    was adjourned for the second time.  He could not explain why the  draft
    statement said to be from her prepared for his appeal hearing  had  not
    been signed.  He stated that she was  willing  to  assist  him  in  his
    appeal but that there had been too many adjournments.

25. The appellant stated that he did know anything about the statement made
    by Mahmoud Shamakh. The appellant did not know much about him  and  had
    not been in touch with him since the date of the letter in the  bundle.
    He stated that people now hesitated to  help  him  because  he  was  in
    trouble with the Home Office.

26. The appellant was then asked about the interview with  him  during  the
    enforcement visit to Denzil Road.  He stated he  was  living  with  his
    wife at that time.  When asked about phone contact with his  wife,  the
    appellant stated that he  was  asleep  when  the  immigration  officers
    arrived, was totally confused and he couldn't understand other than  to
    say that his solicitor should be contacted if there were any  concerns.
    The Immigration Officer asking him questions was screaming at him,  was
    very aggressive and the appellant could not understand what  he  wanted
    in terms of contact with his wife in Poland.   The  appellant  was  not
    given a chance to explain that the contact telephone number  looked  at
    by the Immigration Officer on the appellant's mobile telephone was  his
    wife's old number.  The phone subsequently broke and the appellant  had
    lost it.  The appellant did not agree the contents of  the  Immigration
    Officer's record of the visit.

27. In February 2015, the appellant's wife travelled Poland by car to visit
    her sick mother. She travelled with friends who happened  to  be  going
    back at the same time.

28. The last time the appellant had any  contact  with  his  wife  was  via
    Facebook Messenger when he told her that he had  good  news  but  never
    received any reply.  The appellant thought  that  his  wife's  concerns
    about starting a family were always in  her  mind  and  in  particular,
    consideration of what would happen if the couple had children  and  the
    appellant had to return to Egypt.  The appellant's wife wanted security
    in the United Kingdom. They had a good relationship.  It was not a sham
    marriage and their relationship only went wrong after  the  enforcement
    visit.

29. We  asked  the  appellant  further  questions  about  the  evidence  he
    submitted that he said was his wife's true Facebook account,  which  he
    had used to communicate with her.  That single Facebook page was on its
    face said to have been created on 13 October  2016  but  the  appellant
    stated that this was the account that he used to communicate  with  her
    prior to that date.

Osama Hefnawy

30. In his written statement signed  and  dated  12  November  2017,  Osama
    Hefnawy set out his background and experience of the immigration  visit
    at his property on 27 February 2015.  Mr Hefnawy  opened  the  door  to
    Immigration Officers who said they were from the Home  Office  but  did
    not show him any form of warrant or ID and did not make him aware  that
    he had the choice as to whether to let them in or that  he  could  seek
    legal advice.  He stated that IO Hale was very aggressive  and  hostile
    when questioning the appellant, raising his voice and shouting at  him,
    behaving in a way that was aggressive and threatening.   He  heard  him
    tell the appellant that he would be sent  back  to  his  country.   The
    Immigration Officer interviewing Mr Hefnawy was rude, did not offer him
    an interpreter, suggested that  he  was  lying  and  told  him  on  two
    occasions that his answers were "bullshit".  Mr Hefnawy was  not  shown
    what was recorded in the Immigration Officer's notebook and he was  not
    asked to sign anything during the visit.

31. Mr Hefnawy attended the oral hearing, confirmed  his  details,  adopted
    his written statement and gave oral evidence through a court  appointed
    Arabic interpreter.  In cross-examination  he  confirmed  that  he  had
    known the appellant in Egypt and they were good  friends.   Mr  Hefnawy
    came to the United Kingdom on 14 October 2011.  He stated that  he  had
    seen the appellant's wife's brother-in-law on one or two occasions  but
    they didn't know him as such.

32. Following the visit, Mr Hefnawy's application for an EEA Residence Card
    was refused on the basis  that  he  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  His appeal against that refusal was allowed by the First-
    tier Tribunal in a determination promulgated on  30  October  2015.   A
    copy of that determination was exhibited to the written statement.

33. In relation to the immigration  visit  to  his  property.   Mr  Hefnawy
    stated that he could not remember if he had been showed an ID badge  by
    IO Hale; he was not sure if they did  or  not.   He  did  not  remember
    signing any of the officers' notebooks when they came in.

34. Mr Hefnawy described his bedroom at his premises which had  one  double
    bed and one single bed in it.  The double was for himself and his  wife
    and in the single bed was the appellant.

35. Mr Hefnawy stated that he could recognise IO Hale  but  had  only  been
    told what his name was the day before the hearing when he attended  the
    solicitor's offices and they showed him a picture.  He stated  that  he
    was asked to give a witness statement because of what happened  at  his
    flat and he had not previously been asked to do so.  Mr Hefnawy  stated
    that despite being interviewed by a different IO, he could hear what IO
    Hale was saying to the appellant because IO Hale  was  speaking  loudly
    and was being aggressive and threatening  towards  him.   He  expressly
    stated that he recalled when the officer  was  leaving,  the  appellant
    asked if his solicitor should contact the IO and was told  in  response
    that he could do that when they were sending him back to  his  country.
    He stated that he heard IO Hale laugh at  the  appellant  when  he  was
    leaving.  He denied exaggerating the behaviour of officers to help  his
    friend.

36. We asked Mr  Hefnawy  some  further  questions.   He  stated  that  the
    appellant had been staying with him for 7 to 10 days at the time of the
    immigration visit but not permanently.  He stated  that  the  appellant
    had used Mr Hefnawy's address for his driving licence on the basis that
    the appellant did not at that time have a fixed address and that it was
    Mr Hefnawy's idea for him to do that.  He stated that his  address  was
    not used by  the  appellant  for  anything  else.   In  further  cross-
    examination, Mr Hefnawy stated that the appellant only used address for
    the driving licence and when asked about its use for the appellant open
    a bank account  in  May  2012,  he  stated  friends  who  were  without
    permanent addresses could use his address and there had never been  any
    problems with his mail.  He stated that he moved to the address in  May
    2011 and there were a number of Egyptians living there,  some  of  whom
    came and went.  He said he did not know the appellant's wife's brother-
    in-law who was living at the same address when he moved in until  April
    2012.

Mr Ryzhko & Mrs Sokolowska-Ryzhko

37. In their written statements signed and dated  4  and  11  October  2017
    respectively,  Mr  Ryzhko  and  Mrs  Sokolowska-Ryzhko  set  out  their
    details.  Mr Ryzhko is a Ukrainian national and his wife  is  a  Polish
    national.  When Mr Ryzhko applied for an EEA Residence Card, they  were
    visited by three male Immigration Officers at their home in  the  early
    morning of 17 March 2016.   Neither  could  remember  being  shown  any
    warrant or the officers introducing themselves and were not aware  they
    could have refused the officers entry.

38. Mr Ryzhko says that IO Hale was unpleasant and intimidated him, telling
    him that he would not get any residence documents, that  he  was  lying
    and should wait for the refusal.  He was  rude  throughout  the  visit,
    speaking in a nasty tone of voice and acting in  an  aggressive  manner
    throughout the visit.  At the end of the visit IO Hale  sneered  at  Mr
    Ryzhko.  Mr Ryzhko and his wife were left scared and  intimidated  from
    the visit.

39. Mrs Sokolowska-Ryzhko stated that  she  heard  IO  Hale  say  that  her
    husband "must be gay" which she considered  to  be  inappropriate.   IO
    Hale was described as being very rude, talking in a nasty tone of voice
    and with  an  aggressive  manner  throughout  the  visit,  leaving  Mrs
    Sokolowska-Ryzhko and her husband feeling scared and intimidated.

40. The couple were not asked whether they wanted to speak to a lawyer  and
    were not informed that they could refuse to answer questions during the
    visit.  No interpreter was offered and at times  Mrs  Sokolowska-Ryzhko
    had to act as an interpreter for her husband.

41. The application for an EEA Residence Card was refused on the basis that
    the couple  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of  convenience  but  they
    successfully appealed this decision on 6 September 2017.

42. Mrs Sokolowska-Ryzhko attended the oral hearing, confirmed her  details
    and adopted her statement and gave oral evidence in English.  In cross-
    examination, she stated that she knew that it was IO Hale who was  rude
    and made derogatory comments as she had identified him from  a  picture
    sent to  her  by  her  solicitors  (who  also  acted  for  the  present
    appellant).  Mrs Sokolowska-Ryzhko confirmed that around  the  time  of
    the visit she made a complaint against IO Muir but did  not  know  this
    had been investigated following her statement.  She stated that she had
    not mistaken IO Hale for IO Muir.

43. At the visit, IO Hendry asked most of the questions and wrote  them  in
    his notebook, with some additional questions from IO  Hale  which  were
    not recorded in the Q&A record of the interview.

44. Mr Ryzhko attended the oral hearing, confirmed his details and  adopted
    his written statement.  He gave oral evidence with the assistance of  a
    Ukrainian interpreter.  In cross-examination, he confirmed that he  did
    not know the appellant and had only seen him for the first time at  the
    oral hearing.  When asked why he  was  giving  evidence  in  court,  Mr
    Ryzhko stated that this was to see justice  prevail  as  he  understood
    that the gentleman from the Home Office didn't do his job properly.

45. Mr Ryzhko identified IO Hale from being sent a single photograph by his
    solicitors, after his appeal hearing in September  2017.   He  did  not
    mistake IO Hale for IO Muir.

46. Mr Ryzhko did not remember making  a  complaint  personally  after  the
    visit but thought that maybe his solicitors did  this.   He  could  not
    remember if there was any response to this complaint.  A complaint  was
    made in October 2017 but Mr Ryzhko did not know if this  had  yet  been
    responded to.

47. During the enforcement visit, IO Hale was  said  to  have  acted  in  a
    superior manner and his behaviour  made  it  look  as  if  he  was  the
    decision-maker.  He was rude and it was not just what he said  but  the
    way he said it.

48. Mr Ryzhko  stated  that  he  understood  English  and  was  capable  of
    responding to some questions in English but not all of them  during  an
    interview.  His wife helped him other than  on  simple  questions.   He
    stated that when previously arrested on 11 June 2014 he did not  refuse
    an interpreter. He was not offered one.  In  re-examination  he  stated
    that after his arrest in 2014, when given details of his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom them, he did have access to an interpreter.

The respondent's evidence

Jamie Toleman

49. In his written statement signed and dated 29 December  2016,  Mr  Jamie
    Toleman set out his professional background working for the respondent,
    his qualifications and his investigations about the  appellant's  wife.
    He  accessed  the  appellant's  wife's  Facebook   account   and   took
    screenshots of what he found, which included information about her; the
    places that she has  lived;  contacts  including  family,  friends  and
    relationships; life events and multiple photographs.

50. Separately Mr Toleman conducted online  searches  for  the  appellant's
    wife's employer, named on her alleged payslips as  "Samiramies  Salon".
    This had no internet presence and the  only  company  of  such  a  name
    registered with Companies House was dissolved on 20 October 2015.

51. Mr Toleman  attended  the  oral  hearing,  confirmed  his  professional
    details, adopted his written statement  and  gave  oral  evidence.   In
    cross-examination he stated that he is a criminal  investigator  and  a
    digital  media  investigator  using  open  source  material  with   the
    appropriate level 3 qualification to do so.  Open  source  material  is
    limited to what is publicly available online. What can  be  seen  would
    depend  on  a  person's  privacy  settings.   Mr  Toleman  used  Google
    Translate as a guide to assist him in his work and in this case it  was
    used because he does not speak Polish.  He stated that he was unable to
    confirm whether the photographs on Facebook were  contemporaneous  with
    the dates on which  they  were  posted,  as  Facebook  strips  out  the
    "metadata" from the photograph.

IO Richard Hale

52. In his written statements signed and  dated  10  January  2017  and  30
    November 2017, IO Richard Hale  set  out  his  professional  background
    working for the respondent, his response  to  the  appellant's  written
    statement dated 2 October 2017  and  recollection  of  the  enforcement
    visits to both the appellant/Mr Hefnawy and to Mr and Mrs Ryzhko.

53. As to the visit on 27th February 2015, IO Hale stated that he  attended
    Denzil Road with IO Whittaker.  IO Hale showed Mr Hefnawy  his  warrant
    card and asked him to come in to speak to him.  Mr Hefnawy consented to
    them entering and signed IO Whittaker's notebook to confirm  this.   IO
    Hale made notes in his official notebook throughout the visit.

54. IO Hale woke up the appellant and asked to see his passport, which  the
    appellant stated was at another address, but his  driving  licence  was
    provided.  IO Hale heard Mr Hefnawy stating that the appellant  was  on
    holiday from Egypt but the appellant's driving licence  was  issued  to
    the address of the visit and the appellant claimed to be married  to  a
    Polish lady.  IO  Hale  then  suspected  that  the  appellant  was  not
    lawfully in the United Kingdom.  He cautioned the  appellant,  recorded
    as "C+2" in his notebook and asked him further questions.

55. The appellant was asked for his address, but he could not give it  save
    for the fact that it was in New Eltham.  When asked  to  show  IO  Hale
    contact with his wife, the appellant  unlocked  his  mobile  phone  and
    handed it to IO Hale, displaying on its screen a number on the  phone's
    contact list, which read "Ewelina Lovely". The appellant  consented  to
    IO Hale looking at the text.  IO Hale considered the text to  be  about
    the appellant's wife rather than to or from her.  There were  no  texts
    of a personal nature and nothing to indicate any direct contact between
    the appellant and his wife.  The last call made  to  or  received  from
    this contact was on 6 September 2014.  IO Hale called  the  number  and
    spoke to a man who turned out to be the appellant's wife's  brother-in-
    law who had not had contact with her for over six months.

56. Overall, IO Hale was satisfied that there was sufficient evidence  that
    the appellant's marriage was a sham and that the couple  did  not  live
    together in a  subsisting  relationship.   The  case  was  referred  to
    Immigration Inspector Smith who authorised service  of  papers  on  the
    appellant, including the respondent's decision under challenge in  this
    appeal.

57. IO Hale did not offer the appellant an interpreter during the visit  as
    it appeared him that his English was sufficient, that he understood the
    questions and was able to respond in English.  IO Hale denied the other
    allegations against him, stating in particular that he did not shout at
    the appellant; was not rude and did not laugh at him; did  not  ask  to
    see his notes; did not ask for an interpreter and did not say he wanted
    to call his lawyer save for where this was recorded at the end  of  the
    notes.

58. Checks were conducted by the respondent on the movement history of  the
    appellant's wife, showing that she had only visited the United  Kingdom
    for a total of six days  in  the  last  five  years,  spread  over  two
    different trips, both of which originated in Poland.  IO Hale said  not
    all passenger movements were recorded prior to 2014, so it may be  that
    flights in 2013 would not show up.  The passenger movement check system
    was expanded to cover all travellers by air, sea and rail  on  8  April
    2015 but there were no records of the appellant's  wife  travelling  to
    Poland by car, i.e. using channel or ferry.

59. On 2 August 2013, a marriage interview  was  conducted  with  both  the
    appellant's wife's sister  and  her  brother-in-law,  which  named  the
    appellant's wife and referred to her visiting the United Kingdom for  a
    week in April 2013 with her baby.

60. IO Hale also searched for the appellant's wife on Google  and  found  a
    Facebook page which appeared to belong to her. He confirmed  that  this
    is the same page referred to in and exhibited to the  statement  of  Mr
    Toleman.

61. In response to the appellant's written statement, IO Hale  stated  that
    the appellant did not make any attempt to show  any  other  listing  or
    conversation with his wife on his  mobile  phone  as  claimed  and  was
    satisfied that he saw no second listing for "Ewelina Lovely#".

62. IO Hale exhibited Experian credit records  to  his  written  statement,
    showing that the address given on the appellant's marriage  certificate
    from the Egyptian Consulate was that of the appellant's wife's brother-
    in-law, who was linked  to  that  address  between  December  2012  and
    September 2013.  That person was also linked to the address  at  Denzil
    Road between February/March 2010 and April 2010  or  April  2012.   The
    appellant was also showing to be linked to the address at  Denzil  Road
    on 25 May 2012 when he  opened  a  Barclays  bank  account  using  that
    address.

63. In relation to the enforcement visit to Mr & Mrs Ryzhko, IO Hale stated
    that he did not recognise the claims relating to him and believes  that
    he may have been mistaken for IO Muir.  He was aware that there  was  a
    complaint against IO Muir at the time which was fully instigated by HMI
    Stratton.  He did not remember any trouble communicating with Mr Ryzhko
    during the visit that he had previously in 2014 refuse the  use  of  an
    interpreter.

64. IO Hale attended the oral hearing, confirmed his professional  details,
    adopted his written statement and gave oral evidence.  He  stated  that
    he had worked in the West London Arresting  Team  since  2001  and  had
    never been specifically crime trained, nor  had  he  had  any  specific
    training on PACE, other than a short lecture when he first started.  He
    had not had any specific training on or after  the  2013  direction  on
    PACE.  IO Hale specialises in marriages of  convenience  and  confirmed
    that although it is not a criminal offence to enter into a marriage  of
    convenience it would potentially be one to seek an EEA  Residence  Card
    on that basis.  Overstaying is also a criminal offence, as is breach of
    conditions and he did not know about any potential offences  under  the
    Perjury Act.

65. IO Hale's work does not involve any criminal prosecution  and  although
    he has a power of arrest it is not normally used in connection with the
    kind  of  work  he  undertakes.   His  role  is  to  examine   marriage
    applications by individuals and he did not  go  on  enforcement  visits
    with the objective of finding offenders or arresting them.   He  speaks
    to them and if relevant information arises, he transfers the case to  a
    Chief Immigration Officer or investigator to consider further.   As  to
    the visits undertaken, these are targeted  at  those  as  regards  whom
    there is intelligence to suggest  that  there  may  be  a  marriage  of
    convenience. It was not possible to make such visits  in  the  case  of
    every EEA marriage application.  It may be, for example, that those who
    were already immigration offenders when they got married were  targeted
    for investigation.   IO  Hale  described  his  visits  as  including  a
    "pastoral" element and explained that  this  was  a  phrase  coined  by
    management to show that he was not  there  in  order  to  identify  and
    arrest offenders but as part of a wider  investigation.   The  pastoral
    element was to speak to people about their application and life in  the
    United Kingdom.  This did include the  provision  of  some  advice  and
    support on genuine marriage  applications  and  other  colleagues,  for
    example the family team, may  give  advice  about  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom.

66. IO Hale explained what a caution was and repeated  the  exact  phrasing
    used.  He stated that it  means  a  person  does  not  have  to  answer
    questions but if they do not, then  inferences  may  be  drawn  against
    them.  It was important because it is part of English criminal law that
    the suspect has a right to silence.

67. In relation to the visit to Mr Hefnawy's address, Mr Hefnawy  had  been
    identified by someone else as  a  suspected  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience and IO Hale was part of the team tasked  to  undertake  the
    visit.  He knocked at the door, showed his warrant card, explained  the
    purpose of his visit and Mr Hefnawy  signed  IO  Whittaker's  notebook.
    There was an explanation that Mr Hefnawy was not required  to  let  the
    immigration officers into the premises.

68. Inside the premises, IO Hale woke the appellant up and  asked  him  for
    his ID, further to which the  appellant  handed  IO  Hale  his  driving
    licence.  IO Hale identified a number  of  reasons  why  the  appellant
    might not be lawfully in the United Kingdom (that he had  no  passport;
    that Mr Hefnawy had said that the  appellant  was  on  holiday  in  the
    United Kingdom; and that he had a driving licence which was  issued  to
    the address some four months before  the  visit).  At  that  point  the
    appellant was cautioned.

69. As to the appellant's contacts for his wife, IO  Hale  stated  that  he
    looked beyond the first contact  listed  for  her  on  the  appellant's
    mobile phone and was sure he had made a wider search, despite the  fact
    that this was not in his record made at the time.  He was asked how  he
    remembered this from February 2015 and he stated that he remembered the
    text that he had seen did not show any direct contact with her and  had
    desperately looked through the phone to find anything else.  It was not
    recorded in his pocket book as it did not seem important at  the  time.
    IO Hale checked the appellant's call history and other information.

70. The appellant was not offered an interpreter as IO  Hale  thought  that
    his English was fine when he spoke to him and there was  no  need.   He
    had no doubts about that even when there was a  misunderstanding  about
    the  word  'cleaner'.   When  the  appellant  said  to  him  he  didn't
    understand, IO Hale thought that this wasn't a  lack  of  understanding
    due to language reasons but a lack of understanding on the substance as
    to why his wife's relatives had given the  information  that  they  did
    about contact on his phone.   The  appellant  was  not  prevented  from
    speaking to a lawyer and IO Hale told him at  the  end  that  he  could
    contact one.  IO Hale stated that the appellant did not repeatedly  ask
    for a lawyer nor did he repeatedly say that he  could  not  understand.
    He also stated that the appellant did not give him  his  full  address.
    When asked specifically about the following points, IO Hale stated that
    he did not rely on the appellant not knowing his  rights;  he  did  not
    rely on him not understanding any questions; he did  not  rely  on  the
    lack of interpreter; he was not rude; he did not laugh or swear at  the
    appellant.

71. IO Hale was asked about his visit to Mr and Mrs Ryzhko  and  he  cross-
    referred to written statements from IO Hendry and IO Hendry's  notebook
    about what  happened  on  that  occasion.   He  denied  being  rude  or
    intimidating and denied making any comment about the  sexuality  of  Mr
    Ryzhko, on which  there  were  notes  and  a  statement  from  IO  Muir
    referring to evidence suggesting that he may be gay.   IO  Hale  denied
    making any derogatory comments; telling Mr Ryzhko that his  application
    was going to be refused; denied telling him he  would  need  a  lawyer;
    denied laughing at  him  and  denied  having  any  concerns  about  his
    language  ability.   He  did  not  recall  Mrs  Ryzhko  providing   any
    interpretation for her husband.  IO Hale was unable  to  offer  a  view
    from the notes available to him as to whether IO Farnham followed  PACE
    in this interview.

72. IO Hale was not able to provide any details of the  proportion  of  his
    visits which resulted in further action about marriages of  convenience
    as he did not keep any  statistics.   His  job  was  to  write  up  the
    evidence and someone else would then decide if  it  was  sufficient  to
    find image of convenience or not.

73. In re-examination, IO Hale confirmed that he had powers under paragraph
    17(1)  of  Schedule  2  to  the  Immigration  Act  1971  to  arrest  an
    immigration offender, which was  not  a  criminal  but  an  immigration
    power.  He does not directly exercise any powers covered  by  PACE  and
    does not directly gather evidence for any  criminal  prosecution.   Any
    intelligence received would be passed on to criminal  teams  who  would
    then visit and as needed arrest the  person  themselves.   He  believes
    that an individual would be re-interviewed on such occasions.  In terms
    of the pocketbooks used, IO Hale stated that he  was  not  supposed  to
    write down every word which was spoken.

74. At the time  of  the  visit  to  the  appellant,  IO's  Hale  team  was
    instructed to administer  a  "caution  +2"  on  marriage  visits  if  a
    person's status was uncertain, so they could be questioned about  that,
    and then, if warranted, to serve them  papers  such  as  an  IS151A  or
    IS151B  (now  RED001).   IO  Hale  only  dealt  administratively   with
    immigration offenders.  From around August 2016, the PACE  caution  was
    no longer used by any officer who is not trained in  the  investigation
    of criminal offences.  There is  no  option  for  such  an  immigration
    officer to arrest under section 28A of the  1971  Act  (arrest  without
    warrant), on suspicion that an immigration criminal  offence  has  been
    committed. They can only use the powers of paragraph 17(1) of  Schedule
    2.  The PACE caution was not therefore used in this situation.  It  had
    been replaced by an administrative  caution.   Members  of  a  criminal
    investigation team would use the powers under section 28A.

Closing submissions on the evidence

75. On behalf of the respondent  in  closing,  Ms  Broadfoot  set  out  the
    relevant legal framework which was not in dispute between the  parties.
    She submitted that on the evidence, the respondent had  discharged  the
    burden of proof showing that the appellant had entered into a  marriage
    of convenience with the predominant purpose of achieving an immigration
    advantage for the following reasons:

      i) The appellant was candid in stating his intentions on coming to the
         United Kingdom on a false  basis  in  2012  and  needing  to  marry
         someone to regularise his stay to remain here.

     ii) The appellant's evidence as to how he met his wife was very limited
         and contained no real detail.  It was clear that the  couple  could
         not communicate with each other and had to rely on friends to do so
         for them; and yet within a few months they were married.

    iii) The appellant married in a mosque on 28 March 2013 but  there  were
         no wedding photos.  The mosque was nowhere near where the appellant
         was living  and  there  are  distinct  oddities  in  the  documents
         relating to the  registration  of  his  marriage  at  the  Egyptian
         Embassy on 5 April 2013.  This included repeated use of an  address
         at which the appellant had never lived.

     iv) The appellant's evidence was lacking in detail about the period  of
         his marriage between March 2013 and March 2016, when his  wife  was
         said to have moved out.  There are very few photos of  the  couple,
         those which were available are undated and of low quality  with  no
         explanation for the circumstances of the photographs.  It would  be
         reasonable to expect much more would be  provided  for  a  marriage
         which had subsisted for three years.

      v) There was no evidence at all from  the  appellant's  wife  herself.
         The unsigned witness statement from her is almost identical to  the
         first unsigned statement of the appellant and appeared to have been
         made up as a hopeful first draft rather than based  on  any  direct
         instructions for her.

     vi) The appellant's evidence as to  addresses  used  by  him  was  both
         suspicious and unsatisfactory.  He used an address on his  marriage
         certificate and a different one on his driver's licence but claimed
         that he never lived at either property.  The explanations given for
         the use of these addresses were unsatisfactory,  particularly  when
         post was clearly being received at the address which he said he did
         live at that time.  There  was  a  question  mark  as  to  how  the
         appellant was able to obtain a driver's license,  a  document  used
         for identification and proof of address purposes, at an address  at
         which he had never lived and for which he could  provide  no  other
         documentary link.

    (vii) There was also limited evidence connecting the  appellant's  wife
         to the address in Stonebridge Park consisting only of a TV  licence
         and a few letters from HSBC.

    (viii) There was some evidence linking  the  appellant's  wife  to  the
         address at Inca Drive, including joint  bank  statements  but  this
         account was previously in the appellant's sole name  to  which  she
         was added.  No evidence  has  been  submitted  on  the  process  of
         converting this to a joint  account  and  it  was  clear  that  the
         appellant had been able to  open  numerous  bank  accounts  without
         identity documents.  In any event, it was impossible to  tell  from
         the bank statements whether the appellant's wife undertook  any  of
         the activity contained therein.

    (ix)  There were  payslips  between  May  and  December  2015  for  the
         appellant's wife linked to the address at Inca Drive,  but  it  was
         submitted that such documents were easy to produce to maintain  the
         fiction of a genuine marriage.  It was noted that the pay on  these
         payslips fell just below the threshold for payment of tax  and  any
         other deductions were very small.  The last few payslips post-dated
         the dissolution of the company that they were said to emanate from.
          In the circumstances it was submitted that  no  weight  should  be
         attached to this evidence.

    (x)   There was evidence from the  respondent  as  to  the  appellant's
         wife's travel in and out of the United Kingdom  which  showed  that
         there were only two records of such travel by air,  both  of  which
         originated and finished in Poland, albeit air travel was not  fully
         recorded prior to 2014.  Similarly, although there were no  records
         of travel by car prior to 8 April 2015, there were  no  records  of
         such travel  since  that  date  for  the  appellant's  wife.   This
         evidence does not fit with the appellant's explanation of  how  his
         wife travelled  to  and  from  Poland.   The  suggestion  that  the
         appellant's wife was able to travel with  friends  by  car  at  the
         particular moment when she needed  to  return  to  visit  her  sick
         mother was implausible.

    (xi)  As to the Facebook evidence generally, it was submitted  that  on
         the  balance  of  probabilities,  the  details  produced   by   the
         respondent in evidence were  of  the  appellant's  wife's  Facebook
         account.  First, it has her name on it with the  correct  spelling.
         Secondly, the Facebook shows connections to 2  people  to  whom  we
         knew that the appellant's wife  is  connected  in  real  life:  her
         sister and her brother.  Thirdly, the appellant  accepted  that  it
         contained pictures of his wife.  It would have to be questioned who
         else would create such a page in the appellant's wife's name,  with
         her details and photographs on it.  There was no reason for that to
         have been done.  As to the photographs,  comparisons  can  be  made
         between the person who is in them and in particular  the  identical
         clothing worn by person identified  as  the  appellant's  wife.   A
         partner and child are evident in many of the pictures and there  is
         a record (in the marriage interview of her sister and her  brother-
         in-law) of the appellant's wife having visiting the United  Kingdom
         in April 2013 with her baby.

    (xii)  The Experian credit records submitted by the respondent show the
         connections between the appellant and certain addresses, as well as
         others connected with those addresses, including his wife's brother-
         in-law.

76. Overall, it was submitted that there  was  overwhelming  evidence  that
    this was a marriage of convenience.  It was not necessary in  light  of
    the above to have any regard to or reliance  on  the  evidence  of  the
    interview at the immigration visit on 27 February  2014  to  reach  the
    conclusion that this was a marriage of convenience.

77. As to the immigration enforcement visit, the appellant's evidence shows
    matters  of  perception  only.   It  was  submitted  that  it  was  not
    surprising that someone who was woken  early  and  unexpectedly  by  an
    immigration officer would think that  the  experience  was  unpleasant.
    This is not the same as establishing that IO Hale was rude, aggressive,
    sneering and so on.

78. Counsel for the respondent also  raised  concerns  about  the  evidence
    given by others  about  IO  Hale  and  the  process  by  which  he  was
    identified with those being shown a single photograph of him  and  none
    of the other officers involved.  In particular, Mr & Mrs Ryzhko made  a
    formal complaint against IO Muir following the visit made  to  them  no
    further action was taken.  It was only in recent weeks  that  they  now
    claimed the behaviour complained of was that of IO Hale and a complaint
    had been made against him.  The only reason that this had been made now
    was to allow the appellant to try to  cast  doubt  on  the  Immigration
    Officer's credibility and not because of any  genuine  complaint.   The
    substance  of  that  complaint  was  not  put  to  IO  Hale  in  cross-
    examination.  It was submitted that IO Hale's evidence was clear as  to
    his role in enforcement visits relating to marriages of convenience and
    that  there  was  a  similarity  between  his  oral  evidence,  written
    statement and his pocketbook record.

79. As to Mr Hefnawy's evidence, it was submitted that he  had  exaggerated
    his evidence to help out his childhood friend from Egypt.

80. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Norman submitted on  the  evidence  that
    the respondent had failed to discharge the burden of proving  that  the
    appellant had entered into a marriage of convenience on the balance  of
    probability.  She submitted that the fact that the appellant was candid
    about his plan to stay in the United Kingdom did  not  of  itself  mean
    that his marriage was one of convenience.  It was submitted that people
    limit their potential dating pool on many different grounds  and  there
    was no reason why the appellant could not legitimately have  restricted
    his to EEA nationals or someone who was in a position  to  support  his
    application for leave to  remain.   It  was  stated  that  there  is  a
    difference between a convenient marriage and a marriage of convenience.
     In any event, this was not a  "shotgun"  wedding.  There  were  a  few
    months between the couple meeting and getting married and therefore  no
    significant urgency in doing so.

81. As to the wedding itself, little turned on the location of  the  mosque
    and as to the address used on the forms with the Egyptian  embassy,  it
    was plausible that the appellant had no fixed or permanent  address  to
    use and therefore used a correspondence address.

82. There is documentary evidence consisting  of  a  TV  licence  and  bank
    statements, including a joint bank statement showing the appellant  and
    his wife at the same address and also of moving frequently.  As to  the
    payslips, it was not suggested that the documents were not genuine  and
    not all businesses are registered at Companies House.

83. It was submitted that  it  was  not  inherently  implausible  that  the
    appellant's relationship with his  wife  broke  down  in  the  face  of
    ongoing court proceedings and that this was the reason why there was no
    evidence directly from her in these proceedings.

84. Counsel submitted that the travel records added nothing of significance
    to the respondent's case around the date of the  marriage.   There  was
    nothing inherently implausible about the appellant's wife travelling to
    Poland to visit her mother at the time of the enforcement visit.

85. As for the Facebook evidence, it was submitted that this was limited to
    what was  publicly  available  in  2016,  only  when  accessed  by  the
    respondent.  In any event, social media was not necessarily a  complete
    or accurate reflection but  was  an  opportunity  for  that  person  to
    "curate" their life.  There was no evidence as  to  what  the  Facebook
    profile said in  2013.  It  was  possible  that  there  were  different
    Facebook accounts and it was possible that there may be children from a
    past or new relationship.

Conclusions on the evidence

86. For the reasons set out in paragraphs 96 to 101  below,  which  do  not
    rely on any evidence obtained during the questioning of  the  appellant
    on 27 February 2017, we find that the  respondent  has  discharged  the
    legal burden of establishing, on the balance of probabilities, that the
    appellant entered into a marriage of convenience with his wife; that is
    to  say,  the  marriage  was  entered  into  with  the  sole   aim   of
    circumventing the rules on residence for a third-country national.

87. The appellant's evidence to rebut the  respondent's  suspicions  as  to
    whether he was in a  marriage  of  convenience  is  very  limited.   In
    totality, it includes an Islamic marriage certificate, an  untranslated
    marriage certificate from the Egyptian Embassy, statements for a  joint
    bank account (converted from an account in the appellant's sole  name),
    bank statements and letters addressed to the  appellant  and  his  wife
    individually at  the  same  addresses,  a  TV  licence  issued  to  the
    appellant's wife at one of those addresses, payslips and a P60 for  the
    appellant's wife, a mobile phone letter, a letter  of  support  from  a
    friend and a small number of photographs.

88. Some of the evidence that has been submitted on behalf of the appellant
    carries little weight for the following reasons.  First, although there
    are  two  marriage  certificates,  the  documents  give  rise  to  some
    concerns.  In particular, the one from the  Egyptian  Embassy  has  not
    been translated (save in part, orally  by  the  appellant  through  the
    court appointed interpreter at the hearing)  and  contains  information
    which the appellant has confirmed is and was false as to  his  address.
    The marriage certificate  asks  for  an  address  for  three  different
    purposes (current address, intended address and correspondence address)
    to which George's Drive was given for all three questions, despite  the
    fact that the appellant had never lived there and had no  intention  of
    doing so.  His explanation that  this  was  used  as  a  correspondence
    address because there was no firm plan of where he and  his  wife  were
    going to live therefore does not withstand scrutiny.

89. Secondly, there is no evidence as to when and how the appellant's  bank
    account was converted into a joint account and it is not clear  on  the
    face of the statements  who  was  using  the  account  or  whether  the
    appellant's wife paid in or withdrew from it.

90. Thirdly, the letter of support from Mahmoud Shamakh  dated  10  January
    2016 refers to seeing the appellant and his  wife  regularly  at  their
    home at Inca Drive and refers to them being a genuine couple.  However,
    by this date, the Applicant's evidence was that their relationship  was
    under strain and shortly thereafter the  Applicant's  wife  moved  out.
    The Applicant has also not been in contact  with  this  person  at  all
    since the statement and he did not attend the appeal  hearing  to  give
    oral evidence.

91. Fourthly, the payslips for the appellant's wife  do  not  include  full
    details of her employer and the only trace that can  be  found  of  the
    company she worked for shows that it  was  dissolved  over  two  months
    prior to the last payslip being issued.  This casts  significant  doubt
    on the genuineness of those documents.

92. Finally, the photographs submitted are of poor quality, are undated and
    are very limited in number.  There is no explanation from the appellant
    about the photographs at all.

93. The appellant fails by some margin to discharge the  evidential  burden
    on  him.  Indeed,  that  evidence  fully  supports   the   respondent's
    conclusion that the appellant's marriage is one of  convenience.  There
    are conspicuous gaps  in  the  evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in the evidence which it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  a
    person who undertook a genuine marriage, not  one  of  convenience,  to
    have produced.  First, there is no evidence of either marriage ceremony
    by way of invitations, cards, photographs;  and  so  on.   There  is  a
    photograph in the Facebook evidence of the appellant's wife outside  of
    the Egyptian Embassy on the day of that ceremony, but she is in  casual
    clothing and photographed with her sister and not  the  appellant.   It
    seems strange at the very least that this was the only photograph taken
    on the day/outside the place of a ceremony which the appellant said was
    akin to a marriage ceremony.

94. Secondly, there is no evidence at all of any  direct  personal  contact
    between the appellant and his wife prior to their marriage and at best,
    a short series of messages from the appellant to  which  there  were  2
    short responses in October 2016.  There is no evidence of any tokens of
    affection, phone calls, messages or other electronic communications  at
    all.  The appellant states that all electronic communication  was  lost
    when his phone broke two years ago but  this  was  after  the  decision
    under challenge and after he lodged his notice of appeal when  he  knew
    the respondent was of the view that he had entered into a  marriage  of
    convenience,  such  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to   expect   such
    information to have been preserved prior to that.  In the  alternative,
    there is nothing to suggest that the appellant has made any attempt  to
    obtain, for example, copies of phone records to show contact;  nor  has
    he made any attempt to explain the lack of other evidence that would it
    would be normal and reasonable to expect in a genuine marriage.

95. Thirdly, other than the bank statements, there is no  evidence  of  any
    other joint bills or even bills addressed to one of the couple  at  the
    same address, such as utility bills or council tax bills; nor  are  any
    tenancy agreements available.

96.  Fourthly,  no  witnesses  attended  the  hearing  to  vouch  for   the
    genuineness of the appellant's marriage.

97. Finally, and  strikingly,  there  was  no  evidence  at  all  from  the
    appellant's wife.  Although the appellant stated that she was  prepared
    to support him up until the second adjournment of his appeal hearing in
    January 2016, there was no signed statement from her in advance of that
    hearing, nor  since.   There  is  no  statement  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors that she attended either of the first  two  hearings  (which
    were adjourned only on the day) prepared to give evidence or that  they
    had any direct contact with her.   Although  it  is  plausible  that  a
    relationship may have broken down in the way the appellant claimed,  it
    is less plausible that a person who was also at risk of a finding  that
    she entered into a marriage of convenience with potential  consequences
    for her own stay in the United Kingdom would  not  take  any  steps  to
    defend herself against the allegations of a marriage of convenience.

98. For these reasons, the appellant fails to meet the evidential burden of
    showing his marriage was not one of convenience. This  is  so,  if  his
    evidence  was  considered  alone,  without  taking  into  account   the
    respondent's evidence, including that from the enforcement visit on  27
    February 2015.  When the respondent's evidence is taken  into  account,
    as well as the context of the appellant's position at the time  of  the
    marriage, we find it is overwhelmingly  the  case  that  the  appellant
    entered into a marriage of convenience.

99. First, the appellant's own evidence was  that  he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2012 using deception by applying for a visit visa  when  his
    prior intention (supported by  his  gathering  of  funds  in  Egypt  to
    support  himself  long-term  in  the  United  Kingdom)  was  to  settle
    permanently in the United Kingdom.  He candidly stated  that  his  only
    realistic option to remain longer term in the  United  Kingdom  without
    becoming an overstayer was to find a person  to  marry  to  support  an
    application for leave to remain.  We find that the appellant  succeeded
    in doing just that, although not in a genuine or lawful way.   Although
    it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that it would be  perfectly
    permissible for him to look for a partner from  a  pool  of  those  who
    could help him achieve his objective of remaining in the United Kingdom
    and the one he found was convenient to do so, there was no evidence  of
    this from the appellant himself.  In fact, the evidence of how  he  met
    his wife was very limited and it was clear from his evidence that  they
    had no direct means of communication prior to their  marriage  as  they
    had no common language and had to use friends to interpret for  them  -
    even to the extent that the marriage proposal was effectively  made  in
    advance by a third party.  This context does not provide any support to
    it being a genuine relationship or marriage.

100. As we  have  seen,  on  his  own  evidence,  the  appellant  also  used
    addresses for official purposes which were not ones which he  had  ever
    lived at, showing at least  some  element  of  dishonesty  on  his  own
    marriage certificate, in applying  for  a  bank  account  (which  would
    require proof of  identity/address)  and  in  applying  for  a  driving
    licence  (which  would  also  require  proof  of  identity/address  and
    importantly would be used as a form of ID).

101.  Secondly,  we  find  that  the  Facebook  evidence  submitted  by  the
    respondent shows a genuine account belonging to the  Applicant's  wife.
    The account uses her name, numerous  photographs  which  the  appellant
    accepts are her and contains personal information and references (eg to
    family members) which we know the appellant's wife has and  he  accepts
    are true.  There is no plausible explanation for why such a page  would
    be set up containing real information other than that it is  a  genuine
    account.  In these circumstances, there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the
    remaining information on that Facebook page, which is in many  respects
    supported by other evidence.  This includes that the  appellant's  wife
    was resident  in  Poland  (as  supported  by  the  passenger  movements
    information which included travel only on 2 occasions for a total of  6
    days, both trips originating in Poland); that she had  a  partner  (the
    photographs  of  this  show  the  appellant's  wife  wearing  virtually
    identical clothing to that worn by the woman in photographs  which  the
    appellant accepts are of his wife) and that she had at least one  child
    (as supported by information  in  the  appellant's  wife's  sister  and
    brother-in-law's marriage interview and the photographs).

102. We do not find the alternative Facebook page submitted at  the  hearing
    before us to be credible.  This page was created  only  on  13  October
    2016, contains very little personal information and only 2 posts  about
    the appellant's wife's relationship status.  The  appellant  stated  in
    evidence that this was the means by  which  he  communicated  with  her
    prior to the date on which the page was created,  which  is  of  course
    impossible.  We find on the balance of probabilities that this  account
    was created for the sole purpose of supporting the  appellant's  appeal
    and is inherently unreliable.

103. As referred to above, the respondent has  submitted  evidence  to  show
    that the appellant's wife travelled to the United Kingdom only twice in
    2014 and not otherwise and that her  travel  started  and  finished  in
    Poland on both occasions.  Although records were not complete for other
    travel prior to 2015, there is no evidence of  any  other  travel  once
    they were comprehensive and this directly contradicts  the  appellant's
    evidence.  This evidence, together with the  above,  strongly  suggests
    that the appellant's wife was resident in Poland through  the  time  of
    her claimed relationship and marriage to the appellant.

104. In conclusion, we find that the appellant entered into  a  marriage  of
    convenience and the respondent  has  discharged  the  legal  burden  of
    establishing this on the balance of probabilities.  In so  finding,  we
    have not needed to have recourse to any information  arising  from  the
    enforcement visit on 27  February  2015,  none  of  which  was  in  the
    appellant's favour.




Enforcement visit of 27 February 2015: Immigration (PACE Codes of  Practice)
Direction 2013


105. As has been explained, the  Upper  Tribunal  has  found  that,  without
    regard to any evidence arising from the  enforcement  visit  which  may
    support the respondent's case, she has amply discharged the  burden  of
    showing that the appellant's marriage was one of convenience.   Should,
    however, that evidence be excluded from consideration?

106. Section 66 of the Police and Criminal Evidence  Act  1984  provides  as
    follows:-


    "66. Codes of practice


   1) The Secretary of State shall issue codes  of  practice  in  connection
      with-

        (a)   the exercise by police officers of statutory powers -
             (i)  to search a person without first arresting him;
             (ii) to search a vehicle without making an arrest; or
             (iii)    to arrest a person.
        (b)   the detention, treatment, questioning  and  identification  of
             persons by police officers;
        (c)   searches of premises by police officers; and
        (d)   the seizure of property found by police officers on persons or
        premises.


    (2)  Codes shall (in particular) include provision in  connection  with
        the exercise by police officers of powers under section 63B above.
    ..."

107. Section 145 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, so far as  material
    for present purposes, provides:-


    "145 - Codes of Practice


    (1)  An immigration officer exercising any specified power to-
         (a)  arrest, question, search or take fingerprints from a person,
         (b)  enter and search premises, or
         (c)  seize property found on persons or premises,
         must have regard to such provisions of a code as may be specified.


   2) Subsection (1) also applies to an  authorised  person  exercising  the
      power to take fingerprints conferred by section 141.


    (2A) A person exercising a power under regulations made  by  virtue  of
         section 144 must have regard to such provisions of a code as may be
         specified.

   3) Any specified provision or a code may have effect for the purposes  of
      this section subject to such modifications as may be specified.


   4) "Specified" means specified in a direction given by the  Secretary  of
      State.


   5) "Authorised person" has the same meaning as in section 141.


    (6)  "Code" means -
         (d)  in relation to England and Wales, any code of practice for the
             time being in force under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
             1984.
    ... "

108. Part VII of the 1999 Act is  entitled  "Power  to  arrest,  search  and
    fingerprint".   Its  provisions  largely  involve  amendments  to   the
    Immigration Act 1971, in the form of new provisions relating to  powers
    to arrest and search and to take fingerprints.


109. The Explanatory Notes to Part VII say the following:-

    "The White Paper explains that immigration officers currently  have  to
    rely on the police to perform certain tasks relating to the enforcement
    of  immigration  law  and  announced  that  in  order  to  reduce  this
    dependency ... the government intended to extend the existing powers of
    arrest to immigration officers and to provide immigration officers with
    powers of search, entry and seizure in respect of immigration  offences
    equivalent to those the police already have.  Part VII gives effect  to
    this but imposes certain limitations on the exercise of  these  powers.
    The new powers - and associated safeguards  -  have  been  modelled  on
    those contained in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 ..."


110. The Explanatory Notes to section 145 state as follows:-

    "This section allows the Secretary of State to direct that  immigration
    officers must have regard to relevant provisions of the  existing  PACE
    Codes  of  Practice  in  England,  Wales  and  Northern  Ireland   when
    exercising its specified powers to arrest,  question,  search  persons,
    enter and search premises, take fingerprints or seize properties.   The
    direction issued under this  section  must  specify  which  powers  are
    covered, which provisions of the existing PACE Codes  of  Practice  are
    relevant and list any modifications necessary to ensure consistency  of
    approach.  The section will reinforce  the  existing  commitment  under
    section 67(9) of PACE which requires any person charged with a duty  to
    investigate offences to have regard  to  the  relevant  PACE  Codes  of
    Practice.  It will extend this commitment to immigration officers  when
    they are exercising specified powers under Schedule 2 to the  1971  Act
    and also  to  any  authorised  person  exercising  the  power  to  take
    fingerprints conferred by section 141 of this Act."


111. In exercise of the powers conferred by section 145  of  the  1999  Act,
    the Secretary of State made the Immigration (PACE  Codes  of  Practice)
    Direction 2013.  A copy of this Direction is to be found in the  second
    Appendix to this decision.

112. It is common ground that, in the present case,  the  provision  of  the
    table in Schedule 1 to the Direction which is of material  significance
    is that in which the words in the left hand column are "Interview under
    caution to establish an offence or  breach".   The  right  hand  column
    provides that, in this situation, certain provisions of Codes C, E  and
    F apply.  Code C deals with the detention, treatment and questioning of
    persons.   Code  E  deals  with  audio  recording  of  interviews  with
    suspects.   Code  F  concerns  the  visual  recording  with  sound   of
    interviews with suspects.

113. The case for the appellant is that the  questioning  of  the  appellant
    during the enforcement visit comprised an "interview ...  to  establish
    an offence or breach" and that IO Hale failed to administer  a  caution
    to the appellant, as required by PACE Practice Code C paragraph 10.

114. The relevant provisions of paragraph 10 are as follows:-

    "(a)  When a caution must be given

    10.1     A person whom there are grounds to suspect of an offence,  see
         Note 10A, must be cautioned before any questions about an  offence,
         or further  questions  if  the  answers  provide  the  grounds  for
         suspicion, are put to them  if  either  the  suspect's  answers  or
         silence,  (i.e.  failure   or   refusal   to   answer   or   answer
         satisfactorily)  may  be  given  in  evidence  to  a  court  in   a
         prosecution. A person need not be cautioned if  questions  are  for
         other necessary purposes, e.g. -

         (a)  ...
         (b)   to  obtain  information  in  accordance  with  any   relevant
             statutory requirement, see paragraph 10.9;
         (c)  in furtherance of  the  proper  and  effective  conduct  of  a
             search, e.g. to determine the need to search in  the  exercise
             of powers of stop and search or  to  seek  co-operation  while
             carrying out a search; or
         (d)  to seek verification of  a  written  record  as  in  paragraph
         11.13.


    10.2     Whenever a person not under arrest is initially cautioned,  or
         reminded they are under caution, that person must at the same  time
         be told they are not under arrest and informed of the provisions of
         paragraph 3.21 which explain  how  they  may  obtain  legal  advice
         according to whether they are at a  police  station  or  elsewhere.
         See Note 10C.

    ...

    (b)  Terms of the caution

    10.5     The caution which must be given on:

         (a)  arrest; or
         (b)  all other occasions before a person  is  charged  or  informed
             they may be prosecuted; see section 16,


         should, unless the restriction on drawing adverse  inferences  from
         silence applies, see Annex C, be in the following terms:

         "You do not have to say anything.  But it may harm your defence  if
         you do not mention when questioned something which you  later  rely
         on in Court.  Anything you do say may be given in evidence."

         ...







    Notes for Guidance

    10A      There must be  some  reasonable,  objective  grounds  for  the
         suspicion, based on known facts or information which  are  relevant
         to the likelihood the offence has been committed and the person  to
         be questioned committed it.

    10B      An arrested person must be  given  sufficient  information  to
         enable them to understand that they have  been  deprived  of  their
         liberty and the reason they have been arrested, e.g. when a  person
         is arrested on suspicion of committing  an  offence  they  must  be
         informed of the suspected offence's nature, when and where  it  was
         committed.  The suspect must also be  informed  of  the  reason  or
         reasons why the arrest is considered necessary. Vague or  technical
         language should be avoided.

    10C      The restriction on drawing inferences from silence, see  Annex
         C, paragraph 1, does not  apply  to  a  person  who  has  not  been
         detained and who therefore cannot be prevented from  seeking  legal
         advice if they want, see paragraph 3.21."


115. In her submissions, Miss Broadfoot made reference to a number  of  Home
    Office instructions.  The first is entitled  "Enforcement  interviews".
    This   guidance   "tells   immigration   enforcement   officers   about
    interviewing suspects and witnesses".  It includes  information  as  to
    "the different kinds of enforcement interview and  when  and  how  they
    should be conducted".  At page 5, we find the following:-


    "Types of enforcement interview

    Immigration enforcement officers may  choose  to  try  and  engage  any
    person they encounter in normal conversation but, where the purpose  of
    a conversation is to gather information for a law  enforcement  purpose
    it is a formal interview and must be conducted in accordance with  this
    guidance.   An  enforcement  interview  is  distinct  from   a   normal
    conversation  in  that  its  purpose  is  to  seek  out  and   evaluate
    information for a specific purpose.

    The different types of enquiry or investigation commonly  conducted  by
    Immigration Enforcement officers are:

    Administrative enquiries - interview(s) that follow 3 distinct stages:

    .    Exploratory questioning.

    .    Initial examination under paragraphs 2 or 2A of Schedule 2 to  the
   Immigration Act 1971.

    .    Further examination - usually away from the scene.

    Formal criminal enquiries - an interview conducted under PACE where  it
    is intended to actively pursue prosecution  -  a  criminal  caution  is
    given and the person is notified that they are entitled to  free  legal
    advice.  Usually conducted  in  a  police  station  following  criminal
    arrest - recorded via electronic audio recording: see: Investigation of
    criminal offences in assessing harm.

    This guidance concerns  investigative  interviews  in  connection  with
   administrative enquiries."


116. At page 11, we find the following:-

    "Initial administrative interviews: purpose and conduct

    The purpose of an initial administrative interview is formally to:

    .     establish  whether  a  person  has  committed  a  breach  of  the
   immigration law and/or

    .    gather evidence or supporting information in relation to (1)  from
   a third party ...

    .    identify whether a person is liable to  be  detained  and  removed
         under administrative powers.

    ...

    The following principles must  be  observed  or  considered  during  an
    initial administrative interview:

    .    A caution should  not  be  given  for  an  initial  administrative
         interview where questioning is intended to  establish  basic  facts
         such as identity, relationships or ownership of property - but  you
         must identify yourself and your purpose.

    .    Where an initial examination leads to reasonable suspicion that an
         administrative breach or criminal offence may have  been  committed
         by the person, he  must  be  arrested  and  immediately  given  the
         administrative explanation or criminal caution  as  appropriate  as
         per instructions given within "arrest and restraint" guidance."


117. The guidance on "arrest and restraint" "tells  Immigration  Enforcement
    officers when and how they may  make  an  arrest  using  administrative
    immigration or criminal powers".  At page 8, there begins a section  of
    the guidance entitled "Making  an  administrative  arrest".   The  most
    common power of administrative arrest is under paragraph 17 of Schedule
    2 to the Immigration Act 1971.  Immigration  Enforcement  officers  are
    told that:-
    "You must reasonably suspect that the person in question is  liable  to
    be held in immigration detention under paragraph 16 of  that  Schedule.
    This suspicion may arise as a result of known information, the person's
    actions or information discovered during the course of an enquiry.

    ...

    In general, reasonable suspicion for the purposes  of  arrest  requires
    facts or circumstances that would lead a reasonable person  to  suspect
    that the individual requires leave under the Immigration Act  1971  and
    either:

    .    the individual has no leave;

    .    there are grounds  on  which  the  individual's  leave  should  be
   curtailed.

    The arrest must be necessary to progress the case, this could include:

    .    establishing identity in order to determine status;

    .    interviewing further to determine status;

    .    searching  for  documents  post-arrest  to  establish  status  and
   progress removal;

    ...

    When it is not appropriate to administratively arrest

    It is important to consider whether arrest and detention  is  necessary
    ... for the operation of effective immigration control.  Officers  must
    consider whether an arrest is necessary to determine a person's  status
    and to consider whether the person should be removed from the UK.

    It is unlikely to be appropriate to arrest a person if we already  know
    their immigration status and no progression on the case will be made by
    arresting them.   ...   Where  administrative  arrest  powers  are  not
    available, officers must consider whether it would  be  appropriate  to
    "criminally arrest the individual" (original emphasis).   There  follow
    guidance on:

    Information to be given on administrative arrest

    A person  who  is  administratively  arrested  under  paragraph  17  of
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 as a person who may  be  removed
    from the UK must also be informed that:

    .    they are under arrest and not free to leave;

    .    the reason for the arrest;

    .    why it is necessary to arrest them.

    You must give the following explanation to the person:

    "I am an immigration officer.  I am arresting you on suspicion that you
    are a person liable  to  immigration  detention.   This  is  because  I
    suspect you [give reason] e.g. "have entered the UK  illegally",  "have
    overstayed your leave", "have breached the condition  of  your  leave",
    and so on".  This is not an arrest for a criminal offence.

    Do you understand?"


118. At page 41, the guidance begins on "Criminal arrest".  It is said  that
    "This page tells Immigration Enforcement officers about compliance with
    the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984  (PACE)  Codes  of  Practice,
    following an arrest for a criminal offence".  On the same  page,  there
    is the following:-

    "Compliance with PACE

    The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE),  and  its  associated
    Codes of Practice,  applies  to  all  those  arrested  for  a  criminal
    offence.  Where immigration officers (IOs) use criminal powers to  make
    an arrest they must comply with PACE Code  of  Practice  on  Powers  of
    Entry Search and Seizure and Code of Practice G on Powers of Arrest.

    Persons arrested or detained under Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act
    1971 (the 1971 Act),  including  those  who  were  taken  to  a  police
    station, are not subject to PACE.  Such persons  must  be  notified  of
    their detention and reasons for detention under  the  1971  Act  by  an
    immigration officer, either verbally or in writing.  Where a  detention
    is authorised verbally, the person  and  detaining  authority  must  be
    provided with written confirmation as soon as practicable."


119. At page 42, an explanation is given of the circumstances  in  which  an
    immigration officer can exercise a criminal power of arrest:

    "To exercise a criminal power of arrest, you must:

    .    be investigating an immigration related offence and have a genuine
         intention to prosecute the individual:

    �    if you have no intention of investigating  a  criminal  matter  or
         referring it to  the  Crime  Prosecution  Service  (CPS)  then  use
         administrative powers (see making an administrative arrest)

    .    be investigating an offence for which a power of arrest exists;

    .    have reasonable grounds to suspect that the person:

    �    has committed or attempted to commit the offence

    �    is committing or attempting to commit the offence

    ...

    In England and Wales you must caution the subject as follows:

    "You do not have to say anything but it may harm your defence if you do
    not mention, when questioned, something which  you  later  rely  on  in
    court.  Anything you say may be given in evidence".


120.  Separate  Home  Office  Guidance  has  been  published  on   "Marriage
    investigations".  Page 3 is said to provide "A summary of  the  various
    removals pathways for individuals involved in sham marriages  or  civil
    partnerships, and marriages or durable  partnerships  of  convenience".
    In the table, against the words in the left hand  column  "Marriage  of
    convenience.  EEA residence card issued" we find the following  in  the
    right hand column:-

    "Administrative removal decision

    EEA administrative removal procedures under EEA Regulation  23(6)(a)  -
    which automatically invalidates the extant EEA card".


121. Before engaging  with  Counsels'  submissions  on  this  issue,  it  is
    necessary to mention previous Home Office guidance on what was known as
    "Caution + 2".  The caution could be used when an  immigration  officer
    was exercising administrative powers.  It  consisted  of  the  criminal
    caution and the "+ 2" reference was to the need to add to that caution,
    first, the words "You are not under arrest"  and,  secondly,  "You  are
    free to leave at any time".

122. Importantly, however, the use of "Caution + 2" was not mandatory,  even
    in the circumstances described in the previous guidance when  it  might
    be appropriate to give it.  This was where during  initial  questioning
    an individual "states something that suggests that they may be a person
    to whom removal directions can be given".  In particular the "Caution +
    2 interview is only appropriate in  straightforward  immigration  cases
    where the sole intention is to administratively remove".

123. As we have seen from the written and oral evidence,  IO  Hale  said  he
    administered a "Caution + 2", recording this as C+2  in  his  notebook.
    His written statement makes plain that  this  "was  not  done  for  the
    purposes of any criminal proceedings".

124. For the appellant, Ms Norman puts the case in the following  way.   The
    immigration officers who conducted the enforcement visit fell,  in  her
    submission, within section 67(9) of PACE, which provides:-


    "(9) Persons other than police officers who were charged with the  duty
    of investigating offences or charging offenders shall in the  discharge
    of that duty have regard to any relevant provision of ... a code."


125. According to Ms Norman,  the  fact  that  IO  Hale  and  his  colleague
    considered that they were not investigating a possible criminal offence
    did not matter.  Once they had reasonable cause  to  suspect  that  the
    appellant may have entered into a marriage of convenience, they  should
    have given the appellant a "criminal" caution.  At  that  point,  there
    were reasons to suspect  that  the  appellant  may  have  committed  an
    immigration criminal offence under  the  1971  Act,  by  being  in  the
    country without leave, and that he may have  committed  an  offence  of
    perjury.

126. Ms Norman submitted that, so far as the Home Office guidance  materials
    attempted to circumscribe the circumstances in which a criminal caution
    needed to be administered, these materials were simply wrong.

127.  In  support  of  her  submission  that  section  67(9)  falls  to   be
    interpreted widely, Ms Norman relied upon a number of  authorities;  in
    particular, R v Gill and Another [2003] EWCA Crim 2256.   In  Gill  the
    Inland Revenue had undertaken a so-called "Hansard interview" with  two
    brothers, regarding their tax returns for a business that they  jointly
    ran.  Those interviewing the brothers were three officers "all of  whom
    work for the Special Compliance  Office  ...  which  is  the  Revenue's
    investigation  branch  charged  with   investigating   serious   fraud"
    (paragraph 12).  Later, the brothers were convicted of  six  counts  of
    cheating the Inland Revenue.  They appealed against the convictions  on
    the basis that the trial judge ought not to have admitted into evidence
    material arising from the Hansard interview.  They relied upon  section
    78(1) of PACE, which states:-


    "78  Exclusion of unfair evidence

    (1)  In any proceedings the court may refuse to allow evidence on which
         the prosecution proposes to rely to be given if it appears  to  the
         court that, having regard to all the circumstances,  including  the
         circumstances in which the evidence was obtained, the admission  of
         the evidence would have such an adverse effect on the  fairness  of
         the proceedings that the court ought not to admit it."


128. The Court of Appeal held that the  interviewing  officers  fell  within
    section 67(9) of PACE.  The Hansard interview was not, as  the  Revenue
    claimed, "part of a civil process designed to gather in money and not a
    criminal investigation:-


    "37. While we fully understand the importance of the Revenue being able
    to recover the tax owed to it and the value of the Hansard procedure in
    that regard, we are unable to accept  the  Revenue's  submission.   The
    statement of the Chancellor of the Exchequer made in Parliament  on  18
    October 1990 makes it quite clear that, while in cases of tax fraud the
    Revenue will be influenced by a full confession in deciding whether  to
    accept  the  money  settlement  (including  presumably  an  appropriate
    penalty), it  gives  no  undertaking  to  do  so  or  to  refrain  from
    instituting criminal proceedings.  Tax fraud involves the commission of
    a criminal offence or offences, so that it is in our view evident  that
    the role of the SCO investigating tax fraud involved the  investigating
    of a criminal offence.

    38.  Although we recognise that a caution had not been administered  in
    the past to the Hansard Interview because such  an  interview  has  not
    been regarded by the Revenue as subject to Code C,  in  our  judgement,
    that is to give too narrow an interpretation of the expression "charged
    with a duty of investigating offences" in section 67(9) of  PACE.   The
    officers of the SCO were charged with investigating serious fraud  and,
    since serious fraud inevitably involves the commission of an offence or
    offences, it seemed to us to follow that they were charged with a  duty
    of investigating offences.

    39.  ...  Thus we cannot see why a caution should reduce the chances of
    a taxpayer making a full confession,  which  was  the  purpose  of  the
    process.  However that may be, since the Revenue expressly reserved the
    right to prosecute for fraud, it appears to us that one of the purposes
    of asking the questions must have been the "obtaining of evidence which
    may be given to a court in a prosecution", even if the  Revenue's  main
    ain was to arrive at a monetary settlement."


129. We do not find  that  Gill  compels  the  conclusion  which  Ms  Norman
    contends.   The  fact  that  immigration  officers   have   powers   of
    investigation, administrative arrest and criminal arrest does not  mean
    that all three functions are to be regarded as a single entity, for the
    purposes of section 67(9).  It is, in our view, quite apparent that, in
    carrying out  the  enforcement  visit  of  27  February  2015  and  the
    questioning which followed, the immigration officers  were  not  acting
    "in the discharge of"  any  duty  they  might  have  "of  investigating
    offences or charging offenders".  By contrast, the  Revenue's  officers
    were, as the Court of  Appeal  held  at  paragraph  38,  "charged  with
    investigating serious fraud".  When they interviewed the brothers, this
    is what they were doing.  The fact that they reserved the right not  to
    prosecute, if they  achieved  what  they  regarded  as  a  satisfactory
    outcome from the interview, was immaterial.

130. In the present case, there is no  corresponding  inevitability  between
    the appellant having entered into a marriage  of  convenience  and  his
    having committed  a  criminal  offence.   The  most  obvious  potential
    offence under the 1971 Act is that created by section  24(1)(b),  which
    provides that it is an offence for a person knowingly to remain in  the
    United Kingdom beyond the time  limited  by  his  or  her  leave.   The
    prosecution would, accordingly, have to prove beyond  reasonable  doubt
    the person's state of mind.  There is, in any case,  a  great  deal  of
    difference between "serious fraud" and "entering  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience".  Serious  fraud  is  criminal  conduct,  per  se,  whilst
    entering a marriage of convenience only may involve the  commission  of
    some offence.

131. The subject matter of the other cases referred to by Ms  Norman,  which
    she provided as case summaries, likewise do  not  disclose  a  material
    similarity in subject matter  with  the  carrying  out  by  immigration
    officers of marriage investigations.

132. We accordingly find  that  Miss  Broadfoot  was  entitled  to  ask  the
    Tribunal to place weight upon the distinction drawn in the Home  Office
    Instructions and Guidance between administrative enquiries  and  formal
    criminal enquiries.  The articulation in the instructions and  guidance
    as to where and when PACE requirements apply is,  we  find,  compatible
    with section 67(9).  It reflects the correct legal position.   It  also
    acknowledges  the  important  fact  that,  in  the  immigration  field,
    relatively very few of those who are adjudged to be illegal entrants or
    overstayers  find  themselves  subject  to  criminal  prosecution.  The
    respondent's main aim is to  ensure  such  persons  are  recognised  as
    having no immigration status and, where  appropriate,  to  remove  them
    from the United Kingdom.

133. Having made these findings, we  address  the  submissions  on  what  is
    meant by "interview under caution to establish an offence or breach" in
    Schedule 1 to  the  PACE  Codes  of  Practice  Correction  2013.   Miss
    Broadfoot submitted that an offence must mean a criminal  offence.   We
    agree.  She also submitted that the same  must  be  true  of  the  word
    "breach", although she accepted that the respondent has, in  the  past,
    used the word "loosely".

134. At page 11 of the Enforcement Interviews General  Instructions,  it  is
    stated that where an initial  administrative  examination  leads  to  a
    reasonable suspicion that an administrative breach or criminal  offence
    may have been  committed  by  a  person  "they  must  be  arrested  and
    immediately given the administrative explanation or criminal caution as
    appropriate as per instructions given within the 'arrest and restraint'
    guidance".

135. The statement that reasonable suspicion  of  an  administrative  breach
    should lead to immediate administrative arrest under  paragraph  17  of
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 appears somewhat curious,  given
    what is said at pages 8 and 9 of the Arrest and Restraint guidance (see
    above).   It  is,  nevertheless,  manifest  that  on  page  11  of  the
    Enforcement Interviews Instructions an administrative breach  is  being
    contrasted with a criminal offence.  This means, we find, that when one
    looks at the PACE  entry  "Interview  under  caution  to  establish  an
    offence or breach", the word "breach" must be interpreted  in  the  way
    Miss Broadfoot says.  If it were otherwise, then there will be no scope
    for an "administrative explanation" as opposed to a "criminal caution".
     It is the failure to give a criminal  caution  upon  which  Ms  Norman
    relies.

136. We have set out the wording of 10.1  (Caution)  of  Code  C  above.   A
    close examination of that wording favours the respondent's stance.  The
    words "If either the suspect's answers or silence ... may be  given  in
    evidence to a court in a prosecution" highlight  the  fact  that  there
    needs to be a real likelihood of prosecution.  As we have said, reality
    in the immigration field is  otherwise.   Secondly,  10.1  specifically
    records that a person "need not be cautioned if questions are for other
    necessary purposes".  The list which is then given is non-exhaustive.

137. For these reasons,  we  find  that  the  immigration  officers  on  the
    occasion of the enforcement visit did not breach  PACE  by  failing  to
    give the appellant a criminal caution.

138. Miss Broadfoot submitted that, if the position were otherwise, then  we
    should nevertheless admit the evidence.  She pointed to the fact  that,
    by reason of section 85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002,  as  applied  by  paragraph  1  of  Schedule  1  to  the  EEA
    Regulations, the Tribunal may  consider  any  matter  which  it  thinks
    relevant to the substance of the decision.

139. Ms  Norman  submitted  that,  where  evidence  have  been  obtained  in
    contravention of PACE, the Tribunal should be disinclined to admit  the
    evidence.

140. We have no hesitation in accepting Miss  Broadfoot's  submission.   The
    admissibility in criminal proceedings of evidence obtained contrary  to
    PACE is to be determined in accordance with section 78 of that Act (see
    above).  What fairness demands is highly  context-specific.   The  fact
    that a judge in a criminal trial may decide that certain evidence ought
    to be excluded, as having an adverse effect  on  the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings, has little to say about the task  facing  a  Tribunal,  in
    civil proceedings, which must determine a  person's  entitlement  under
    the EU Treaties to be  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Plainly,  a  grossly
    abusive set of failures may incline the Tribunal, in such  proceedings,
    to the view that - for its purposes - admission of the  evidence  would
    be inappropriate; for example, if admission would be seen as  endorsing
    highly problematic behaviour on the part of immigration officers.

141. That is not, however, the position in the present case.  We have  taken
    account of the criticisms levelled at IO Hale.  We  also  note  that  a
    similar criticism was made of him in  the  Administrative  Court  (Ait-
    Rabah v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWHC  1099
    (Admin).  Having heard the appellant's  witnesses  (and  the  appellant
    himself), we do not find them to be reliable  on  this  issue.   Having
    made our own assessment of IO Hale, we  consider  that,  at  best,  the
    criticisms made have been substantially exaggerated.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     29th January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


























                                 Appendix 1




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Numbers: IA/09729/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 6th October 2016                           |Promulgated                    |
|                                              |On 7th October 2016            |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                   MR MAHMOUD AHMED ABDEL-SAMIA ELSAKHAWY
                                  Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Norman instructed by Sterling and Law
                    Associates

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a spouse of an EEA national and appealed  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to give removal directions in  accordance
    with Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999,  justified  on
    the grounds of abuse of rights in accordance with Regulation 21B (2) of
    the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   It  was
    asserted that the appellant had undergone a sham marriage.

 2. On 31st March 2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Miller  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant  filed grounds for permission to appeal on the bases that



       i) The judge failed properly to  deal  with  submissions  under  the
          Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE).  Specifically  that
          when  the  Immigration  Officer  interviewed  the  appellant   on
          encounter (on 27the February 2015), he  had  not  administered  a
          caution, failed to offer an  interpreter,  failed  to  produce  a
          contemporaneous note, and failed to allow the appellant to obtain
          legal advice.

      ii) the judge failed to acknowledge a  central  submission  that  the
          documentary evidence predated the 'visit' and could not  possibly
          have been arranged in anticipation of the proceedings

     iii) the judge applied the wrong test for the marriage of  convenience
          and appeared to  conflate  the  'sole  aim'  test  with  that  of
          'genuine and subsisting' marriage under the immigration rules.

      iv) the absence of the sponsor was explained but the  explanation  (a
          build up of stress on the part of the wife) was not addressed  by
          the judge.  The appellant's evidence was  that  the  relationship
          had begun to break down in October 2015.

 4. Ms Pal submitted that PACE did not apply  to  immigration  matters  and
    only applied to criminal matters. She did, however, appear  to  concede
    that the judge appeared to have conflated the test of 'sole  aim'  with
    that  under  the  Immigration  Rules   of   'genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship'.

 5. Ms Norman expanded on her written grounds.

 6. I am satisfied that there was an error of law in the decision which may
    have materially affected the outcome.

 7. With regards ground (iii) the judge, in his approach to  the  evidence,
    concentrated on the evidence from 2015.   The  parties,  however,  were
    said to have married on 28th March 2013.   The  relevant  date,  albeit
    that later evidence may also have an impact on the assessment,  is  the
    date of the marriage and the intention of the  parties  at  that  date,
    hence the reference  by  Ms  Norman  to  'sole  aim'.   Throughout  the
    decision the judge appears to consider the circumstances only  of  2015
    (which included the interview dated February 2015).  For  the  purposes
    of applying the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006,
    the  appellant  is  still  married  and  would  be  treated  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,  as  a  spouse
    until formal divorce, unless of course it was a sham  marriage  and  it
    would be important to consider the aim of the  marriage  at  the  time.
    The judge appears to ignore this previous evidence and for  example  at
    paragraph [25] states

    'There are, I accept, statements in both names, the address being given
    as Stonebridge Court, London NW10. - However, these all seem to predate
    the marriage of the parties'.

 8. Thus the judge does not make reference to the circumstances as  at  the
    date of the marriage, which is of key importance, or,  in  relation  to
    ground (ii) tackle the point that the documentary evidence was said not
    to have been prepared for the proceedings.

 9. In response to ground (iv) the judge did not  address  the  explanation
    for the absence of the wife but again at paragraph [22] stated 'she  is
    not residing with the appellant'.  This approach, too, concentrated  on
    the events of 2015 which in my view was an error.

10. With regards ground (i), I was encouraged, also, to find  an  error  of
    law in relation to the judge's treatment of the  submissions  regarding
    PACE.  As I have found an error stemming from the other grounds, I  set
    the decision aside and as it must be remade, those arguments  regarding
    PACE may be fully rehearsed in the resumed hearing before me.

11. For the avoidance of doubt the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is set aside in its entirety. Having found an error  of  law  the
    matter is to be set down for a resumed hearing before me.

12. Any further evidence should be produced at least 14 days prior  to  the
    substantive hearing.





Signed            Helen Rimington



Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

Dated    7th  October  2016

























                                 Appendix 2


     [pic]




 The Immigration (PACE Codes of Practice) Direction 2013

 Made: 15 July 2013

 Coming into Operation: 15 July 2013

 The Secretary of State, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 145
 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 19991 hereby makes the following
 Direction:

 1.  This Direction may be cited as the Immigration (PACE Codes of Practice
 Direction) 2013.


 2.  In this Direction:
   a. "the 1971 Act" means the Immigration Act 19712;
   b. "the 1999 Act" means the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999;
   c. "the 2004 Act" means the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
   Claimants etc.) Act
     20043;
   d. "the 2007 Act" means the UK Borders Act 20074;
   e. "PACE" means the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 19845; and
   f. "the PACE Code(s) of Practice" means any code of practice issued
   under sections 60, 60A
     or 66 of PACE.


 3.  This Direction does not apply in Scotland or Northern Ireland.


 4.  Nothing in this Direction affects the operation of section 67(9) of
 PACE.


 5.  Subject to paragraphs 6 and 7 and the modifications set out in Schedule
    2, an immigration officer exercising a power that is specified in Column
    1 of Schedule 1 of this Direction, must have regard to any provision of
    the corresponding PACE Code(s) of Practice that is
    specified in Column 2 of that Schedule.






 1  1999 c.33
 2  1971 c.77
 3  2004 c.19
 4  2007 c.30
 5  1984 c.60
 6.  The specified provisions of the PACE Code(s) of Practice in Schedule 1
    shall apply to immigration officers exercising the corresponding
    specified power as if the words and phrases in Column 1 of Part 1 of
    Schedule 2 include reference to the words and phrases in Column 2 of
    that Part.


 7.  Where in the specified provisions of the PACE Code(s) of Practice, any
    thing is or is not to be done by a constable, police force or a member
    of police staff, that thing shall also be done or not done by an
    immigration officer.


 8.  The Immigration (PACE Codes of Practice) Direction 2000 and the
    Immigration (PACE Codes of Practice No 2 and Amendment) Direction 2000
    are revoked, but only insofar as they relate to immigration officers
    exercising specified powers in England and Wales.



 9.  Nothing in this Direction affects the operation of the Immigration
    (PACE Codes of Practice) Direction 2000 and the Immigration (PACE Codes
    of Practice No 2 and Amendment) Direction 2000, insofar as they require
    immigration officers exercising powers in Northern Ireland to have
    regard to specified provisions of a code of practice issued under the
    Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 19896.






    Mark Harper
    Minister for Immigration
    Home Office
    15 July 2013




























 6  SI 1989/1341

                                                                           2
                                 SCHEDULE 1


 Column 1
 (powers exercised under the following provisions)
 Section 28A of the 1971 Act (arrest without warrant) Section 28AA of the
 1971 Act (arrest with warrant)
 Paragraph 24 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act (arrest for breach of bail)

 Paragraph 33 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act (arrest for breach of bail)

 Paragraph 7(1) of Schedule 3 to the 1971 Act (arrest for breach of court
 restrictions pending deportation)
 Section 109A of the 1999 Act (arrest for section 105 or 106 offence)
 Section 142(3) of the 1999 Act (arrest for failing to attend for
 fingerprinting)

 Section 2(10) of the 2004 Act (arrest without warrant for an offence under
 2(1) or 2(2) - failure to produce a passport or travel document)

 Section 14(1) of the 2004 Act (arrest without warrant for offences listed
 in 14(2))

 Section 35(5) of the 2004 Act (arrest without warrant for an offence under
 35(3) - failure to co-operate with documentation process for removal or
 deportation)

 Section 23(1) of the 2007 Act (arrest without warrant for an offence under
 section 22(1) - assaulting an immigration officer)
Column 2
(code provisions for England and Wales)
Code C - 2.1A, 2.6, 2.6A, 2.7; 6.4; 10.1-10.7, 10.9

Code G - 1.1-1.4; 2.3A; 3; 4
 Paragraph 17(1) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act (arrest without warrant)
 Section 28B of the 1971 Act (search and arrest by warrant) Paragraph
 17(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act (warrant to enter
 premises for the purpose of arresting person liable to detention)

 Section 125 of the 1999 Act (entry to accommodation provided under section
 95 or 98 for a supported person by warrant)

 Section 45 of the 2007 Act (search for evidence of nationality by warrant)
Code C - 2.1A, 2.1, 2.6, 2.6A, 2.7

Code G -  1.2, 1.3, 3.3, 4 (not 4.5)
Code B - 1; 2 (not 2.4, 2.7, 2.11-2.13); 3 (not 3.4, 3.7); 5; 6 (not 6.3,
6.3B, 6.14, 6.15); 8; 9
 Section 28D of the 1971 Act (entry and search of premises by warrant)

 Section 28FB of the 1971 Act (searching business premises with a warrant)
 Section 28C of the 1971 Act (search and arrest without a warrant)

 Section 28CA of the 1971 Act (search and entry of business premises without
 a warrant)
Code B - 1; 2 (not 2.4, 2.7, 2.11-2.13); 3 (not 3.4, 3.7); 5; 6 (not
6.3B, 6.14, 6.15); 7 (not 7.14); 8; 9




Code B - 1; 2 (not 2.4, 2.7, 2.11-2.13); 5; 6 (not 6.1, 6.3, 6.3A, 6.3B,
6.14, 6.15); 8; 9
 Section 28E of the 1971 Act (entry and search of premises following
 arrest)

 Section 28F of the 1971 Act (entry and search of premises following arrest
 under sections 25, 25A & 25B)

 Section 44 of the 2007 Act (search for evidence of nationality)
Code B - 1; 2 (not 2.4, 2.7, 2.11-2.13); 5; 6 (not 6.1, 6.3A, 6.3B, 6.14,
6.15); 7 (not 7.14); 8 (not 8.2, 8.3); 9
 Section 28FA of the 1971 Act (searching for personnel records without a
 warrant)
Code B - 1; 2 (not 2.4, 2.7, 2.11-2.13); 5; 6 (not 6.1, 6.3A, 6.3B, 6.4,
6.6, 6.13-6.15); 7 (not 7.14); 8 (not 8.2, 8.3); 9
 Paragraph 25A of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act (entry and search of premises)
Code B - 1; 2 (not 2.3-2.5, 2.7, 2.11-2.13); 5; 6 (not 6.1, 6.3A, 6.3B,
6.14, 6.15); 7 (not 7.14); 8 (not 8.2, 8.3); 9
 Section 28G of the 1971 Act (searching arrested persons)

 Paragraph 25B of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act (searching persons arrested by
 immigration officers)

 Section 28H of the 1971 Act (searching persons in police custody)
 Paragraph 25C of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act (searching persons in
 police custody)
Code A -1.1, 1.2, 1.5  2.2-2.5 2.9, 2.10, 3.1, 3.2, 3.4-3.7, 3.9, 3.11;
Annex F

Code B -7 (not 7.14)

Code C - 10.1(c); Annex A Part B; Annex E para 12; Annex L Code A - 3.1,
3.2

Code B - 7 (not 7.14

Code C -  1 (not 1.11-1.17), 4; Annex A Part B; Annex E para 12; Annex L
 Paragraph 18(2) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act Section 141 of the 1999 Act
 (fingerprinting) Section 142(4)(b) of the 1999 Act (fingerprinting)
 Section 35(2)(c) of the 2004 Act (to provide fingerprints etc. for
 documentation purposes)
Code D - 4.10

 Sections 5-15 of the  2007 Act (BIDS) Immigration (Biometric Registration)
 Regulations 2008 (taking fingerprints and or photograph for the issue of a
 BID)
 Section 46 of the 2007 Act (seizure of nationality documents)
 Code B - 7.16, 7.17.

 Section 8(1) PACE
                        Code B - All provisions (not 2.11-2.13, 3.4, 3.7, 4,
 6.14. 6.15 and
                                     10)


 Paragraph 12, Schedule 1 PACE
              Code B - All provisions (not 2.11-2.13, 3.4(b), 4 and 10).
 Section 17(1)(a)(i) PACE
                      Code B - All provisions (not 2.4, 2.11-2.13, 3, 4.2,
 4.3, 6.1, 6.3A,
                                                           6.3B, 6.14,
                                                           6.15, 7 and 10).
 Section 18 PACE
                         Code B - All provisions (not 2.4, 2.11-2.13, 3,
 4.1, 4.2, 6.1, 6.3A,
                                                           6.3B, 6.14,
                                                           6.15, 7 and 10).

 Section 24(1) to (3) PACE
                     Code C - 2.1A, 2.6, 2.7; 6.4; 10.1-10.7, 10.9

                                                           Code G - All
                                                           provisions
 Section 19 PACE
                         Code B - 7

 Section 32(1) and (2) PACE

                                                            Code A -1.1,
                                                           1.2, 1.5, 2.2-
                                                           2.5 2.9, 2.10,
                                                           3.1, 3.2, 3.4-
                                                           3.7, 3.9, 3.11;
                                                           Annex F

                                                           Code B - 1; 2
                                                           (not 2.4, 2.7,
                                                           2.11-2.13); 5; 6
                                                           (not 6.1, 6.3A,
                                                           6.3B, 6.14,
                                                           6.15); 7; 8 (not
                                                           8.2, 8.3); 9

                                                           Code C - 1.0,
                                                           1.4, 1.6, 1.7,
                                                           10.1(c); Annex A
                                                           Part B; Annex E
                                                           para
                                 12, Annex L

 Interview under caution to establish an offence or breach
    Code C - 1 (not 1.1A - 1.3, 1.9, 1.11, 1.13 - 1.17); 2.6, 2.6A; 6.1,
 6.4,
                                                           6.6-6.17; 10
                                                           (not 10(c),
                                                           10.11A); 11; 12;
                                                           13; 16 (not
                                                           16.1A, 16.1B,
                                                           16.2, 16.3,
                                                           16.6, 16.10);
                                                           Annex B, C, D
                                                           and G

                                                           Code E - All
                                                           provisions (not
                                                           1.6(a), 1.6(b),
                                                           1.8, 1.9, 3.2)
                                                           Code F - All
                                                           provisions (not
                                                           1.6(a), 1.6(b),
                                                           3.2)


 Part 1
SCHEDULE 2
 Column 1                                                     Column 2

 Police/police force                                        Immigration
 Enforcement Police officer/constable/police staff              Immigration
 Officer Inspector
 Chief Immigration Officer

 Part 2
 Code Provision (England and Wales)       Modification







 Code A










 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.9, 2.10


All references to 'stop and search' or to a person being 'stopped' are to
be construed as including a reference to an arrested person being searched.

Nothing in the application of this Code shall entitle an immigration
officer to conduct an intimate search of a person.

Where reference is made to 'suspicion'
also read 'belief'

 Code B
 1.1A










 2.3








 4.1



 6.1




 7.1(b)
At the end, insert the further bullet points:
 . nationality documents, as defined by section 44(5) of the UK Borders Act
   2007
 . relevant documents, as defined by paragraph 25A(9) of Schedule 2  to  the
   Immigration Act 1971

After sub-paragraph (d) insert '(e) under the specified powers of search in
the Immigration (PACE Codes of Practice) Direction 2013'

After 'section 17' insert 'and section 28C
of the Immigration Act 1971.'

After 'three calendar months' insert '(or one calendar month for a warrant
issued under the Immigration Acts)'

Substitute with 'covered by the powers of search and seizure specified in
the Immigration (PACE Codes of Practice) Direction 2013'
 7.5








 7.15

 Code C




 6.6(b)(i), 6.10, 6.11, 11.18







 13.1





 Code E




 3.1






 3.3



 4.18





 Code G

 1.4








 2.3A



 3.4



 4.1
Delete 'An officer must have regard to their statutory obligation to retain
an original document or other article only when a photograph or copy is not
sufficient.'

Delete the reference to paragraph 7.14


All references to 'police station(s)' shall
be taken to include a reference to
'immigration office(s)'

Where reference is made to an 'officer of
superintendent rank' also read
'immigration inspector or equivalent grade (only when the interview is
being carried out elsewhere than at a police station)'

Where reference is made to a 'chief officer' also read 'immigration
Inspector or equivalent grade'

Where reference is made to 'police station(s)', this shall be taken to
include a reference to 'immigration office(s)'.

After sub paragraph (c) insert '(d) with a
person cautioned under Code C, section
10 in respect of any suspected immigration
offence or breach'

Where reference is made to 'custody officer' also read 'chief immigration
officer'.

Where reference is made to 'custody officer' also read 'chief immigration
officer'.





After the reference to section 24 of PACE insert 'and the specified powers
of arrest in the Immigration (PACE Codes of Practice) Direction 2013'

Where reference is made to 'suspicion'
also read 'belief'

After sub paragraph (b) insert '(c) the arrest is under paragraph 17(1) of
Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971'.

After 'the nature and circumstances of the offence leading to the arrest'
insert
'why the person is liable to be detained


                                        under paragraph 16 of Schedule 2 to
                              the
                                        Immigration Act 1971'

                                   After 'the reason or reasons why the
                                  arrest was necessary' insert 'only if
                                  arrested under section 24 of PACE'






-----------------------


8



