
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MY (refusal of human rights claim) Pakistan [2020] UKUT 00089 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |
|Further written submissions received on 5     |                              |
|December 2019 and 9 January 2020              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     MY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Lucy Mair, Counsel, instructed by the Greater
                  Manchester Immigration Aid Unit

 For the Respondent: Mr Christopher Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

(1)   The  Secretary  of  State's  assessment  of  whether  a  claim  by   C
constitutes a  human  rights  claim,  as  defined  by  section  113  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, is not legally  determinative.
The Secretary of State's Guidance is, however, broadly compatible with  what
the High Court in  R  (Alighanbari)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2013] EWHC 1818 (Admin) has found to be the minimum elements  of
a human rights claim.

(2)  The fact that C has made a human rights claim does not  mean  that  any
reaction to it by the Secretary of State, which is not an acceptance of  C's
claim, acknowledged by the grant of leave, is to be treated as  the  refusal
of a human rights claim under section 82(1)(b) of the 2002  Act,  generating
a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State  is
legally entitled to adopt the position that she  may  require  human  rights
claims to be made in a particular way,  if  they  are  to  be  substantively
considered by her so that, if refused, there will be a right of appeal.

(3)   There  is,  accordingly,  no  justification  for  construing   section
82(1)(b) otherwise than according to its ordinary  meaning,  which  is  that
the Secretary of State decides to refuse a human rights claim if she:

  (i)  engages with the claim; and
  (ii) reaches a decision that  neither  C  nor  anyone  else  who  may  be
  affected has a human right which is of such a kind as  to  entitle  C  to
  remain in the United Kingdom (or to be given entry to it)  by  reason  of
  that right.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



A.  INTRODUCTION

 1. Section 82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides that:-

             " (1)    A person ('P') may appeal to the Tribunal where-

             ...

             (b) the Secretary of State  has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
             rights claim made by P, or

             ..."

 2. Section 113(1) of the 2002 Act defines a "human rights claim" as:-

             ... a claim made by a person to the Secretary of  State  at  a
             place designated by the Secretary of State that to remove  the
             person from or require him to leave the United Kingdom  or  to
             refuse him entry into the United  Kingdom  would  be  unlawful
             under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority
             not to act contrary to convention..."

 3. In the present case, the appellant  submits  that  the  respondent  has
    decided to refuse the appellant's human rights claim, with  the  result
    that the appellant may exercise a right of appeal against that decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing in  Bradford  in  June
    2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly decided that the  decision  which
    the appellant had received from the respondent was not a refusal  of  a
    human rights claim.  Judge Kelly, accordingly, dismissed the appeal for
    want of jurisdiction.

 4. In a postscript to his decision, the judge noted  the  observations  of
    counsel for the appellant, Ms Mair,  that  First-tier  Tribunal  judges
    were "arriving at different decisions in respect of appeals  that  were
    indistinguishable upon their material facts from this appeal and indeed
    from each other".  Judge Kelly considered that it would be  helpful  to
    have  the  matter  resolved  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Following   an
    application by the appellant for permission to appeal,  Resident  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Zucker granted permission on 11 July 2019.

 5. We wish to record at the outset that we have been much assisted by  the
    oral and written submissions of the parties' representatives.



B.  THE APPELLANT AND HIS APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO REMAIN AS THE  VICTIM  OF
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

 6. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born in 1982, who  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2014 with limited leave to remain as the spouse of  a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom, whom he  had  married
    in Pakistan in November 2012.  Before  that  period  of  limited  leave
    expired, the appellant's marriage had broken down  irretrievably.   The
    appellant applied under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules for  leave
    to remain as a "victim of domestic violence".

 7.  The  appellant  completed  form  (SET)(D)  which,  pursuant   to   the
    requirements of paragraph 34 of the Rules, is the form required by  the
    respondent to be used for a person seeking leave to remain as a  victim
    of domestic violence.  The form was concerned  with  the  provision  of
    information and documentary evidence to satisfy the respondent that the
    appellant was a victim of domestic  violence  and  that  there  was  no
    reason, such as bad character, why he should  not  be  given  leave  to
    remain if he satisfied the requirements of the Rules.  Nowhere  in  the
    form was the appellant invited to  say  whether  there  was  any  other
    reason why he might be entitled to leave to remain.

 8.  With  the  application  form,  the  appellant's  advisors,  ASR  Legal
    Solicitors, submitted a letter  dated  6  November  2017.   The  letter
    described how the appellant had been ill-treated in the United  Kingdom
    by  his  wife  and  in-laws.   It  was  stated  that  he  had  suffered
    psychological, physical, financial  and  emotional  abuse  as  well  as
    controlling and coercive behaviour.  A  medical  report  diagnosed  the
    appellant as suffering from depression.  The writer of the report noted
    that the appellant was fearful that if  he  returned  to  Pakistan,  he
    would be more vulnerable both mentally and psychologically.   This  was
    referable to "direct  and  implied  threats  made  to  him  during  his
    domestic abuse.  Such fear of imminent mortal danger, having some basis
    in reality, superimposed on his tendency to be anxious and  low,  might
    prove extremely detrimental to his  fragile  mental  health".   In  his
    witness statement, also included with the  application,  the  appellant
    said he was fearful that if he returned to Pakistan "I  have  potential
    threaten of being murder (sic) in Pakistan by my in-laws".



C.  THE RESPONDENT'S DECISION

 9. The appellant received from the respondent a letter, dated 9  September
    2018, part of which read as follows:-

             "Dear Sirs

             You applied for indefinite leave to remain on 14 February 2018
             (sic).  I am writing to tell  you  that  your  application  is
             refused.

             What this means for you.

             You can apply for administrative review.  Instructions on  how
             to apply can be found  under  "Next  steps"  section  of  this
             letter.

             If you do not apply for administrative review and do not  have
             extended leave you must leave the country.

             The reasons for this decision are set out on the next page.

             Yours sincerely".

10. Over the page, the "Reasons for Decision" contained the following:-

             "We  have  considered  your  application  on  behalf  of   the
             Secretary of State and your application has been  refused.  In
             making  the  decision  to  refuse  your  application,  careful
             consideration has been given to the following:

             Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  sets  out  the  criteria
             that the government would expect a person to fulfil, in  order
             to establish a right to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
             victim of domestic violence.

             The requirements to be met for indefinite leave to remain as a
             victim of domestic  violence  under  Paragraph  DVILR.1.1  are
             that:

             (d) the applicant must meet all the requirements of Section  E
             -DVILR.

         E-DVILR.1.1 To meet the  eligibility  requirements  for  indefinite
         leave to remain as  a  victim  of  domestic  violence  all  of  the
         requirements of paragraphs E-DVILR.1.2. and 1.3 must be met.

         E-DVILR.1.2. The applicant's first grant  of  limited  leave  under
         this Appendix must have been as a partner (other than  a  fianc�(e)
         or proposed civil partner) of a British Citizen or a person settled
         in the UK under paragraph E-ECP.1.1, or D-LTRP.1.1. or  D-LTRP.1.2.
         of this Appendix and any subsequent grant  of  limited  leave  must
         have been:

                  a) granted  as  a  partner  (other  than  a  fianc�(e)  or
                     proposed civil partner of a British Citizen or a person
                     settled  in  the  UK  under  paragraph  D-ECP.1.1.;  D-
                     LTRP.1.1 or D-LTRP.1.2. of this Appendix; or

                  b) granted to enable access to  public  funds  pending  an
                     application under DVILR  and  the  preceding  grant  of
                     leave was granted as a partner (other than a  fianc�(e)
                     or proposed civil partner) of a British  Citizen  or  a
                     person settled in the UK under paragraph D-ECP.1.1., D-
                     LTRP.1.1 or D-LTRP.1.2. of this Appendix; or

                  c) granted under paragraph D-DVILR.1.2.

         E-DVILR.1.3. The applicant must provide evidence  that  during  the
         last period of limited leave as a partner of a British Citizen or a
         person settled in the UK under paragraph D-ECP.1.1,  or  D-LTRP.1.1
         or D-LTRP.1.2 of this Appendix the  applicant's  relationship  with
         their partner broke  down  permanently  as  a  result  of  domestic
         violence."

11. The reasons continued by explaining how, in March 2013, the  government
    introduced a new definition of domestic violence to be used across  all
    government departments.  The definition was set out and the letter then
    turned to an examination of whether the appellant's "application  form,
    submissions from representative and your personal statement"  satisfied
    the requirement to show  that  the  appellant  had  been  a  victim  of
    domestic violence.  The respondent considered that the information  was
    "insufficient as documentary evidence as the account detailed upon each
    of these documents ... has been taken entirely from your own  personal,
    verbal testimony and is not considered to be  from  an  independent  or
    impartial source".  This criticism extended to the reports submitted by
    the appellant.

12. The reasons concluded as follows:

         "Careful consideration has been given to  the  documents  you  have
         submitted but it is concluded that none of the  evidence  submitted
         is sufficient to establish that, on the balance  of  probabilities,
         your relationship was caused to break down as a result of  domestic
         violence.   Your  application   therefore   fails   to   meet   the
         requirements  of  Paragraph  E-DVILR.1.3  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

         For the reasons outlined above,  your  application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain as a victim of domestic violence is refused as  you
         have failed to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules under
         paragraph D-DVILR.1.3 with reference to  paragraph  D-VILR.1(d)  of
         Appendix FM of HC395 (as amended).

         Any submissions you may have made relating  to  your  Human  Rights
         have not been considered, as an application  for  settlement  as  a
         victim of Domestic Violence is not considered to be a Human  Rights
         based application.  Therefore, if you wish to apply  for  leave  to
         remain,  based  upon  your  Human  Rights  or  other  compassionate
         practice  it  is  open  to  you  to  apply  using  an   appropriate
         application form.  Please see our  website  for  further  details".
         (our emphasis)

13. The communication of 9 September 2018 ended by informing the  appellant
    of the opportunity to apply for administrative review if he  considered
    that there had been a case working error.  The  appellant  applied  for
    and obtained an administrative review of the  decision.  Amongst  other
    things, the appellant argued that the respondent had failed to consider
    his human rights claim.  The administrative review decision stated:-

           "However, you applied for Indefinite Leave to remain as a Victim
           of Domestic Violence and this is not considered to  be  a  Human
           Rights based application.  Therefore  any  submissions  you  may
           have made in relation to your Human Rights would not  have  been
           considered."



D.  THE APPELLANT ATTEMPTS TO APPEAL

14. On 24 September 2018, the appellant filed a notice of appeal  with  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  challenging  the  respondent's  decision  of   9
    September 2018.

15. The grounds of appeal contended that the respondent's decision "amounts
    to a refusal of a human rights claim ... and the appellant  appeals  on
    the basis of his proposed removal to Pakistani is  unlawful  under  the
    HRA 1998".  The appellant relied upon the judgment of Kerr J in  R  (on
    the application of AT) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWHC 2589 (Admin).  The grounds further submitted  that  if  the
    appellant were  correct  and  he  could  meet  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules as a victim of domestic violence,  this  would  be  a
    "weighty factor" in support of his human rights claim.

16. The grounds ended as follows:-

       "12. The Appellant avers that the Respondent has failed  to  consider
       the evidence in the round or to apply anxious scrutiny. The Appellant
       avers that he has submitted substantial evidence which, when taken in
       the round, demonstrates that on the balance of probabilities  he  was
       the victim of domestic violence.

       13.  In addition it would be a breach of the  Appellant's  Article  8
       ECHR rights to remove him to Pakistan without  considering  the  full
       scale of the evidence provided with his application.

       ...

       15.  The Appellant new partner is provided him with shelter and  food
       and paid for his necessaries of life. The appellant is dependent upon
       his new partner in UK who also provided emotional and  moral  support
       which is most important in the recovery process of his mental health.
       The removal of the Appellant will also affect the Appellant  and  his
       partner family life (sic).

       16.  The decision of the Respondent is thus unlawful  because  it  is
       incompatible  with  the  Appellant's  rights   under   the   European
       Convention on Human Rights and the Human Rights Act 1998."

17. The appellant's Notice of Appeal and grounds were examined by the First-
    tier Tribunal, pursuant to rule 22 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.   Rule  22
    provides as follows:-

           "22. (1) Where a person has provided a notice of appeal  to  the
           Tribunal and any of the circumstances in  paragraph  (2)  apply,
           the Tribunal may not accept the notice of appeal.


           (2) The circumstances referred to in paragraph (1) are that-


             (a) there is no appealable decision; or


             (b) the Lord Chancellor has refused to issue a certificate  of
             fee satisfaction.


           (3) Where the Tribunal does not accept a notice  of  appeal,  it
           must-


             (a) notify the person providing the notice of appeal  and  the
             respondent; and


             (b) take no further action on that notice of appeal."



E.  THE DECISION OF FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

18. In the present case, the First-tier Tribunal's duty judge decided  that
    it was inappropriate to issue a notice under rule 22.  Accordingly, the
    matter preceded to a hearing before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly,
    sitting in Bradford on 18 June 2018.  In his decision he said:-

         "7. One might have thought... that it was clear what the  Secretary
         of State had decided and what he had not decided.  On the  face  of
         it, he had decided to refuse the appellant's application for  leave
         to remain as a victim of domestic violence but, rightly or wrongly,
         had declined to make a decision upon any human rights claim that he
         may also have made.  Given that a right of appeal is only triggered
         for these purposes under section 82 of the 2002 Act, "where...  the
         Secretary of State has decided to refuse a human rights claim  made
         by [a person]", it would seem on the face of it that  the  Tribunal
         had in those circumstances no option but to issue  a  Notice  under
         Rule 22... informing the parties  that  it  did  not  "accept"  the
         Notice of Appeal and that, accordingly, no further action would  be
         taken upon it.

         8. However, in  accordance  with  the  general  practice  of  those
         charged with the responsibility of scrutinising Notices  of  Appeal
         upon receipt by the Tribunal, the duty judge in this  case  instead
         "directed" the appellant within 14 days to submit, "a full copy  of
         the application... including any covering  letters  submitted  with
         the application".  That direction was issued on  the  17th  October
         2018 and complied with under cover of a letter dated  25th  October
         2018.  The duty judge noted her reasons for allowing the appeal  to
         proceed to a hearing on the following terms:

                  Human Rights issues raised in application - different form
                  required by Resp. but it's still an HR claim - VALID".

19. At paragraph 12, First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly found as follows:-

         "12. I ... hold for there to be a right  of  appeal  under  section
         82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act, the Secretary of State  must  (a)  accept
         the application in question as constituting "a human rights  claim"
         within the meaning of section 113, and (b) refuse it.  If  both  of
         those things are present,  then  there  is  a  statutory  right  of
         appeal.  If the Secretary of State explicitly declines to treat the
         application as constituting a human rights claim, then  the  remedy
         is to seek Judicial Review. It is not  for  a  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge  in such circumstances to exercise that function  by  calling
         for  and   scrutinising   the   application   and/or   accompanying
         representations to decide whether the Secretary of State  ought  to
         have treated them as a  human  rights  claim.   If  it  is  unclear
         whether the appellant has accepted and refused the application as a
         "human rights claim" then, depending on the circumstances,  it  may
         be that documents other than the  decision  itself  (including  the
         original application and/or representations) may  cast  light  upon
         the issues.  It is not however, appropriate routinely to direct the
         appellant to produce such documents, especially where the Secretary
         of State's decision is unambiguous."

20. At paragraph 14, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  rejected  Ms  Mair's
    submission that the phrase "any human rights claim you may  have  made"
    in the respondent's letter could be construed to mean  "I  accept  that
    you have made a human rights claim and, having considered  it,  I  have
    decided to refuse it".  In his view, the meaning of the decision "could
    not have been  clearer:  the  respondent  was  neither  confirming  nor
    denying that the appellant had made 'a  human  rights  claim'.  and  is
    reinforced by the reasons  given  by  the  reviewer  to  maintain  that
    decision.

21.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly was reinforced in that conclusion,  as
    he noted at paragraph 15 by the fact that Ms Mair's  skeleton  argument
    complained about "the very fact that the respondent had failed to  make
    a decision in respect of what was said  to  be  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim".

22. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly concluded that the First-tier  Tribunal
    did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal because it was brought  in
    respect of a decision that was  not  an  "appealable  decision"  within
    section 82 of the 2002 Act.

F.  R (AT) v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME  DEPARTMENT  [2017]  EWHC  2589
(ADMIN)

23. We have already noted the reliance  placed  by  the  appellant  on  the
    judgment of Kerr J in AT.  This was a judicial review challenge,  which
    sought to quash the inclusion of words in paragraph  AR3.2(c)(xiii)  of
    Appendix AR of the Immigration Rules.  Having noted the changes made by
    the Immigration Act 2014 to the rights  of  appeal  in  the  2002  Act,
    including the creation of an appeal against  the  refusal  of  a  human
    rights claim, as defined in section 113, Kerr J continued:-

       1.  Those  decisions  where  the   route   of   challenge   is   now
          administrative review are  dealt  with  in  Appendix  AR  to  the
          Immigration  Rules.  'AR',  indeed,  stands  for  'Administrative
          Review'. In that appendix they are called 'eligible'  decisions'.
          From 6 April 2015, the list of 'eligible' decisions was expanded.
          From that date it included, among other things
          '[a] decision ... on an  application  for  leave  to  remain  ...
          unless it is an application as a visitor, or where an application
          or human rights claim  is  made  under  ...  (viii)  Appendix  FM
          (family members), but not where an application is made under  ...
          section DVILR (domestic violence)'.
       1. That quote is from Appendix AR, paragraph A3.2(c), which goes  on
          to state that in such cases, i.e. where a human rights  claim  is
          made in a case falling within Appendix FM that is not a  domestic
          violence case, the remedy remains in appeal under section  82  of
          the 2002  Act  rather  than  an  application  for  administrative
          review. So, the provision now made in Appendix AR appears  to  be
          that in a domestic violence case, administrative review  only  is
          available even if the domestic violence case is  a  human  rights
          claim.
       1. But that is not the law enacted  in  primary  legislation,  since
          section 82 provides, as I have already noted,  that  there  is  a
          right of  appeal,  not  only  administrative  review,  where  the
          Secretary of State refuses a human  rights  claim.  It  might  be
          said, therefore, that the primary legislation is at odds with the
          latest version  of  Appendix  AR  in  relation  to  treatment  of
          domestic violence cases that are also human rights claims. To the
          extent that  this  were  the  case,  the  inconsistent  parts  of
          Appendix AR would appear to be ultra vires.
       1. The claimant  says  that  they  are  irrational,  since  domestic
          violence cases are by their nature also human rights claims,  but
          the Secretary of  State  begs  to  differ.  She  says  that  most
          domestic violence cases are not human rights claims.
          ...
       1. In the present case, there was a specified form  on  the  website
          which was called SET(DV). That is the form specified for  use  in
          an application for indefinite leave to  remain  as  a  victim  of
          domestic violence. That is indeed the form that was used  by  the
          claimant. There is also a further specified form to be  used  for
          any application for leave to remain on the basis of  family  life
          as a partner or parent, or on the basis of private life, i.e.  in
          a human rights claim. That form is called FLR(FP).  The  claimant
          did not use that form, either instead of or in addition  to  form
          SET(DV).
       1. Mr Lewis, for the Secretary of State, generously accepted in oral
          argument that use of the wrong form would not of itself defeat an
          application.  I  agree  that  it  should  not.  Less  generously,
          however, he did suggest  that  a  person  wishing  to  apply  for
          indefinite leave to remain in a domestic violence case  which  is
          also a human rights claim, should file two separate applications,
          which means paying two separate fees, one using SET(DV)  and  the
          other using form FLR(FP).
       1. Although the point does not arise directly for decision  in  this
          case and was not fully argued, I do not  agree  that  to  require
          domestic violence victims to make two separate applications in  a
          case said by the victim to be a human rights claim, is necessary,
          fair or lawful.  Any  such  requirement  would  almost  certainly
          discriminate indirectly against women who bear the brunt of  most
          domestic violence. Why should they pay two fees when  others  pay
          only one?
       1. It is obvious that in domestic violence claims  the  form  to  be
          used should include an option to assert that the claim is also  a
          human rights claim. I hope the forms will be revised accordingly,
          as soon as  the  Secretary  of  State's  busy  schedule  permits.
          Meanwhile,  I  hope  she  will  be  advised  to  treat  a  single
          application, whether on form SET(DV) or on  form  FLR(FP),  as  a
          valid application, even if it purports  to  be  both  a  domestic
          violence claim and a human rights claim."
24. Kerr J then considered the parties' submissions on whether all domestic
    violence claims were necessarily human rights  claims.   This  entailed
    consideration of what a human rights claim comprises:-

       1.  That issue was considered in  a  different  context  by  Stephen
          Morris QC sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge (as he  then  was)
          in R (Alighanbari) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 1818 (Admin).  The  Iranian
          claimant said he could not be removed to Slovenia, a  safe  third
          country, until he had exercised his in-country right  of  appeal.
          Whether he had such a right  of  appeal  (under  the  then  law),
          depended on whether he had made a  'human  rights  claim'  within
          section 113 of the 2002 Act.
       1. On the facts, the judge found that he had not made such a  claim.
          His assertion that he wanted to come to the UK  to  be  with  his
          family did not measure up to what  the  judge  found  to  be  the
          minimum elements of a section 113 human rights  claim  which,  he
          said at paragraph 70, are:
                '(a) A claim not to be removed from the UK; (b) an assertion
                of facts that could constitute an  existing  or  prospective
                private and/or family  life,  the  interference  with  which
                Article 8 ECHR protects; (c) an assertion that removal  will
                interfere with that private and/or family  life  (i.e.  that
                the, or a, basis upon which the claimant wishes to remain in
                the UK is the desire to maintain or build a  private  and/or
                family life)... .'
       1. The parties agreed, and so do I, that this is a correct statement
          of what, at the minimum, a section 113  human  rights  claim  is,
          where article 8 is invoked. It can also be  adapted  so  that  it
          works where other articles of the  Convention  are  invoked,  for
          example, article 2 or 3.
          ...
       1. At the hearing, we discussed examples of domestic violence  cases
          that might or might not satisfy all three criteria. At one end of
          the spectrum one can envisage a  domestic  violence  claim  where
          returning the claimant to a third country would expose her  to  a
          serious risk, for example, of 'honour killing' or torture at  the
          hands of non-state agents.
       1. Manifestly, such a domestic  violence  claim  would  be  a  human
          rights claim. The claimant would be saying it would  be  unlawful
          under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  to  return  her  to  the
          third country, because to  do  so  would  be  to  act  in  a  way
          incompatible with  her  rights  under  article  3  and,  perhaps,
          article 2 also.
       1. Mr Lewis is therefore  correct  to  concede  that  some  domestic
          violence claims are human rights claims within  section  113.  He
          gave the further example of a case where removal is sought  of  a
          domestic violence victim while the police  or  Crown  Prosecution
          Service are considering prosecution of the  alleged  perpetrator,
          which would be frustrated by the victim's removal.
       1. At the other end of the spectrum, it is not difficult to envisage
          a domestic violence claim which does not include element  (b)  of
          the three criteria articulated in Alighanbari. Suppose  that  the
          claimant came to this country from Pakistan to  marry  a  British
          citizen, intending to take him back to live with her in Pakistan.
          On arrival here, he beats her up and she changes her mind.  As  a
          result of that domestic violence inflicted by him,  the  marriage
          breaks down.
       1. The claimant then, let it be supposed, moves away to live with an
          aunt in Leicester and decides that she wants to settle  alone  in
          the UK, instead of returning to Pakistan where she has  a  loving
          and supportive family and would be in no danger. In such a  case,
          it would not in my judgment be arguable  that  the  claimant  had
          asserted facts that could constitute an existing  or  prospective
          private and/or family life, the interference with which article 8
          protects.
       1. I therefore reject Ms Mair's submission, eloquently though it was
          made, that all domestic  violence  claims  are  necessarily  also
          human rights claims. Some are, others are not. Mr Lewis submitted
          that the facts asserted in this case do not raise a human  rights
          claim. I am inclined to agree; the Article 8  case  made  in  the
          claimant's covering letter was wafer thin, though  perhaps  I  do
          not need to decide the issue, as will become apparent.
       1. In light of the above, I come to the rest  of  my  reasoning  and
          conclusions on ground 2. First, the claimant is correct that  the
          Secretary of State's position  appears  to  be  irregular:  on  a
          literal reading of Appendix AR, the  provision  attacked  by  the
          claimant wrongly assumes that all domestic  violence  claims  are
          not human rights claims, a position which the Secretary of State,
          through Mr Lewis, now rightly concedes is wrong.
       1. On the other hand, the Secretary  of  State  is  correct  in  her
          submission that not all domestic violence claims are human rights
          claims. It follows  that  she  is  perfectly  entitled  to  enact
          delegated legislation removing the right of appeal  from  victims
          of domestic violence whose claims are not  human  rights  claims,
          and replacing that right with one of administrative review.  What
          she cannot do without primary legislation is remove the right  of
          appeal for domestic violence claims that are  also  human  rights
          claims. That would be contrary to Section 82(1)(b)  of  the  2002
          Act.
       1. In those circumstances, I agree with the claimant  that  Appendix
          AR is wrongly drafted. I do not, however, consider that it  would
          be appropriate to quash it. I think the right course is  to  give
          effect to its application to domestic violence  claims  that  are
          not also human rights claims, while recognising that it cannot be
          read as overriding the provision in section 82  which  confers  a
          right of appeal in a domestic violence case that is also a  human
          rights claim.
       1.  This  can  be  done  by  adopting  a  purposive   and   strained
          construction of sub-paragraph (viii)  of  AR3.2(c)  so  that  the
          provision may rather survive than perish (or if  you  prefer,  ut
          res magis valeat quam pereat), reading that sub-paragraph  as  if
          it included the words below which I have added  in  brackets  and
          italicised:
          '(viii) Appendix FM (family members) but not where an application
          (not being a human rights claim) is made under...  Section  DVILR
          (domestic violence)'.
       1. By way of postscript,  the  amendment  to  Appendix  AR  was  not
          irrational. There is nothing irrational about deciding to  remove
          appeal rights from domestic violence victims. The rationale is to
          stop appeals: once the  right  is  removed,  they  cannot  appeal
          anymore. The  challenge  should  have  been  a  vires  challenge.
          Treated as such, it comes close to succeeding, but I have managed
          - just - to interpret the operative provisions of Appendix AR in
          a manner consistent with the primary legislation they  so  nearly
          contradict."
G. R (SHRESTHA) v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE  HOME  DEPARTMENT  [2018]  EWCA
CIV 2810
25. R (Shrestha) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 2810 is a permission decision, given a neutral citation so that  it
    could be reported as raising  an  issue  of  importance,  described  by
    Hickinbottom LJ as follows:-

        " 1. This application raises the following issue: if  an  applicant
        for leave to remain raises a human rights ground for the first time
        after the refusal of  his  application  on  other  grounds  and  in
        response to a request by the Secretary of State under  section  120
        of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002
        Act"), does the Secretary of State have an obligation to treat  and
        determine that response as an application for leave  to  remain  on
        human rights grounds even absent any further form  of  application?
        The Applicants submit that he does. The Secretary of  State  denies
        any such obligation."

26. Hickinbottom LJ then set out the power of  the  respondent  to  require
    applicants for leave to use the particular application  form  specified
    for the purpose;-

              "4. Section 50(1) of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality
           Act 2006 ("the 2006 Act") provides:

             "Rules under section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971-
             (a) may require a specified procedure to be followed in making
             or pursuing an application or  claim  (whether  or  not  under
             those rules or any other enactment),
             (b) may, in particular, require the use of  a  specified  form
             and the submission of specified information or documents,
             (c) may make provision about the manner in which a fee  is  to
             be paid, and
             (d) may make provision for  the  consequences  of  failure  to
             comply with a requirement under paragraph (a), (b) or (c)."
          1. The relevant rules made under that section are the Immigration
             Rules (HC 395) as amended  from  time-to-time  ("the  Rules").
             Paragraph  34  of  the  Rules  sets  out  the  procedure   for
             applications for leave to remain, so far as relevant  to  this
             application, as follows (emphasis added):
             "An application for leave to remain must be made in accordance
             with sub-paragraphs (1) to (9) below.
             (1) (a) ...[T]he application must be made  on  an  application
             form which is specified for  the  immigration  category  under
             which the applicant is applying  on  the  date  on  which  the
             application is made.
             (b) An application form is specified when it is posted on  the
             visa and immigration pages of the gov.uk website.
             (c) An application can be made on  a  previous  version  of  a
             specified paper application form (and shall be treated as made
             on a specified form) as long as it is no more than 21 days out
             of date.
             (2) All mandatory sections of the  application  form  must  be
             completed.
             (3) Where the applicant is required to pay  a  fee,  this  fee
             must be paid in full in accordance with the process set out in
             the application form...".
          1. The  gov.uk  website  provides  that,  in  order  to  make  an
             application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  family  and
             private life, the form that must be used is  Form  FLR(FP)  or
             Form FLR(HRO) (but, at the relevant time, Form FLR(O))."
27. For our purposes, the relevant part of the discussion  section  of  the
    judgment is as follows:-

           1.  As  I   have   described,   to   promote   consistency   and
              administrative efficacy, section  50  of  the  2006  Act  and
              paragraph 34 of the Rules mandate a particular  form  for  an
              application for leave to remain on human rights  grounds.  No
              doubt the Secretary of State has a discretion to waive  those
              requirements - and, in certain circumstances, may be  obliged
              to do so  (see  Ahsan,  referred  to  at  paragraphs  31  and
              following below) - but there are no such circumstances  here.
              The Secretary of State was unarguably at  least  entitled  to
              require the Applicant to make such an application in  respect
              of his human rights claim.
           1. Section 120 of  the  2002  Act  does  not  suggest  that  the
              requirements of section 50 of the 2006 Act and  paragraph  34
              of the Rules are waived where an applicant make  a  statement
              in response to a section 120 request.  The  section  does  no
              more than require an applicant to provide a statement setting
              out his reasons for wishing to remain, and any  grounds  upon
              which he considers he should be permitted to remain,  in  the
              United Kingdom. It  does  not  require,  or  in  itself  even
              enable, an applicant to make  an  application  for  leave  to
              remain on human rights grounds. The relevant  provisions  for
              such an application are found elsewhere. Those provisions, of
              course, include section 50 and paragraph 34.
           1. Ahsan does not assist the Applicant. The applicants in  Ahsan
              were in the United Kingdom and, under the  appeal  regime  in
              operation at that time, they  were  entitled  to  an  out-of-
              country appeal against a decision to remove them in the  face
              of submissions that removal  would  breach  their  article  8
              rights. The court concluded that they  were  entitled  to  an
              effective appeal; and such an appeal could  not  be  afforded
              from their home country.
           1. In those circumstances, the  Secretary  of  State  made  this
              concession, summarised in [14] of Ahsan:
              "Although it appeared from her  initial  correspondence  that
              the  Secretary  of  State's  position  might   be   something
              different, Ms Giovannetti [Leading Counsel for the  Secretary
              of State] accepted before us that in order to fall within the
              terms of section 113 a 'claim' does not require to be made in
              the form of a  fee-paid  application  under  the  Immigration
              Rules. She made it clear that it is still  the  Secretary  of
              State's position that a human rights claim ought to  be  made
              by a formal application, in the interests of orderly decision-
               making, and that priority may be given to  claims  so  made;
              but  she  acknowledged  that  that  was   not   a   statutory
              requirement and she said that even if a  claim  was  made  in
              some other form a claimant would not be removed from  the  UK
              until it had been considered. "
           1. In this case, Mr Thomann accepts that the Secretary of  State
              cannot remove the Applicant  without  considering  his  claim
              that to do so would breach article 8 of the ECHR. But, as  he
              submits, the use of removal powers is a last resort.  On  the
              basis that the Applicant needs leave to remain and  does  not
              have it, he would be expected to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
              voluntarily. It is,  of  course,  open  to  him  to  make  an
              application for leave to remain on human rights  grounds,  in
              the required form and on payment of the required fee.  If  he
              considers that he has  such  a  claim,  that  is  the  course
              required by the statutory scheme. If, in  the  meantime,  the
              Secretary of State issues removal directions, then,  at  that
              stage, the Applicant will be able to rely on any human rights
              claim that he and/or his daughter have; and,  reflecting  the
              passage  from  Ahsan  which  I  have   quoted,   subject   to
              certification, he will be entitled to a right  of  appeal  to
              the First-tier Tribunal to assess the merits  of  that  claim
              whether or not a formal claim for leave to  remain  has  been
              made because, otherwise, his removal would breach article  8.
              Therefore, the Applicant will suffer no  possible  unfairness
              or injustice as a result of the Secretary of  State  refusing
              to consider his human rights claim at this stage."


H. BALAJAGIGARI AND OTHERS v SECRETARY OF  STATE  FOR  THE  HOME  DEPARTMENT
[2019] EWCA CIV 673
28. Balajigari & Ors v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 673 concerned persons who had been given  leave  to  enter  or
    remain as Tier 1  (general  migrants)  and  who  subsequently  applied,
    pursuant to the Rules as then in force, for indefinite leave to  remain
    after 5 years.  In the cases under  consideration  in  Balajigari,  the
    respondent had refused to grant  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  citing
    discrepancies in financial  returns  submitted  by  the  claimants  to,
    respectively, the respondent  and  Her  Majesty's  Revenue  &  Customs.
    Underhill  LJ,  giving  the  judgment  of  the  Court,   examined   the
    circumstances in which the claimants might  challenge  the  refusal  of
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR.   For
    our purposes, the following paragraphs of the judgment are relevant:-

       1. Having concluded that article 8 is  (generally)  engaged  by  the
          refusal of  ILR  in  these  cases,  where  does  that  leave  the
          procedural position with regard to a challenge to that refusal  ?
          In principle it seems to us, as it did to the  Court  considering
          an analogous issue in Ahsan (see para. 115  of  the  judgment  of
          Underhill LJ), that the appropriate route of challenge is by  way
          of appeal to the FTT rather than by way of a claim  for  judicial
          review in the UT. Although the UT can, if it  has  to,  determine
          disputed issues of primary fact, that is not its usual role,  and
          doing so is not a good use of  its  limited  resources.  But  the
          procedural route to an appeal is not straightforward.
       1. The starting-point is that a refusal of ILR is not in  itself  an
          appealable decision under section  82  (1)  of  the  Nationality,
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. However, by section 82 (1)  (b),
          a right of appeal is provided in these terms:
                "A person ('P') may  appeal  to  the  [First-tier]  Tribunal
                where... the Secretary of State  has  decided  to  refuse  a
                human rights claim made by P...".
       1. For these purposes, "human rights claim" is  defined  in  section
          113 (1) of the 2002 Act (as amended by paragraph 53  (2)  (a)  of
          Schedule 9 (4) to the Immigration Act 2014) as follows:
                "... a claim made by a person to the Secretary of State at a
                place designated by the Secretary of State  that  to  remove
                the person from or require him to leave the  United  Kingdom
                or to refuse him entry into  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
                unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998
                (public authority not to act contrary to the [ECHR])".
       1. The procedural requirements for making such a claim were recently
          reviewed by this Court in R (Shrestha) v Secretary of  State  for
          the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ  2810. In short,  section  50
          of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  enables  the
          Secretary of State  to  require  a  particular  procedure  to  be
          followed, including the form to be used and the fee to  be  paid;
          and paragraph 34  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  made  under  that
          provision, sets out mandatory requirements for an application for
          leave to remain (which includes  an  application  made  on  human
          rights grounds). Where an application fails to comply with  those
          requirements (including by not referring to a claim for leave  on
          human rights grounds at all), there is no  "human  rights  claim"
          refusal of which would give  rise  to  a  right  of  appeal.  The
          Secretary of State has, however, conceded that in the context  of
          an imminent removal an appeal will  lie  to  the  FTT  against  a
          refusal of a human rights claim even if not made in proper  form:
          see paras. 31-33 of the judgment of Hickinbottom LJ in  Shrestha.
          The basis of the concession (which originated in Ahsan: see para.
          14 of the judgment of Underhill LJ) is not  articulated,  but  it
          would appear to be justified on the basis that the  Secretary  of
          State can waive the formal requirements in the Rules.
       1. Against that background, the most straightforward situation  will
          be where the applicant has included a human rights claim  in  his
          or her original T1GM ILR application. The relevant form  includes
          a box in which an applicant can rely on matters  other  than  the
          relevant Part 6A grounds, and (although this was not a matter  on
          which we were addressed) we can see no reason in principle why an
          applicant should not complete that box in the alternative  so  as
          to raise a human rights claim; the point may also be  capable  of
          being raised in the covering letter. If they  have  done  so  the
          refusal of the application will  constitute  a  refusal  of  that
          claim and can be appealed as such. Having said that, it is in the
          nature of things unlikely that an applicant  for  T1GM  ILR  will
          have thought it necessary to make an alternative article 8  claim
          of this kind: typically they will  regard  their  application  as
          standing or falling on whether they satisfy the  requirements  of
          the relevant PBS category. We would thus  assume  that  cases  of
          this kind are uncommon.
       1. In the usual case where the applicant has not  included  a  human
          rights claim in their original ILR application  it  follows  from
          Shrestha that if they wish to generate a right to  an  appeal  on
          human rights grounds following its refusal they will need to make
          a fresh application, using the proper form (again,  we  were  not
          addressed on which that would be), the gist of which will be that
          they have been rendered liable to removal,  in  breach  of  their
          article 8 rights and in circumstances where they  were  otherwise
          entitled to ILR, on the basis  only  of  a  wrong  and/or  unfair
          finding of dishonesty. Such an application might be  prompted  by
          the Secretary of State serving a "one-stop" notice under  section
          120 of the 2002 Act. If, as presumably would be the  case  except
          in rare circumstances, the  Secretary  of  State  maintained  his
          original decision and  refused  the  application,  the  applicant
          would then be entitled to an in-country appeal,  subject  to  the
          possibility of it being certified as  "clearly  unfounded"  under
          section 94 (1) of the 2002 Act.
       1. The alternative course to secure  an  appeal  would  be  for  the
          applicant to wait until steps are taken to  enforce  removal.  It
          appears from the concession referred to at para. 98 above that if
          at that stage he or she makes a human rights claim  in  order  to
          resist removal the Secretary of State will not insist on a formal
          application being made and will proceed  to  a  decision  against
          which they can appeal (subject,  again,  to  certification  under
          section 94 (1)).
       1. Neither of those routes to an appeal is  very  satisfactory.  The
          first requires the applicant  to  go  through  the  formality  of
          making, and paying for, a further application in order to  decide
          substantially the same question, with no certainty as to how soon
          the decision will be made. The second requires him or her to wait
          for an indefinite and possibly lengthy period before  being  able
          to obtain an  appealable  decision.  It  would  be  open  to  the
          Secretary of State to waive the formal  requirements,  treat  the
          initial claim as including a human  rights  claim  which  he  had
          refused and thus, subject to the applicant having an  appropriate
          opportunity to put that human rights claim in order,  afford  the
          applicant a right of appeal to  the  FTT.  Ms  Anderson  made  it
          clear, however, that the Secretary of State  was  not  minded  to
          waive the formal  requirements  generally  so  as  to  facilitate
          appeals (as opposed to applications for judicial review)  in  all
          cases. As the legislation now stands, that appears to be a stance
          that he is entitled to take."
I.  HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE TO CASEWORKERS
(a) Rights of Appeal
29. It is also necessary to consider two sets of Home  Office  Guidance  to
    the respondent's caseworkers.  In Rights of Appeal (version  7.0  -  30
    July 2018[1]), caseworkers are guided "about  appeal  rights  following
    implementation of the Immigration Act 2014".  Under the  heading  "What
    is a human rights claim?", case workers are  told  how  to  identify  a
    human rights claim.  So far as concerns  applications  made  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the Guidance states:-

             "the applications listed in this section and  made  under  the
             Immigration  Rules  are  human  rights  applications  and  the
             starting position is that there is a right of  appeal  against
             refusal

             ...

             The relevant applications are those made under:-

                 . Paragraph 276B (long residence)
                 . Paragraphs 276ADE(1) or 276DE (private life)
                 . Paragraphs 276U and 276AA (partner or child of  a  member
                   of HM Forces)
                 . Paragraphs 276AD and 276AG (partner or child of a  member
                   of HM Forces), where:
                       o the sponsor is a foreign or Commonwealth member  of
                         HM Forces and has  at  least  4  years'  reckonable
                         service in HM Forces at the date of application
                 . Part 8 of these Rules (family members) where:
                       o the sponsor is present and settled in the UK or has
                         refugee or humanitarian protection in the  UK,  not
                         paragraphs 319AA to 319J (points-based system (PBS)
                         dependents), paragraphs  284,  287,  295D  or  295G
                         (sponsor granted settlement as a PBS Migrant)
                 . Part 11 (asylum)
                 . Part 4 or Part 7 of Appendix  Armed  Forces  (partner  or
                   child of a member of HM Forces) where:
                       o The sponsor is a British Citizen or has at least  4
                         years' reckonable service in HM Forces at the  date
                         of application
                 .  Appendix  FM  (family  members),  not:   section   BPILR
                   (bereavement) or section DVILR (domestic violence)."




30. Application outside the Immigration Rules made in  the  United  Kingdom
    are dealt with by the Guidance as follows:-

             "Applications for leave to remain outside the rules  on  human
             rights grounds are made on forms FLR(O) for further  leave  to
             remain (LTR) and SET(O) for indefinite leave to remain (ILR).

             It is important to note that these forms are only to  be  used
             for human rights applications where there is no specific  form
             available. For example, neither  the  FLR(O)  nor  the  SET(O)
             should be used for applications under Appendix FM  or  on  the
             private life route under paragraphs 276ADE and  276DE.   Where
             the application uses the  wrong  form,  you  must  reject  the
             application as invalid under paragraph 34 Immigration Rules.

             These forms are multi-purpose and not all applications made on
             these forms are human rights claims.

             The FLR(O) and SET(O) forms require the applicant  to  tick  a
             box indicating which application they are using the form  for.
             Only one box may be ticked.

             It is only where the applicant ticks the box  'Other  purposes
             or reasons not covered by other  application  forms'  that  it
             should be treated as a human rights claim. Though even if this
             box is ticked, the application  may  not  be  a  human  rights
             claim.

             In order to decide whether the application is one for a  human
             rights claim, you should consider the following questions:

                . does the application say that it is a human rights claim?
                . does the application raise issues that  may  amount  to  a
                  human rights claim even though it does not expressly refer
                  to human rights or a human rights claim?
                . are the matters raised capable of engaging human rights?"



31. Under the heading "Determining if a human rights claim has  been  made"
    there is the following:-

             "For the purposes of Part 5 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 (appeals  in  respect  of  protection  and
             human rights claims), a human rights claim  is  defined  as  a
             claim made by a person that to remove  them  from  or  require
             them to leave the UK or to refuse him entry into the UK  would
             be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

             The form does not ask the applicant to  indicate  whether  the
             claim being made is a human rights claim.  You  will  need  to
             identify whether a human rights claim is being  made  so  that
             you know whether to serve a section 120 notice on  receipt  of
             the application and whether a refusal will attract a right  of
             appeal.

             ...

             You should ask yourself whether, having regard  to  the  human
             rights protected by the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
             (ECHR), it is obvious that the application relates to  one  of
             those rights.  If it is obvious that the  application  relates
             to one of these rights, a human rights  claim  may  have  been
             made."

32. Under the heading  "Determining  if  human  rights  are  engaged",  the
    Guidance states:-

             "If the claim raises human rights, consider whether the  claim
             made is capable of engaging the human right relied  on.   This
             will involve examination of the merits of the claim.

             You should refer to considering human  rights  guidance  which
             sets out how to undertake a  substantive  examination  of  the
             merits of human rights claims.

             If no human rights claim has been made, the application should
             be refused with no right  of  appeal  and  no  right  to  seek
             administrative review.  You should serve notice ICD.4985.

             It is not generally possible to make a human rights  claim  as
             part of an application made under the Immigration Rules except
             where the application is deemed to be a human rights claim, or
             the claim is  made  in  section  of  the  application  seeking
             further grounds to enter or remain in UK. See the  section  on
             how to identify a human rights claim for more information.

             Notices to be served

             If the claim made does engage the human right relied  upon,  a
             human rights claim has been made. If the claim is refused, the
             appropriate notice from the following list  should  be  served
             (except in deportation cases):

                 . ICD.3050.IA (refusal with a right of appeal)
                 . ICD.1182.IA (refusal with section 94 certification
                 . ICD.3051.IA (refusal with no right of appeal because  not
                   a fresh claim under paragraph 353)
                . ICD.3052.IA (refusal with no right of  appeal  because  of
                  section 96 certification)."


33. Where, in the United Kingdom, an applicant is detained, a human  rights
    claim must be  made  directly  to  a  prison  officer,  prison  custody
    officer, detainee custody officer or a member of a Home Office staff at
    the migrant's place of detention;-

             "There is no requirement to complete a specific form or follow
             a specific process.  Where removal is  imminent,  it  is  more
             likely that the applicant will not be  required  to  follow  a
             formal process to make a claim.

             The individual to whom the  claim  is  made  should  pass  the
             submissions to a member of Home Office staff to  consider  the
             questions in Determining if a human rights claim has been made
             to establish whether the human rights claim has been made.

             ...

             If a human rights  claim  has  been  made,  its  refusal  will
             attract an appeal right..."

34. The final passage to note in this Guidance is  that  relating  to  "New
    human rights claims":-

             "There will be applicants who have immigration leave on  human
             rights grounds who make a new and different human rights claim
             which if refused will have a right of appeal.  For example, an
             applicant who has extant leave as a  partner,  which  they  no
             longer qualify for, seeks a variation of  that  leave  on  the
             basis that they are the parent of a child.  That constitutes a
             new human rights claim. The refusal of such a claim will  give
             rise to a right of appeal.

             Where the applicant has extant  immigration  leave  on  a  non
             human rights basis and is seeking to  vary  that  leave  on  a
             human rights basis that will normally be a human rights  claim
             and they will have a right of appeal from any refusal of  that
             claim.

             The section What is a human rights claim?  gives  guidance  on
             this.  An example of this would  be  where  an  applicant  has
             extant immigration leave as a student and makes an application
             for  leave  to  remain  as  partner  which  is  refused.   The
             applicant would have a right of appeal against that refusal as
             it has not been accepted that they have a right to  remain  on
             human rights grounds.  At the end of their student leave  they
             will be required to leave the UK and be  removable  and  their
             argument is that that removal will be unlawful under the Human
             Rights Act 1998."

(b) Applications for leave to remain: validation, variation and withdrawal

35. The second set of  Guidance  is  "Applications  for  leave  to  remain:
    validation, variation and  withdrawal  (version  2.0)  -  (30  November
    2018).  This Guidance observes that paragraph 34(1) of the  Immigration
    Rules "sets out that the  application  must  be  made  on  a  specified
    application  form.  There  is  a  specified  form  for  all  types   of
    application for leave to  remain".  Under  the  main  heading  "How  an
    application is made" there is the following:-

                       Simultaneous applications

             An applicant cannot submit simultaneous applications, only one
             form of leave can be granted at  any  time.  If  an  applicant
             attempts to submit more than one paper application on the same
             day, you must normally explain  to  them,  in  writing  or  in
             person  at  a  Service  and  Support  Centre,  that  only  one
             application can be made at  a  time.  You  must  ask  them  to
             indicate within 10 working days which application  they  would
             like to be considered and which  application  or  applications
             they would like to withdraw. If they  do  not  clarify  within
             this timescale you must reject  all  applications  as  invalid
             using the approved notice of invalidity template: ICD 4946  on
             Doc Gen or the Invalid Application template on Atlas.

             ...

             Varying an application for leave to remain

             An applicant can vary the purpose of  an  application  at  any
             time before a  decision  on  the  application  is  made.   Any
             application submitted where a previous application has not yet
             been decided is a variation of that previous application.   An
             applicant can only have one application outstanding at any one
             time.  See Variation of  an  application  for  leave:  example
             scenarios."

36.  Under "Variation of an application for leave: example scenarios" there
    is this:-

             "An application can only have one application outstanding at a
             time, except for one very specific exception  as  set  out  in
             example scenario 4 below, and where one application is a human
             rights or protection claim.  See: Varying an  application  for
             leave to remain.  When an applicant submits an application for
             leave followed by another application for  leave,  the  second
             application  will  either  be  a  variation   of   the   first
             application, or a new application.  The examples below explain
             how this works

             ...

             Example scenario 4

             An applicant submits application A in time.   They  transition
             to 3C leave and application A is refused, and the decision  is
             served with a right of appeal.   The  applicant  then  submits
             application B, whilst still on 3C leave (for  example,  before
             the time limit to appeal has ended)

             In this scenario, if application B is a human rights claim, or
             protection  claim,  application  B  must   be   decided.    If
             application B is any other type of application, then  it  must
             be returned as void as there is no longer  an  application  to
             vary.   For  further  information  on  3C  leave,  see:  Leave
             extended by section 3C (and leave extended by  section  3D  in
             transitional cases)."

37. Finally for our purposes, guidance is given regarding "Attempts to make
    multiple applications in a single form:-

             "An application form  can  only  be  used  for  its  specified
             purpose.   Sometimes   applicants   try   to   make   multiple
             applications as part of a single form, for example,  they  may
             raise human rights claims as part of an application for  leave
             to remain as a student.  This is not allowed unless  the  form
             is designed to include a human rights claim.   Almost  all  of
             the application forms on GOV.UK and the paper forms include  a
             message reminding applicants of this.   This  message  is  not
             included on specified forms for human rights  routes.  If  you
             are unsure of whether  the  applicant  would  have  seen  this
             message, you can check with  the  Guidance,  rules  and  forms
             team.

             Where multiple applications are raised in an application  form
             or an accompanying letter, you must write out  to  the  person
             using the multiple applications template ICD 5187 on  Doc  Gen
             or the relevant template on  Atlas.   This  template  explains
             again to the applicant  that  they  have  raised  issues  that
             cannot be considered as part of  that  specified  application.
             The template explains that the applicant can make a  variation
             application to raise those issues. (our emphasis)

             Where a further application is submitted before a decision  is
             made on the existing application, it has the effect of varying
             the existing application.  Where a further application is made
             after a decision has been made on  the  existing  application,
             this must be treated as a  new  application.   If  no  further
             application is submitted,  consider  the  current  application
             only in relation to those issues which can be raised  on  that
             specified form."




J.  THE APPELLANT'S CASE

38. For the appellant, Ms Mair submits that the scheme of  the  legislation
    does not permit the respondent to make an  evaluative  judgment  as  to
    whether  there  has  been  the  refusal  of  a  human   rights   claim.
    Significantly, Parliament has chosen not to define what is meant by the
    refusal of a human rights claim.   In  section  85  of  the  2002  Act,
    Parliament has given  the  respondent  sufficient  protection,  in  the
    appeal context, to ensure that the First-tier Tribunal does not  become
    the primary decision maker.  If, faced with a human rights  claim,  the
    respondent chooses not to respond to it, that is her choice,  (and  her
    problem), as she has to be treated as having refused the  human  rights
    claim.

39. There is nothing  in  the  respondent's  guidance  documents,  Ms  Mair
    submits, to tell the respondent's case workers that they can "refuse to
    refuse" a human rights claim.  This is for the simple reason that  such
    power does not exist.

40. Ms Mair further submits  that,  in  the  present  case,  the  "covering
    letter"  received  by  the  appellant  stated:  "your  application   is
    refused".   This  letter,  not  the  accompanying   reasons,   is   the
    respondent's decision and it is, plainly on its face, a refusal.  Since
    the applicant had made a  human  rights  claim,  by  reference  to  the
    covering letter, witness statement and reports (see paragraph 8 above),
    this refusal of "your application" was the refusal of his human  rights
    claim. The refusal decision always has to be the refusal of  the  human
    rights claim and there is no third category.  The refusal  of  a  human
    rights claim does not have to involve any substantive consideration  of
    that  claim.   It  is  not  satisfactory,  Ms  Mair  submits,  for  the
    respondent to point to the fact that  the  appellant  could  judicially
    review the respondent's  reaction  to  his  human  rights  claim.   The
    judicial review would be limited, in general terms, to the situation as
    it was at the date of the respondent's decision.  This  contrasts  with
    the position in an  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    refusal of a human rights claim.

41. Ms Mair contends that it cannot be right for the respondent to  respond
    to a human rights claim by  stating  that  it  does  not  suit  her  to
    consider that claim.  The position would be  different  if  an  invalid
    application had been submitted; but that is not the position here.

K.  THE RESPONDENT'S CASE

42. The respondent points to the fact that human rights claims must be made
    in the appropriate form  and  supported  by  the  requisite  fee.   The
    lawfulness of  the  respondent's  position  in  this  regard  has  been
    "endorsed by the appellate  courts,  and  serves  both  consistency  of
    treatment and orderly decision making".  Those formal requirements fall
    to be viewed in the context of the fact  that  the  Guidance  indicates
    that specified forms of applications under the  Immigration  Rules  are
    treated as raising human rights  claims.   These  include  applications
    under Appendix FM, other than in relation to  domestic  violence.   The
    specific guidance for the handling  of  applications  provides  for  an
    applicant to be notified and/or to be given an opportunity  to  vary  a
    "rules-based" application, where a human rights claim has  been  sought
    to be made.  The insistence on fees for applications falls to  be  read
    in the light of the provisions for fee waiver in respect of impecunious
    applicants.  Finally, the respondent has an obligation,  recognised  in
    Shrestha, in any event to consider a human rights claim,  whether  made
    in a particular form or not, prior to actual removal of  an  individual
    from the United Kingdom.

43. The respondent submits that the judgment of Kerr  J  in  AT  recognised
    that not all domestic violence claims are necessarily also human rights
    claims.  Kerr J's observations at paragraphs 48 and 49 of his  judgment
    must be considered with caution.  The point there at issue was not,  as
    Kerr J observed, fully argued before him.   Furthermore,  his  judgment
    now falls to be read in the light of Court of Appeal judgments in Ahsan
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 and Shrestha.  Had the court in AT  been  able  to
    review the respondent's Guidance: Applications  for  leave  to  remain:
    validation, variation and withdrawal, this would have  alleviated  Kerr
    J's concerns.

44. The respondent  accepts  that,  in  the  case  of  the  appellant,  the
    caseworker who examined his application for leave to remain as a victim
    of domestic violence had not informed the appellant that he could "make
    a variation application to raise" the human rights issues contained  in
    the accompanying materials.  The respondent is, accordingly,  "prepared
    now to consider the human rights claim"  of  the  appellant.   However,
    although the respondent accepts that a person relying upon episodes  of
    domestic violence can rely upon this in order to make Article 8  claim,
    that has to be "advanced in the appropriate  form,  and  by  way  of  a
    variation to the application, and would need to  be  supported  by  the
    requisite fee (subject to a fee waiver application)".

L.  THE APPELLANT'S REPLY

45. In her written reply, Ms Mair  submits  that  Shrestha  and  Balajigari
    addressed "a different issue entirely" from that of the  present  case.
    They were concerned with what the position would be regarding  a  human
    rights claim "raised only after an  initial  application  for  ILR  was
    made.  In other words, those were all cases where no human rights claim
    was raised in the original ILR application" (original emphases).

46. In Shrestha, the Court of Appeal was "simply ruling as to what  whether
    a s. 120 notice could constitute an application for leave to remain  on
    human rights grounds in a case where the original application  for  ILR
    contained no such submissions/claims/application with regard  to  human
    rights".  That  ratio  was,  she  says,  reiterated  in  Balajigari  at
    paragraph 100.

47.  Ms Mair relies, in  particular,  on  the  passage  in  Underhill  LJ's
    judgment at paragraph 99 that:

             "Where the applicant has included a human rights claim in  his
             or her original T1GM...  ILR  application...  we  can  see  no
             reason in principle why an applicant should not complete  that
             box in that alternative so as to raise a human  rights  claim;
             the point may also be capable of being raised in the  covering
             letter. If they have done so, the refusal of  the  application
             will constitute a refusal of that claim and can be appealed as
             such".

48. Ms Mair challenges the lawfulness of the passages in  the  respondent's
    Guidance that state an application  form  can  only  be  used  for  its
    specified purpose;  and  that  applicants  who  try  to  make  multiple
    applications as part of a single form, such  as  raising  human  rights
    claims as part of an application for leave to remain as a student,  are
    not allowed to do so unless the form is designed  to  include  a  human
    rights claim. These passages of the Guidance conflict with the Court of
    Appeal's judgment in Balajigari and Kerr J's findings in AT.

49. Ms Mair's reply continues as follows:-

       26. Firstly, there must be a refusal  decision  of  the  application
           being made (which there is in this case - see  the  Respondent's
           clear language in this case "I am writing to tell you that  your
           application is refused"; and  secondly,  that  refusal  must  be
           against an application/claim that includes a human rights claim.
           Thus, where either the Respondent or the Tribunal has  accepted/
           determined that a human rights claim has been raised as part  of
           an application, then it follows inexorably that the  refusal  of
           that application amounts to the refusal of a human rights  claim
           and thus generates an appeal under s. 82. Just as there  are  no
           two separate applications being made there are no  two  separate
           decisions to be made; there is only one decision/ refusal. Where
           an  application  is  refused  and  where,  as  here,  both   the
           Respondent (now, as part of these proceedings) and the  tribunal
           (through its case worker in the first instance, and  FtTJ  Kelly
           in the second  instance),  agrees  that  the  application  being
           refused included a human rights [claim], then  the  decision  is
           both a refusal of DV-ILR  under  the  immigration  rules  and  a
           refusal of a human rights claim.

       27. This approach concurs with the Court of  Appeal's  reasoning  in
           Balajigari and the comments of Mr Justice Kerr in AT as set  out
           above. It was thus an error of law for FtTJ Kelly  to  find  the
           tribunal had no jurisdiction.


       28. The Appellant continues to submit that to find  otherwise  would
           be demonstrably unfair. It  would  allow  one  party  (i.e.  the
           Respondent) to single-handedly deny the other  party  (i.e.  the
           Appellant) a statutory right of appeal  which  was  intended  by
           Parliament to adhere to any refusal where the application raised
           human rights. The Respondent would be provided a  mechanism  for
           doing so by being permitted to ignore entirely any human  rights
           claim or, as in this appeal, simply acknowledge the existence of
           human rights submissions but then purport to refuse to  consider
           those submissions as part of the application.
           ...
       31. Nowhere in the guidance does the Respondent suggest there  is  a
           second question which she has to ask herself - i.e.  determining
           whether a human rights claim has  been  refused  or  determining
           what amounts to a refusal of a human rights claim. There is also
           clearly no option in the guidance for the Respondent to identify
           that  a  human  rights  claim  has  been  made  as  part  of  an
           immigration application but then go on  to  refuse  to  consider
           that claim. Had the Respondent understood the  statutory  scheme
           to  include  such  an  option,  she  would  have  directed   her
           caseworkers to this.


       32. If the Appellant is correct, as  per  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
           Balajigari, and if an applicant raises human rights as  part  of
           an application, then a refusal of that application is a  refusal
           of a human rights claim and will generate a statutory  right  of
           appeal. For that reason it was simply otiose for the  Respondent
           in this case to say that she had not considered any human rights
           submissions that  may  have  been  made.  From  the  moment  the
           Respondent refused the application,  she  had  refused  a  human
           rights claim."




M.  DISCUSSION

50. In Baihinga (R.22; Human  Rights  appeals;  requirements)  [2018]  UKUT
    00090,  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered,   in   general   terms,   the
    requirements for establishing that a human rights claim has been  made.
    The Tribunal doubted the correctness of the proposition, still found in
    the Rights of Appeal Guidance, that an unsubstantiated claim is  not  a
    human rights claim within the meaning of  section  113.   The  Tribunal
    considered that the appropriate course, in such a case, was to  certify
    the claim, under section 94 of the 2002 Act, as clearly unfounded.  The
    same view was expressed by Kerr J in AT at paragraph 59, where he  held
    that "section 94(1) is drafted on the premise that a clearly  unfounded
    human rights claim is still a human rights claim,  albeit  one  without
    foundation".

51. As also noted in Baihinga,  the  Guidance  is  on  stronger  ground  in
    telling the respondent's caseworkers that "in order for an  application
    to raise human rights, it is not necessary for the application form  to
    say so". Examples given are a person  who  seeks  leave  to  remain  on
    medical grounds, fearing an undignified death if returned to his or her
    home country, owing to the unavailability of medical facilities  there.
    The Guidance tells caseworkers that "you should ask  yourself  whether,
    having regard to the human rights protected by the European  Convention
    on Human Rights... it is obvious that the application relates to one of
    those rights.  If it is obvious that the application relates to one  of
    these rights, a human rights claim may have been made".

52. These passages indicate that the respondent is aware  of  the  need  to
    scrutinise, with some care, the substance of a person's application for
    leave, in order to determine whether  it  falls  within  the  statutory
    definition of a human rights claim.  Subject to what we  have  said  in
    paragraph 50 above, the Guidance is, we find, broadly  compatible  with
    the "minimum elements" of  a  human  rights  claim,  as  identified  by
    Stephen Morris QC, sitting as a deputy High Court  Judge  (as  he  then
    was)  in  Alighanbari  (see  paragraph  24   above).    These   minimum
    requirements now require to be read in the light of the fact  that  the
    definition of "human rights claim" includes a claim that  to  refuse  a
    person entry into the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section  6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998.

53. In the present case, the appellant's witness statement, read  with  his
    solicitor's covering letter and reports, contended that there would  be
    problems for the appellant's mental health,  if  he  were  returned  to
    Pakistan; and that he might face physical dangers there from his wife's
    family.  The respondent accepts that  these  contentions  amount  to  a
    human rights claim, within the meaning of section 113.

54.  The respondent's case is that  her  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  by
    reference to the rules on domestic violence was  not  a  refusal  of  a
    human rights claim. The starting point is the wording of  the  statute.
    In the absence of a statutory definition of a refusal of a human rights
    claim,  one  needs  to   apply   ordinary   principles   of   statutory
    interpretation to the words used in section 82(1)(b).

55. The first requirement is for there to be a human rights claim,  in  the
    sense  we  have  discussed.   Even  though  an  appellant,  if  legally
    unrepresented, may be unsure of the position, the  respondent  and  her
    caseworkers know that their task is to decide  whether,  on  the  facts
    advanced by the person concerned, it would be a breach of that person's
    human rights (or of some other person or persons), if he  or  she  were
    removed from the United Kingdom or required  to  leave  it,  or  denied
    entry.  In the case of a  qualified  right,  such  as  Article  8,  the
    decision will usually  turn  on  whether  any  of  those  things  would
    constitute a disproportionate interference  with  protected  family  or
    private life.

56. Section 82(1)(b) requires there to have been a decision on  the  claim.
    That, in  turn,  at  least  strongly  suggests  there  must  have  been
    engagement with the claim. The outcome of  that  engagement  must  have
    been to "refuse" the claim. In the  light  of  paragraph  55  above,  a
    decision to refuse a human rights  claim  requires  the  respondent  to
    reach a decision that the person concerned does not  have  a  case  for
    remaining in the United Kingdom by reference to his or her,  or  anyone
    else's, human rights.

57.  The use of the word "refuse" indicates that the  legislature  did  not
    intend to cover the case where the respondent's position  is  that  she
    will not consider the claim.  This point was forcefully made by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelly.

58.  In  the  light  of  this  analysis  of  the  statutory  language,  the
    appellant's case faces serious difficulties at its outset.  It  may  be
    thought that the respondent's statement of  September  2018  could  not
    have been any clearer:

             "Any submissions you may have  made  relating  to  your  Human
             Rights  have  not  been  considered,  as  an  application  for
             settlement as victim of Domestic Violence is not considered to
             be a Human Rights based application.  Therefore, if  you  wish
             to apply for leave to remain, based on your  human  rights  or
             other compassionate factors it is open to you to  apply  using
             an appropriate application form".

59. Even if the respondent's reason for not considering  the  human  rights
    claim was legally erroneous, it would still be the case that the  human
    rights claim had not been considered by her.  Any such error  would  be
    judicially reviewable, on public law grounds; but that would need to be
    by application to the Upper Tribunal, not by way of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

60. Ms Mair's case, however, on behalf  of  the  appellant  is  that,  even
    though the respondent may have thought she was  not  refusing  a  human
    rights claim, the refusal of leave to remain as a  victim  of  domestic
    violence was the refusal of the appellant's human rights claim.

61. As we see it, Ms Mair's argument can be  construed  as  containing  two
    propositions.  First,  if  the  respondent's   current   practice,   as
    articulated  in  the  Guidance,  is  fundamentally   misconceived   and
    unlawful, the language of section 82 should not be construed in the way
    just described, but more broadly; so that a refusal of leave to  remain
    by reference to the Rules should also  be  treated  as  a  decision  to
    refuse a human rights claim that has been  made  alongside  the  Rules-
    based application, whether or not the respondent has chosen  to  engage
    with the human rights claim in the manner we have just described.

62. Second, if one analyses the communication that the  appellant  received
    from the respondent in September 2018, it is in two  entirely  separate
    parts. The part that says "you applied for indefinite leave  to  remain
    ... your application is refused" is the decision. The reasons for  that
    decision are, for  present  purposes,  immaterial.  That  includes  the
    paragraph which  says  any  human  rights  submissions  have  not  been
    considered. The decision to refuse has, therefore, to be treated  as  a
    decision to refuse the human rights  claim,  which  the  appellant  had
    made, compatibly with section 113, along with his application under the
    Rules.

63. The implications for the respondent and the appellate  process,  if  Ms
    Mair is right, are potentially serious.  It is therefore  necessary  to
    examine the appellant's case by going back to first principles.

64. The respondent has been given the function by Parliament,  through  the
    Immigration Acts, of deciding applications from those who require leave
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.  As  a  general  matter,  the
    respondent is the primary decision  maker,  with  her  decisions  being
    subject to a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal under the  2002
    Act or to judicial review, where a right of appeal does not exist.

65.  In the appellate context, the position of the Secretary  of  State  as
    primary decision- maker is necessarily subject to the  requirements  of
    the ECHR and the Refugee  Convention,  which  focus  attention  on  the
    present  position,  as  it  is  at  the  date  of  an  appeal  hearing.
    Nevertheless, section 85(5) contains a mechanism for the respondent  to
    consent to the consideration  of  "a  new  matter"  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

66. If the appellant is correct as to the proposition we  have  articulated
    in paragraph 61  above,  the  respondent  would  find  herself  in  the
    following position.  If she maintains her current  stance  of  engaging
    with human rights claims only if made by way of particular forms and in
    particular circumstances, the respondent  faces  the  prospect  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal becoming the primary decision-maker in what may  be
    a significant number of human rights cases.  The alternative is for the
    respondent to abandon her current practice.

67. We find the appellant's first  proposition  involves  an  impermissible
    "reading-down" of section 50 of the 2006 Act and the Rules  made  under
    it; and of the relevant case law. The respondent's ability, pursuant to
    section 50 of the 2006 Act, to require  a  specified  procedure  to  be
    followed in making  or  pursuing  an  application  or  claim,  and,  in
    particular, in requiring the use of a specified form  (along  with  the
    payment of a fee) has been endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Shrestha.
     Although that case was concerned with a section 120 Notice, paragraphs
    29-33 of the judgment of Hickinbottom LJ acknowledged the power of  the
    respondent to regulate the way in which applications  and  claims  fall
    for consideration under the Immigration Acts.  The  way  in  which  the
    respondent does so may, of course, be subject to public law  challenge.
    However, there  is  no  suggestion  in  Shrestha  that  the  Court  had
    difficulties with the respondent's stance (which differed from that  in
    Ahsan), whereby the respondent will, as a general matter,  engage  with
    an application or claim only if made in the specified manner, until the
    point  at  which  the  individual  concerned  is  subject  to   removal
    directions, when no formality will be necessary.  We reject  Ms  Mair's
    attempt to distinguish Shrestha; although concerned with  section  120,
    it contains an  endorsement  of  the  respondent's  practice  that  has
    relevance to the present case.

68. Importantly, at paragraph 102 of Balajigari, the Court  of  Appeal,  in
    discussing the formal requirements, noted counsel for the Secretary  of
    State as making it clear:

             "...that the Secretary of State was not minded  to  waive  the
             formal requirements generally so as to facilitate appeals  (as
             opposed to applications for judicial review) in all cases.  As
             the legislation now stands, that appears to be a  stance  that
             he is entitled to take".

    We are, accordingly, satisfied that the respondent is  entitled,  as  a
    general matter and subject to her  overriding  public  law  duties,  to
    adopt the position whereby, even if a communication  is  given  to  her
    which satisfies the definition of a "human  rights  claim"  in  section
    113, she is not for that reason alone  necessarily  obliged  to  engage
    substantively with the claim in order to decide whether  it  should  be
    granted or refused.  The respondent can, therefore, as a general matter
    lawfully respond to a human rights claim by declining to consider it.

69. In creating paragraph 34 of the Immigration Rules, pursuant to  section
    50 of the 2006 Act, it is clear that the respondent was not seeking  to
    remove the right of appeal afforded by Parliament in section 82 of  the
    2002 Act to someone whose human rights claim has been  refused  by  the
    respondent.  She cannot preclude a claim, however made,  from  being  a
    human rights claim under section 113.   What  the  respondent  can  do,
    however, is determine the  circumstances  in  which  she  will  make  a
    decision on whether to refuse that claim.

70.  In AT, the Court held that the respondent:-

             "... is perfectly  entitled  to  enact  delegated  legislation
             removing the right of appeal for victims of domestic  violence
             whose claims are not human rights claims, and  replacing  that
             right with one of administrative review.  What she  cannot  do
             without primary legislation is remove the right of appeal  for
             domestic violence claims that are also human rights claims".

    In AT, the Court was considering the  provisions  of  Appendix  AR;  in
    particular those which provided there would be no administrative review
    of decisions taken under Appendix FM (family members), except where  an
    application was made under section DVILR (domestic violence).  Assuming
    one accepts, for the moment,  the  categorisation  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as delegated legislation,  we  do  not  consider  that  delegated
    legislation of any kind can remove  the  right  of  appeal  in  section
    82(1)(b).  In fact, the provision in question in Appendix  AR  was  not
    purporting to remove the right of appeal which  would  otherwise  exist
    under the 2002 Act.  It was, instead, enabling refusals of applications
    under the domestic violence provisions of the Rules to  be  subject  to
    administrative review, because such refusals were not considered by the
    respondent to be refusals of human rights claims.

71. As AT found, some victims of domestic violence may have a human  rights
    claim that arises out of, or otherwise involves, the domestic violence.
    At paragraphs 47 to 49 of his judgment, Kerr J considered that, in such
    cases, the respondent could not lawfully compel a person  to  make  two
    separate applications: one under the Rules and another in the form of a
    human rights claim. Those paragraphs are, however, obiter. They need to
    be read in the light of Shrestha and Balajigari. Moreover, there is  no
    suggestion that Kerr J was of the view that a refusal by the respondent
    to engage with an application for leave in  a  domestic  violence  case
    with a human rights element must fall to be considered as  the  refusal
    of a human rights claim. On the contrary, he was going no further  than
    to suggest that the respondent's  stance  might  well  be  unlawful  in
    public law terms.  These  paragraphs  do  not,  therefore,  afford  the
    present appellant's case any material support. We should add  that  the
    fact a person may be required to pay a fee for two applications is  not
    a general reason to doubt the lawfulness of  the  system,  particularly
    given the respondent's policy for fee waiver.

72. Ms Mair submitted that provisions of the Guidance set out at paragraphs
    35 and 36 above are unlawful. In the light of what we have  just  said,
    they are not. Furthermore, any practical difficulty is  alleviated,  at
    least to a significant extent, by the paragraphs of  the  Guidance  set
    out in bold in paragraph 37 above that tell caseworkers they must write
    to a person who has used multiple applications,  explaining  they  have
    raised issues that cannot  be  considered  as  part  of  the  specified
    application but that they can make a variation application in order  to
    raise those issues.  This is what the respondent accepts in the present
    case was not done, but should have been done.

73. We have seen in the Guidance on rights of appeal how, under the heading
    "What is a Human Rights claim?", a number  of  applications  under  the
    Rules are described as being "human  rights  applications"  where  "the
    starting position is that there is a right of appeal against  refusal".
    Amongst the listed applications are paragraph 276B (long residence) and
    paragraphs 276ADE(1) or 276DE (private life).

74. The important point to bear in mind about these applications  is  that,
    although they may be made  solely  by  refence  to  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the provisions in  question  are  ones  where  human
    rights matters are necessarily in play.  For example, in  the  case  of
    paragraph 276B, a person who has spent ten years continuously  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom can be expected to have formed a private
    life here, which is entitled to respect, such that their removal may be
    a disproportionate interference with Article 8 Rights.  Accordingly,  a
    caseworker determining whether a person satisfies the  requirements  of
    276B is necessarily engaged with human rights issues.  This  is  to  be
    contrasted with applications made under the provisions of the  domestic
    violence rules.

75. In deciding whether to refuse any human rights claim, whether  made  by
    reference to  provisions  of  the  Rules  listed  in  the  Guidance  or
    otherwise, the caseworker is required to consider whether, even  though
    the person in question fails to satisfy the requirements of the  Rules,
    there  may  be  "exceptional  circumstances"  that  nevertheless   mean
    removing them or requiring them to leave the United  Kingdom  would  be
    contrary to section 6 of the 1998 Act: Hesham Ali v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; paragraphs 51-53 (Lord Reed)  .
    It seems to us that the hallmark of a decision  by  the  respondent  to
    refuse a human  rights  claim  will  be  a  consideration  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, by reference to Article 8 or such other  article  of
    the ECHR as may be engaged.

76. We therefore do not consider the appellant can draw  any  support  from
    the fact that, in these instances of applications made under the Rules,
    the respondent acknowledges that the  application  is  a  human  rights
    claim,  which  needs  to  be  determined  alongside   the   Rules-based
    application, whether or not the applicant has raised human rights as  a
    discrete issue.

77. For these reasons, the appellant's first proposition does  not  require
    the adoption of the kind of broad interpretation  of  the  phrase  "has
    decided to refuse a human rights claim" that he  needs,  if  he  is  to
    persuade a court of construction to displace the interpretation set out
    in paragraphs 54 to 57 above.

78. We turn to the second  proposition.  Ms  Mair  submits  that  the  mere
    refusal of leave to  the  appellant,  as  a  person  who  has  made  an
    application under the rules and a human rights claim,  amounts  to  the
    refusal of that claim.  She seeks to draw support from paragraph 99  of
    the judgment in Balajigari where, discussing a  TIGM  ILR  application,
    which included a box in which the applicant could rely on matters other
    than the Part 6A grounds, the Court said that it could see no reason in
    principle why:

             "an applicant should not complete that box in the  alternative
            so as to raise a human rights claim;  the  point  may  also  be
            capable of being raised in the covering letter.  If  they  have
            done so, the refusal  of  the  application  will  constitute  a
            refusal of that claim and can be appealed as such".

79. We do not consider  that  this  passage  constitutes  support  for  the
    appellant's second proposition.  The  Court  made  it  clear  that,  in
    saying what it did in paragraph 99, it was opining on a matter on which
    it had not been addressed by the parties.  Furthermore, it  is  evident
    that the Court did not have in mind the precise issue with which we are
    concerned.  When it said that the refusal of the  application,  in  the
    circumstances described, will constitute a refusal of that  claim,  the
    Court was, we consider, envisaging  a  refusal  by  the  respondent  of
    indefinite leave to remain, by reference both to the TIGM Rules and  to
    the applicant's asserted human rights.

80. We also reject Ms Mair's submission that the only relevant part of  the
    respondent's communication to the appellant of 9 September 2018 was the
    page which stated that his application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    "is refused".  That cannot be right. The document needs to be read as a
    whole.  As we have seen, the reasons for the decision make it  pellucid
    that  the  appellant's  human  rights  submissions   "have   not   been
    considered".

81. In summary:

         (a)  a human rights claim is defined by section  113  of  the  2002
             Act;

         (b)  the respondent's assessment of whether a claim satisfies  that
             definition is not legally determinative;

         (c)  the respondent's Guidance is, however, broadly compatible with
             what the High Court has found to be the minimum elements of  a
             human rights claim;

         (d)  the fact a human rights claim has been made does not mean that
             any reaction  to  it  by  the  respondent,  which  is  not  an
             acceptance of the claim, acknowledged by the grant  of  leave,
             is to be treated as the  refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim,
             generating a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal;

         (e)  the respondent is legally entitled to adopt the position  that
             she may require human rights claims to be made in a particular
             way, if they are to be  substantively  considered  by  her  so
             that, if refused, there will be a right of appeal;

         (f)  in view of (d) and (e) above, there is  no  justification  for
             construing section 82(1)(b) of the  2002  Act  otherwise  than
             according  to  its  ordinary  meaning,  which  is   that   the
             respondent decides to refuse a human rights claim if she:

              (i) engages with the claim; and

             (ii) reaches a decision that  neither  the  claimant  (C)  nor
                  anyone else who may be affected has a human right which is
                  of such a kind as to entitle C to  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom (or to be given entry to it)  by  reason  of  that
                  right.

82. It is apparent from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly and
    the grant of permission by Resident Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Zucker that a  practice  appears  to  have  arisen  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, whereby applications for leave are requested  by  caseworkers
    or duty judges to be filed with that Tribunal and then scrutinised,  in
    order to see whether a human rights claim has been made.   If  it  has,
    then, merely because the application  for  leave  to  remain  has  been
    refused, regardless of the nature of the application and regardless  of
    whether the respondent has said that she has not considered  any  human
    rights claim that may have been made, the caseworker or duty judge will
    nevertheless determine that the respondent  has  decided  to  refuse  a
    human rights claim; and that there is therefore a valid appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

83. For the reasons we have given, the mere fact that leave  to  remain  is
    refused, in circumstances where a person has submitted  what  satisfies
    the statutory definition of a human rights claim, is not sufficient  to
    create a right of appeal.  As  a  general  matter,  the  respondent  is
    entitled to operate a  system  whereby  she  can  withhold  substantive
    consideration of a human rights claim that  has  not  been  made  in  a
    particular manner.  There is nothing  inherently  unlawful  in  such  a
    system.  In particular, one can understand  the  respondent's  need  to
    maintain orderly decision making by requiring separate applications  in
    the case of certain human rights claims.

84. In any event, any challenge to this system (or to any specific  refusal
    to engage with a human rights claim) has  to  be  by  judicial  review.
    There is no justification for the present practice  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which involves an impermissible reading of section  82(1)(b).
    We respectfully endorse what First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  said  at
    paragraph 12 of his decision in the present case.  The practice  should
    cease.

85. In most cases, it should not be difficult  for  a  caseworker  or  duty
    judge to see whether a human rights  claim  has  been  refused  by  the
    respondent. The starting point will be whether the decision says it  is
    the refusal of a human rights claim and what, if anything, the decision
    and reasons say about a right of appeal.  The reasons for a refusal  of
    a human rights claim will necessarily involve a  consideration  of  the
    human rights of the applicant or other relevant person.   Even  if  the
    decision is made by reference to a provision of the  Immigration  Rules
    which of its nature involves human rights matters, there  should  be  a
    consideration of the position outside the Rules, compatibly with Hesham
    Ali (see paragraph 75 above).

86. If the reasons for the decision reveal no  such  consideration  by  the
    respondent, the caseworker or duty judge will need to look to see  what
    the explanation might be. If, as in the present case, the reasons state
    in terms that "any submissions you may have made relating to your human
    rights have not been considered",  then,  barring  something  extremely
    unusual, that statement should be accepted at face value.   No  purpose
    will be served by asking to see the  application  and  covering  letter
    since, even if these disclose the making of a human rights  claim,  the
    respondent has not decided to refuse it.

     DECISION

87. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  does  not  contain
    the making of an error on a point of law.  The appeal is,  accordingly,
    dismissed.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  applicant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the applicant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





                                                             Mr Justice Lane
                                                                   President

                                                            17 February 2020

                                                     -----------------------
[1] Version 8.0 appeared on 31 January 2020. For present purposes, there  is
no difference in the relevant provisions.

