
SA (Section 82(2)(d): interpretation and effect) Pakistan [2007] UKAIT
00083

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Glasgow (Eagle Building)
Date of Hearing: 20 July 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                    Designated Immigration Judge Macleman

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Byrne, of Drummond Miller
For the Respondent:          Ms M MacDonald, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1) In order to give s82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act any meaning at  all,  it  has
to be read in such a way as entirely to exclude the effect  of  s3C  of  the
1971 Act.  (2)  Subject to that, s82(2)(d) means what it says, and a  person
whose existing leave continues beyond the date when a variation  is  refused
has no right of appeal against the refusal.

                             NOTICE UNDER RULE 9


 1. The claimant (to whom we refer as "the appellant")  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  She arrived in the United Kingdom  on  6  April  2005,  with
    entry clearance as a spouse.  That entry clearance took effect as leave
    to enter granted before her arrival and expiring on  3  February  2007.
    During the course of that leave she made an application for  indefinite
    leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  victim  of  domestic
    violence.  Her application was refused on 11 January 2007.  The  letter
    refusing the  application  noted  that  her  leave  continued  until  3
    February, and informed her that  she  had  no  right  of  appeal.   Her
    solicitors maintained that she had a right  of  appeal,  and  that  the
    decision made in her case was one which fell within  s82(2)(d)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Mr Byrne  (who  appeared
    also before us) made similar submissions to an Immigration  Judge,  who
    rejected them, in a document entitled "Determination and Reasons", sent
    to the parties on 22 March 2007, and ending with the words  "I  dismiss
    the appeal as incompetent".  The Secretary of State sought and obtained
    an order for reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. There is an initial procedural difficulty, in that Rule 9 of the Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/1230) requires
    the Tribunal, if there is no "relevant decision", to give  notice  that
    it does not accept the notice of appeal and to take no further  action.
    It follows that the Immigration Judge's view that there was no right of
    appeal should have led him not to dismiss the appeal but to  issue  the
    notice envisaged by Rule 9.  If he had done so, there could  have  been
    no  reconsideration,  because   s103A   of   the   2002   Act   permits
    reconsideration only of the Tribunal's  decision  on  an  appeal.   The
    Immigration Judge having, however, purported to dismiss an  appeal,  we
    are content, as were the parties before us,  to  accept  that  we  have
    jurisdiction to look into this matter.

 3. Section 82 of the 2002 Act provides, in subsection (1), that  where  an
    "immigration decision" is made in respect of a person, he may appeal to
    the Tribunal.  Section 82(2) sets out the types of decision  which  are
    "immigration decisions" for these purposes.  At (2)(d) we find:

        "Refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the  United
        Kingdom if the result of the refusal is  that  the  person  has  no
        leave to enter or remain".

      It is that provision upon which the appellant relies.

 4. There is no doubt that s82(2)(d) is not happily worded.  The  reference
    to "refusal" makes it clear that this paragraph refers  to  a  decision
    made as a result of an application.  The problem is, however, that when
    other provisions of the statutory regime are  taken  into  account,  it
    appears that no decision could fall within s82(2)(d).  If a person  who
    has no leave makes an application for leave, and  it  is  refused,  the
    decision does not fall within that paragraph because the reason why the
    applicant now has no leave is not because he has been  refused  it  but
    because he did not have it to  begin  with:  his  having  no  leave  is
    therefore not "the result of the refusal".  If a person who  has  leave
    applies for a variation of his leave and is refused at a time when  his
    original leave still continues, then the decision does not fall  within
    s82(2)(d), because the result of the refusal is  not  that  he  has  no
    leave: his original leave continues.

 5. What then of a person who applies during existing leave, but receives a
    negative decision  only  after  his  original  leave  expires?   As  we
    understand the matter, s82(2)(d) is intended to give  him  a  right  of
    appeal.  But even he cannot truthfully  say  that  the  result  of  the
    refusal is that he has no leave, because s3C of the 1971 Act  continues
    his leave, first during the time between the  expiry  of  the  original
    leave and the date of the decision on it; secondly "during  any  period
    when an appeal under s82(1) could be brought against  the  decision  on
    the application for variation (ignoring any possibility  of  an  appeal
    out of time with permission)"; and thirdly while  any  such  appeal  is
    pending.  (The wording is quoted from s3C(2).)  There is  obviously  no
    sense in this.  The wording of s82(2)(d) excludes the  appeal,  because
    of the effect of s3C; but the latter section clearly envisages that the
    decision is appealable.  Section 82(2)(d) can  be  understood  only  by
    entirely excluding the effect of s3C from its meaning.

 6. That, however, does not assist the appellant.   Mr  Byrne  pointed  out
    that the effect of s82(2)(d) might be haphazard.  If an application was
    made in time and refused during the period of leave, there would be  no
    right of appeal; if it was refused  after  the  period  of  leave  then
    (subject to what we have said about s3C) there  would  be  a  right  of
    appeal.  That appears to us to be so: but Mr Byrne did not suggest  any
    reading of s82(2)(d) properly open  to  us  that  would  extinguish  or
    ameliorate the effect of which he complained.  There is no  doubt  that
    the result of the decision refusing to vary the appellant's  leave  was
    not that she had no leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom:  as
    the letter pointed out, her leave continued.  For that reason  she  had
    no right of appeal.

 7. To that extent the Immigration Judge was correct.  There was and is  no
    appeal before the Tribunal capable of being dismissed.  For the reasons
    we have given, and rather belatedly it  may  be  thought,  this  notice
    refusing to accept the notice of appeal is now issued.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
