
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Arusha and Demushi (deprivation of citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 80
                                    (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 November 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WAUMSLEY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                             First Appellant
                                     and

                                ALTIN ARUSHA
                                                            First Respondent
                                     and

                                UGEZA DEMUSHI
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - TIRANA
                                                           Second Respondent
Representation:

For the First Appellant
and Second Respondent: Mr M Barnes, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor
For the First Respondent
and Second Appellant:        Mr C Jacobs instructed by Nova Legal Services



    (i)   The following rulings made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
        nature and scope of an appeal against the deprival  of  citizenship
        under s.40 of the British Nationality Act 1981 were not  challenged
        by either party before the Upper Tribunal:


           (a)   The Tribunal has a wide-ranging power to consider, by  way
           of appeal not a review, what the decision in an appellant's case
           should have been.  The Tribunal has  to  ask  itself  'does  the
           evidence in the case establish that citizenship was obtained  by
           fraud?'   If  it  does  then  it  has  to  ask  'do  the   other
           circumstances of the case point to discretionary deprival?'


           (b) In terms of the proof of fraud, the Tribunal  will  consider
           any evidence, whether or not available to the respondent at  the
           time  he  made  his  decision,  which   is   relevant   to   the
           determination of that question.


           (c)   It is for the respondent to  prove  that  the  appellant's
           conduct comes within the scope of s.40 of the 1981 Act.


           (d)  The appellant can raise general human  rights  grounds  but
           they must be framed to deal with the breach alleged to be caused
           by the decision to deprive the appellant of his nationality, and
           giving effect to that decision, and not framed to deal with  the
           fiction that the appellant would be removed.


    (ii)    To establish that a delay in the promulgation of a decision has
        led to an error of law it has to be shown that the decision was not
        safe and therefore unlawful.  There must be  a  nexus  between  the
        delay and the safety of the decision: see Secretary of State  v  RK
        (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    There are two appeals before  the  Tribunal.   The  first  is  by  the
    Secretary of State against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Senior Immigration Judge Perkins  and  Immigration  Judge   Kopieczek)
    allowing Altin Arusha's appeal against the decision made on 2 February
    2009 depriving him of his British citizenship on the basis that it  was
    obtained by fraud and the second by Ugeza Demushi against the  decision
    of the Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision of the Entry
    Clearance Officer, Tirana to refuse her entry clearance as Mr  Arusha's
    fianc�e.   In this determination we shall refer to the parties as  they
    were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Altin  Arusha  as  the  first
    appellant, Ugeza Demushi the second appellant, the Secretary  of  State
    the first respondent and the Entry Clearance Officer Tirana the  second
    respondent.

Background

2.    The background to this appeal can briefly be  summarised  as  follows.
    The first appellant was born on 22 June 1984.  He arrived in the UK  on
    17 October 2000 and made an application for asylum relying on his claim
    that  he  was  a  Kosovan  national  born  in  Presevo,  Kosovo.    His
    application was refused and following a hearing on 21 March  2002  his
    appeal was dismissed by an Adjudicator on asylum grounds but allowed on
    human rights grounds.  He was subsequently granted exceptional leave to
    remain and on 1 November 2006, indefinite leave to remain.  He  applied
    for and was granted British citizenship by naturalisation on  10  April
    2008.

3.    On 28 July 2008 the second appellant, an Albanian national born  on  9
    October 1985, applied for entry  clearance  as  the  first  appellant's
    fianc�e.  The history given was that they had met in Albania  in  April
    2007 when the first appellant was on holiday and become  engaged  on  1
    August 2007 following a further visit by him.  Inquiries were made as a
    result of this application which led the respondent to believe that the
    first appellant had not been born in Kosovo but in Albania and  was  an
    Albanian citizen.

4.    On 2 November 2009 the first  appellant  was  notified  of  the  first
    respondent's decision to deprive him of his British  citizenship  under
    s.40 of the British Nationality Act 1981 because it had  been  obtained
    fraudulently.  This was on the basis of information received  from  the
    Ministry of the Interior in Albania that he was named in  the  Albanian
    National Civil Register and it was therefore concluded that he  was  in
    fact a citizen of Albania.  When he had claimed political asylum he had
    said that he was from Kosovo and it had been on  this  basis  that  his
    appeal had been allowed on human rights grounds leading  to  the  later
    grant of indefinite leave to remain.

5.    On 6 November 2009 the second appellant's application was  refused  as
    the second respondent was not satisfied  that  their  relationship  was
    genuine and, in  the  light  of  the  decision  to  deprive  the  first
    appellant of his citizenship, that she was  engaged  to  a  person  who
    could properly be regarded as present and settled in the UK.

6.    Both appellants appealed against these  decisions  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and their appeals were heard together with  the  agreement  of
    the parties on 26 and 27 April 2010.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

7.    At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  there  was  a  dispute
    between the parties on where the burden  of  proof  lay  in  an  appeal
    involving  the  deprival  of  citizenship  and  on  whether  the  first
    appellant was entitled to raise human rights arguments  in  support  of
    his appeal.  The Tribunal also considered  the  general  scope  of  the
    appeal in light of the fact that the provisions of s.84 and s.86 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  do  not
    apply to appeals under s.40.  There is no challenge before  us  to  the
    decisions of the Tribunal on these issues.

8.    The Tribunal heard oral evidence from  the  first  appellant  and  had
    before it documentary evidence  comprising  firstly,  the  respondents'
    bundle of 288 pages with the following additional documents,  a  letter
    to the first appellant from the Home Office  dated  18  March  2008,  a
    document verification report, a letter from the Ministry of Interior in
    Albania dated 9 September 2009 with a translation and  three  pages  of
    supporting documents and secondly the appellants' three bundles of  92,
    123 and 202 pages respectively,  a further bundle with  tabs  1  to  20
    and, finally, a BAE ticket dated 22 May 2007.

9.    The Tribunal set out its findings  and  conclusions  relating  to  the
    first appellant at paras 103-140 of  its  determination.   It  was  not
    satisfied that the first respondent had discharged the onus of  proving
    that he had  obtained  his  citizenship  by  fraud.   The  findings  in
    relation to the second appellant are set  out  in  paras  141-154.   It
    found that the second  appellant  had  not  established  that  she  was
    seeking leave to enter the UK for the purpose of marriage or  that  the
    parties intended to live permanently with the other  as  spouses  after
    any marriage.  On this basis the first appellant's appeal  was  allowed
    and the second appellant's appeal dismissed.  The written determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal was promulgated on 25 March 2011.

The Legal Framework

10.   The provisions relating to deprivation of citizenship are set  out  in
    ss.40, 40A and 41 of the British Nationality Act 1981.  It is  provided
    by s.40(3) that:

         "The Secretary of  State  may  by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
         citizenship  status  which  results  from   his   registration   or
         naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -
         (a)      Fraud,
         (b)      False representation, or
         (c)      Concealment of a material fact.


    A right of appeal is given by s.40A(1) as follows:


         "A person who has been given notice under s.40(5) of a decision  to
         make an order in respect of him under s.40 may appeal  against  the
         decision to [the First-tier Tribunal]."


11.   As the First-tier Tribunal pointed out neither s.84 nor s.86  of  the
    2002 Act applies to appeals under s.40A.  The right of appeal in  s.40A
    is not an appeal under s.82(2) against an immigration decision and  the
    grounds of appeal are not limited to or enhanced  by  those  identified
    under s.84 and therefore the provisions of s.84(1)f giving the Tribunal
    power to allow an appeal on the ground that a discretion  contained  in
    the immigration rules should have been  exercised  differently  do  not
    apply.  The Tribunal directed itself on the nature  and  scope  of  the
    appeal as follows:


         "13.     In our judgment the absence of prescribed grounds can only
             mean that the Tribunal is to have  a  wide  ranging  power  to
             consider, by way of appeal not a review, what the decision  in
             an appellant's case should have been.  The Tribunal has to ask
             itself  'does  the  evidence  in  the  case   establish   that
             citizenship was obtained by fraud?'  If it does then it has to
             ask  'do  the  other  circumstances  of  the  case  point   to
             discretionary deprival?'.


         14.      As this is an appeal not a review, the  Tribunal  will  be
             concerned with the facts as it finds them  and  not  with  the
             Secretary of State's view of them.  In terms of the  proof  of
             fraud, the Tribunal will consider any evidence, whether or not
             available to the Secretary of State at the time  he  made  his
             decision, which is  relevant  to  the  determination  of  that
             question."


12.   At the hearing it was argued by each party that the  burden  of  proof
    lay on the other.  The Tribunal resolved this issue as follows:

         "17.     For all these reasons we are satisfied that it is for  the
             first respondent to prove that the appellant's  conduct  comes
             within the scope of s.40 the [1981] Act.


         18.      It is for the second appellant to show that she  satisfied
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


         19.      Human rights issues aside it is, in both cases, sufficient
             for the party bearing the burden of proof to establish a  fact
             on the balance of probabilities."


13.   It was also contended on behalf  of  the  first  respondent  that  the
    first appellant was not entitled to raise human rights  in  his  appeal
    against this decision.  The Tribunal summarised its  findings  on  this
    issue as follows:

         "41.     We reject the submission that  human  rights  grounds  are
             outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in  an  appeal  under
             s.40A of the 1981 Act although we find it equally  plain  that
             we cannot decide the case as if there had been a  decision  to
             remove the first appellant when  no  such  decision  had  been
             made.


         42.      We have spent some time on this because it was the subject
             of detailed argument before  us.   Having  given  considerable
             thought to the matter the position is, we find,  quite  simple
             and clear.  The  first  appellant  cannot  rely  on  a  ground
             alleging that  'removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
             Kingdom in consequence of the immigration decision  would  ...
             be unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act  1995  as  being
             compatible with the appellant's  Convention  rights.   Such  a
             ground  can  be  raised  as  of  right  in   appeals   against
             immigration decisions but this is not such  a  decision.   The
             grounds  could,  conceivably,  be  raised   in   a   different
             deprivation case where, unusually and  improbably,  there  was
             some reason to think  that  the  appellant  was  going  to  be
             removed without an 'immigration decision' being made but  this
             would not be because it was a statutory ground but because  it
             was  an  expression  of  a  claim  on  human  rights   grounds
             formulated to meet a particular case.  In the absence  of  any
             statutory restriction, the appellant can raise  general  human
             rights grounds but they must be framed to deal with the breach
             alleged to be caused by the decision to deprive the  appellant
             of his nationality, and giving effect to  that  decision,  and
             not framed to deal with the fiction that the  appellant  would
             be removed."


14.   We have set out these conclusions reached by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    following detailed  comprehensive  submissions.   They  have  not  been
    challenged by either party in the present appeal and we record them  at
    the request of the parties to assist the First-tier Tribunal  as  there
    are a number of pending deprivation of citizenship appeals.


The  Challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Findings   in   the   First
    Appellant's Appeal

15.   We now  turn  to  the  specific  challenges  made  to  the  Tribunal's
    findings and conclusions in the present appeals. The  first  respondent
    argues that although the Tribunal directed itself correctly as  to  the
    test to be applied it erred in law by failing properly  to  apply  that
    test in respect of the evidence  produced  at  the  hearing,  to  place
    sufficient weight on that evidence or to weigh up  the  evidence  as  a
    whole with the result that its conclusions were unlawful.

16.   Mr Barnes supported this  submission  by  referring  to  the  evidence
    relied on by the first respondent in support of the assertion that  the
    first appellant had obtained his  citizenship  by  fraud.   The  matter
    first came to attention in a referral dated 30 October  2008  from  the
    British Embassy in Pristina as  a  result  of  the  second  appellant's
    application for entry clearance.  It was said that the first  appellant
    appeared to have obtained his British  nationality  through  deception.
    His birth certificate had not been provided with  the  application  and
    checks with  the  authorities  in  Serbia  revealed  that  he  was  not
    registered with them.  This was a reference to  a  redacted  e-mail  at
    R133 from a visa assistant at  the  British  Embassy,  Pristina,  which
    says:

         "Checked with the Presevo registration office  who  have  confirmed
         that Altin Arusha is not (not) registered with them  ...  therefore
         the birth identity of Mr Altin Arusha does not  exist  in  Presevo
         Municipality (in Serbia)."


17.   Information was then sought from the Ministry of Internal  Affairs  in
    Kosovo and a reply was received on 6 July 2009 (R142)  which  confirmed
    that  local  registry  books  of  births,  marriages  and  deaths  were
    considered to be 95% accurate but during the Kosovo war most  of  these
    books (generally 80%) were burned or taken over by the Serb authorities
    and sent somewhere in the territory of Serbia.   The  response  to  the
    request of verification that a person was a citizen of Kosovo  and  was
    recorded in the birth registry book was 90 to 95% accurate.  Mr  Barnes
    submitted that this letter indicated that the Kosovan  authorities  had
    made efforts to make good the deficiency  in  their  records  and  were
    saying that those records were 90 to 95% accurate.

18.   The respondent then carried  out  further  investigations,  this  time
    with the Albanian authorities.  This produced a reply at  R144  to  the
    effect that Altin Adem Arusha was  registered  in  Sukth  Municipality,
    Dures District, National  Register  "Hamalle"  number  34.41  with  the
    following details, father: Adem, mother: Cbane, dob: 22/06/1984,  place
    of  birth  Bajram  Curi,  civil   status:   single,   nationality   and
    citizenship: Albania.  Mr Barnes submitted these  details  chimed  with
    the details the appellant had given at A16 save for his  mother's  name
    and that this evidence was persuasive, even if not conclusive, that the
    first appellant was not from Kosovo but was a citizen of Albania.

19.   Mr Barnes pointed out that  the  Tribunal  had  considered  the  first
    appellant's evidence but had rejected it.  It did not find  him  to  be
    reliable about how he had  obtained  the  documents  he  relied  on,  a
    Kosovan birth certificate, identity card and passport,  describing  his
    evidence as inconsistent at times and otherwise unreliable  [118].   It
    was not satisfied that any reliance could be placed on those  documents
    in light of the evidence as a whole [127].  It summarised its views  on
    the first appellant's credibility on these issues as follows:

         "133     It is apparent therefore from  the  observations  we  have
             made in relation to the appellant's credibility  that  we  did
             not find him to be a credible witness.  However, for the  most
             part, the credibility issues relate to  the  circumstances  in
             which he is said to have obtained his Kosovan documents.


         134.     These credibility issues do not affect the  conclusion  we
             have come to that the respondent  has  not  established  on  a
             balance of  probabilities  that  the  appellant  obtained  his
             British citizenship by fraud, or by  false  representation  or
             concealment of a material fact.  We are not satisfied, for the
             reasons we have given  above  that  the  evidence  adduced  on
             behalf of the respondent establishes this to be the case.  The
             appellant's credibility does not affect these observations."


20.   Mr Barnes argued that having made  that  finding  in  respect  of  the
    first appellant's credibility there was no evidence to set against  the
    inferences which could and should properly have  been  drawn  from  the
    respondent's evidence.  He then argued that the Tribunal approached the
    evidence in the wrong way, failing to consider each part of it  in  the
    light of the evidence as a whole and that if this was  done,  the  only
    rational conclusion could be that the first respondent had  established
    her case on a balance of probabilities.  He submitted that the Tribunal
    had considered the evidence piece by piece but had failed  to  consider
    the weight of the evidence in total.  He argued that it  was  mandatory
    for the Tribunal to consider the effect of the evidence from  both  the
    British Embassy, the Kosovan authorities and the  Albanian  authorities
    by asking whether as a whole it satisfied the balance of probabilities.



21.   In response, Mr Jacobs argued that these grounds amounted to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the findings of  fact  made  by  the  Tribunal
    which had clearly been aware of the requisite standard of proof and had
    properly applied it.  It had given clear reasons for its concerns about
    the evidence from  the  British  Embassy  dated  3 October  2008,  the
    accuracy of the Kosovan records referred to in their reply  of  6 July
    2009 and the letter from the Albanian authorities of 9 September  2009.
     In substance he argued that the Tribunal had  given  adequate  reasons
    and reached a decision properly open to it.

Assessment of the Issues

22.   So far as the e-mail from the visa assistant at  the  British  Embassy
    dated 3 October 2008 was concerned, the  Tribunal  noted  that  it  was
    criticised by the first appellant because of the lack of  detail  given
    and said that in its view there was some merit in that  criticism.   It
    commented that perhaps for understandable reasons the  details  of  the
    sender of the e-mail and the recipient's details were blanked  out  but
    that may not be  significant  but  said  that  what  in  its  view  was
    significant was that the information said to have come from the Presevo
    Registration Office had not been provided.  There was no indication  of
    precisely what information had been provided or whether it was  subject
    to any qualification and that the conclusion that the birth identity of
    the first appellant did not exist in Presevo Municipality did  not,  on
    the face of the e-mail, necessarily follow from the contention that  he
    was not registered with the Presevo Registration Office [104].

23.   We are satisfied  that  these  comments  were  properly  open  to  the
    Tribunal when deciding what inferences could be drawn from this e-mail.
     It went on to consider the letter from the Department of  Registration
    dated 6 July 2009 and to the reference at  para  2  that  the  back  up
    system for records was considered to be  95%  accurate.   The  Tribunal
    commented that this degree of accuracy could also be  read  as  meaning
    that the back up system was suspect in as many as one record in twenty.
     It  referred  to  births,  marriages  and  deaths  and  there  was  no
    assessment in fact of the accuracy of the birth records alone.  Para  3
    of the letter said that most of the local  registry  books  (80%)  were
    burned or taken over by the Serb authorities.  The Tribunal  said  that
    one  interpretation  of  that  letter  and,  in  its   view,   a   fair
    interpretation on a close reading of it was  that  whilst  the  records
    were 95% accurate, 80% of the records were destroyed or  taken  by  the
    Serb authorities.  In these circumstances whilst  confirmation  of  the
    first appellant's evidence  from  the  records  would  be  useful,  the
    absence of such confirmation did not amount to very much.  Again we are
    satisfied that these comments were ones the Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    make.  It found that the letter was not a sufficient basis on which  to
    conclude that the first appellant was not born in Kosovo.

24.   The Tribunal  then  referred  to  the  letter  from  the  Ministry  of
    Interior  in  Albania  dated  9  September  2009   referring   to   the
    registration of one Altin Adem Arusha in the  Sukth  Municipality.   It
    was argued on behalf of the first respondent that  the  coincidence  of
    the details recorded and those previously given by the first  appellant
    was such that it made it very likely that  it  referred  to  him.   The
    Tribunal noted that the name of the mother was different from the  name
    he had given for his mother, Mane rather than Cbane, and  that  it  was
    argued on behalf of the first respondent that  the  difference  in  the
    mother's name might have been significant if the  first  appellant  had
    been a more convincing witness but the Tribunal rejected that  argument
    holding that the deficiencies in his evidence did  nothing  to  improve
    the quality of the first respondent's case which  necessarily  included
    an argument that the first appellant was probably Albanian because of a
    registration certificate which identified the first appellant's  mother
    by a name that the first appellant had not  been  shown  to  have  used
    [111].

25.   The Tribunal also commented that the  information  provided  from  the
    Ministry of the Interior did not give the dates of birth of the parents
    in relation to the match found.  The evidence showed that an individual
    was registered in Albania with the same name and date of birth  as  the
    appellant and with the same father's name but it went no  further  than
    that.  The Tribunal said that the question arose  as  to  whether  only
    some of the details in relation to the first appellant  were  found  to
    match that of the individual whose details were given in the reply  and
    it had not been told the answer.  We are satisfied that these  comments
    were properly open to the Tribunal.  It was a question of fact for  the
    Tribunal to decide what inferences could properly be drawn  from  these
    documents.

26.    In  [114]-[115]  the  Tribunal  commented  that   there   was   other
    information which it was reasonable to have expected the respondent  to
    provide in relation to these enquiries. There was  no  explanation  why
    the dates of birth of the parents had not been given.  It said that  it
    could have been  told  if  there  was  any  significant  difference  in
    Albanian between the names Cbane and Mane and how,  or  otherwise,  the
    appellant's names were spelled.  The Tribunal was  not  satisfied  that
    this letter established on a balance of probabilities  that  the  first
    appellant was born in Albania.   Having  made  those  comments  on  the
    documents produced by the first respondent, the  Tribunal  went  on  to
    consider  in  [117]  -  [133]  the  evidence  of  the  first  appellant
    explaining why it did not find him to be credible.  It then  said  that
    these credibility issues did not affect the conclusion it had  come  to
    which was that the first respondent had not established on a balance of
    probabilities  that  the  first  appellant  had  obtained  his  British
    citizenship by fraud. It said in [137]:

         137.     "We must and have given weight to the Secretary of State's
             evidence and we have not been  impressed  by  it.   It  really
             boils down to the Secretary of State  telling  us  about  (not
             producing) a birth certificate for a person with the name  and
             date of birth as the appellant, a father with  the  same  name
             and date and birth as the appellant's father but  a  different
             mother.  As explained above we have no  direct  evidence  that
             the identified dates of birth are the same.


         138.     In all the circumstances we think that the  most  probable
             explanation for the birth record relied on by  the  respondent
             referring to a person with a mother whose name is not the same
             as the first appellant's mother's  name  is  that  the  person
             identified in the record is not the first appellant."


27.   We are not satisfied that the first  respondent  has  established  any
    error of law in  the  way  the  Tribunal  approached  or  assessed  the
    evidence about the first appellant's nationality.  It properly directed
    itself on the burden and standard of proof.  It did not fall  into  the
    error of compartmentalising the evidence or  considering  it  piece  by
    piece or of failing to consider the weight of the  evidence  in  total.
    It considered the evidence in the round and reached a decision properly
    open to it.  In substance the first  respondent's  challenge  is  to  a
    question of fact where the Tribunal reached a decision properly open to
    it for the reasons given.  We are not satisfied that  the  findings  of
    fact can be categorised as unreasonable, irrational or as not  properly
    open to it on the evidence.

The appeal of the Second Appellant

28.   We now turn  to  the  appeal  by  the  second  appellant  against  the
    decision dismissing her appeal against the refusal of entry  clearance.
    Mr Jacobs argues firstly that the Tribunal erred in law by  failing  to
    put to the first appellant a number of relevant  matters  on  which  it
    drew an  adverse  inference  as  to  the  parties'  intentions  and  in
    particular whether the first appellant  had  contacts  outside  the  UK
    other than the second appellant in view of marking every 0207 and  0208
    number on his phone records as calls to her [148], whether the  numbers
    marked on his Vodafone account related to the  second  appellant  [149]
    and whether it was their custom and  culture  to  exchange  cards.   He
    argued that these failures also support an argument that the Tribunal's
    credibility findings are unsafe because of the long delay  between  the
    hearing in April 2010 and the issue of the determination in March 2011.



29.   We were referred to two Court of Appeal authorities on  the  issue  of
    delay, Sambasivam v Secretary of State IATRF 1999/0419/4 and  Secretary
    of State v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868 and two  determinations  of
    the IAT, Omonijo [2002] UKIAT 02643 and Liaqat [2002] UKAIT 08142.   We
    referred the parties to a further Tribunal decision SB (Sufficiency  of
    protection - Mafia) Albania [2003] UKIAT 00028

30.   Mr Barnes submitted that we should follow the position set out  in  RK
    (Algeria) that the passage of time alone did not undermine  the  safety
    of the decision.  He argued that Mr Jacobs had failed to  identify  any
    inadequacy in the reasoning and that when the Tribunal's  determination
    was read with the Records of Proceedings provided by both judges  there
    was no basis on which it could properly be said that the findings  were
    unsafe.  Mr Jacobs argued that a nexus had been established between the
    delay and the credibility findings which depended on an  assessment  of
    the bearing and demeanour of  the  first  appellant  when  giving  oral
    evidence and inevitably this would be lost over the  passage  of  time.
    He drew a distinction between appeals where the outcome depended on the
    analysis of documents with those depending on the  assessment  of  oral
    evidence.

Assessment of the Issues

31.   The first challenge raised by Mr Jacobs is that the Tribunal erred  by
    failing to put to the first appellant a number of relevant  matters  on
    which it then drew an  adverse inference as to the parties' intentions.

32.   There is no obligation on the Tribunal particularly in  appeals  where
    the parties are represented by competent Counsel,  as  in  the  present
    case, to raise each and every matter  on  which  it  has  or  may  have
    concerns.  There will certainly be cases where a point not  pursued  in
    evidence should, out of fairness, be put to a witness before a Tribunal
    draws an adverse inference as to credibility.  However,  the  issue  of
    whether a failure to raise a particular matter amounts to a  procedural
    irregularity or lack of fairness depends upon the circumstances of each
    particular case. In Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 Schiemann  LJ  said
    whether a failure  by  the  Tribunal  expressly  to  put  a  particular
    inconsistency to a witness would amount to procedural unfairness  would
    depend on the facts of each appeal as the requirements of fairness were
    very much  conditioned  by  the  facts  of  each  case  and  whether  a
    particular course  was  consistent  with  fairness  was  very  much  an
    initiative judgment of the facts.

33.   We are not satisfied that the  issues  raised  by  Mr Jacobs  in  his
    grounds and submissions were such that it can properly be said that the
    Tribunal erred in law by not raising  these  issues  for  itself.   The
    Tribunal heard the first appellant's evidence about the extent  of  the
    contact between him and the second appellant, setting out its  analysis
    in [144]-[152].  It was a question of fact for the Tribunal  to  assess
    what inferences could properly be drawn from that evidence.   The  onus
    was on the second appellant to show that  she  was  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules for entry  clearance.   The  first  appellant
    gave oral evidence about his contact by telephone and on the  issue  of
    whether they exchanged cards.  There  was  an  opportunity  for  cross-
    examination and re-examination of the  first  appellant's  evidence  on
    these issues and we are not satisfied that the Tribunal can be  faulted
    for not pursuing for itself the  specific  issues  now  raised  in  the
    grounds.

34.   We now turn to the issue of delay.  In Sambasivam the Court of  Appeal
    referred to the jurisprudence of the IAT summarised by the Tribunal  in
    Mario [1998] Imm AR 281 in the context of an  asylum  appeal  where  it
    said that  when  credibility  was  in  issue  a  duty  was  imposed  on
    Adjudicators to reach their decision within a reasonable period of time
    and that this was a period of no more than three months from  the  date
    of hearing to the date the determination was handed in for typing.  The
    court said that the decision in Mario was no more and no  less  than  a
    useful statement of guidance for practitioners upon the usual  attitude
    and likely decision of the IAT in a case where an  issue  essential  to
    the disposition of  the  claim  for  asylum  depended  upon  a  careful
    weighing of the credibility of the appellant where it appeared that the
    delay between the hearing date and the preparation of the determination
    exceeded three months. It commented that in the absence of  special  or
    particular circumstances that was plainly a useful and proper  rule  of
    thumb which in the experience of the Tribunal it was  broadly  just  to
    apply but added that it might be appropriate to depart from the rule of
    thumb in a broad spectrum of individual cases.

35.   In his judgment Potter LJ summarised his views by saying:

             "In cases of delay of this kind, the matter is best  approached
             from the starting point, where important issues of  credibility
             arise, a  delay  of  over  three  months  between  hearing  and
             determination will merit  remittal  for  rehearing  unless,  by
             reason of  particular  circumstances,  it  is  clear  that  the
             eventual outcome of the application, whether by the same  or  a
             different route must be the same."

36.   However, those comments must be read in the light of the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in RK (Algeria), where Wilson LJ,  having  referred
    to the comments of Potter LJ, made the point that where  the  issue  is
    whether the Tribunal had erred in law, the task  was  to  persuade  the
    Court of Appeal that it should have no confidence in the correctness of
    the determination or, to put it  more  precisely,  in  its  safety  and
    therefore in its lawfulness.  He went on to say:

         "22.     The currency in which this court deals is that of  reason;
             and, if her case is to prevail, Ms Chan must  tender  reasoned
             arguments why  the  determination  is  unsafe.   She  has  not
             appealed against the delay.   She  is  appealing  against  the
             decision; and, if she can, she must,  in  some  rational  way,
             present the delay as a source of infection of the decision.  I
             am quite unable to  see  how  in  any  case  a  delay  between
             preparation and promulgation, however lamentable, can thus  be
             presented.  And, in relation to the delay  until  preparation,
             we have both Ms Chan's confirmation that credibility  was  not
             in issue and her specific acknowledgment today that she cannot
             even argue that in its  determination  the  Tribunal  did  not
             adequately address the submissions made orally to it.


         23.      Ms Chan's brief is in effect to submit that, of itself,  a
             delay of about six months until preparation of  the  decision,
             with or without the gross further delay thereafter, represents
             such a lamentable failure on the part of the system  that  the
             only fair reaction of an appellate court  is  to  require  the
             exercise to be  undertaken  again.   When  in  the  course  of
             argument I suggested to her that, were her submission  upheld,
             all judges and Tribunal chairman should,  in  cases  in  which
             their decisions were not fully prepared by the expiry  of  six
             months,  cease  work  on  them,  she,  in  a  way  reasonably,
             qualified her submission.  The length  of  delay  which  would
             trigger the need for a rehearing under her suggested principle
             would of course depend upon the complexity of the decision.  I
             also accept  that  the  anxious  scrutiny  to  be  applied  to
             immigration cases might make them more appropriate  candidates
             for the sort of principle which  she  purports  to  enunciate.
             But, even as thus qualified, I cannot  accept  her  principle.
             For she has failed to show, indeed she  does  not  purport  to
             show, any nexus between  the  delay  and  the  safety  of  the
             decision."


37.   The relevance of delay and the assessment  of  whether  it  makes  the
    determination unsafe must be considered in the light of the comments of
    the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Cobham  v  Frett  [2001]
    1WLR 1775 (referred to in SB (Albania)  at  [14])  where  the  Judicial
    Committee held that if  excessive  delay  was  to  be  relied  upon  in
    attacking a judgment, a fair case must be shown for believing that  the
    judgment  contained  errors  that  were  probably  or   even   possibly
    attributable to that delay.  Excessive delay may require a very careful
    perusal of the judge's findings of fact and  of  his  reasons  for  his
    conclusions in order to ensure that the delay has not caused  injustice
    to the losing party.  It would be important to consider the quality  of
    the judge's notes not only of the evidence but also of the  appellant's
    submissions.  It was not permissible to conclude merely from  the  fact
    of delay that a judge had difficulty in remembering  the  demeanour  of
    witnesses.  An appellate court must be satisfied the judgment  was  not
    safe and to allow it to stand would be unfair to the losing party.

38.   In order to show that delay has led to an error of law it  has  to  be
    shown that the judgment was not safe and  therefore  unlawful.   In  RK
    (Algeria) the court said that a nexus had to be shown between the delay
    and the safety of the decision. Mr Jacob relied on the  long  delay  in
    the issue of this determination between April 2010 and March  2011  and
    the fact that the issue of  the  parties'  intentions  and  whether  in
    particular they intended to live together as husband and wife depended,
    at least to a significant extent,  on  the  credibility  of  the  first
    appellant's oral evidence.

39.   The second appellant's  appeal  was  heard  together  with  the  first
    appellant's appeal against the deprival of citizenship, an appeal which
    raised difficult issues both of  fact  and  law.  As  we  have  already
    indicated, the respondents produced a bundle of 288 pages with a number
    of further documents; and the appellants, three bundles with a total of
    over 400 pages together with  a  further  bundle  with  20  tabs.   The
    hearing lasted for two days.  It was inevitable  that  there  would  be
    some delay in the preparation and the issue of this determination.  SIJ
    Perkins who prepared the determination apologised for the delay in  its
    promulgation in para 3 where he said:   "I  regret  the  delay  in  the
    promulgation of this decision.  This is not in any  way  the  fault  of
    Immigration Judge Kopieczek who has assisted  me  expeditiously  during
    the preparation of this determination."  However, we see no  reason  to
    infer from the delay alone that the decision of the Tribunal,  a  panel
    of two experienced judges, is unsafe or that there is any error of  law
    in its assessment of the relevant legal and factual issues.

40.   We have also seen the Records of Proceedings prepared by both  judges.
     It is clear both kept careful and extensive notes of the evidence  and
    the  submissions.   We  also  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    assessment of the parties'  intentions  turned  only  in  part  on  the
    assessment of the first appellant's  oral  evidence  but  also  on  the
    documentary evidence as is inevitable in an appeal by an appellant  who
    is seeking entry clearance from abroad.

41.   When assessing the parties' intentions the Tribunal took into  account
    the visits said to have been made by the first appellant to the  second
    appellant, his passport showing  visits  to  Albania  in  August  2008,
    December 2008, April 2009 and October 2009 which  corresponded  to  the
    visits described in his witness statement [147].   It  noted  that  the
    dates of the visits were supported by other evidence  relating  to  his
    travel.   It then went on to consider  the  evidence  about  the  phone
    records [148]-[149] and the lack of evidence  about  letters  or  cards
    [150].   It noted that the first appellant said he was in  Albania  for
    the second appellant's birthday, New Year and other holidays  and  that
    there was no reason for communication by letters  or  cards.   It  also
    noted that none of the visits had  taken  place  on  his  birthday  and
    commented that in any event even if they were together on any of  their
    birthdays, which suggestion the evidence did not support, or  on  other
    festive occasions that did not rule out their  having  exchanged  cards
    [150]. It found that the evidence in the phone  record  was  of  little
    weight in establishing the nature and  extent  of  their  relationship.
    These were comments and findings properly open to the Tribunal.

42.   It noted that photographs were produced but none had  a  date  and  it
    was  not  clear  which  photographs  referred  to  the  date  of  their
    engagement [152].  It is correct that the Tribunal  took  into  account
    the views it had formed about the first appellant's credibility but  we
    are not satisfied that it has been shown that simply by reason  of  the
    delay in promulgation that its assessment of his credibility was unsafe
    so as to undermine the lawfulness of the decision.   It  is  not  shown
    that the unfortunate delay in the promulgation of this decision had any
    effect on the assessment of credibility or on any of the  other  issues
    such as to make it unsafe and unlawful. In our judgment the  delay  has
    not led to any error of law.

43.   In summary, we are not satisfied that the Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    its assessment of either appeal.  In both  cases  it  reached  findings
    properly open to it for the reasons it gave.

Decision

44.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and  its  decisions  stand.
    Both appeals are dismissed.












Signed                                             Date: 2 February 2012


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
