
                 IY (Ankara Agreement - fraud and abuse) Turkey [2008]
UKAIT 00081

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |
|On 7 October 2008                             |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR
                        IMMIGRATION JUDGE S J CLARKE


                                   Between

                                     IY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ANKARA

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Basharat Ali (Kuddus Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Richards of Counsel instructed by the Treasury
Solicitors

The benefits of the  Ankara  Agreement  may  if  appropriate  be  denied  to
applicants who have made fraudulent asylum claims or established  businesses
unlawfully notwithstanding that the applicant has left  the  United  Kingdom
voluntarily to make  an  application  from  overseas  under  the  standstill
clause.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 2 June 1974.  He  arrived
    in this country in the back of a lorry on 10 January 1997  and  applied
    for asylum on 24 February 1997.  The  application  was  refused  on  28
    April 2003.  The appellant was served with a notice advising him of his
    liability to detention and removal as an illegal entrant.

2.    The appellant appealed against the refusal of his  asylum  application
    and his appeal came before an adjudicator at  a  hearing  on  5  August
    2003.  The adjudicator heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant.   The
    appellant's case was that he was involved with Dev Yol and that he  was
    arrested and detained and interrogated and suffered  at  the  hands  of
    both  the  authorities  and  of  fascists.    The   adjudicator   found
    significant inconsistencies in the appellant's account and rejected the
    appellant's story.  She did not find that he was  a  supporter  of  any
    political group nor did she accept that he had  been  detained  at  any
    time.  Further she did not accept that the appellant had been beaten by
    fascists as he had claimed.  She  also  rejected  the  account  of  his
    method of departure from Turkey.  The adjudicator dismissed the  appeal
    on asylum and human rights grounds on 20 August 2003.

3.    The appellant has run businesses in the United Kingdom.  He  purchased
    a fish and chip shop in October 2000 which he ran for four and  a  half
    years.  He sold this business in May 2005  for  �60,000  and  bought  a
    restaurant in June 2005.  In October 2006 he bought a  kebab  take-away
    for �65,000.  His wife is a partner in that enterprise and worked  with
    him there.

4.    On 14 October 2003 the appellant submitted an  application  for  leave
    to remain under the agreement establishing an association  between  the
    European Economic Community and Turkey, signed on 12 September 1963  at
    Ankara - "the Ankara Agreement".  Article 41  of  the  1970  Additional
    Protocol to that Agreement - "the standstill clause" - provides that:


         "The contracting parties shall  refrain  from  introducing  between
         themselves any new restrictions on the freedom of establishment and
         freedom to provide services."


      The effect of the standstill clause is to require applications  to  be
    considered by reference to the rules in force when the  United  Kingdom
    acceded to the European Community in  January  1973.  These  rules  are
    paragraphs 29 to 32 of HC 509  for  out  of  country  applications  and
    paragraph 21 of HC  510  for  in  country  applications.  However,  the
    appellant's application was refused on 28 May 2004 and on 8  June  2004
    the appellant was issued with a Form IS96 advising him  that  "you  may
    not enter employment, paid or unpaid, or  engage  in  any  business  or
    profession".

5.    Although removal directions were set for  22  September  2004  it  was
    subsequently agreed that the appellant would not be removed pending the
    outcome of the case of Tum and Dari v Secretary of  State  [2004]  EWCA
    Civ 788.  The appellant varied his initial application to  reflect  his
    current business circumstances (in particular the  acquisition  of  the
    restaurant) on 2 November 2005 and on 30 November 2005 the Secretary of
    State refused it.  An application based on  human  rights  grounds  was
    refused on 15 November 2006 and an appeal came  before  an  Immigration
    Judge on 3 January 2006 brought by both the  appellant  and  his  wife.
    The Immigration Judge found in paragraph  27  that  the  appellant  had
    exhausted all his appeal rights some years ago and while  she  accepted
    that the appellant had established a private and  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom and had built up two  restaurant  businesses  she  found
    that he had done so whilst in the  United  Kingdom  illegally  and  she
    further found that his wife had both arrived illegally and  had  worked
    in the United Kingdom illegally and throughout her  stay  had  been  an
    illegal entrant.  In respect of both of them any application to  remain
    in the United Kingdom under the Ankara Agreement would have to be  made
    from Turkey and not in-country.  The Immigration  Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds giving weight  to  the  fact  that  both
    appellants had established their private and family lives in the United
    Kingdom whilst here illegally.

6.    The appellant and his  wife  and  children  left  the  United  Kingdom
    voluntarily in order to make an application  under  the  terms  of  the
    Ankara Agreement and they sought to do so at the Ankara Embassy  on  26
    February 2007.  The respondent refused to accept the  applications  and
    judicial review  proceedings  were  initiated.   The  proceedings  were
    stayed by the court pending the ECJ judgement in  Tum  and  Dari.   The
    respondent finally agreed to consider the appellant's  application  for
    entry clearance under the Ankara  Agreement  but  the  application  was
    refused on 7 January 2008.  In  the  notice  of  refusal  reliance  was
    placed on Tum and Dari v Secretary of State (C-16/05) [2007] INLR  473,
    in particular on paragraph 64 where the court observed  that  according
    to settled case law "community law cannot be relied on for  abusive  or
    fraudulent ends..."  Having referred to the municipal jurisprudence the
    respondent set out the appellant's immigration history as follows:

         "You entered the United Kingdom  on  10  January  1997  and  on  24
         January 1997 you made an application for asylum.


         This asylum claim was  refused  on  28  April  2003.   Your  appeal
         against this decision was dismissed  on  20  August  2003  and  you
         became Appeal Rights Exhausted on 6 September 2003.  At  the  point
         that  your  appeal  rights  were  exhausted,  you  no  longer   had
         permission to work or set up a business.


         On 14 October 2003 you make an  application  for  leave  to  remain
         under the  Turkish  ECAA.   This  application  was  refused  on  15
         December 2003.


         On 8 June 2004 you were issued with an IS96 which stated 'You  must
         not enter employment, paid or unpaid, or engage in any business  or
         profession'.


         The businesses that provide the basis for your current  application
         for entry clearance 15 November 2007 are '[P] Restaurant' which you
         have stated commenced trading in July 2005 and  '[C]  Grill'  which
         you stated commenced trading on 30 August 2006.


         It is clear that these businesses were started at a time  when  you
         did not have permission to engage in business.


         In light of this it is considered  that  your  immigration  history
         amounts to abusive conduct.


         Furthermore, it is clear from the facts found  by  the  adjudicator
         that you put forward and relied upon  an  account  which  has  been
         found to be manifestly untrue in its crucial respects in  order  to
         seek leave to enter the United Kingdom following  your  arrival  in
         1997 on the grounds of asylum/human rights by virtue of  paragraphs
         6, 7, 8, 10 and 11 of the adjudicator's determination,  promulgated
         on 20 August 2003.


         In light  of  this,  it  is  considered  your  conduct  amounts  to
         fraudulent activity.


         Therefore, it has been decided that you are not entitled to rely on
         the standstill clause due to your fraudulent activity  and  abusive
         conduct.   Accordingly,  you  are  not  entitled   to   have   your
         application considered under the Immigration Rules in force in 1973
         (HC 509).


         Consequently, in order to obtain leave to  enter  to  establish  in
         business you would need to meet the requirements of paragraphs  201
         and 203 of HC 395, the current Immigration Rules.  Your application
         would fail under these Rules because you  have  failed  to  provide
         evidence that you have 200,000 of your own money that is under your
         control and held in your name which you intend to  invest  in  your
         businesses in the United Kingdom.


         Accordingly your application has been refused."


7.    Grounds of appeal were drafted by Mr Ali on 30 January 2008.   It  was
    requested  that  the  matter  be  heard  by  three  legally   qualified
    Immigration Judges and although attempts were made to achieve  this  in
    the absence of the requisite Presidential consent pursuant to paragraph
    2.4 of the practice directions, we sat as  a  panel  of  two.   In  the
    grounds of appeal the background to the Association Agreement  and  the
    standstill clause was explained by reference to R (Parmak) v  Secretary
    of State [2006] EWHC 244 (Admin) and R v Secretary of  State  ex  parte
    Savas (C-37/98) [2000] ECR 1-2927.  The specific grounds of appeal  are
    set out in paragraphs 4 to 7 as follows:

    "4.    The respondent has erred in law by concluding that the appellant
         is not  entitled  to  have  his  application  for  entry  clearance
         considered under HC 509 and the standstill clause.  This  error  is
         premised on misdirections in law, principally  in  misunderstanding
         the dicta of the authorities cited by the respondent in the  notice
         of decision.


    5.     The appellant is entitled to bring an appeal under Section 13(2)
         of the Immigration Act 1971 the  appeal  provisions  that  were  in
         force on 1 January 1973.  The respondent's  purported  decision  to
         exclude the appellant from appealing under these appeal  provisions
         is unlawful.


    6.     The respondent's decision amounts to a  permanent  exclusion  of
         the appellant for the purpose of  HC  509  and  is  in  consequence
         unlawful under HC 509, under EU law and disproportionate under  the
         ECHR, in particular Article 8 and Protocol 1 of the ECHR.


    7.     The decision is unlawful under Section 84(1)(c)."


8.    At the hearing we had  the  benefit  of  skeleton  arguments  on  both
    sides.  We also had an appellant's bundle and supplementary bundle  and
    a respondent's bundle together with authorities provided by both sides.
     Ms Richards handed in without objection  the  notices  that  had  been
    issued to the appellant on 2 May 2003 and 8 June 2004 respectively.

9.    Mr Ali intimated that he proposed to call no  oral  evidence  and  the
    case would proceed on the basis of submissions only.

10.   Ms Richards accepted that in view  of  the  allegation  of  fraud  the
    burden of proof lay on the Secretary of State rather than the appellant
    as had been indicated in the notice of refusal.  It was agreed  between
    the representatives that Ms Richards would address us first.

11.   Ms Richards referred to the recently  filed  evidence  that  had  been
    lodged after she had prepared  the  skeleton  argument  concerning  the
    grant of leave under the Ankara Agreement to four individuals including
    one of the appellants in Tum and Dari.  She was not in  a  position  to
    comment about the facts of these cases or whether  similar  points  had
    been taken in relation to them as had been taken in this case.  In  Tum
    and Dari it was clear there had  been  no  suggestion  of  fraud  -  as
    appears from paragraph of the judgment of  the  Court  of  Appeal.   Ms
    Richards outlined  the  appellant's  history  and  submitted  that  the
    appellant was an illegal entrant, liable to  detention  who  had  given
    evidence that was entirely incredible at  the  hearing  of  his  asylum
    claim  leading  the  adjudicator  wholly  to  reject  it.   After   the
    exhaustion of his appeal  rights  the  appellant  was  given  temporary
    admission on 8 June 2004 and it was plain from the form issued  to  him
    on that date that he was not to enter employment or engage in business.
     There was  a  clear  prohibition.   The  businesses  in  question  had
    commenced after the serving of the  form  on  the  appellant  in  2004.
    Having referred to the case of Tum and Dari in the ECJ Ms Richards took
    us to Aksoy v Secretary of State [2006] EWHC  1487  (Admin).   Although
    this was a judicial review application the court had  given  permission
    to rely upon it.  In that case the applicant was a Turkish national who
    had, like this applicant, arrived in this country  in  the  back  of  a
    lorry and claimed  asylum  and  had  made  an  appeal  which  had  been
    dismissed by an adjudicator on the  basis  that  he  had  invented  his
    claim.   An  application  was  subsequently  made  under   the   Ankara
    Agreement. The Secretary of State refused it  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was not entitled to the benefit of the agreement  because  he
    had used fraudulent means to enter the United  Kingdom  and  thus  fell
    within the  fraud  exception  in  Tum  and  Dari.  The  merits  of  the
    application were however considered under the  earlier  Rules  HC  510.
    The application was refused on the merits, applying the old  Rules,  on
    various grounds.  Sullivan  J  noted  that  there  was  no  substantive
    challenge to those grounds.   Sullivan  J  concluded  his  judgment  as
    follows:

    "4.    To revert to the fraud exception, the Secretary of State made it
         plain in the summary grounds that he was not simply relying on  the
         mode of entry of the claimant, which might well not distinguish him
         from the circumstances in Dari and Tum, but was further relying  on
         the adjudicator's conclusions which I have  summarised  above.   It
         seems to me that, unless  Mr  Slatter  can  persuade  me  that  the
         decision of Beatson J in Yilmaz and Wilkie J in Taskale were wrong,
         this is one of those claims that falls within the fraud  exception.
         Of course, much will turn on the particular facts of each case  and
         the particular conclusions reached by the  Immigration  Judge.   It
         does not follow that simply because a claim for asylum is  rejected
         entry was sought to be obtained by means  of  a  fraudulent  story.
         There is no doubt on the facts of this case that that is  precisely
         what was attempted and the short point that is made in  Yilmaz  and
         Taskale is that it cannot make a difference whether  the  applicant
         is someone whose false representations enabled him to gain leave of
         entry, or someone whose false representations  were  not  believed,
         who was placed on temporary admission, and who then sought to  gain
         entry  by  repeating  those  false  assertions  in  front   of   an
         Immigration  Judge  who  rejected   them.    Although   those   two
         authorities are merely persuasive and not binding upon me, I am not
         satisfied that they are wrong and therefore this case falls at that
         hurdle.


    5.     There is however a further problem  for  the  claimant  in  this
         case.  Although the letter of  11  January  2006  states  that  the
         claimant has no right of appeal, if he was not  excepted  from  the
         standstill provisions by reason of the  fraud  exception,  then  at
         best he would have been entitled to an  out  of  country  right  of
         appeal against the refusal of  his  application.   That  being  so,
         there would be no reason  for  the  defendant  not  to  remove  the
         claimant to Turkey from where he could pursue the  out  of  country
         right of appeal conferred under the earlier rule.


    6.     This is not one of those cases where there  appears  to  be  any
         genuine desire to pursue an appeal out of country.  The  desire  is
         to remain in this country and the challenge to the decision is,  in
         truth, a challenge to the defendant's wish to remove the  claimant.
         In these circumstances, it seems to me that the distinction between
         no right of appeal and an out of country right of appeal is  simply
         academic and, for this reason also, the application must fail.


    7.     As I have mentioned, apart from the alleged distinction  between
         HC 509 and HC  510,  there  is  no  substantive  challenge  to  the
         decision on the  merits  in  any  event.   So  even  if  the  fraud
         exception had not applied, and  even  if  there  had  been  a  more
         extensive  right  of  appeal,  the  claim  would  have  had  to  be
         dismissed."

12.   Ms Richards referred us to Taskale [2006] EWHC 712 (Admin).   In  this
    case the applicant had again arrived in the United Kingdom in the  back
    of a lorry and had claimed asylum and an adjudicator had dismissed  his
    appeal.  The appellant had applied for leave to remain under the Ankara
    Agreement which  the  Secretary  of  State  had  refused,  not  relying
    expressly on the fraud exception.  However the court took the point for
    itself.  Ms Richards referred us to paragraphs 29 to 34 of the judgment
    of Wilkie J. We reproduce paragraphs 32 to 34:

    32.          In his summary  grounds  of  resistance  set  out  in  the
         acknowledgment of service, reference is made  to  the  question  of
         fraud, but it is  limited  to  what  was  said  about  the  precise
         circumstances of his entry, namely, by deception in the back  of  a
         lorry. In the fuller grounds of resistance the full history of  the
         matter, including the consideration of the application  for  asylum
         by the adjudicator, is referred to as part of the  history,  though
         it is right to say that once again it appears that the question  of
         fraud is only adverted to by reference to the mode of entry in  the
         back of the lorry.

    33.          It therefore seems to me that, were I only considering the
         decision letter, it would not be open to the Secretary of State  to
         take the fraud point because that is not the basis upon  which  the
         application was dealt with. However, it is the case  that,  were  I
         wrong about the substance of the matter  and  the  decision  letter
         could not stand, a question might arise as to  whether  any  remedy
         should be granted to the claimant. The circumstances were not  only
         that he sought entry clandestinely in the back of a lorry, but when
         he made an application for asylum he did so by giving an account of
         how and in what circumstances he had left Turkey. That account  was
         the subject of examination by  the  adjudicator  when  hearing  the
         appeal against a refusal of asylum. It is perfectly plain from  the
         terms of the adjudicator's decision, in particular paragraphs 20 to
         22 and 25 and 26 of his reasons,  that  the  adjudicator  concluded
         that the claimant had put forward a fraudulent and false account in
         order to support his claim for asylum. It describes  the  claim  as
         obviously false. It describes the only inference that he could draw
         from various matters was that the appellant  put  forward  a  false
         story from the moment he arrived in the UK.

    34.          In my judgment and consistent with the approach  taken  by
         the Court of Appeal in Dari v Tum and having regard to the judgment
         of Beatson J in Yilmaz, the Secretary of State would be entitled to
         have  regard  to  the  findings  of  the  adjudicator   (apparently
         unappealed) of fraud on the part of the claimant, not  so  much  in
         the way in which he gained entry by being hidden in the back  of  a
         lorry, but subsequently by giving a false and fraudulent account to
         immigration officers and thereafter to the  adjudicator.  In  those
         circumstances it would be open to the Secretary of  State  to  have
         rejected this  application  at  the  outset  by  saying  that  this
         claimant was not entitled to the benefit of the agreement scheme on
         account of his having attempted,  albeit  unsuccessfully,  to  gain
         entry by the use of fraud. Accordingly, if I were wrong  about  the
         matter of substance, I would have been minded to have  refused  the
         claimant permission in any event as, inevitably, the  Secretary  of
         State would, lawfully, have been entitled to decline  to  give  him
         the benefit of the scheme had he  been  required  to  consider  the
         matter afresh and so it is not arguable  that  the  claimant  would
         have obtained any remedy.

    35.          However, essentially on  the  matter  of  substance,  this
         application for judicial review must be dismissed."


13.   Ms Richards referred us to Temiz v  Secretary  of  State  [2006]  EWHC
    2450 (Admin) a decision of Collins J.  The applicant had  attempted  to
    enter hidden in a van but had been discovered while on a ferry crossing
    the channel.  He applied for asylum on arrival.  Collins J  found  that
    the appellant had not told the truth about the claim that he  had  come
    straight from Turkey - it was the Secretary of  State's  position  that
    the appellant had in fact claimed asylum in Italy after  his  departure
    from Turkey.  After the refusal of his application  the  appellant  had
    absconded and then he had set up a business and had made an application
    under the Ankara Agreement.  Ms Richards referred us to  paragraphs  18
    and 19 of the judgment and indeed these paragraphs are relied on by  Mr
    Ali as well. Paragraph 19 reads as follows:


    "19.    That unlawful presence, whether as an  illegal  entrant  or  an
         overstayer,  can  justify  a  refusal  to  permit  an  in   country
         application under the Association Agreement is in my view supported
         by the jurisprudence of the ECJ.  Furthermore, if  the  opportunity
         to engage in business has been created by working in breach of  the
         terms of any temporary admission or when  overstaying  and  so  the
         unlawfulness of the applicant's conduct goes beyond  mere  unlawful
         presence,  there  is  a  further  justification  for  refusing  the
         application.  The applicant must  return  to  Turkey  and  make  an
         application from there.  That application  will  be  considered  in
         accordance with the  standstill  clause  and  so  under  the  Rules
         applicable on 1 January 1973.  I can seen no justification for  the
         approach which I am told is being taken by the  Home  Office   that
         those who have attempted unsuccessfully to rely on the  Association
         Agreement following the failure of their asylum claims will have to
         apply under the current Rules. That would  be  a  clear  breach  of
         Article 41(1). Incidentally, a requirement to return and  to  apply
         from outside the United Kingdom has an analogy  with  the  marriage
         cases in which the court has indicated  that  it  will  not  permit
         queue jumping and only in exceptional cases would it be  proper  to
         overturn the exercise by the Secretary of State  of  his  power  to
         remove: see for example R (Mahmood) v Secretary of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2001] 1 W.L.R 840."

14.   Ms Richards also referred us to paragraphs 23 to 28 of  the  judgment.
    In paragraph 24, having referred to Kondova [2001] ECR  1-06427  (where
    the ECJ spoke of the risk of an applicant building up assets  during  a
    period of unlawful stay, opening the way to abuse) Collins J stated:

      "This reasoning seems to me to apply with equal force to  cases  such
         as the present.  If  Turkish  nationals  can  remain  illegally  in
         breach of the UK's immigration laws and use that  illegal  stay  to
         establish the basis for an application which meets the  requirement
         of the Rules, there will be encouragement to do just that.  That is
         precisely what is happening since there are a large number of these
         applications being made by failed  Turkish  asylum  seekers.   Many
         will properly be rejected for failure to meet the  requirements  of
         the Rules, but they could also be rejected on the basis of  illegal
         presence."

15.   Ms Richards asked us to take into account paragraphs 34 and 35 of  the
    judgment which reads as follows:

    "34.   In the case of one seeking asylum, clandestine entry is not  per
         se to be regarded as fraudulent in the sense identified in  Dari  &
         Tum.   But if lies are told to an immigration officer in  order  to
         persuade him to grant leave,  fraud  is  established.   Thus  if  a
         dishonest story is given to try to establish  an  asylum  or  human
         rights claim, there is  fraud  and  the  fact  that  on  appeal  an
         applicant has been disbelieved suffices to  establish  that  fraud.
         Equally, a deliberate failure to disclose  that  an  applicant  has
         claimed asylum in another country, particularly if that country  is
         a Member State of the EU, is enough to  establish  fraud.   I  have
         already indicated that the  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to
         decide that the claimant had deliberately  concealed  that  he  had
         claimed asylum in Italy.  Unless the claimant can  show  that  that
         decision by the Secretary of State was wrong in  law,  which  would
         mean in the context of this case irrational, He cannot  succeed  in
         persuading me that it should be set aside.  Thus, even  if  Dari  &
         Tum does have the broad effect for which the claimant contends, the
         fraud exception applies to defeat the claim.


    35.    I should add that I entirely agree with the further points  made
         in Yilmaz [2005] 1 W.L.R. 3944  at paragraph 18 that a  person  who
         fails to comply with a condition attached to his admission  becomes
         an illegal entrant and so cannot rely on the Association Agreement.
           That is entirely consistent with what I have indicated I  believe
         to be the position in law."


16.   Finally Ms  Richards  drew  our  attention  to  paragraph  40  of  the
    judgment where Collins J stated:

      "As will be apparent, I believe that it will only be  in  exceptional
         circumstances that a claim by a failed Turkish  asylum  seeker  who
         has not been given leave to enter or remain and who accordingly  is
         either an illegal entrant  or  an  overstayer  could  succeed.   He
         cannot obtain the benefit of the Association Agreement  if  he  has
         created the ability to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  by
         working or establishing a business in breach of conditions  of  his
         admission or  while  here  unlawfully.   It  is  not  necessary  to
         establish fraud, but if fraud is shown, there can be no doubt  that
         refusal is proper.  All  that  Dari  &  Tum  decides,  in  my  view
         correctly, is that the 1973 law applies because of  the  standstill
         clause.  But the 1973  domestic  immigration  law  fully  justifies
         refusal of leave to enter without any need to consider  the  Rules,
         unless, in a given set of circumstances,  the  Secretary  of  State
         decides exceptionally  that  he  can  exercise  discretion  in  the
         claimant's favour. I doubt that he will do that very often and,  if
         he does not, it is difficult to imagine that his refusal  would  be
         wrong in law."


17.   Ms Richards then took us to LF (Turkey) [2007]  EWCA  Civ  1441  where
    the Court of Appeal  considered  the  position  in  the  light  of  the
    decision of the ECJ in Tum and Dari.

18.   The appellant in that case had made an asylum  claim  which  had  been
    rejected as false in its core aspects by an adjudicator.  The appellant
    was prohibited from entering into  employment  but  he  opened  a  caf�
    restaurant notwithstanding.  He made an application for leave to remain
    under the Ankara Agreement.  Ms Richards pointed out  that  while  the
    Court of Appeal had identified two questions as stated in paragraph  13
    of the judgment of Laws LJ, argument had concentrated on the  first  of
    those questions.  The first question was whether the Secretary of State
    was entitled to disregard the facts of the applicant's establishment of
    his business on the ground that those  facts  were  the  fruit  of  the
    applicant's breach of  his  conditions  of  temporary  admission.   The
    second question was whether the applicant was to  be  deprived  of  the
    benefit of HC 509 because of his attempt to gain entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom by means of a fraudulent asylum claim.  The judgment  concludes
    as follows:

    "14.   The argument this morning has concentrated on the first of these
         questions.  Indeed, we have not  gone  into  the  second.   If  the
         Secretary of State succeeds on the first then he needs  no  support
         from the second point.  It is convenient at this stage  briefly  to
         review the learning which bears on this part of  the  appeal.   The
         appropriate starting point is Kondova  in  the  European  Court  of
         Justice.  This decision preceded the  material  English  cases.  It
         concerned  antidiscrimination   provisions   in   the   Association
         Agreement between  the  European  Communities  and  Bulgaria.   The
         European Court of Justice said:


         '77. ... if Bulgarian nationals were allowed at any time  to  apply
             for establishment in the host Member State, notwithstanding  a
             previous infringement of its national immigration legislation,
             such nationals might be encouraged to remain illegally  within
             the territory of that State and submit to the national  system
             of control only once the substantive requirements set  out  in
             that legislation has been satisfied.


         78.      An applicant might then rely on the clientele and business
             assets which he may have built up during his unlawful stay  in
             the host Member State, or  on  funds  accrued  there,  perhaps
             through taking employment, and so present himself  as  a  self
             employed person now engaged in, or likely to be engaged in,  a
             viable activity whose rights ought to be  recognised  pursuant
             to the Association Agreement.


         79.      Such an interpretation would risk depriving Article  59(1)
             of the Association Agreement of its effectiveness and  opening
             the way to  abuse  through  endorsement  or  infringements  of
             national   legislation   on   admission   and   residence   of
             foreigners."


    15.    Kondova was referred to by Woolf LCJ, as he then was, in Dari  v
         Tum [2004) EWCA Civ 788  which  was  directly  concerned  with  the
         standstill  clause  in  the  Additional  Protocol  to  the   Ankara
         Agreement.  There the respondents had unlawfully  remained  in  the
         United  Kingdom  after  their  asylum  claims  had  been   rejected
         although, as the Lord Chief Justice made clear, it  was  not  shown
         that the claims  had  been  fraudulent.   On  those  facts  it  was
         submitted to the Secretary of State that the respondents  were  not
         entitled to the benefit  of  the  standstill  clause.   Lord  Woolf
         disagreed.  He said:


         '22.     There is  nothing  in  article  41(1)  of  the  Additional
             Protocol itself to support that argument.   Furthermore,  when
             the judgment in Savas [I interpolate - that  has  been  relied
             on] is properly understood as falling into  two  clear  parts,
             then it seems to me that the judgment  strongly  supports  the
             contention of the respondent.  The fact that the  "standstill"
             provisions are to apply to a person whatever his status so far
             as his right to remain in this country or his right  to  enter
             this country are concerned, is covered  by  the  '"standstill"
             provisions.


         23.      The one exception that I would make to that clear position
             is with regard to a person who achieves entry to this  country
             by the use of fraud.  It has  long  been  the  situation  that
             those who enter by fraud cannot benefit from the point of view
             of immigration status by so doing.  The case of Kondova  (Case
             C-235/99, 27 September 2001) which was not referred to in  the
             court  below,  confirms  that  that  is  the   position.   The
             provisions which are being considered by  the  Court  in  that
             case are not the  same  as  here,  but  for  present  purposes
             paragraph 80 can be  applied.   It  says:  "....  a  Bulgarian
             national who intends to take up an activity in a Member  State
             as an employed or self-employed person but who gets round  the
             relevant national controls by falsely  declaring  that  he  is
             entering that member Sate for the  purpose  of  seasonal  work
             places him outside the sphere of protection  afforded  to  him
             under the Association Agreement."  The sentiments expressed in
             that paragraph would be  equally  applicable  to  a  situation
             where a person otherwise in the position  of  the  respondents
             sought to gain access to this country as an asylum  seeker  by
             fraudulent means.'


    16.    In the same case, Dari v Tum,  their  Lordships'  House  made  a
         reference to the European Court of Justice. The European  Court  of
         Justice handed down its judgment as recently as 20 September  2007.
         At paragraph 64 of the judgment this is said:


             'Lastly, as regards the alternative  argument  of  the  United
             Kingdom Government that failed  asylum  seekers  such  as  the
             applicants in the main proceedings should not  be  allowed  to
             rely on Article 41(1) of the Additional  Protocol,  since  any
             other interpretation would be tantamount to endorsing fraud or
             abuse, it must be borne in mind  that,  according  to  settled
             case-law, Community law cannot be relied  on  for  abusive  or
             fraudulent ends [authority then cited] and that  the  national
             courts may, case  by  case,  take  account  on  the  basis  of
             objective evidence of abuse or fraudulent conduct on the  part
             of the persons concerned in order, where appropriate, to  deny
             them the benefit of the provisions of Community law  on  which
             they seek to rely [and a further case is cited].'


    17.    This, if I may say so with great respect, is an  application  of
         the abuse of rights principle which  is  well  established  in  the
         jurisprudence of the Court of Justice. There is plain affinity with
         the common law rule (if I may express it very broadly) that  a  man
         may not  profit  from  his  own  wrong  and  the  linked  principle
         expressed in the Latin phrase ex  turpi  causa  non  oritur  actio.
         There is in the present context no reasonable distinction, I think,
         between abuse of rights and fraud.  Such a distinction if  it  were
         asserted could not in my judgment  survive  the  reasoning  of  the
         Court of Justice in Kondova and Dari v Tum. This conclusion  is,  I
         apprehend,  in  line  with  first   instance   decisions   in   the
         Administrative Court, notably Yilmaz and Temiz to which I have made
         reference.  I will not, with respect, cite those judgments.


    18.    What then is the position  here?   I  have  concluded  that  the
         Secretary of State was entitled to deny the applicant  the  benefit
         of paragraphs 30 to 32 of HC 509  because  his  reliance  on  those
         provisions was in truth only viable by virtue of his own wrongdoing
         - the establishment of a business in 2004 in plain contravention of
         a then extant prohibition against his doing so.  It  is  true  been
         [sic] the focus of the argument this morning has been the fact that
         from October 2005 onwards, successive forms  IF96  did  not  repeat
         this restriction on their face.  However, the  applicant  had  made
         his application to enter as a businessman in January  2005  and  he
         relied on the business he had established from June  2004  onwards.
         That essentially remained the case.   The  Secretary  of  State  in
         paragraph 7 of the decision letter, which I have already  set  out,
         is plainly addressing his attention to the basis on  which  or  the
         circumstances  in  which  the  business  of   the   applicant   had
         historically been established. Even if (which I am bound to  say  I
         doubt) in October 2006  the applicant was entitled  to  think  that
         the restriction was not then being insisted on, the basis on  which
         his application had been put forward on which  indeed  it  depended
         remained the historic establishment of a business in  violation  of
         his conditions.


    19.    In these circumstances it seems to  me  that  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision was lawfully arrived at, and for my part I do  not
         find it necessary to decide whether the Secretary of State was also
         entitled to rely on the applicant's fraudulent asylum claim. It may
         be said that that claim was in effect what allowed the applicant to
         remain in the United Kingdom albeit  on  temporary  admission  from
         2000 onwards while the appeal process took  its  course.   But  the
         circumstances relating to the fraudulent asylum claim may  well  be
         thought more remote from the claim to enter as a  businessman  than
         is his actual establishment of the business in question.


    20.    For these reasons I conclude that there is nothing in the  first
         and principal ground of appeal.  There is a suggestion that  it  is
         in some way enforced by a legitimate  expectation.  I  perceive  no
         such expectation.  None, I think, is generated by the Secretary  of
         State's guidance discussed by Lloyd Jones J and  to  which  I  have
         referred.  As regards the point under the  European  Convention  on
         Human Rights, Mr Zahed has this morning very candidly accepted that
         in truth the Article 8 claim  falls  away,  as  it  is  now  to  be
         understood that the applicant could launch a fresh claim  to  enter
         the United Kingdom from Turkey.  It is not in  those  circumstances
         necessary to say any more  about  Article  8.   Nor  in  truth  can
         Article  1  of  the  First  Protocol  provide   any   self-standing
         justification for overturning the Secretary  of  State's  decision.
         That being so, it is not necessary to go into the question  whether
         the  Article  8  claim  might  be  thought  to  be  a  fresh  claim
         theoretically generating fresh appeal rights."


19.   Ms Richards submitted that the observations of the Court of Appeal  in
    relation to the fraudulent asylum claim  were  obiter.   The  case  did
    establish that the appellant could not rely on the  fact  that  he  had
    established the business in the face of an expressed  prohibition.   It
    was wholly illogical to submit that the abusive behaviour  which  could
    be relied on in country by the Secretary of State could not  be  relied
    on out of country by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   There  might  be
    circumstances  where  an  applicant  could  make  an  application  from
    overseas relying on a fresh business which was in no way tainted by his
    previous behaviour.  That was  not  the  circumstances  of  this  case.
    Fraud had not been alleged in the case of Dari & Tum.  Savas was not  a
    case about fraud or abuse.  The cases of Aksoy and  Taskale  and  Temiz
    established that the Secretary of State was entitled  to  rely  on  the
    false asylum claim.  In the light of the authorities  the  decision  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer was lawful and abuse had been  established.



20.   Mr Ali submitted that it had to be borne in mind  that  the  case  law
    relied upon arose in connection with judicial review proceedings.   The
    Secretary of State's decision would stand absent irrationality  and  it
    was no light thing  to  establish  irrationality.   While  it  was  not
    conceded that the case law in relation to in country  applications  was
    correct, it was quite clear from the decision of  Collins  J  in  Temiz
    that the proper course was to do what the appellant had  done  in  this
    case and make the application  from  overseas.   The  case  of  Taskale
    referred at paragraph 29 to those who were in this country.  It  was  a
    public law challenge.  The court had been dealing  with  the  issue  of
    fraud in the context of judicial review being a discretionary remedy  -
    see paragraph 33 of  the  judgment.   The  case  of  Kondova  had  been
    concerned with a different Association Agreement.  The  case  of  Temiz
    turned on the issue of the justification of  a  refusal  to  permit  an
    application made in country  under  the  Association  Agreement  -  see
    paragraph 19.  The Secretary of State was cherry picking the  parts  of
    the judgment that were useful to her. The last sentence of paragraph 19
    had to be read in the light of recent jurisprudence from the  House  of
    Lords.

21.   In paragraph 27 of the judgment reference had been made to people  not
    being permitted to circumvent national legislation - the appellant  was
    not seeking to do this.  He was applying from overseas.   In  paragraph
    34 it was clear that the court  was  concerned  with  an  irrationality
    challenge - it was necessary for the claimant to demonstrate  that  the
    decision of the Secretary  of  State  was  wrong  in  law  and  it  was
    difficult to establish irrationality.  The  Secretary  of  State's  own
    guidance referred to in paragraph 12 of LF indicated  that  a  negative
    history including previous unlawful presence in the United Kingdom  did
    not prevent the application of the standstill clause.   The  court  had
    referred to paragraph 78 of the decision in  Kondova  but  it  must  be
    recalled that that  decision  had  been  taken  in  the  context  of  a
    different Association Agreement.  In paragraph 17 the Court  of  Appeal
    had referred to the abuse of rights principle but that did not apply in
    the circumstances of the instant case where the appellant had set up  a
    business on which he was paying taxes and there was nothing  fraudulent
    about it.  The issue of the false asylum claim was too remote a  matter
    - see paragraph 19 of the judgment.

22.    The  Secretary  of  State's  conduct  was  also  in  issue.   He  had
    demonstrated no will to consider the case  properly  or  at  all  until
    compelled to do so.  The Secretary of State was  in  effect  compelling
    Turkish nationals to comply with the current Rules.  The issue of fraud
    had not been raised in Tum and Dari but the facts in those  cases  were
    important.  The Secretary of State's argument had no application  to  a
    properly submitted application in Turkey.  The cases  concerned  public
    law challenges to  applicants  seeking  leave  to  remain  having  been
    present improperly.  Was it suggested  that  the  alleged  abuses  only
    applied to the old Rules and not the  current  Rules?   That  would  be
    absurd.  In paragraph 61 of the decision in Savas reference was made to
    periods in which a Turkish national  was  employed  under  a  residence
    permit which was issued to him only "as a result of fraudulent  conduct
    which has led to a conviction" were not based on  a  stable  situation.
    There was no conviction in the instant case.   The  circumstances  were
    different.  Mr Ali referred to the case  of  A  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2002] EWCA Civ 1008 where the Court of Appeal set aside a reference to
    the ECJ on the basis that the law was acte clair.

23.   In relation to the ground of appeal concerning the  1971  Act  Mr  Ali
    accepted that no difficulties arose in the context of this case but  in
    another case reliance might be sought to be placed on the former appeal
    provisions. We should point out that the respondent initially contended
    that the appellant only had a qualified right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision of 7 January 2008 but  by  letter  sent  to  the  Tribunal  18
    September 2008 it was accepted that the appellant enjoyed a full  right
    of appeal under s.82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act,
    2002.

24.   In reply Ms Richards submitted that in the  context  of  the  judicial
    review proceedings the Secretary of State  had  agreed  to  accept  and
    process the appellant's application in Turkey but that there  had  been
    no acceptance that the fraud and abuse principle would  be  disapplied.
    There was no waiver.  This was abundantly clear when one looked at  the
    e-mails in the respondent's bundle.  No guarantee had been given as  to
    the outcome.  There was no estoppel.

25.   Ms Richards accepted that there was no issue  in  the  instant  appeal
    concerning advantages to be derived by  former  appeal  and  procedural
    rights.  Such a question was not relevant to the instant appeal.

26.   Ms Richards responded to the submission that it was nonsense  to  rely
    on fraud in respect of the old Rules and not the new ones.  Ms Richards
    submitted that the appellant was relying on a  principle  of  Community
    law.  The Secretary of State was contending that the appellant was  not
    entitled to rely on that Community law principle because of  fraud  and
    abuse.  The current Rules had nothing to do with Community law.

27.   On the question of  the  evidential  burden,  the  appellant  had  put
    forward nothing to counter what  the  Secretary  of  State  said.   The
    respondent had discharged the burden.

28.   The ECJ was not concerned with  the  factual  issues  appertaining  to
    fraud and it was for the national courts to apply the jurisprudence  on
    a case-by-case basis.

29.   Reliance by the appellant had been placed on the case  of  A  but  the
    Court of Appeal in Tum & Dari  had  referred  at  paragraph  27  to  an
    apparent inaccuracy in A as reported insofar as it was  suggested  that
    the court had made any form of declaration as to the legal position.  A
    had in any event considered a very limited issue.

30.   In Savas fraud and abuse had not been raised  and  the  same  position
    arose in Tum and Dari.

31.   While  it  was  accepted  that  the  case  law  concerned  public  law
    challenges that was irrelevant.  The cases set  out  parameters  as  to
    what amounted to fraud and abuse for community law purposes.

32.   While all the authorities concerned in  country  cases  the  principle
    applied more widely.  One could not rely on abuse or fraud to establish
    a community right as held in Tum and Dari. There was no logical  reason
    to confine the principle to in  country  applications.   The  cases  of
    Aksoy, Temiz and Teskale established that making a false  asylum  claim
    was an aspect of fraud or abuse  as  was  establishing  a  business  in
    breach of conditions - see LF and the decision of the  Tribunal  in  FS
    (Breach of conditions: Ankara Agreement) Turkey [2008] UKAIT 00066.

33.   An applicant should be denied the benefit of the old Rules in  an  out
    of country application just as much as in an  in  country  application.
    What Collins J had said in paragraph 19 of Temiz was obiter and did not
    have  the  significance  contended   for   by   the   applicant.    The
    circumstances in which the fraud or abuse principle  could  be  engaged
    had not been addressed.  What had been said in paragraph 5 of Aksoy did
    not undermine the submission. It was not said that an  out  of  country
    application would be dealt with any differently.

34.   Although Kondova was concerned with a different Association  Agreement
    what was said was relevant to the fraud and abuse  principle.   It  was
    recognised by the courts that fraud would be encouraged  if  applicants
    could seek to obtain an  advantage  on  the  basis  of  illegal  entry,
    maintaining a false claim and building  up  a  business  in  breach  of
    conditions.  It would be nonsense if what was relevant to an in country
    application could not be relevant to an out of country application.  If
    the appellant relied upon a completely new business when making his out
    of country application it might be argued that the fraud principle  did
    not apply.  However in the instant case the appellant was seeking entry
    clearance on the basis of a business which he had set up  when  he  was
    prohibited from doing so.  For the reasons given in the Entry Clearance
    Officer's decision, the appeal should be dismissed.

35.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
    We have had the benefit of written and oral  submissions  and  we  have
    carefully taken these into account.

36.   We did not hear oral evidence from the appellant.  He has submitted  a
    statement dated 10 July 2008 in which he denies  that  his  immigration
    history amounts to abusive conduct and he contends that he started work
    with the permission of the Home Office.   Once  his  domestic  remedies
    were exhausted he left the country voluntarily  in  order  to  make  an
    application from abroad.  He had never been  told  that  he  could  not
    place reliance on the successful business that he  had  established  in
    the United  Kingdom.   He  had  left  the  country  "so  that  a  fresh
    application could be made and my previous immigration  history  ignored
    for the purposes of the Ankara Agreement".   In  paragraph  12  of  the
    statement the appellant said this:

         "In the refusal letter the officer refers to  fraud  or  abuse.   I
         think that he is entirely wrong to  take  this  into  account  when
         considering an out of country application for first admission."

37.   The High Court application had, in the appellant's view, been  refused
    "on  the  basis  that  the  defendant  will  consider  the   claimant's
    application pursuant to the 1973 Rules  within  28  days  of  it  being
    received at the British Embassy."  The appellant's case  was  that  the
    High Court Judge was wrongly led to believe that the  application  will
    be considered under the 1973 Rules and  the  Treasury  Solicitors  were
    well aware of the facts of the appellant's case and the basis on  which
    the application would be made from Turkey.  Nowhere in the  1973  Rules
    were Entry  Clearance  Officers  allowed  to  take  into  account  past
    immigration history and accordingly the appellant could not be  accused
    of fraud or abuse.  The appellant felt he  had  been  subjected  to  an
    abuse of process.

38.   While the appellant did not admit that  he  had  engaged  in  business
    without permission, he was now making  an  application  to  rejoin  the
    business which he had established.  He could have taken the  money  out
    and applied to start a fresh business but he could  not  see  why  this
    would make a difference.  Had he taken this course the Entry  Clearance
    Officer might possibly have refused the application by arguing that the
    appellant had circumvented the procedures.

39.   It appears from the  authorities  that  the  fact  that  an  appellant
    entered the country in a clandestine fashion and  made  an  application
    for asylum which failed does not in itself render the appellant  guilty
    of abusive  or  fraudulent  conduct  for  the  purposes  of  making  an
    application under the  Ankara  Agreement.   This  much  is  clear  from
    paragraph 67 of the case of Tum and Dari which reads as follows:

         "In those circumstances, the fact that Mr  Tum  and  Mr  Dari  had,
         prior to their applications for clearance to enter the UK  for  the
         purpose of exercising freedom of establishment,  made  applications
         for asylum which  had,  however,  been  refused  by  the  competent
         authorities of that member state,  cannot be regarded,  in  itself,
         as constituting abuse or fraud."


40.   However,  it  is  in  our  view  equally  plain  that  an  appellant's
    immigration history and conduct may not be irrelevant when  considering
    an application under the  Ankara  Agreement  -  see  Tum  and  Dari  at
    paragraph 64 - Community  law  cannot  be  relied  on  for  abusive  or
    fraudulent ends.  The ECJ held that the national courts  may  "case  by
    case take account - on the basis of  objective  evidence  of  abuse  or
    fraudulent conduct on the part of persons  concerned  in  order,  where
    appropriate, to deny them the benefit of the  provisions  of  community
    law on which they seek to rely...".

41.   Mr Ali submitted that it was absurd to say that  the  appellant  could
    not rely on the old Rules because of his fraud and then  refer  him  to
    the new Rules.  This is a submission based on a misunderstanding of the
    position.  The appellant is  seeking  to  rely  on  the  provisions  of
    Community law.  He argues that he is entitled by  virtue  of  Community
    law to rely on the old Rules.  But the respondent contends  he  is  not
    entitled to rely on those old Rules because of his behaviour.

42.    In  this  case  the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in   a
    clandestine fashion  and  applied  for  asylum.   His  application  was
    refused and his appeal was heard by an adjudicator.  His appeal failed.
     As we have said, none of these  factors  would,  by  themselves,  have
    given rise to the obstacle that is said to face the appellant  in  this
    case.  However, the facts on which the  appellant  founded  his  asylum
    claim were false.  This was the clear finding of  the  adjudicator  and
    there has been no challenge to that finding.  Indeed in the appellant's
    latest statement he makes no protest about the decision at all and does
    not complain that the adjudication was wrong.

43.   It follows in our view that the appellant was not a bona  fide  asylum
    seeker.  He came to this country to put forward a false claim.  He  put
    that false claim forward to the authorities and then to an adjudicator.
     What was said by Sullivan J at paragraph 4 of Aksoy is of relevance:

         "Of course much will turn on the particular facts of each case  and
         the particular conclusions reached by the  Immigration  Judge.   It
         does not follow that simply because a claim for asylum is  rejected
         entry was sought to be obtained by means  of  a  fraudulent  story.
         But there is no doubt on the  facts  of  this  case  that  that  is
         precisely what was attempted and the short point that  is  made  in
         Yilmaz and Taskale is that it cannot make  any  difference  whether
         the appellant is someone whose false representations enabled him to
         gain leave of entry, or someone whose  false  representations  were
         not believed, who was based on temporary admission,  and  who  then
         sought to gain entry by repeating those false assertions  in  front
         of an Immigration Judge who rejected them."


      In our view there is a world  of  difference  between  the  bona  fide
    asylum applicant who tells a truthful story but whose  case  fails  for
    reasons which do not reflect on his credibility and  the  circumstances
    of the present case.  For example an  appellant  may  fail  because  of
    positive developments in  the  objective  situation.   Defeat  may  not
    impinge on his integrity at all.

44.   Mr Ali places reliance on LF where  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered
    that the circumstances relating to the  fraudulent  asylum  claim  "may
    well be thought more remote from the claim to enter  as  a  businessman
    than is his actual establishment of the business in question."

45.   It is quite clear from paragraph 14 of the judgement of the  Court  of
    Appeal that it had not gone into the argument on the  question  of  the
    impact of fraudulent asylum claims in cases of this type.  Even  if  it
    could be said that a fraudulent asylum claim was more remote, the Court
    of Appeal was not saying that it was an irrelevant factor.   Indeed  in
    Tum and Dari in the Court of Appeal the Lord Chief Justice  stated,  in
    relation to the fraud exception, that it had long  been  the  situation
    that those who entered by fraud could not benefit  from  the  point  of
    view of immigration status by so doing.  The Court of  Appeal  referred
    to Kondova and found that the circumstances  in  that  case  "would  be
    equally applicable to a situation  where  a  person  otherwise  in  the
    position of the respondent sought to gain access to this country as any
    asylum seeker by fraudulent means."  In  Taskale  Wilkie  J  stated  at
    paragraph 34:

         "In my judgment and consistent with the approach taken by the Court
         of Appeal in Dari v Tum  and  having  regard  to  the  judgment  of
         Beatson J in Yilmaz, the Secretary of State would  be  entitled  to
         have  regard  to  the  findings  of  the  adjudicator   (apparently
         unappealed) of fraud on the part of the claimant, not  so  much  in
         the way in which he gained entry by being hidden in the back  of  a
         lorry, but subsequently by giving a false and fraudulent account to
         Immigration Officers and therefore to the  adjudicator.   In  those
         circumstances it would be open to the Secretary of  State  to  have
         rejected this  application  at  the  outset  by  saying  that  this
         claimant was not entitled to the benefit of the Agreement scheme on
         account of his having attempted,  albeit  unsuccessfully,  to  gain
         entry by the use of fraud."


46.   In our view  the  appellant  was  guilty  of  fraudulent  and  abusive
    conduct in the circumstances  of  this  case.   His  circumstances  are
    similar to the circumstances of the appellant in Taskale.

47.   It is submitted that the appellant should not benefit from the  Ankara
    Agreement because the businesses that  he  established  in  the  United
    Kingdom were established without authorisation.  From  an  early  stage
    the appellant was an illegal entrant and notification was given to  him
    to that effect.  Any doubts that he might  have  had  would  have  been
    dispelled by the notice that was served on him on 8 June  2004  stating
    that "you may not enter employment, paid or unpaid, or  engage  in  any
    business or profession."

48.   The appellant went on to establish the  two  businesses  on  which  he
    places reliance in this case.  The case of LF makes it  clear  that  in
    such a case the Secretary of State was entitled to deny  the  appellant
    the benefit of the old Rules because - see paragraph 18 of the judgment
    - "his reliance on those provisions was in truth only viable by  virtue
    of his own wrongdoing" - in that case the establishment of  a  business
    in 2004 in plain contravention of a then extant prohibition against his
    doing so.   The Tribunal reached a similar conclusion in  FS.   Mr  Ali
    makes the point that the cases we have been referred to are all  public
    law cases and it was  necessary  for  the  applicant  to  displace  the
    Secretary of State's position. In the appeal before us the boot  is  on
    the other foot.  It is for the Secretary of State to prove her  case  -
    Ms Richards accepts that the burden  lies  on  her.   Nevertheless  the
    facts are in the main undisputed.  It is quite clear that the appellant
    was a failed asylum seeker who based his case on  a  fraudulent  story.
    He  maintained  this  story  before  the  Secretary  of  State  and  an
    adjudicator.  He was  prohibited  from  working.   He  established  the
    businesses he relies upon in face of a plain prohibition.  In our  view
    the respondent could make good her case on either limb - the fact  that
    the appellant was a bogus asylum seeker who put forward a  false  claim
    or the fact that the appellant set up his businesses  in  breach  of  a
    requirement imposed by the  Secretary  of  State.   We  find  that  the
    respondent has amply discharged the burden on her  to  establish  fraud
    and abuse in this case.

49.   It is submitted that there was some waiver and that the appellant  was
    led to believe that he could leave the country and make his application
    from overseas and this would be considered under the old Rules and  his
    past would not be held against him.  We find no  basis  whatsoever  for
    such a belief.  The e-mails sent from the respondent to the appellant's
    representatives are inconsistent with any such expectation in the  mind
    of the appellant.  Ms Richards  referred  us  to  an  e-mail  dated  19
    October 2007 which refers to the arrangements in  place  in  Turkey  to
    accept entry clearance applications  under  the  Ankara  Agreement  and
    added "There is no dispute that such applications can now be made  from
    Turkey (subject to the fraud and abuse  exceptions),  as  I  previously
    indicated to you."  There is an earlier e-mail to similar affect  dated
    8 October 2007 which states:  "The guidance for ECOs is in the  process
    of  being  amended.   It  is  accepted  that  in   principle   business
    applications under the 1973 Rules can be made from Turkey  (subject  to
    the fraud/abuse exceptions, of course.).

50.   We see nothing in the order of the High Court or indeed  elsewhere  to
    warrant any expectation in the mind of  the  appellant,  legitimate  or
    otherwise, that his past would somehow be forgotten.

51.   Mr Ali submits that the behaviour of  the  respondent  could  only  be
    interpreted as a way of frustrating Turkish applicants from relying  on
    the old Rules and forcing them to comply with the new ones.  This is in
    some respect inconsistent with the recently lodged evidence which shows
    that the respondent does consider matters on a case-by-case  basis  and
    does grant in country applications.  However we find the submission  is
    completely without merit.  The appellant was not compelled to  rely  on
    the businesses established in breach of his  conditions  of  stay.   He
    could have indicated  a  wish  to  start  a  fresh  business  and  that
    application would have to have been considered  under  the  old  Rules.
    Indeed any further application made by the appellant would  still  fall
    for consideration under the old Rules.  The appellant gives an  example
    in his statement  of  withdrawing  the  funds  from  the  business  and
    starting a  fresh  business.   Such  a  device  might  well  cause  the
    appellant problems, as he recognises.  The  appellant  would  still  be
    arguably relying on funds gained in a manner tainted  by  his  unlawful
    conduct.

52.   The appellant is faced with a conundrum.  He has to rely  on  the  old
    Rules as it does not appear to be in dispute that he cannot comply with
    the minimum investment provisions of the current Rules.   In  order  to
    rely on the old Rules he has to rely on community law.  In  relying  on
    Community law, he faces the hurdle of his own  fraudulent  and  abusive
    conduct.

53.   Mr Ali submits that the cases concern in country applications and  are
    irrelevant overseas.  We see no merit in this submission.  It would  be
    completely illogical if the fraud and abuse which stood in the  way  of
    an  in  country  application  were  suddenly  forgotten  and   forgiven
    overseas.  The same policy arguments  remain  valid.  We  do  not  read
    paragraph 19 of the judgment of Temiz as indicating more than  that  an
    application in circumstances such as apply in the instant case must  be
    made from overseas and that such an application will be  considered  in
    accordance with the standstill clause. This is exactly what happened in
    this case. Mr Ali also referred us to the case  of  A  v  Secretary  of
    State, a case in which the Court of Appeal declined to refer a point to
    the ECJ as the decision in Savas dealt with the  issue.  The  Court  of
    Appeal in Tum and Dari drew attention to an inaccuracy in the report  -
    no form  of  declaration  had  been  made.  The  circumstances  of  the
    appellant in that case were  different  to  the  circumstances  in  the
    instant case and the points  taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  were
    different too. We do not find that that the case  assists  Mr  Ali.  We
    prefer the submissions made by Ms Richards on the cases put before us.

54.   The new evidence concerning applicants who have  successfully  applied
    in country for leave to remain was served too late in the day  for  the
    respondent to deal with it.  There can be no doubt that  the  Secretary
    of State considers many applications made  by  Turkish  asylum  seekers
    under the Ankara Agreement and she deals with them  on  a  case-by-case
    basis.  We can only determine the instant appeal on the facts  of  this
    case.

55.   It may be that a combination of fresh circumstances  and  the  passage
    of time would create conditions where it would no longer be appropriate
    to deny the appellant the benefit of Community law. As  is  established
    in Tum and Dari at paragraph 64, the  "national  courts  may,  case  by
    case, take account on the basis  of  objective  evidence  of  abuse  or
    fraudulent conduct on the part of the persons concerned in order, where
    appropriate, to deny them the benefit of the  provisions  of  Community
    law on which they seek to rely...". However, we do  not  consider  that
    such conditions have yet been made out. While the appellant  has  built
    up businesses, he has not done so lawfully, while he  has  no  criminal
    record, he had been guilty of fraud and abuse. It is to his credit that
    he left the country voluntarily, and we take that into account, but the
    application overseas was founded very much on the  fruits  of  unlawful
    enterprise.

56.   Bearing in  mind  all  the  matters  relied  upon  in  favour  of  the
    appellant, we nevertheless find it established that his fraudulent  and
    abusive conduct does indeed deny him the benefit of Community  law.  In
    the premises it is not necessary for us to go into the substance of the
    appellant's application under the 1973 Rules.

55.   We heard no arguments on other  issues  such  as  human  rights.   The
    appeal accordingly fails on all grounds.



Signed                                             Date 17 October 2008


Senior Immigration Judge

