
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL
                            RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
       Date of Hearing: 22 August 2006
                                             Promulgated on: 2 November 2006
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                        Senior Immigration Judge Gill

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Tony Okperin, Sponsor
For the Respondent:          Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

An allegation of forgery needs to be proved by evidence and  by  the  person
making it.  The procedure under s108 of the 2002 Act  remains  available  to
respondents.  A bare allegation of forgery, or  an  assertion  by  an  Entry
Clearance Officer that he believed the document to be forged  can  in  these
circumstances carry no weight.  The Tribunal treats  a  document  as  forged
only  on  the  basis  of  clear  evidence  before  it.  KS  (Allegations  by
respondent: proof required?) Pakistan [2005] UKAIT 00171should not  be  read
as implying the contrary.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the reconsideration, at the instance of the appellant,  of  her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent on 22 March 2005 refusing
    her entry clearance as a family visitor to the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's application was made on 9 March 2005.  It was supported
    by a considerable number  of  documents  relating  to  the  appellant's
    employment as a Shell  contractor  since  1992.   The  appellant's  son
    applied jointly with her.  His application was supported  by  documents
    relating to his educational status.  The  appellant  indicated  in  her
    application that she had been to the  United  Kingdom  before  and  had
    left, apparently with no problems.  She referred also to  another  visa
    that had been issued to her, but which she  had  not  used  because  of
    illness.  She supported that assertion by a doctor's  report.   Amongst
    the employment documents supporting the application are copy remittance
    advices from the Shell Petroleum Development Company  of  Nigeria  Ltd.
    One is dated 8 January 2004; six others  bear  dates  in  December  and
    January 2005.  The total amount payable on those six is about 4,000,000
    Naira.

 3. The appellant was not interviewed.  She therefore had no opportunity to
    deal with any concerns arising from her application.  At some stage her
    application form was marked:

        "Suspect forged documents - remittance advice from Shell has a  run
        date of 6.1.05 but the stamp is 24/1/04.   Not  satisfied  rest  of
        docs genuine"

 4. The reasons for the refusal are in the following terms:

        "The introduction of the courier assisted visa application  process
        has led me to consider your application  solely  on  the  documents
        provided  and  the  information  recorded  by  you  on  your   visa
        application form.  I acknowledge the importance of family visits in
        maintaining family ties, therefore I have  given  your  application
        careful consideration.  In support of your  application,  you  have
        submitted remittance  advice  [sic]  from  Shell  Petrolium  [sic].
        Following  examination  by  a  member  of  the  Visa  Forgery   and
        Intelligence Team I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt  that  the
        document  in  question  is  a  forgery.   The  production  of  such
        documents undermines the credibility of the application and  causes
        me to doubt your true motivation for this visit.  In the  light  of
        this I am not satisfied you are genuinely seeking entry to  the  UK
        as a visitor for a period not exceeding six months as  required  by
        Rule 41(i) of HC 395 and that you intend to leave the UK at the end
        of the period of the visit as stated by you  as  required  by  Rule
        41(ii) of HC 395.


        In making my decision I have also taken account of the Human Rights
        Act.  Whilst  I  accept  that  this  decision  constitutes  limited
        interference with Article  8,  I  remind  myself  that  this  is  a
        qualified right and I am satisfied that the decision  is  justified
        and proportionate in the  interests  of  maintaining  an  effective
        immigration control.  I am also aware of the  fact  that  there  is
        nothing in English law that prohibits the sponsor  from  travelling
        to Nigeria and enjoying family life with you in this country."

 5.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  asserts  that   the
    respondent who concluded that  "my  SPDC  registration  certificate  is
    forged" and that "I am leaving the country to UK  for  the  purpose  of
    settlement".  In her grounds  she  asserts  that  she  is  a  "renowned
    contractor to SPDC", and was registered as such on 24  April  1992  and
    that her status earning her living  as  a  contractor  can  be  readily
    checked.  She points out that her "several trips to  and  from  London"
    ought to be sufficient to show that she has no intention  of  settling,
    and asserts that  in  any  event  her  son's  studies  at  Delta  State
    University prevent the  two  of  them  from  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. In the course of preparing the respondent's bundle for the appeal,  the
    respondent added to it a letter, apparently in standard form, signed by
    the Entry Clearance Manager, and reading as follows:

        "I have reviewed the ECO's decision following receipt of  a  family
        visit appeal and carefully considered the grounds of appeal.  I  am
        satisfied that the decision is correct and in accordance  with  the
        Immigration Rules.


        ECOs in both  Abuja  and  Lagos  are  able  to  assess  and  decide
        applications for  Entry  Clearance  primarily  on  the  information
        provided in the information form and  the  documents  submitted  in
        support.  ECOs make additional  enquiries  or  reference  to  local
        records to assist them in deciding an application.  In the majority
        of cases where an interview is deemed necessary the applicant  will
        be asked to attend in person.  In such cases the  interview  record
        will be included in the appeal bundle."

 7. The hearing before the Immigration Judge took place on 7 February 2006.
     The sponsor appeared for the appellant and  the  respondent  was  also
    represented.  The sponsor gave evidence.  It is not clear whether there
    were any submissions made by either party: the determination contains a
    passage headed "The Case for the Respondent", but that  merely  repeats
    the wording of the Notice of Refusal.

 8. The following section of the determination is headed "My Findings".  We
    have to say that we do not find it easy to understand.  The Immigration
    Judge begins by saying that "My initial reaction was that  if  it  were
    not for the finding that the Shell document was a forgery I would  have
    no difficulty in deciding this matter  in  favour  of  the  appellant".
    This is because the sponsor's evidence was credible and "not in any way
    inconsistent" and the sponsor's evidence relating  to  the  appellant's
    previous visits to the United Kingdom had  not  been  disputed  by  the
    respondent.  As the Immigration Judge writes, "this  therefore  appears
    to be a strong application, well supported  by  the  ample  documentary
    materials which the appellant has  provided".   We  must  set  out  the
    following three paragraphs of the determination in full.

      "18.  The evidence difficulty, of course, comes in the  form  of  the
             check that has been done on the Shell document provided by  the
             appellant.  This document has been found, following examination
             by a member of the Visa forgery and Intelligence  team  'beyond
             reasonable doubt' to have been a forgery.  I therefore have the
             very difficult task of setting  of  this  finding  against  the
             application which I otherwise regarded as  being  strong.   The
             finding to the effect that the document was a forgery is a bare
             statement to that effect.  There is no condescension to  detail
             and this is possibly for the  understandable  reason  that  the
             Visa forgery and intelligence team do not want to advise people
             who put forward fraudulent documents as to the shortcomings  of
             their efforts.  I have to say  that  I  have  had  considerable
             misgivings about attaching much weight to this assertion.   The
             position which I am left in is that there is only one piece  of
             evidence which goes against the applicant.  It  is  simply  the
             say-so of somebody who has apparently conducted  an  inspection
             or investigation of which I have no details.  If this appeal is
             to have any real function or meaning I should not be  asked  to
             decide in the one  party's  favour  on  the  basis  of  a  bare
             statement which I am almost wholly unable to evaluate.  It  may
             very well be that the investigation or examination was  carried
             out with great thoroughness and care on the other hand  it  may
             have been done in a  very  different  way.   However  there  is
             another document which causes a problem for the appellant.   In
             the bundle of documents there is a letter of the 3  March  2005
             from the appellant saying that she wished to  renew  her  visa.
             She said that her last visa which expired 12/9/04 was not  used
             due to a very serious health problem.


      19.   These dates simply do not fit with the evidence of  Mr  Okperin
             who said that she had visited in December 2004.  She also  said
             that she had been travelling to the UK on several  trips  since
             2002.  This  statement  also  does  not  really  fit  with  the
             evidence of Mr Okperin either, since he  said  that  there  had
             been two visits and seemed to have difficulty in recalling  the
             one before the December 2004 visit.


      20.   It is unfortunate that Mr  Okperin  was  not  challenged  about
             these matters.  However the documents in question emanate  form
             [sic] the appellant and I have to take them into  account.   In
             all the circumstances I have to put the problems over the dates
             together with the evidence of the forgery and I  find  that  on
             the balance of probabilities the appellant has not satisfied me
             that she is genuinely  seeking  entry  as  a  visitor  for  the
             limited period as stated by her."


    The Immigration Judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.


 9. The application for reconsideration is incomplete on the file  and  may
    never  have  been  complete.   Reconsideration  was  ordered  for   the
    following reasons:

        "Although the forgery point was not the only one relied upon by the
        Immigration  Judge,  he  recognised  the  problem  caused  by   the
        respondent's failure to give any details  of  his  allegation,  and
        these may have led to an arguable error of law on his part."

10. We heard submissions from Mr Gulvin and the sponsor;  the  sponsor  had
    come prepared with documents intended to establish that the  difficulty
    as to dates, identified by the Immigration Judge but  not  put  to  the
    sponsor at the hearing, ought not to cause any concern.  Mr Gulvin told
    us that he would be prepared to accept on the basis of those  documents
    that the appellant had made three previous visits to the United Kingdom
    and had returned in each case after two or three  weeks.   He  remarked
    that it was not  particularly  surprising  if  the  sponsor  could  not
    remember the exact dates at the hearing.

11. We  are  primarily  concerned  with  whether  the  Immigration  Judge's
    determination is vitiated by a material error of law.  Although  it  is
    no doubt, in retrospect, regrettable that the Immigration Judge did not
    give the sponsor an opportunity to explain the  apparent  discrepancies
    between his and the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  the  dates  of  her
    previous visits, we do not consider that that amounted  to  a  material
    error of law.  It was for the appellant to put a coherent and  credible
    case, and the  evidence,  taken  as  a  whole,  was  not  coherent  and
    credible.  The Immigration Judge committed no conceivable error of  law
    in regarding the sponsor as credible, and he was left with the position
    that the credible evidence  before  him  did  not  match  the  evidence
    derived directly from the appellant, whose credibility had been put  in
    doubt by the Entry Clearance Officer.

12. Paragraph 20 of the  Adjudicator's  determination,  however,  makes  it
    quite clear that despite  the  reservations  about  the  allegation  of
    forgery that he had expressed at paragraph 18, he took that allegation,
    now described  as  "the  evidence  of  the  forgery"  into  account  in
    determining the appeal.  We think that that was an error of law, and  a
    serious one.  It appears to us  also  to  have  been  material  in  his
    determination of the appeal.

13. In this case the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  alleged  that  a  document
    provided by the appellant  was  forged.   Despite  the  possibility  of
    interviewing the appellant, he decided not to do so.  He expressed  his
    refusal in such vague terms that, as is apparent from  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal, she was not aware which document was alleged  to  be
    forged.  The Notice of Refusal indicates the process by which the Entry
    Clearance Officer has reached  his  conclusion  that  the  document  in
    question is forged, but no further information has been provided.

14.  In  judicial  proceedings  an  allegation  of  forgery  needs  to   be
    established to a high  degree  of  proof,  by  the  person  making  the
    allegation.  This is therefore a matter on which the  respondent  bears
    the burden of proof.  Immigration Judges decide cases on evidence,  and
    in the absence of any concession by the appellant, an Immigration Judge
    is not entitled to find or assume that a document is a forgery,  or  to
    treat it as a forgery for the purposes of his  determination,  save  on
    the basis of evidence before him.  In the present case the evidence was
    limited to the Entry Clearance Officer's assertion of his own view  and
    the defect in the document identified in the notes on  the  application
    form - that is to say, the mismatch between the run date and  the  date
    stamp on one of the remittance  documents.   That  evidence  is  wholly
    insufficient to establish that that document is a forgery.  There is no
    reason to suppose that it is not a  simple  mistake.   As  it  happens,
    "petroleum" is misspelt in the Notice of Refusal.  Although we would be
    inclined to suppose that Entry Clearance Officers can spell this  word,
    we do not automatically assume that the Notice of Refusal is a forgery:
    there is no reason to suppose that it was not simply a mistake.

15. It is right, of  course,  to  say  that  a  person  involved  with  the
    detection of the forgery would not wish to broadcast the means by which
    he had been able to establish that a  document  was  forged.   But  the
    state has, in immigration appeals, the rare privilege of being able  to
    give evidence as to forgery in private.   That  privilege  has  existed
    since the Immigration Act 1971, and is presently contained in  s108  of
    the 2002 Act, which is in the following terms:

      "108. Forged document: proceedings in private
          1) This section applies where it is alleged -
              a) that a document relied on by a party  to  an  appeal  under
                 section 82, if a forgery, and
              b) that disclosure to that party of a matter relating  to  the
                 detection of the forgery would be contrary  to  the  public
                 interest.

          2) The Tribunal
              a) must investigate the allegation in private, and
              b) may proceed in private  so  far  as  necessary  to  prevent
                 disclosure of the matter referred to in sub-section (1)(b)"


      Section 108 is  a  specific  exception  to  Rule  51(7)  of  the  2005
      Procedure Rules requiring the Tribunal not  to  take  account  of  any
      evidence that has not been made available to all the parties.

16. We are aware that in a case reported as KS (Allegations by  respondent:
    proof required) Pakistan [2005] UKAIT  00171,  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal asserted that:

        "Allegations of forgery made by the Entry Clearance Officer do have
        to  be  given  some  evidential  value.   Without  particulars   or
        supporting evidence, that value will not be a high  one;  but  they
        are  not  mere  assertions  by  an  ordinary  civil  claimant   but
        statements by a person in a official position about something  very
        much within his responsibilities.

17. That does not seem to us to be right.  No doubt the allegations by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer are, as allegations, entitled to  the  greatest
    respect.  But findings have to be made on evidence, and the Tribunal in
    KS appears to have taken no account of  either  the  incidence  of  the
    burden of proof where there is an allegation of  forgery,  nor  of  the
    existence of s108.  Section 108 removes from the  respondent  any  need
    for caution in presenting evidence supporting an allegation of forgery.
     In these circumstances we do not think it can be right to allow a bare
    assertion to stand by itself as though it were evidence.  Indeed, given
    that the facilities under s108 are available, we  should  have  thought
    that if a respondent chooses  not  to  provide  evidence  enabling  the
    Tribunal to decide for itself that a document is forged, the  inference
    that no such evidence exists is almost inevitable.  In  any  event,  we
    regard an Entry Clearance Officer's bare assertion that  in  his  clear
    opinion a document is a forgery as wholly inadequate to  establish  the
    matter before the Tribunal.

18. In the present case,  the  Immigration  Judge  had  the  advantages  of
    inspecting the documents in question, which had been identified to him,
    although not apparently to the appellant.  There is  no  indication  at
    all in his determination  that  he  gave  the  matter  any  independent
    thought.  If he had done so, he ought to  have  considered  whether  it
    would be right to reach the conclusion that that document was a forgery
    rather than incorporating an honest mistake; and in the context of this
    case in particular he perhaps ought to have considered the documents as
    a whole.  It is of course right  to  say  that  the  use  of  a  forged
    document casts grave doubt upon the credibility of an  applicant.   But
    the conclusion which the Entry Clearance Officer drew  in  the  present
    case, and asked the Immigration Judge to draw, was that this individual
    document was a forgery, and that this cast doubt on the entire thirteen-
    year employment history of the applicant, which history  had  evidently
    been accepted by previous Entry Clearance Officers.  We are inclined to
    doubt whether even the Entry Clearance Officer ought  to  have  reached
    the conclusion without any further enquiry at all.  Suffice it  to  say
    that the Immigration Judge erred by treating the document  that  was  a
    forgery on the basis of the material before him.

19. The one document which has the features identified has not  been  shown
    to be a forgery; none of  the  other  copious  documentation  has  been
    doubted in any way, nor has the appellant's employment  or  immigration
    history.  Having found that the Immigration Judge materially  erred  in
    law, we substitute a determination allowing the appellant's appeal.


20. The Immigration Judge also dismissed the appeal of the appellant's son.
      There  appears  to  have  been  no  application  on  his  behalf  for
    reconsideration of the appeal: that may, however, have been because the
    appellant, acting in person, thought that one application  was  enough.
    Formally, the dismissal of the son's appeal stands: in the light of our
    decision on the reconsideration of his mother's appeal, however, it  is
    clear that he should now be treated as a successful appellant  in  line
    with her.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

