
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Baylan (Turkish ECAA -"identical" applications) [2012] UKUT 83 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 January 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                ensar baylan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:


For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam of Counsel instructed by UK
Immigration Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


In dealing with Turkish ECAA cases, decision-makers must bear  in  mind  the
guidance given in EK (Ankara  Agreement - 1972 Rules - construction)  Turkey
[2010] UKUT 425 (IAC).

Identicality or near-identicality in Turkish ECAA  applications  is  not  in
itself a reason  to  find  an  applicant  cannot  succeed.  However,  it  is
apparent from the wording of  paragraph  21  of  HC510  and  the  underlying
objective of the Association Agreement that the business plan must be  shown
to be viable in the context of an applicant's own personal circumstances.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey.  He entered the UK  on  19  October
2007 having been granted entry clearance as a student.  He was  subsequently
granted extensions in the same capacity until 11 May 2011.  On 10  May  2011
De Silva Ltd applied on his behalf for leave to remain to establish  himself
in business under the Turkey  -  European  Community  Association  Agreement
(Ankara  Agreement).  He  had  not  completed   the   application   himself.
Documents relating to his business plan ran to 17 pages.  The basis  of  his
application was that he  wished  to  commence  business  as  a  rickshaw  or
pedicab driver in  Central  London.  His  application  was  refused  by  the
respondent on 16 June 2011.  The respondent considered  that  the  appellant
had failed  to  show  his  business  plan  represented  a  genuine  business
proposal from himself because it was identical to three  other  applications
received having the same (17-page) supporting  documentation.   He  appealed
to the First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT).  His  main  contention  was  that  "such
similarities cannot constitute grounds for refusal". His  witness  statement
said he did not know his business plans were identical to  others  submitted
to the Home  Office.   He  gave  evidence  during  which  he  explained  his
business plan in more detail.  He also called a witness, a  Mr  Dogrul,  who
said he had been a pedicab driver for one and a  half  years  and  had  made
�13,000 in his first year.  On 15  August  2011  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Brenells dismissed his appeal.  The judge observed that the appellant  stood
to benefit from the "standstill" clause such that he fell to  be  considered
not under the stringent Immigration Rules  in  force  presently,  but  under
those in force on 1 January  1973,  as  set  out  in  HC  510  Statement  of
Immigration Rules of Control after Entry laid before the  House  of  Commons
on 23 October 1972 HC 510, paragraph 21 of which provides:

    "People admitted as visitors may apply for consent of the Secretary  of
    State to their establishing themselves here for the purpose of  setting
    up in business, whether on their own account or as partners in a new or
    existing business.  Any such application is to be considered on merits.
     Permission will depend on a number of factors, including evidence that
    the applicant will be devoting assets  of  his  own  to  the  business,
    proportional to his interest in it, that he will be able  to  bear  his
    share of any liabilities the business may incur, and that his share  of
    its profits will be sufficient to support him and any dependants.   The
    applicant's  part  in  the  business  must  not  amount  to   disguised
    employment, and it must be clear that he will not  have  to  supplement
    his business activities by  employment  for  which  a  work  permit  is
    required.  Where the applicant intends to join  an  existing  business,
    audited  accounts  should  be  produced  to  establish  its   financial
    position, together with a written statement of the terms on which he is
    to enter into it; evidence should be sought that he  will  be  actively
    concerned with its running and that there is a  genuine  need  for  his
    services  and  investment.   Where  the  application  is  granted   the
    applicant's stay may be extended for a period of up to 12 months, on  a
    condition  restricting  his  freedom  to  take  employment.   A  person
    admitted as a businessman in the  first  instance  may  be  granted  an
    appropriate extension of stay if the conditions set out above are still
    satisfied  at  the  end  of  the  period  for  which  he  was  admitted
    initially."

2. Nevertheless the judge considered  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet
those  requirements.   Whilst  disagreeing  with  the  respondent  that  the
identicality of the appellant's application with three  others  was  not  in
itself a valid reason for refusing his  application,  the  judge  considered
his plan as explained in evidence had a number of  flaws.   First,  contrary
to his plan stating he had already identified some potential  customers,  it
was clear he had not.   Second,  in  terms  of  the  identity  of  potential
customers, the appellant had said  that  some  of  his  customers  might  be
commuters as distinct from tourists, whereas there was no credible  evidence
to support that.  Third, his own claim in  his  cash  flow  estimate  (which
indicated that November and December were likely to be his  busiest  months)
was at odds with the evidence of his own witness, Mr Baylan.   Further,  his
own claim that he would buy a second pedicab and employ  a  driver  was  not
supported by Mr Baylan's own  evidence  that  after  eighteen  months  as  a
driver he still worked on his  own  with  one  pedicab  only.   Fourth,  the
appellant's oral evidence about Mr Baylan not having  any  previous  cycling
experience was at odds with what he had claimed in his  business  plan.   At
paragraph 21 the judge concluded:

    "Given the Appellant's lack  of  experience  in  his  chosen  field  of
    activity, the lack of evidence as to his physical  ability  to  move  a
    pedicab for long  hours  around  Central  London  and  the  errors  and
    misstatements in his business plan, and on the totality of the evidence
    before me, I find that the Appellant has not discharged the  burden  of
    proof which is on him.  The reasons given by the Respondent justify the
    refusal.  Therefore the Respondent's Decision is in accordance with the
    law and the applicable Immigration Rules."

3. The judge went on to reject the appellant's Article 8 grounds of appeal.

4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  were  threefold.   First  it
was contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in that  two  out
of three reasons the judge gave for finding the appellant did not  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 21, (namely (i) lack of  previous  experience  and
(ii) lack of requisite physical ability) had not previously been  raised  by
the respondent and in the interests of fairness the  appellant  should  have
been given an opportunity properly to address them.  Second  the  point  was
made that neither of these reasons were specified as criteria  in  paragraph
21.  Third, it was argued  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  treat  lack  of
previous experience as  an  obstacle  to  becoming  a  pedicab  operator  in
Central London as one  can  learn  the  job  and  the  appellant's  physical
ability had been attested to by a letter  from  Dr  Seymenogh  dated  4  May
2011.

5. I consider that the judge's decision was not vitiated by legal error.

6. Before turning to the grounds I should note first of  all  one  point  of
fact.  Although  the  respondent's  refusal  decision  does   describe   the
appellant's ECAA application as being "identical" to  that  of  three  other
applicants, it does elsewhere accept that a few of the figures  differ  very
slightly. The latter indication is correct: there were minor differences  in
some of the figures.

7. I need next to remind myself of the legal approach that  is  required  in
determining Turkish ECAA appeals and of two points in particular.

8. First, it must always be borne in mind that the legal requirements  under
the Turkish ECAA regime are far less stringent than  those  applying  to  be
businessmen under para 209 of the current Immigration Rules  HC395  and  are
also different from those applied in the case of EC  Association  Agreements
in respect  of  Bulgaria  and  Romania  (para  222).  That  is  perhaps  not
surprising given  that  the  Turkish  ECAA  regime  entitles  applicants  to
benefit from Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol to that Agreement  and
its "standstill" clause which bars  the  UK  from  imposing  conditions  for
business applicants less favourable than those which were in force, some  39
years ago, when the UK became bound by the Agreement in 1973:  see  Case  C-
37/98 R v SSHD, ex parte Savas [2000] 1 WLR 1828; Case  C-16/05  R  (on  the
application of Tum and Dari) v SSHD [2007] ECR I-7415, [2008] 1 WLR 94.  The
 aim of the Agreement  is  essentially  economic:  it  is  "to  promote  the
continuous and  balanced  strengthening  of  trade  and  economic  relations
between  the  Contracting  Parties,  which  includes,  in  relation  to  the
workforce, the progressive securing of freedom of movement for  workers  and
the abolition of restrictions on freedom of establishment and on freedom  to
provide services, with a view to improving the standard  of  living  of  the
Turkish people and facilitating the accession of Turkey to the Community  at
a later date" (Oguz (External relations) [2011]  EUECJ  C-186/10,  14  April
2011) (Advocate-General Kokott, para 4).


9. Second, as emphasised by the Tribunal in EK  (Ankara   Agreement  -  1972
Rules - construction) Turkey [2010] UKUT 425  (IAC  at  para  21),  in  1973
"the Rules themselves were an open textured exercise in  discretion  in  the
round  having  regard  to  the  general  policy   and   particular   factors
identified; so was the practice in applying  them".  There  are  significant
differences in the HC510 Rules and the ones in force since around  1995.  At
para 22 EK notes three in particular:

         "...   First, there is nothing in  HC  510  that  provides  that  a
    person who cannot come within one of the categories of the  Immigration
    Rules is to be refused an extension of  stay  for  that  reason  alone.
    Indeed paragraph  4  of  HC  510  says  in  terms  that  the  following
    paragraphs set out "the main categories" of people  who  may  be  given
    leave, recognising the possibility that there are other categories  not
    specifically set out that can be dealt with on a  discretionary  basis.
    Secondly, paragraph 28 does not in turn require a person who  had  been
    given leave as a businessman to demonstrate as a pre-condition for  the
    exercise of discretion that in each or any year in which they have been
    given  leave  in  that  capacity  they  had  complied  with  particular
    requirements of paragraph 21.  Those  requirements  are  only  directly
    relevant to the  first  application  for  permission  to  remain  as  a
    businesswoman and the first extension of stay  thereof.  In  terms  the
    words look to the future "will" rather than the past  "have".  Thirdly,
    there is no precise code in HC 510 distinguishing between  maintenance,
    accommodation  and  precluding  third  party  contributions  to  living
    expenses."

10.  Against this background, I turn to the  grounds,  the  first  of  which
concerns procedural fairness. I do not find it is made out. It is true  that
the respondent in his refusal letter had not raised either the issue of  the
appellant having previous cycling experience or of  his  requisite  physical
ability, but both had  been  addressed  by  the  appellant  himself  in  his
business plan which described him as "an  experienced  cyclist".  The  judge
clearly put the appellant on notice that he wished further information  from
the appellant as to various aspects of his business  plan  and  in  response
the appellant's  own  evidence  (in  answer  to  questions  from  Mr  Aslam)
covered, inter alia, the issues of his experience and ability.  He  said  he
had cycled previously usually in parks, that he had not  done  a  physically
demanding job previously and that although he could offer no assurance  that
he could do a physically demanding job, he trusted himself to do  it.   Both
representatives then  made  submissions  covering,  inter  alia,  those  two
issues.  Hence there was clearly no  procedural  unfairness  and  indeed  Mr
Aslam conceded as much at the end of his submissions.

11. As to whether the  judge  in  basing  his  decision  on  experience  and
requisite ability had taken irrelevant  factors  into  account  (the  second
ground), I agree with Mr Saunders that paragraph 21 mandates  the  decision-
maker to take into account a wide  (non-exhaustive)  range  of  factors  and
emphasises the need for the  applicant  to  demonstrate  that  his  proposed
business plan is viable. Viability is  clearly  also  part  of  the  general
policy  underlying  the  exercise  of  discretion  under   this   paragraph.
Particularly in the case of an application based  on  sole  self-employment,
it is inevitable that ability is to be regarded as  a  relevant  factor  and
that where, as here, the proposed activity  (rickshaw-driving/"pedicabbing")
involves physical exertion, that physical  ability  should  be  regarded  as
particularly  relevant.  The  grounds  contend   that   in   assessing   the
appellant's ability,  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
documentary  evidence  submitted  with  the   business   plan   included   a
certificate issued by Bugbugs certifying that the  appellant  had  completed
level 3 of the National Cycling Award Scheme and a  letter  of  Theory  Test
pass from the London Pedicab  Operators  Association  (LPOA).  However,  the
judge specifically noted these items  of  evidence  (see  paragraph  5)  and
given  that  the  appellant's  documentation  was  near-identical  to   that
submitted by three other applicants, he  was  quite  entitled  to  test  the
appellant's  evidence  to  ascertain  whether  he  had  the  abilities   and
proficiencies these described.  He cannot be criticised for seeing  the  key
to establishing the truth as being the appellant's oral testimony.

12. As regards the third ground, I would agree with Mr Aslam  that  previous
experience for such an occupation cannot  be  treated  as  an  indispensable
requirement, but I disagree that the judge regarded it as  such.  The  judge
did no more than treat it as a relevant and significant factor - and it  was
a factor on which the appellant  himself  in  his  business  plan  and  oral
evidence had sought to rely.  The judge's approach was to  look  at  matters
in the round.

13. I note further that the grounds fail  to  mount  any  challenge  to  the
additional reason the judge gave for dismissing the appeal,  namely  "errors
and misstatements in  his  business  plan".   Neither  the  grounds  nor  Mr
Aslam's submissions furnished any  effective  reasons  for  considering  the
judge's analysis of these was flawed. (One obvious  oddity  about  the  plan
was that despite stating that the business would largely revolve around  the
tourist trade, the appellant had identified his busiest months as likely  to
be November and December.)

14.  Although  neither  party  referred  me  to  it,  I  have   also   given
consideration to whether the judge's assessment of this case was  consistent
with the guidance given in EK (see above para  9).  Even  though  the  judge
does not appear to have taken into account, as EK requires,   that  para  21
involves an "open textured exercise of discretion", it  is  clear  from  the
particulars of the appellant's application and appeal  that  he  could  only
succeed if able to establish that his business plan was  viable  and  in  my
judgement the judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant  had  not
established that.

15. Neither the appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  nor  Mr
Aslam's  oral  submissions  sought  to  pursue  the  appellant's  Article  8
grounds, which the First-tier Tribunal had rejected.   I  need  only  record
that I see no error in the judge's assessment at paragraph 22  that  Article
8 was not engaged.

16. It seems to me that even if I had found  a  material  error  of  law,  I
would have had to  consider  an  additional  problem  with  the  appellant's
business plan which, as it had been raised by the respondent in the  refusal
letter, I would also have needed to address, namely the absence in the  plan
of any specific explanation of how (to use the wording of  paragraph  21  of
HC 510) "his share of its profits will be sufficient to support him and  any
dependants". The judge does not record any evidence or  submissions  bearing
on the matter, nor is it a  matter  addressed  in  the  appellant's  witness
statement.  On the evidence before me I would have treated the lack  of  any
particulars showing that his plan  was  consistent  with  his  own  personal
circumstances as a significant factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the
paragraph 21 consideration.


17. Given that the Tribunal has recently encountered  a  number  of  Turkish
ECAA cases in which the respondent has relied on the existence of  identical
or near-identical applications, it may assist to state the following.

18. First, judges should remind themselves of the points  made  at  paras  8
and 9 and of the guidance given in EK in  particular.  Second,  it  will  be
important to  check  whether  the  applications  are  indeed  identical.  As
already noted, in this appellant's case  the  respondent  was  not  strictly
correct to say (as  was  said  at  one  point)  that  his  and  three  other
applications  were  identical:  there  were   some   differences,   although
relatively few in number and significance; but it  cannot  be  assumed  that
this will always be the case.

19. Third - and by way of approving the reasoning of the FTT judge  in  this
case - identicality or near-identicality in an  application  should  not  be
treated as in itself a  reason to find an applicant  cannot  succeed  in  an
ECAA application. It is a fact of  life  that  persons  embarking  on  small
businesses will often model (and will often be  encouraged  by  professional
advisers, to model) their applications on similar business  proposals  which
have succeeded and been proven to be viable. It is also a fact of life  that
when  seeking  to  commence  such  a  business  an  applicant  may  rely  on
professional advice and leave the drafting of particulars to others. If  the
application is genuine, i.e. a bona fide and realistic  proposal  for  self-
employment that the applicant/appellant intends to  undertake  and  deliver,
the fact that others are applying for a  similar  purpose  and  plan  should
make no difference.

20. Fourth, however, it is apparent from the wording of  para  21  of  HC510
and  the  underlying  objective  of  the  Association  Agreement  (that   of
promoting economic activity; see above para 8), that the business plan  must
be shown to be  viable  in  the  context  of  an  applicant's  own  personal
circumstances. The rationale of the Turkish ECAA is  to  facilitate  genuine
economic activity. Thus under para  21  it  must  not  amount  to  disguised
employment, so the evidence needs to show that it will  be  self-employment.
The appellant needs to pinpoint the assets of his own that he will bring  to
the  business.   His  own  ability  to  shoulder  any  liabilities  is  also
relevant. Further (as might have become relevant in this case had I found  a
material error of law), an applicant needs to show that  his  share  of  its
profits will be sufficient to support him and any  dependants.  In  general,
and bearing in mind  the  guidance  given  in  EK,  this  entails  that  his
application must make clear what are his  personal  financial  circumstances
(which may include third-party support: see EK) and that his  share  of  the
profits will suffice to ensure he can maintain himself and  any  dependants.
By their very nature such requirements call for the production  of  personal
financial particulars.

21. It can be no surprise to applicants that their business  plan  needs  to
be tailored to their specific circumstances.  That  is  made  clear  in  the
relevant Immigration Rules. And in terms  of  processing  applications,  the
UKBA website makes clear  what  caseworkers  are  instructed  to  look  for.
Chapter 6 Section 8 of the Business Applications under  the  Turkish  -ECAA,
dated May 2011 includes the following entries:


    "4.2.1. Is there a genuine intention to set up the business?
    See section 4.3 for further guidance.


    It may be the case that the business proposal appears on paper to  meet
    the minimum requirements of  the  1973  business  provisions  i.e.  the
    applicant has sufficient funds, a good projected turnover  and  profit,
    the proposal has been researched etc, but each case is to be considered
    on its merits and there may be reason to  believe  that  the  applicant
    does not intend to set up, or is not capable of running,  the  proposed
    business.


    For example,  there  may  be  a  lack  of  relevant  qualifications  or
    experience, depending on the nature of the business the applicant's age
    may suggest he/she is unable to run the  business  or  the  applicant's
    conduct may suggest that the application does not represent  a  genuine
    intention to establish.

    4.2.2. Is it a business of  the  kind  covered  by  the  1973  business
    provisions?
    See section 4.4 for further guidance.


    The minimum requirements of the 1973 business provisions are  that  the
    applicant has sufficient funds proportional  to  his  interest  in  the
    business which he intends to invest in the business, is  able  to  show
    that s/he can bear his/her share of any liabilities that  the  business
    may incur, can show that the business profits  will  be  sufficient  to
    support him/her and any dependants and that the business proposal  does
    not amount to disguised employment. In addition to  these  requirements
    an applicant who is joining an existing business will need  to  provide
    the business accounts for previous years, a statement of the  terms  on
    which s/he will be joining the business, evidence  that  s/he  will  be
    actively concerned with the running of the business and  evidence  that
    there is a genuine need for his/her services and investment.


    The intention behind the 1973 business  provisions  was  to  provide  a
    basis for applying for leave for those who wish to establish a business
    of the kind that involves genuine financial investment and risk on  the
    part of the applicant. If an application is based on a business that is
    unable to meet the minimum requirements of the 1973 business provisions
    because it does not represent genuine investment and risk, even if  the
    proposal itself is genuine, the application should be refused. "

22. By referring to these entries, I do not intend to make any  judgment  on
whether they fully reflect correct legal principles to be  applied  in  ECAA
cases; my point here is simply that the respondent, by placing them  in  the
public realm, makes unequivocally clear to applicants that  a  Turkish  ECAA
business proposal must be specific to an applicant's personal and  financial
circumstances.


23. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal judge did not  materially
err in law and his determination stands.


Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
