
IA and Others (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Dates of Hearing: 15-17 August 2007
                                   Determination delivered orally at hearing
                                                            Sent by post on:


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                      Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson

                                   Between

                                IA and Others
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the First Appellant:     Mr T U Cooray, instructed by Thompson & Co.
Solicitors
For the Second Appellant:    Ms M Phelan, instructed by Thompson & Co.
Solicitors
For the Third Appellant:     Mr A Khan, for Thompson & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr J P Waite, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor

Contrary to what is said in KM (Pakistan) [2004] UKAIT 00302, MM  (Pakistan)
CG [2002] UKIAT 05714, KK  (Pakistan)  [2005]  UKIAT  00033,  MC  (Pakistan)
[2004] UKIAT 00139, and AZ (Pakistan) CG [2002]  UKIAT  02642,  Rabwah  does
not constitute a safe haven for any Ahmadi at risk of persecution  elsewhere
in Pakistan and should not, without  more,  be  treated  as  an  appropriate
place of internal relocation.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Ahmadi religion or faith differs in a number of important  respects
    from Sunni Islam.  The practitioners and followers of Ahmadiyya  regard
    themselves as Muslim but Sunnis regard  them  as  heretics.   For  that
    reason there has been enmity between Sunnis and Ahmadis in Pakistan and
    in other countries for a considerable period  of  time.   In  Pakistan,
    Ahmadis are subject to restrictions on the public practice of a  number
    of aspects of their faith, largely stemming from Ordinance XX of  1984.
    That proscribes a number of activities as  blasphemous.   As  a  result
    Ahmadis have sought refuge from the consequences  of  the  practice  of
    their religion, not only in the  United  Kingdom  but,  we  understand,
    elsewhere.   Ahmadi  cases  have  featured  in  the  Tribunal  and  its
    predecessors for many  years  and  there  are  currently  Ahmadi  cases
    amounting to country guidance in the form of MM [2002] UKIAT 05714  and
    AZ [2002] UKIAT 02642.  In addition, there is important guidance to  be
    found in KK [2005] UKIAT 00033.  The guidance given on Ahmadi cases has
    a number of features: one is that an Ahmadi is entitled to practise his
    religion, despite it being for some  purposes  a  criminal  offence  in
    Pakistan, and that any punishment for so doing would accordingly amount
    to persecution.  Another  feature  is  that  Ahmadis  are  said  to  be
    distinguished from Muslims by the need or duty, not merely to  practise
    their religion but to  proselytise;  not  merely  to  preach  to  other
    followers of their own religion but also to convert.

 2. A further feature is that it is said that for some Ahmadis at any  rate
    a safe haven is to be found in a town called Rabwah (or  Chenab  Nagar,
    to give it its new name) in Punjab province.  We must say a little more
    about that last element.  Rabwah is a town of 1,043  acres.   The  land
    was bought from the Pakistani  government  on  partition  in  order  to
    provide a location for the headquarters of one of the two  branches  of
    Ahmadiyya whose place of foundation and of loyalty before partition was
    Qadian in India, which became, of course, no longer available to  them.
    Indeed the Ahmadis themselves are formed of  two  principal  divisions.
    The Lahori division differs in a number of respects from the other.  It
    is the other division with which  we  are  principally  concerned,  the
    division which is called, more often by its enemies than its followers,
    Qadiani.  They are formally based in  Rabwah,  which  is,  as  we  have
    already indicated, limited in size.  Its  population  is  difficult  to
    state exactly but it is between  25,000  and  50,000  people,  of  whom
    probably rather over ninety-five per cent are Ahmadis.

 3. The existence of what has been described as an  Ahmadi  stronghold,  as
    indeed it is when seen from  the  point  of  view  of  the  demographic
    structure, has seemed on a number of occasions to the Tribunal to  give
    a reason for supposing that an Ahmadi who in Pakistan  needed  to  seek
    refuge, that is to say, an  Ahmadi  who  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in his home area, could be expected  to  obtain  refuge  in
    Rabwah  rather  than  seeking   the   surrogate   protection   of   the
    international community.  Thus, it has become the practice, and  it  is
    the guidance that an Ahmadi needing to seek refuge should  be  regarded
    generally as able to find such refuge in Rabwah.  Rabwah is,  according
    to the existing  guidance,  a  proper  place  of  internal  relocation,
    sufficient to defeat an asylum claim.

 4. Ahmadis in Pakistan are subject to more than  occasional  outbursts  of
    persecution from Sunnis particularly acting under the auspices  of  the
    body called the Khatme Nabuwwat (KN).   That  is  a  neo-fundamentalist
    organisation which has the aim of the extinction of Ahmadiyya: not,  it
    must be emphasised, the extinction of Ahmadis, although its  activities
    are sometimes violent.  Its purpose is to bring an end to the  religion
    by converting its followers to Sunni Islam.  But it is  the  activities
    of that organisation, the KN, which form the basis of  many  claims  of
    persecution by  Ahmadis.   The  organisation  has  branches  throughout
    Pakistan  and   in   particular   throughout   Punjab   province   and,
    specifically, there is a strong  branch  in  Rabwah  because,  although
    ninety-five per cent or more of the population are Ahmadis, there is  a
    minority who are not Ahmadis and Rabwah is the place where Ahmadis  can
    evidently be found if there should be anybody who seeks to take  action
    against them.

 5. The evidence is that, because of the proscription of  Ahmadiyya,  there
    is little opportunity for those who are prosecuted (under the  auspices
    of the KN  or  otherwise)  to  make  a  proper  defence  or  to  invoke
    effectively the protection of the courts.  There is  evidence  relating
    to cases almost indefinitely adjourned from month to month or from year
    to year.  There is evidence also that those who might be  available  as
    witnesses are unwilling to come forward.

 6. Thus the position has sometimes been, in Ahmadi cases,  that  a  person
    has claimed to be a  follower  of  the  religion;  has  been  therefore
    assumed for the reason that we have already indicated to  be  a  person
    who will attempt to convert others; has been at risk from activities of
    the KN; even if his conduct was clearly not illegal he has been at risk
    of unmerited prosecution against  which  defence  would  be  difficult;
    there has been the further risk of illegal or violent activity  by  the
    KN.  He has been able in some cases to establish  a  well-founded  fear
    therefore of persecution in his home area; but the  guidance  has  been
    that he can safely and appropriately relocate to Rabwah.

 7. Each of the three cases before us has a Rabwah element.  The first  two
    have the features we have  just  indicated.   In  the  first  case  the
    appellant appeals against a  decision  of  25  February  2004  to  give
    removal directions against him as  an  illegal  entrant  following  the
    refusal of asylum.  There have been  two  full  hearings  of  his  case
    before  the  Tribunal  already,  and  the  matter  is  before   us   on
    reconsideration as the result of  a  Consent  Order  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The terms of the Consent Order and the fact that it  was  made
    by consent are of some importance.   The  order  is  in  the  following
    terms:

        "BY CONSENT IT IS ORDERED THAT:


            1. the appeal be allowed
            2. the determination of  the  Immigration  Judge,  Miss  Clough
               promulgated on 16 January 2006 be quashed
            3. the matter be remitted back to the  Asylum  and  Immigration
               Tribunal for  re-determination,  limited  to  the  issue  of
               whether the Appellant can be expected to relocate to Rabwah.
                Such issue is  to  include  consideration  of  the  general
               safety of Ahmadis, as well as whether  it  would  be  unduly
               harsh to relocate there
            4. ... ."


 8. The facts of the first appellant's case, as summarised by Mr  Waite  in
    his helpful skeleton argument provided on behalf of the respondent, are
    as follows.  The Immigration  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  is  a
    married man with six children.  He was a partner in a business  in  his
    home town.  He converted three Muslims to the Ahmadi faith in  February
    2003.  All of them were connected with him as employees or  friends  of
    employees.  The conversions brought him to the attention of the KN, who
    attacked his home and threatened to kill him.  He escaped  to  a  place
    about 200 miles away where he worked in a relative's  shop.   While  he
    was there he learnt that the police in his home town were investigating
    a blasphemy case against him.  He paid a  bribe  of  30,000  rupees  to
    avoid being investigated.  The police, however, refused to  register  a
    complaint that he made against the KN.  In his new  location  he  began
    preaching again and converted two men in 2003.  A complaint was made to
    the local mullah and as a result there were threats to  kill  him.   He
    learnt of the threats and fled to Lahore.  In October 2003  his  father
    warned him that the investigations into the original blasphemy case had
    been reopened.  He therefore left Pakistan.

 9. The Immigration Judge disbelieved part of the appellant's evidence.  He
    did find, however, that the  appellant  felt  under  an  obligation  to
    preach his faith, but that he had  restricted  his  efforts  to  people
    known to him  or  known  to  friends  of  his,  and  that  he  did  not
    proselytise in a way which would draw adverse attention  to  him.   The
    Immigration Judge found that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to relocate to  Rabwah,  despite  his  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in his home area.  The Immigration Judge thus dismissed the
    appeal.  On application there was an order for reconsideration  on  the
    ground that the Immigration  Judge  should  not  have  found  that  the
    appellant could avoid difficulty by relocating to Rabwah.

10. The second appellant appeals against a  decision  on  9  July  2004  to
    refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom after refusing him asylum.
     So far as he is concerned, Mr Waite's  summary  is  to  the  following
    effect.  The Immigration Judge found that the appellant's entire family
    are Ahmadi although not all are practising.  On 10 June 2002 his  uncle
    was murdered by the KN.  In 2002 the appellant began preaching  in  his
    home village.  Local members of the KN found out about his  attempt  to
    convert a man and threatened the appellant at his  house.   The  police
    refused to investigate.  On 5 January 2003 the appellant and his family
    decided that it was no longer safe to stay in the village and left  for
    Lahore, where he lived with a  friend.   In  June  2003  the  appellant
    became the assistant secretary of his local preaching group  and  began
    to preach widely.  He gave a book to a man and this was  discovered  by
    members of the KN who vandalised his home.  As a result, he returned to
    his home town and on 25 April 2004, when he was returning from a mosque
    where he had been praying, he was shot at.  He reported the incident to
    the police the next day but they refused  to  register  the  complaint.
    However, a few days later they arrested the appellant  without  charge.
    He was released on payment of a  bribe;  his  family  decided  that  he
    should  flee  Pakistan  and  he  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.    The
    Immigration Judge found that the appellant was at risk  of  persecution
    in his home area but could relocate to Rabwah.  The  Immigration  Judge
    found that the appellant was  in  the  same  position  as  every  other
    unnamed Ahmadi who wished to preach.  He would not,  according  to  the
    Immigration Judge, come specifically to the notice of the KN in  Rabwah
    and the level of protection  would  be  markedly  different  from  that
    available elsewhere.  The matter before us  in  the  second  appeal  is
    therefore the same as that in the first: that is to  say,  the  general
    issue of whether Rabwah is to be regarded as a place of safety  and  of
    potential internal relocation for a person with a well-founded fear  of
    persecution as an Ahmadi elsewhere in Pakistan.

11. The third appeal is somewhat different.  The appellant appeals  against
    a decision made as long ago as 15 October 2003 to  give  direction  for
    her removal as an illegal entrant after refusal of asylum.   The  third
    appellant comes from Rabwah itself and so far as she is  concerned  the
    summary by Mr Waite is as follows.  The Adjudicator accepted  that  the
    following was credible.  In late 2000 she commenced active preaching of
    her faith to non-Ahmadis.  In January 2001 she was attacked by a  group
    of Mullahs who formed part of the KN and was struck and knocked to  the
    ground.  She reported the incident to the police which resulted in  her
    arrest for preaching.  Her brother secured her release by a bribe.   On
    release she moved to Lahore and remained there until, a couple of weeks
    later, she went to Rawalpindi.  Soon after that a mob of about 20 or 25
    mullahs attacked the Ahmadi mosque there.  The appellant recognised one
    of them as being one of the mullahs who had attacked her in Rabwah  and
    he recognised her.  The appellant returned to Lahore and from there she
    came to the United Kingdom.

12. The Adjudicator did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine
    subjective fear of persecution at the time she left Pakistan,  but  did
    find that there was a reasonable likelihood  that  members  of  the  KN
    would target her and that there was, as it is put in the determination,
    "an attendant risk of greater harm", that is to say greater  than  that
    she had already suffered.  The Adjudicator dismissed the appeal  solely
    on the ground that the appellant would have  sufficient  protection  in
    Rabwah: that is to say, that although her fears would  be  well-founded
    and would be sufficient to establish her refugee status if it were  not
    for the fact that her home area was  Rabwah,  the  view  taken  by  the
    Adjudicator was that Rabwah itself would provide  protection  for  her.
    He took the view that  it  was  not  credible  that  a  sufficiency  of
    protection would be unavailable to her given that her home town was the
    very town which has a ninety-five per cent population of Ahmadis.   The
    appellant sought and obtained  an  order  for  reconsideration  on  the
    ground that the Adjudicator's reasoning to that effect  was  defective.
    Thus the matter comes before us.  And again, it is therefore  concerned
    with the situation in Rabwah for Ahmadis, reconsideration  having  been
    ordered solely on the issue of the safety or otherwise  of  Ahmadis  in
    Rabwah.

13. Mr Waite valiantly attempted to persuade us that larger issues ought to
    be determined by us in these appeals.  We are not  persuaded.   We  are
    bound by the order of the Court of Appeal, as of course is he,  consent
    having been given to its terms on behalf of the Secretary of State.  So
    far as concerns the other two  cases:  the  issues  identified  by  the
    applications for and  grant  of  reconsideration  are  precise  and  in
    neither of them was there any suggestion  earlier,  whether  by  notice
    under Rule 30 or by any other procedure, that larger issues  should  be
    determined.   Nevertheless,  although  we  consider  that  it  is   not
    appropriate to determine any larger issues in these  appeals;  we  note
    that other issues remain to be looked at in Ahmadi cases.  There may be
    questions about whether the prosecution of Ahmadis in truth and in  law
    amounts to persecution for the  purposes  of  the  Refugee  Convention.
    There may also be  questions  about  the  distribution  of  Ahmadis  in
    Pakistan, there being only a small minority of all Ahmadis  in  Rabwah.
    It may also be necessary to decide  whether  Ahmadis  have  a  duty  to
    preach and proselytise that is particular to them, and if  so  what  is
    its effect in claims of this kind.  All Muslims have the duty of  dawah
    and it may not be right to assume that an Ahmadi is more likely to be a
    preacher.

14. We heard oral evidence from two witnesses put before  the  Tribunal  as
    experts and we have had access to a substantial amount  of  documentary
    evidence.  The principal and perhaps  most  important  element  of  the
    documentary evidence is a report dated 26 January 2007 by  the  (United
    Kingdom) Parliamentary Human Rights Group entitled "Rabwah: A place for
    martyrs".  There is no doubt about the purpose of that report.  It  was
    designed to meet the Tribunal's conclusion that Rabwah was a  place  of
    safety for Ahmadis because of its majority Ahmadi population.

15. Dr Ensor, who gave oral evidence before us, was one of the researchers.
     He did not purport to be an expert on Ahmadiyya or on Rabwah.  He  put
    himself forward as an expert in research techniques; and  it  was  very
    noticeable and very creditable that he was clear about the purposes  of
    the research and did not attempt to take the evidence  which  had  been
    obtained further than it was intended to go.  For example, he was asked
    about the process by which he had identified individuals to talk  about
    their experiences in Rabwah, having come  there  from  other  parts  of
    Pakistan.  He indicated clearly and frankly that he had  not  attempted
    to survey such individuals and he agreed, that so far as  that  element
    of the report is concerned, the material is purely anecdotal.  What  he
    did say was that the report was designed to  examine  the  governmental
    structure of Rabwah.  Was it right to say  that  because  there  was  a
    large majority of Ahmadis a person could obtain  protection  in  Rabwah
    that was unavailable  elsewhere?   Was  it  right  to  assume,  as  the
    Tribunal had assumed in previous guidance, that  a  large  majority  in
    Rabwah necessarily meant a local government  and  local  officials  who
    were Ahmadis?  The research embodied  in  the  report  is  directed  to
    informing conclusions on that issue.  Other issues came to mind but the
    report was not designed to deal with them and Dr Ensor did not  pretend
    that it did deal with them.

16. Dr Roger Ballard also gave oral evidence before us.   He  had  produced
    three papers for the purposes of these appeals,  one  report  dated  in
    November 2006 and two supplementary notes.  We are bound to say that we
    have, to say the least, some concerns about Dr Ballard's evidence.   He
    is an experienced anthropologist with experience of work in  the  field
    in South Asia, as well as very long standing links with the South Asian
    communities in  the  United  Kingdom,  particularly  in  the  north  of
    England.  He speaks and writes with real expertise and knowledge  about
    the general developments of  religion  and  religious  sectarianism  in
    South Asia.  He has published widely, particularly on Sikhism. We were,
    however, not persuaded that he spoke with true knowledge  about  Rabwah
    or about the current difficulties faced by individuals in  Rabwah.   It
    appeared to us that as an expert he was drawing on  opinions  which  he
    had formed, but  that  the  opinions  which  he  had  formed  were  not
    sufficiently based on current information to enable us to be  satisfied
    that  we  should  take  his  opinion  as  the   truth   without   more.
    Nevertheless, we were well informed by the information he gave us about
    Ahmadis generally and about the  feeling  Sunni  Muslims  have  towards
    them.

17. We found difficulty, however, in accepting Dr Ballard's views about the
    intensity of the KN activities against Ahmadis in Rabwah and elsewhere.
     He asserted, for example, that a leading mullah, whom he had described
    in November 2006 as not being in Rabwah though as perhaps having  moved
    to Rabwah, was now in Rabwah and has, as one of his three main targets,
    any Ahmadi who arrived in Rabwah from elsewhere in  Pakistan  and  most
    especially so if he had  received  information  that  that  person  was
    fleeing from the attention of KN activists elsewhere.  That information
    is from his November 2006 report.  He expanded on it with  some  vigour
    in evidence before us.  But the position is that no other  evidence  of
    that activity has been cited to us and in particular the  Parliamentary
    Human Rights Commission did not detect KN activity or activity by  that
    individual mullah as asserted.

18. From the evidence we derive the following facts about Rabwah,  some  of
    which we have already referred to.  Rabwah is a relatively  small  town
    and has a defined area.  It has a population of something under  50,000
    of whom the vast majority are Ahmadis.  There are between 2,000,000 and
    5,000,000 Ahmadis in  Pakistan  in  all  probability.   Thus,  although
    Ahmadis are a majority  in  Rabwah,  the  Rabwah  Ahmadis  are  a  tiny
    minority of the Ahmadis in  Pakistan.   Ahmadis  however  have,  for  a
    reason which has not been explained to us but the fact is not disputed,
    a disinclination  to  engage  in  government.   They  are  required  to
    register in a separate electoral  roll.   That,  we  understand,  is  a
    feature  which  they  do  not  share  with  other  Pakistani  religious
    minorities.  Whether as a result of that or not, Ahmadis as a group  do
    not register for elections: it is that which makes it so  difficult  to
    estimate their numbers, but it is also that which has the  effect  that
    although in Rabwah they are the vast majority of the inhabitants,  they
    are not represented in government as one might  expect.   In  fact  the
    evidence shows that Ahmadis are not in government in  Rabwah,  as  they
    are not in government anywhere else in Pakistan.

19. In Rabwah there is a strong branch  of  the  KN;  there  are  large  KN
    rallies several times a year and other activities.  Rabwah is known  as
    an Ahmadi area and therefore may be  the  target  of  such  activities.
    There is,  however,  as  Mr  Waite  pointed  out  in  his  submissions,
    relatively little evidence of anti-Ahmadi trouble in Rabwah.   That  is
    the result, no doubt, of a number of factors.  One may be, as Mr  Waite
    suggested, that Rabwah is relatively safe and indeed "slightly safer or
    a little safer" was the evidence received by  the  Parliamentary  Human
    Rights Commission.  But of course the lack of activity against  Ahmadis
    in Rabwah does not necessarily show that Rabwah is safe.  It  may  only
    show that the amount of activity against  Ahmadis  is  not  very  great
    anyway.  The question for an individual is whether he is at  risk,  not
    whether everybody is at risk.

20. The Secretary of State now accepts  and  indeed  has  set  out  in  the
    Operational Guidance note of 15 March 2007 as follows:

        "3.7.4   Rabwah is the  headquarters  of  the  Ahmadi  movement  in
               Pakistan and is made up of  ninety-five  per  cent  Ahmadis.
               Although Rabwah does provide a degree of  community  support
               to individual Ahmadis, there  are  reports  suggesting  that
               Rabwah is targeted by  fundamentalist  Islamic  grounds  for
               anti-Ahmadi protests and other actions.   Enquiries  through
               the British High Commission in Islamabad show that very  few
               Ahmadis  are   represented   in   public   and   semi-public
               organisations in Rabwah.  Approximately 54%  of  the  voting
               population of Rabwah are Ahmadi, but it appears that Ahmadis
               do not normally vote in or contest elections."

      To that extent, therefore, the Secretary of State's view is  congruent
    with our view on the evidence before us.

21. Nevertheless, Rabwah's status as an Ahmadi stronghold has given rise to
    the view expressed sometimes by the Secretary of State, particularly in
    letters of refusal, and sometimes by the Tribunal, whether in  reliance
    on country guidance or otherwise, that a person at risk  elsewhere  and
    so in need of a place to which to relocate internally could  reasonably
    be expected to go to Rabwah where he would obtain protection because of
    the Ahmadis there.  We are satisfied that that is wrong.  The situation
    for Ahmadis in Rabwah is capable  of  examination  in  a  way  that  is
    perhaps not so easy elsewhere because of the numbers.   To  the  extent
    also that there is a large Ahmadi population in Rabwah,  there  may  be
    some safety in numbers and it may also be the case that a member of the
    KN, who is intent merely on pursuing the KN's agenda in  a  generalised
    fashion, is less likely to target any identified individual  in  Rabwah
    simply because there are so many Ahmadis there.  That is  a  difference
    from a person who seeks to do the same thing in a small  village  where
    there  are  few  Ahmadis,  each  of  whom   would   therefore   be   at
    proportionately greater risk.

22. But  although  there  is  that  safety  in  numbers,  and  there  is  a
    possibility  of  informal  community  support  amongst   Ahmadis,   the
    advantages of Rabwah stop there,  even  for  an  Ahmadi  who  lives  in
    Rabwah.  Such a person cannot expect in Rabwah any more  than  anywhere
    else to obtain protection from the police (there are few or  no  Ahmadi
    policemen) or from other officials; because, despite being the majority
    population of Rabwah, Ahmadis are not represented  in  government.   So
    there is no greater protection available for local  Ahmadis  in  Rabwah
    than there is for Ahmadis anywhere else in Pakistan.

23. For those who move  to  Rabwah,  from  other  parts  of  Pakistan,  the
    prospects are, on the evidence we have seen, to  be  viewed  with  even
    less equanimity.  Unless they have friends or relations in Rabwah  they
    may not, according to the evidence, be able  to  obtain  accommodation.
    There are regulations prohibiting the sale  of  land  in  one  part  of
    Rabwah to Ahmadis, although there is some evidence of  Ahmadi  building
    on vacant land in the other part of Rabwah and outside the town centre.
     Further, the very fact of having moved to Rabwah may attract attention
    to an individual's religious affiliation.

24. We should say that the evidence  does  not  establish  that  Rabwah  is
    particularly  deprived.   Dr  Ensor,  who  gave  evidence   about   the
    production of the Parliamentary Human  Rights  Committee  report,  said
    that he observed poverty in Rabwah but at about the same level that  he
    had observed elsewhere in  Pakistan.   The  third  appellant's  witness
    statement gives some indication of her home  situation  in  Rabwah  and
    again it does not appear to be deprived.  Dr Ballard, in  his  November
    report, described  Rabwah  as  "thriving",  though  he  retreated  very
    rapidly from that position in  oral  evidence  and  said  that  it  was
    subject to corruption.  Rabwah is not a ghetto on the evidence that  we
    have heard.  It is, however, a place like any other place in  Pakistan.
    That is to say it is a place where the government is Sunni and  it  has
    the additional difficulty that, if it is seen  as  a  centre  to  which
    Ahmadis are attracted, it is at the same time a small  place  in  which
    they may have some difficulty in acquiring accommodation.

25. It therefore seems to us that despite Rabwah's special profile  in  the
    Ahmadi religion it  has  no  special  status  in  the  refugee  related
    discourse relating to Pakistani Ahmadis.  It is simply wrong to say  in
    general that a person who has established a history of persecution or a
    fear of persecution as an Ahmadi in some other  part  of  Pakistan  can
    reasonably be expected to relocate to Rabwah.  It may be that he can go
    to Rabwah for a short time.  It may be that for that short time he will
    be safe.  But, save in exceptional circumstances, for example if he has
    family or relatives in Rabwah,  despite  the  majority  of  inhabitants
    there, he may not in fact be reasonably practicably able to live  there
    and, if he does, he will be no safer than anywhere  else:  because  the
    governmental, official structure and seat  of  power  is  the  same  as
    elsewhere in Pakistan  and  the  fundamentalist  anti-Ahmadi  religious
    group, the KN, is as active there as anywhere else, if not more so.

26. That is  not  to  say  that  every  Pakistani  Ahmadi  is  at  risk  of
    persecution and is a refugee.  As Mr Waite pointed out, the evidence of
    serious harm to Ahmadis in Rabwah is relatively sparse.  The point  is,
    however, that the evidence does not suggest to us that Rabwah is  safer
    than anywhere else.  Mr Waite pointed to the fact that  there  is  some
    evidence that, at any rate for short periods,  Ahmadis  from  elsewhere
    seek some protection in Rabwah  amongst  the  Ahmadi  community  there.
    That is a perfectly fair point, but it does not demonstrate that Rabwah
    is safe for long-term residence.   The  incidence  of  actual  harm  to
    Ahmadis is, on the evidence, not high in Rabwah, and, on the  evidence,
    is not high elsewhere in Pakistan.  But that is  not  the  point.   The
    point is not whether every Ahmadi is at risk of persecution but whether
    some Ahmadis who are at risk of persecution can be expected to relocate
    to Rabwah.

27. The Tribunal will look in due course at the other  issues  relating  to
    Ahmadis.  In the meantime, however, we draw attention to one comment in
    particular in the evidence given by  the  Human  Rights  Commission  of
    Pakistan to the  Parliamentary  Human  Rights  Group  and  recorded  at
    paragraph 4.1 of the latter document.

        "... the HRCP stated that safety in Rabwah depends on the nature of
        the persecution  and/or  the  influence  of  the  persecutor.   For
        example, if a neighbour wishes to take over an Ahmadi's business by
        capitalising  on  anti-Ahmadi  sentiment,  then  the  job  of   the
        persecutor  is  complete  once  the  Ahmadi  has  left  the   local
        community.  However, should the persecutor be a person of influence
        or means, they may use this to follow their  target  to  Rabwah  as
        well. ... ."

    There is therefore a difference  between  those  who  are  targeted  or
    pursued,  in  particular  those  in  respect  of  whom  there  is  some
    institutional pursuit on the one hand, and those  who  are  merely  the
    victims of local Sunnis who want to take advantage of  restrictions  on
    Ahmadis in order to  secure  some  financial  or  other  advantage  for
    themselves.

28. It is wrong to assume that  Rabwah,  because  of  its  majority  Ahmadi
    population, is  either  accessible  or  safe  for  those  who,  on  the
    evidence, need a place of safety.  Each case will depend on  its  facts
    but in no wise can the existence of Rabwah be regarded generally  as  a
    reason for dismissing an appeal that would otherwise be allowed.

29. In the present cases the first and second appellants have, as  we  have
    indicated, a history of KN activity against them.  Mr  Waite  has  done
    his very best to minimise the findings of the Immigration  Judges,  but
    the position in both cases is that we are concerned today  with  Rabwah
    because the starting point is  that  both  the  first  and  the  second
    appellants have established that  they  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Convention reason in their home areas.  The  question
    in both cases it therefore whether they can reasonably be  expected  to
    relocate to Rabwah.  Would they, as the Immigration Judges said in both
    cases, be safe in Rabwah in a way that they would not be elsewhere?  In
    both cases the appeals were dismissed solely  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellants would, despite their profile, be safe in  Rabwah  and  could
    reasonably be expected to relocate to Rabwah and live there rather than
    seeking the surrogate protection of the international  community.   For
    the reasons we have given, those conclusions  were  wrong.   They  were
    based on existing country guidance and the Immigration Judges cannot be
    criticised for following it.  But we are persuaded that to that  extent
    existing authority amounting to country guidance was wrong  and  should
    not be followed.  Mr Waite suggested that neither individual was  being
    pursued; but it seems to  us  that  each  of  them  had  a  history  of
    difficulties in more than one  locality  and  there  is  no  reason  to
    suppose therefore that they would be  safer  in  Rabwah  than  anywhere
    else.   Because  no  other  issue  falls  for  determination  in  these
    reconsiderations  we  shall  substitute  determinations  allowing   the
    appeals of the first and second appellants.

30. In the third case the Immigration Judge found, as we  have  said,  that
    the KN  would  target  the  appellant  again  with  even  more  serious
    consequences than she had previously suffered, but dismissed the appeal
    solely  because  he  regarded  it  as  not  credible  that   sufficient
    protection would not be  available  to  the  appellant  in  the  Ahmadi
    stronghold of Rabwah.  For the reasons we have  given,  that  view  was
    erroneous.  On the findings of fact that the Immigration Judge made  he
    should have recognised that the risk from the KN was as real in  Rabwah
    as it was elsewhere in Pakistan and he should  therefore  have  allowed
    the appeal.  We shall substitute a  determination  allowing  the  third
    appellant's appeal.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:



Annex A: Background materials before the Tribunal

|1  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada Report,     |                 |
|   |Pakistan: Update on the situation of Ahmadis        |November 1996    |
|2  |Amnesty International Report, Pakistan:             |                 |
|   |"Insufficient protection of religious minorities"   |15 May 2001      |
|3  |Human Rights Committee Rabwah note: "To Whom It May |22 March 2005    |
|   |Concern"                                            |                 |
|4  |Immigration and Refugee Board in Canada Report: "The|                 |
|   |situation of members of the Ahmadiyya Movement in   |31 August 2005   |
|   |Islam"                                              |                 |
|5  |Correspondence between Mr T McNulty Esq and Lord    |August - October |
|   |Avebury                                             |2005             |
|6  |Letter from Dr Iftikhar Ayaz                        |15 September 2005|
|7  |Freedom House: Freedom in the World 2006, Pakistan  |6 June 2006      |
|8  |UK Home Office IND Operational Guidance Note,       |19 June 2006     |
|   |Pakistan                                            |                 |
|9  |U.S Department of State International Religious     |                 |
|   |Freedom Report 2006, Pakistan                       |15 September 2006|
|10 |Report by Dr R Ballard: "The Ahmadis of Pakistan,   |                 |
|   |with particular reference to the prospect of finding|                 |
|   |safe haven in Rabwah/Chenab Nagar"                  |30 November 2006 |
|11 |Parliamentary Human Rights Group Report: "Rabwah: A |                 |
|   |place for Martyrs"                                  |26 January 2007  |
|12 |UK Home Office Pakistan Country of Origin Report    |30 April 2007    |
|13 |Human Rights Watch Report: "Pakistan: Pandering to  |                 |
|   |Extremists Fuels Persecution of Ahmadis"            |8 May 2007       |
|14 |Amnesty International Report: "Amnesty International|                 |
|   |Report 2007: Pakistan"                              |23 May 2007      |
|15 |US Commission on International Religious Freedom    |                 |
|   |Report, Pakistan: "USCIRF Decries Abuse of Blasphemy|                 |
|   |Laws, Apostasy Bill"                                |11 June 2007     |
|16 |Report by Dr R Ballard: "The Ahmadiyyas of Pakistan"|8 August 2007    |
|17 |Report by Dr R Ballard: "Pakistan's 'Crisis of      |Undated          |
|   |Legitimacy'"                                        |                 |

Annex B: Specific Documents
    . Supplementary bundle

|1  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada Report,     |                 |
|   |Pakistan: Update on the situation of Ahmadis extract|November 1996    |
|2  |State of Human Rights Report extract: "Freedom of   |                 |
|   |thought, conscience and religion"                   |2003             |
|3  |Human Rights Committee Rabwah note: "To Whom It May |22 March 2005    |
|   |Concern"                                            |                 |
|4  |Correspondence between Mr T McNulty Esq and Lord    |August - October |
|   |Avebury                                             |2005             |
|5  |Appendices to Parliamentary Human Rights Report     |19 July, 1       |
|   |(2007)                                              |September and 9  |
|   |B1:  Notifications from the Government of the Punjab|September 2006   |
|   |banning Ahmadi materials                            |                 |
|   |  B2:  Photographs supplied by the Ahmadi Community |Undated          |
|   |  B3:  Police Report (FIR) against the entire       |                 |
|   |population of Rabwah                                |15 December 1989 |
|   |  B4:  Circulars from the Ministry of Interior,     |8 May 2006 and 8 |
|   |Government of Pakistan,                             |June 2006        |
|   |  B5:  The Nation newspaper article: "College       |                 |
|   |building declared dangerous"                        |Undated          |
|   |  B6:  Public Auction Notice, taken from The Daily  |                 |
|   |Nawa-i-Waqt, Lahore                                 |5 December 2005  |
|   |  B7:  Material relating to Rabwah water supply     |7 October 2004   |
|   |  F:  Photographs of Mullah Arshad's Khatme Nabuwwat|                 |
|   |mosque and damage to adjacent Ahmadi headstones     |Undated          |

