

     JS (Family ILR Exercise -near-miss argument) Albania [2007] UKAIT 00080

                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 30th April, 2007                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley
                        Senior Immigration Judge Gill
                              Mrs B W Southwell

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr P Nathan of Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan, solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kovats of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor.



Individuals who lodged  their  asylum  claims  after  2  October  2000  were
subject to one-stop appeals under  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act,  1999
which did not apply to individuals who lodge their claims before that  date.
 Given the rationale for this cut-off date,  it  has  an  "all  or  nothing"
significance in that where an individual lodged a claim  for  asylum  on  or
after 2 October 2000 the Family ILR Exercise does not apply to  him  or  her
and the fact that he or she "only just missed" being eligible, even if  only
by one day, is irrelevant.
The Court of Appeal in Jovan Shkembi v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1592 did not decide that the Family ILR  Exercise
had any significance or relevance to the Article 8 claim  of  an  individual
who lodged his claim on or after 2 October 2002.  The  court  in  that  case
was concerned with procedural unfairness.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This  is  the  reconsideration  of  the  determination  of  Adjudicator
    Morrison, promulgated on 25th February, 2004, following the appellant's
    hearing at Hatton Cross held on  12th  February,  2004,  in  which  the
    Adjudicator dismissed the appellant's appeal, against the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department, taken on 21st December,
    2000, to direct the  appellant's  removal  to  Albania  as  an  illegal
    entrant.

The appellant

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania, who  was  born  on  30th  March,
    1956.  He claims  to  have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  23rd
    November, 2000, concealed  in  a  lorry  and  claimed  asylum  on  30th
    November, 2000, at the Asylum Screening Unit.  His wife and son are his
    dependants.

Grounds of application for leave to appeal

3.   Following the promulgation  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination,  the
    appellant sought leave to  appeal  to  the  former  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal (IAT). The grounds of application are relevant and we set  the
    relevant part out in full below:-

        "Expulsion from UK


        2.   It was submitted to the Adjudicator that to remove the  family
             would interfere  with  their  Private  and  Family  Life  under
             Article 8.  This the Adjudicator accepted.  However, he went on
             to find that the Respondent's actions in so  interfering  would
             be proportionate  under  Article  8(2)  ECHR  to  the  need  to
             maintain an effective immigration control.   In  so  doing  the
             Adjudicator refused at paragraph 42 to consider as relevant  to
             the  'balancing  exercise'  the  Secretary   of   State's   ILR
             concession announced in October 2003 to cover families arriving
             in the UK prior to October 2000.  It is submitted  that  in  so
             doing the Adjudicator erred and failed to take into  account  a
             significant factor.  In particular the appellant seeks to  rely
             on the following passage of the skeleton  argument  before  the
             Adjudicator and about which the Adjudicator failed  at  all  to
             comment.


                       'However it  is  submitted  that  the  views  of  the
                  Secretary of State himself would appear to  indicate  that
                  he, as arguably the best positioned individual  to  assess
                  proportionality  in  the  context  of  interference   with
                  Immigration  Control,  now  believes  himself,  that   the
                  interference with the appellant's  son's  education  would
                  breach Article 8(2).  Speaking on BBC Radio  4  on  Monday
                  27th October, Mr Blunkett, when questioned about the above
                  concession, stated in reference to potential  interference
                  with children's education that:


                  '...not only would it be disproportionate but it would be
             wrong."


         This was a case where the Respondent had not previously considered
             Article 8 and  as  such  was  one  where  the  Adjudicator  was
             required to carry out the Article 8 balancing exercise himself.
              However the President of the Tribunal recently gave  'starred'
             guidance on  how  such  cases  should  be  considered  by  both
             Adjudicators and the Tribunal observing in M  (Croatia)  [2004]
             UKIAT 00024:


                       'The  way  in  which  that  independent  decision  is
                  reached must [my emphasis] reflect  State's  primary  role
                  in the assessment of proportionality,'


        3.   It is submitted that in refusing  to  consider  Mr  Blunkett's
             informed position that the interference with education would be
             both  'disproportionate'  and  'wrong'  and  instead  making  a
             recommendation that the family be allowed to remain in  the  UK
             until the conclusion of the  appellant's  secondary  education,
             the  Adjudicator  failed  to   properly   pay   heed   to   the
             aforementioned 'primary role' of the Secretary of State."

The Family ILR Exercise

4.   The  "ILR  concession"  referred  to  was,  in  fact,  the  Family  ILR
    Exercise, as described in APU Notice 4/2003.

5.   As originally formulated and  announced  by  the  Home  Office  on  4th
    October, 2003, under the Family ILR Exercise, a family  with  dependent
    children would be granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom (ILR) outside the Immigration Rules,  if  the  application  for
    asylum was made before the 2nd October, 2000,  and  the  applicant  for
    asylum at the time of the application  "has"  at  least  one  dependant
    "currently" aged under 18 who "has been living" in  the  UK  since  2nd
    October, 2000.  Provided the family were  still  present,  neither  the
    refusal of asylum nor the grant of limited leave,  removed  eligibility
    under the exercise.  To qualify,  the  dependant,  since  2nd  October,
    2000, and on 4th October, 2003, had to be a child of the applicant,  or
    of the applicant's spouse, aged under 18 and financially or emotionally
    dependent on the appellant and  part  of  the  family  unit.   Once  an
    applicant for asylum met that criteria, leave would be granted in  line
    with that grant to  all  dependants  who  met  the  basic  criteria;  a
    dependant for these purposes was a spouse, a child of the applicant  or
    spouse, who was dependent on and formed part of the family unit on 24th
    October, 2003.  APU Notice 4/2003 contains  exclusions  inter  alia  in
    respect of dependants having criminal convictions,  or  who  present  a
    risk to security, or whose  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  not
    conducive to the public good and for  other  reasons  set  out  in  the
    notice.

The former Immigration Appeal Tribunal

6.   Leave to appeal to IAT was granted and the  IAT  heard  the  appeal  on
    14th December, 2004.  The IAT dismissed the appeal.

7.   During the course of the hearing before the IAT, the  Chairman  of  the
    panel asked Counsel for the appellant how he intended to prove what the
    former Secretary of State had said during the BBC Radio 4 programme  on
    27th October, 2003.   Counsel  applied  for  an  adjournment.   It  was
    refused and it was on the basis of  that  refusal  that  the  appellant
    sought permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal was refused by the IAT, but granted on application to the  Court
    of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal

8.   By order dated 23rd November, 2005, the Court of  Appeal  ordered  that
    the appellant's appeal be allowed and that the matter  be  remitted  to
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal. The  judgment  of  the  Court  was
    given in Jovan Shkembi v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1592.

9.   It is against this background that the appellant's appeal  came  before
    us as a first stage reconsideration hearing.

The hearing before us

10.  Mr Nathan started by pointing out that the decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Delo Mongoto [2005] EWCA Civ 715 is pending before the  House
    of Lords and that the decision of Ouseley J, in  Rudi  [2007]  EWHC  60
    (Admin) was pending in the Court of Appeal.  By way  of  clarification,
    he confirmed that he was not seeking an adjournment.

11.  On  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  the  following  documents  have  been
    submitted to the Tribunal:

     (a) a witness statement dated 14 September 2006 from  Mr.  J.  Ponsord,
             senior  policy  officer  in  the  Asylum  and  Appeals   Policy
             Directorate of the  Immigration  and  Nationality  Directorate;
             this statement refers to the three exhibits mentioned below;
     (b) Exhibit JP1, which is a copy of a press release of 24 October  2003
             announcing the Family ILR Exercise;
     (c) Exhibit JP2, which is the transcript of a radio interview given  by
             the then Secretary of State to  Radio  4  "The  World  At  One"
             programme on 24 October 2003; and
     (d) Exhibit JP3, which is a copy of the  policy  document  (APU  Notice
             4/2003).

12.  Mr. Nathan objected to the admission of Mr. Ponsford's  statement  and,
    initially, to all three Exhibits. However,  he  subsequently  confirmed
    that the Tribunal was entitled to consider the policy  itself  (Exhibit
    JP3), since this was a document in the public domain. Under Rule 32  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules, 2005 ("Procedure
    Rules")  and  under  paragraph  14A.2  of  the   President's   Practice
    Directions, the Secretary of State  should  have  given  notice  if  he
    wished the Tribunal to accept such new  evidence  which  had  not  been
    submitted on a previous occasion when the appeal was considered.   Such
    notice should indicate the nature of the evidence and  explain  why  it
    was not submitted on a previous occasion.  Additionally,  new  evidence
    will normally only be admitted in accordance with  "Ladd  and  Marshall
    principles" (see Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489).   Paragraph  14A.2
    of the Practice Directions requires that parties must comply  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 32(2) of the Procedure Rules.

13.  This case, Mr Nathan reminded us,  predates  Rudi.   The  Secretary  of
    State has had a number of opportunities to prepare his case and did not
    do so, either before the Adjudicator, before  the  IAT  or  before  the
    Court of Appeal.  In Mr Nathan's submission, the Secretary  of  State's
    reliance on the fresh evidence in the form  of  the  witness  statement
    from Mr Ponsford was in breach of the Procedure Rules, the  President's
    Practice Direction and  the  Ladd  and  Marshall  principles.   In  his
    submission,  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in   ex   parte
    Ravichandran and Jeyeanthan [1999] EWCA Civ 3010 was not relevant.

14.  Mr Nathan explained that he was embarrassed, because solicitors  acting
    on behalf of the appellant  had  written  to  the  Treasury  Solicitors
    Office on  23rd  April,  2007,  and,  in  referring  to  Mr  Ponsford's
    statement, enquired whether the Treasury Solicitors had  complied  with
    "Rule 32 of the Civil Procedure Rules".  This reference was intended to
    be to Rule 32 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules,
    2005, not to the Civil Procedure Rules.  In responding to this  letter,
    the Treasury  Solicitors  had  not  answered  the  point.   Mr.  Nathan
    submitted that in the circumstances, it  would  only  be  fair  to  the
    appellant to exclude Mr Ponsford's evidence; comprising  his  statement
    and exhibits and that to do otherwise would be grossly  unfair  to  the
    appellant.

15.  Responding briefly, Mr Kovats suggested  that  the  appellant  had  not
    been in any way prejudiced and the evidence had been served as long ago
    as last September.  Mr Kovats suggested that it was not  necessary  for
    him to rely on Mr Ponsford's evidence. However, he submitted  that  the
    Tribunal should base its  decision  on  all  the  evidence  before  it,
    because the accuracy of that evidence was not challenged.  There was no
    prejudice caused to the appellant, who had been in  possession  of  the
    evidence  for  months.    There   was   substantial   compliance   with
    requirements of Rule 32, in that the evidence was identified and it was
    served as long ago as September 2006.  The hearing has not in  any  way
    been delayed because of this evidence.   The  reason  why  it  was  not
    submitted earlier was because, given the history  of  the  appeal,  the
    focus earlier was on other issues.

16.  In response, Mr Nathan suggested that there was a degree  of  prejudice
    in this case, in that it was being prolonged by the Secretary of  State
    putting in evidence that he could and should have relied on prior to or
    at the Court of Appeal hearing. He submitted that the arguments as  set
    out in Mr. Ponsford's statement should  have  been  raised  before  the
    Court of Appeal  because  Mr.  Ponsford's  statement  might  have  been
    determinative; the appellant's  case  might  have  been  resolved  much
    sooner. Mr Nathan submitted that  the  Secretary  of  State's  position
    seems to have "flowed as the case moved against him".

17.  The Tribunal enquired of Mr Nathan why the actions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, in putting  questions  in  correspondence  to  the  Treasury
    Solicitor to be put to Mr Ponsford dealing with his  statement,  should
    not be considered to be a waiver on behalf  of  the  appellant  of  any
    procedural irregularities in this appeal?  Mr. Nathan  suggested  that,
    in any event, the letter setting out the questions  to  be  put  to  Mr
    Ponsford addressed to the Treasury Solicitor contained the request  for
    confirmation that the Procedure Rules were being complied with.

18.  Mr Nathan confirmed that he was ready  to  deal  with  the  substantive
    issues today and if Mr Ponsford's evidence  were  to  be  admitted,  he
    would be happy to deal with it today.  Mr Kovats invited us to consider
    Mr Ponsford's evidence and accept  it  because  it  would  promote  the
    overriding objective.

19.  Mr. Nathan accepted that there  had  been  no  change  in  Home  Office
    policy announced as a result of the comments made by the  Secretary  of
    State and it has  never  been  sought  to  suggest  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that there was.  However, it is suggested on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the Secretary of State's comments were, and amounted to,
    "a gloss" on the Secretary of State's published policy.

20.  Mr Nathan suggested that Mr Ponsford's  evidence  took  the  matter  no
    further.  The decision of Ouseley  J  in  Rudi  was,  he  suggested,  a
    difficult one.  He referred us to paragraph 61 where Ouseley J said:-

        "The second group of arguments on behalf of Mr Ibrahimi remains for
        consideration and to that I now turn. Mr Ibrahimi contends that the
        refusal of the SSHD to treat his  circumstances,  set  out  in  his
        judicial review claim form,  as  amounting  to  a  fresh  claim  is
        irrational. An  Adjudicator  arguably  might  allow  the  claim  on
        appeal. He first relied on the terms of the Exercise and  extension
        which does not apply to him: the circumstances arguably fell within
        the spirit if not the letter of the policy.  In  R  (Domi)  v  SSHD
        [2006] EWHC 1314  Admin, Keith J had held that it was arguable that
        the Exercise drew an irrational distinction, as  argued  here,  and
        that an Adjudicator might allow an  appeal  on  that  basis.  In  R
        (Shkembi) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1592, the Court of Appeal had held
        in effect that a policy which did not strictly apply  could  supply
        through its rationale an exceptional case  for  an  Adjudicator  to
        consider on appeal."

21.  At paragraph 79 of his judgment, Ouseley J went on to say:-

        "79. An Adjudicator would have to approach the Family  Exercise  on
             the footing that the Claimant fell  outside  it  and  that  its
             scope was lawful. Much of the rationale  could  apply  to  many
             whose lives had developed over the prolonged periods for  which
             they remain in this country either without a decision or before
             removal action. But the approach in Mongoto to those  who  fall
             outside the scope of a particular policy to my  mind  precludes
             an Adjudicator in effect expanding it to cover near  misses  or
             those to whom aspects of the rationale could  apply.  I  accept
             that there may be cases in which the rationale for a policy may
             inform the judge of the significance  of  a  particular  point;
             there may be lacunae, but that is very different from  treating
             a policy as the basis for extension by analogy  or  comparison.
             That is not what Shkembi decided. There  is  not  a  near  miss
             penumbra around every policy providing scope for its  extension
             in practice to that which it did not cover, and  this  case  is
             not a near miss but wholly outside the Exercise. The  rationale
             for the Exercise does not apply to the Claimant, although  some
             of the points made about its purpose could  apply  to  any  who
             have stayed for a while in this country after their appeals  on
             all grounds have been dismissed."

22.  Mr Nathan suggested that there was a tension between  the  decision  in
    Shkembi and that in Mongoto.  He suggested that  the  comments  of  the
    Secretary of State made during a Radio  programme  are  something  that
    should be and could be taken into account and,  in  the  circumstances,
    those comments are material  to  a  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim.  Mr Nathan relied on the  judgment  of  Latham  LJ  in
    Shkembi and in particular to paragraph 14 of it, where it was argued on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that it was not material, because  the
    case was bound to fail.  The "near miss" should, he submitted,  make  a
    difference to the outcome of the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    views about "dragging children out of school" are clear;  his  decision
    to remove the appellant was disproportionate.

23.   At  paragraph  45  of  his  appeal,  the  Adjudicator  dismissed   the
    appellant's Article  8  claim,  but  made  a  recommendation  that  the
    appellant's son, Oreste, be allowed to complete his sixth form studies,
    since he only had a short period  of  his  education  to  complete  and
    recommended that the respondent did not remove  Oreste  or  the  family
    until he completes his sixth year studies in July,  2004.   One  should
    bear in mind, urged Mr. Nathan, that the Adjudicator had  rejected  the
    Article 8 submission, but nonetheless, made  a  recommendation  to  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department.  When that is coupled  with
    the fact that the Secretary of State provided a gloss to his Family ILR
    concession, one can see that, if the  Adjudicator  had  not  failed  to
    consider what the Secretary of State had said, he may  very  well  have
    allowed the appeal.

24.  Mr Kovats reminded the Tribunal that the appellant's grounds of  appeal
    did not raise an Article 8 claim  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   The
    skeleton argument put before the Adjudicator dealt with the  Article  8
    claim, although it has been accepted on behalf of  the  appellant  that
    the family do not come within the Family ILR  concession  made  by  the
    Secretary of State and referred to by him  during  the  course  of  the
    Radio 4 programme.

25.   In  his  determination,  the  Adjudicator  recorded  the   appellant's
    immigration history at paragraph 2.  He  recorded  that  the  appellant
    arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  23rd  November,  2000.   Mr  Kovats
    submitted that the appellant clearly arrived in the United Kingdom  too
    late in order to meet the requirements of the Family ILR Exercise.

26.  At paragraph 40 of the determination, the Adjudicator was  prepared  to
    accept that the appellant and his wife and child had established both a
    private and  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Adjudicator
    referred at paragraph 42 of the determination to Mr Nathan's submission
    in relation to the  one-off,  Family  ILR  exercise.   He  records,  at
    paragraph 42 of his determination:-


        "42. Mr Nathan also relied on the  respondent's  recent  concession
             made on 24th October 2003 in which he announced  the  intention
             to grant ILR to families arriving  in  the  UK  before  October
             2000.  This concession is purely a matter for  the  respondent.
             Having announced the concession the respondent will  decide  in
             due course which families at present within the system  qualify
             to benefit from the concession.  The concession does not change
             the law or in any way affect the way in which Article 8 appeals
             require to be dealt with and I cannot regard the concession  as
             having any significance in this appeal.  I have to  decide  the
             Article 8 appeal solely on the evidence before me."

27.  That was a correct statement of the law,  submitted  Mr  Kovats.   This
    was an Article 8 appeal, not an 'in accordance with  the  law"  appeal.
    The Adjudicator properly dealt with the question of proportionality  at
    paragraphs 43 and 44 of his determination.

28.  So far as the recommendation made by  the  Adjudicator  was  concerned,
    this was clearly directed towards the son's completion of his education
    in July, 2004, and to that extent is therefore "spent".

29.  The grounds of appeal relevant to  today  are  the  un-amended  grounds
    which had been submitted to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  dated  9th
    March, 2004, (an extract of which appears at paragraph 3 above).   When
    the matter came before the IAT, the chairman of the IAT's panel refused
    to grant an adjournment and Counsel who then appeared for the appellant
    (Mr. M. Mullins) had conceded that, unless an adjournment was  granted,
    he was bound to fail.

30.  At paragraph 4 of his judgement in Shkembi , Latham LJ said this:-

        "4.  Counsel acting for the appellant before  the  Adjudicator,  Mr
             Nathan, who appears for him today, relied in his support of his
             argument that the removal would be a  breach  of  the  family's
             Article 8 rights on a concession made by the respondent to  the
             effect that, as a matter of policy, he would not  remove  those
             families with children who had come to this  country  prior  to
             October 2000.  Mr  Nathan's  argument  was  that  although  the
             appellant and his family clearly fell outside the strict  terms
             of  that  concession,  nonetheless  the  rationale   for   that
             concession applied to the family and, accordingly, there was  a
             proper basis for saying  that  there  could  and  should  be  a
             departure from the normal rule which  was  that  those  refused
             asylum should be refused leave to enter this country."

31.  And paragraph 9, he went on to say:-

        "9.  When the matter came before the Tribunal, the Tribunal was not
             prepared to accept mere say-so as to what Mr Blunkett was  said
             to have said in the interview referred to  in  the  grounds  of
             appeal.  In my judgment, the Tribunal was absolutely correct to
             take that view.  The position was that in  order  to  make  any
             sensible decision on this issue, the factual matrix had  to  be
             properly established.  That matrix was not merely what was said
             by Mr Blunkett in an interview, but was, and should have  been,
             the terms of the concession and  its  context.   The  Tribunal,
             however, refused to grant an adjournment to  the  appellant  to
             allow that matter to be put in proper  order.   It  is  against
             that decision to refuse an adjournment, essentially, that  this
             appeal relates."

32.  Mr Kovats submitted that it was clear that the appeal  was  allowed  on
    pure fairness grounds.  Mr Kovats then addressed us at some  length  on
    Mr Ponsford's statement and the exhibits to it.  For reasons which will
    become  apparent,  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to   record   those
    submissions.

33.  Mr Kovats asked us to note that the appellant had conceded that he  did
    not come within the one-off Family ILR Exercise.

34.  The only ground relied on by the appellant was whether the decision  of
    the Secretary of State would breach Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998 (HRA 1998), because it would cause a  breach  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights.  At the time, the decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  M*
    (Croatia) [2004] 00024 was the authority on the point, but now  it  was
    the opinion of the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords  in  Huang
    and Kashmiri v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  UKHL
    11.  The latter, Mr Kovats suggested makes it clear that  the  question
    of  proportionality  is  for  the  Tribunal  and  the  Tribunal  alone.
    Whatever the Secretary of State said or did not say during  the  course
    of his radio broadcast, it could not possibly  affect  the  outcome  of
    this appeal, since it is only the Tribunal who are able to  decide  the
    question of proportionality.  The facts are the  circumstances  of  the
    family, not the views expressed by a member of the Executive. Any  view
    expressed by the Secretary of State could not affect the  Adjudicator's
    decision, he said, because proportionality was for the Adjudicator.

35.  In Rudi, Mr Justice Ouseley was there dealing with a minor who  arrived
    in the United Kingdom with a cousin in August 1999 and  claimed  asylum
    on 10th August, 1999, aged 16.  The appellant in that  appeal  was  not
    granted ELR until his eighteenth birthday.  His application for  asylum
    was refused on 19th July, 2000, and his appeal dismissed on 9th  April,
    2001.  He asked to be considered under the Family ILR Exercise because,
    as the Exercise was subsequently amended in August 2004, it would apply
    to somebody who had a dependant under the  age  of  18  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 2nd October, 2000, or on  24th  October,  2003.   Qualifying
    dependency could be shown by dependency, living as  part  of  a  family
    unit, on either of those two dates.  It was argued that  the  appellant
    would have been eligible for a grant of leave if he had arrived in  the
    United Kingdom with his parents or one of them and had been part  of  a
    family unit on 24th October, 2003.  It was argued by the applicants  in
    the Rudi case that the operation of terms of  the  Exercise  so  as  to
    exclude them from being  eligible  was  unlawful,  because  this  would
    offend the principle that  like  cases  should  be  treated  alike;  no
    rational  distinction  could  be  drawn  between  the  accompanied  and
    unaccompanied child, when deciding to whom to grant indefinite leave to
    remain.

 36. Mr. Kovats relied  on  the  reasoning  at  paragraph  79  of  the  Rudi
    judgment. He submitted that the Adjudicator made no error of  law.  The
    Adjudicator had correctly decided that it was for  him  to  decide  the
    question of proportionality and his decision was correct.

37.  Finally Mr Kovats relied on the Tribunal's decision in TK  (Immigration
    Rules - policy - (Article 8) Jamaica [2007] UKIAT 00025.  In that  case
    it was contended that the Adjudicator,  who  dismissed  an  appellant's
    appeal, had failed, when considering an Article 8  claim,  to  consider
    that the appellants fell within the "spirit"  of  paragraph  297(1)  of
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395, in that although the
    appellant's mother was not settled in the United Kingdom at the date of
    the Secretary of State's decision, she was "residing in the UK and  not
    intending to return to Jamaica".  The Tribunal noted  the  decision  of
    Collins J in R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte  Lekstaka  [2005]
    EWHC 745 (Admin) and  in  paragraph  18  noted  Shkembi.  The  Tribunal
    concluded that the issue of whether a person falls within the spirit of
    the Immigration Rules or the rationale of a Home  Office  policy  is  a
    matter which is capable of affecting the determination of  whether,  in
    all the circumstances, the immigration decision, if implemented,  would
    involve a disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights.   There,
    Mr Kovats submitted, factual circumstances were being compared with the
    Immigration  Rules.   Here,  in  this  current  appeal,  there  is   no
    comparison between the appellant's circumstances (the  facts)  and  the
    Immigration Rules or policy, but instead between  the  policy  and  the
    Secretary of State's views on the policy.  TK did  not,  he  submitted,
    assist.  He invited us to dismiss the appeal.

38.  Responding, Mr Nathan reminded us that it was a requirement, under  the
    Procedure Rules and that of  Ladd  and  Marshall  principles  that  the
    statement of Mr Ponsford and its exhibits  should  not  be  allowed  in
    evidence.  He accepted that following Huang and Others v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11, it was for  the  Tribunal
    to assess the question of  proportionality.   But,  he  submitted,  the
    views of the Secretary of State must be  relevant.   The  Secretary  of
    State has an important role in considering what  is  and  what  is  not
    proportionate.

39.  We reserved our determination.

Determination

40.  At the bottom of the second page of Mr. Nathan's skeleton argument,  it
    is said that the Court of Appeal remitted the appellant's appeal to the
    Tribunal for further hearing on the merits. This is not correct. It was
    accepted before us that the issue before us is whether the  Adjudicator
    materially erred in law in his determination.

41.  Mr. Nathan contends that the Adjudicator did err in law,  in  that,  he
    failed to consider the Family ILR Exercise, together with  the  "gloss"
    put upon it by the then Secretary of State in the  radio  broadcast  of
    27th October, 2003, when conducting the balancing  exercise in relation
    to proportionality under Article 8(2).  Mr. Nathan's skeleton  argument
    dated 24 January 2007 (paragraph 8) refers to this radio  broadcast  as
    providing an "insight" into the  rationale  for  the  policy  that  the
    removal of children who fell within the terms of the  policy  would  be
    disproportionate. Mr. Nathan's skeleton argument specifically makes the
    point that it is not sought to argue on the appellant's behalf that the
    radio broadcast amends the  Family  ILR  Exercise,  as  such.   So,  we
    stress, the argument  for  the  appellant  is  simply  that  the  radio
    broadcast provides a "gloss on the policy", or  an  "insight  into  the
    rationale for the policy",  so  that,  although  the  policy  does  not
    strictly apply to the appellant, it furnishes through its  rationale  a
    stronger Article 8  claim.  It  is  contended  that  the  Adjudicator's
    failure to consider such rationale for the policy, as  may  be  gleaned
    from the radio broadcast of 27th October, 2003, when carrying  out  the
    balancing exercise in relation to the appellant's Article 8 claim,  was
    an error of law.  The appellant's case is that the error  is  material,
    given the circumstances of this case, in particular, the fact that  the
    Adjudicator considered that the circumstances warranted the making of a
    recommendation to the Secretary of State to defer removal  until  after
    31st July, 2004 (the determination was signed on 22nd  February,  2004)
    so as to enable the appellant's son to complete his sixth form  studies
    in Bradford. On this basis, Mr. Nathan asked us  to  allow  the  appeal
    outright. Alternatively, if we concluded that there  was  an  error  of
    law, Mr. Nathan asked  us  to  proceed  immediately  to  determine  the
    substantive Article 8 claim on the basis  of  the  evidence  which  was
    before  the  Adjudicator,  together  with  the   statement   from   the
    appellant's son dated 5th September 2006. If we were not  with  him  on
    this option either, then he asked us to adjourn the hearing  part-heard
    for a second-stage reconsideration of the Article 8 claim.

42.  The significance of Mr. Nathan's objection to Mr. Ponsford's  statement
    and Exhibits 1 and 2 and of Mr. Nathan's reminder to us that  the  Rudi
    judgment was delivered after this case was heard, is that he wishes  us
    to discern what we can in terms of the rationale  for  the  Family  ILR
    Exercise from one document only - i.e.  the  transcript  of  the  radio
    broadcast of 27th October, 2003. He does not wish us to decide what the
    rationale for the policy is from Mr. Ponsford's statement or Exhibits 1
    and 2, nor from the summary of a similar statement from Mr. Ponsford in
    the Rudi judgment, or from the summary of the radio broadcast  of  24th
    October, 2003 in the Rudi judgment.

43.  We therefore will  first  deal  with  Mr.  Nathan's  objection  to  the
    admissibility of Mr. Ponsford's statement and Exhibits  1  and  2.  The
    objection is made on the basis that Rule 32 of the Procedure Rules  and
    paragraph 14A.2of the Practice Directions have not been complied  with,
    i.e. that no formal application complying with Rule 32  has  been  made
    for Mr. Ponsford's and the Exhibits thereto to be admitted in  evidence
    and that no explanation has been given for the failure to produce  this
    evidence on any previous occasion when the appeal was considered.

44.  We are wholly unimpressed by Mr. Nathan's objection  to  the  admission
    of Mr. Ponsford's statement and Exhibits 1  and  2  for  the  following
    reasons:

     (a) It is apparent that Mr. Ponsford's statement and Exhibits 1  and  2
        explain the rationale for the Family ILR Exercise. Whilst  we  note
        that paragraph 12 of the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  Shkembi
        refers to the extracts from the radio broadcast  of  27th  October,
        2003, to which the Court was referred as:

     "......the gloss, if that is what it can properly be described  as,  on
             the concession........"

         it is also apparent from paragraphs 4 and 15 of the  judgment  that
        Mr. Nathan's argument before the Court of  Appeal  related  to  the
        rationale for the policy, not merely a  "gloss",  such  as  may  be
        gleaned from one or two sentences in one radio broadcast, the  main
        topic of which concerned  an  entirely  different  subject  matter.
        Given that the main argument for the appellant before the Court  of
        Appeal was that he should have been allowed by the Tribunal to rely
        on the rationale for the  Family  ILR  Exercise,  albeit  that  the
        argument at that stage was that the rationale for the policy  could
        be ascertained from the radio broadcast of 27th October,  2003,  we
        would need very strong  reasons  to  exclude  evidence  as  to  the
        rationale for the policy, even if that evidence was to be found  in
        documents other than the radio  broadcast  of  27th  October,  2003
        (subject, of course, to the requirement of procedural fairness , in
        that, the appellant should have an opportunity  to  deal  with  any
        evidence relied upon).

     (b) Mr. Nathan accepted that, by their letter of 23rd  April,  2007  to
        the  Treasury  Solicitor,  the  appellant's  solicitors   requested
        questions to be put to Mr. Ponsford. However,  Mr.  Nathan  pointed
        out that the  letter  also  refers  to  Rule  32,  albeit  that  it
        incorrectly refers to the Civil Procedure Rules. However, we  noted
        that a previous hearing before the Tribunal on 29th  January,  2007
        was adjourned in order to enable the appellant's representatives to
        put questions to Mr. Ponsford. In these circumstances,  we  do  not
        consider that the bare mention of Rule 32 in  the  letter  of  23rd
        April, 2007 is sufficient to preserve to the appellant the right to
        object to the admission of the documents at this  late  stage,  if,
        indeed, it is being suggested that the appellant's  representatives
        had reserved to themselves the right to object on a later  date  to
        the admission of the documents. To the contrary, we are of the view
        that  it  is  evident  from  the  letter   that   the   appellant's
        representatives were aware that Rule 32 was relevant and  yet  they
        did  not  take  the  opportunity  to  register  any  objection.  If
        anything, they appear to be suggesting to the  Respondent  that  it
        would be appropriate to make an application under Rule 32.

     (c) Mr. Nathan considered that the guidance in  ex  parte  Ravichandran
        and Jeyeanthan was not relevant. He relied on Ladd v Marshall.   In
        our view, the guidance in  ex  parte  Ravichandran  and  Jeyeanthan
        applies, since the issue before us is whether the Respondent should
        be allowed to  rely  on  Mr.  Ponsford's  statement  and  Exhibits,
        notwithstanding the failure to comply with a  procedural  rule.  We
        have noted the fact that Mr. Kovats was  in  difficulty  giving  an
        explanation for the failure to comply with Rule 32, but asked us to
        bear in mind the history of the proceedings in this  case  and  the
        way in which the arguments have developed  since  the  IAT  refused
        permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal by its  decision  dated
        24th February, 2005. We have some considerable sympathy  with  this
        argument. Mr. Nathan submitted that the prejudice in this case  was
        the fact that the Respondent had failed to  produce  this  evidence
        before the hearing which took place before the Court of Appeal.  He
        says that the arguments as set  out  in  Mr.  Ponsford's  statement
        should have been raised before the Court  of  Appeal,  because  Mr.
        Ponsford's statement might have been determinative; the appellant's
        case might have been resolved much sooner.  However,  it  is  clear
        from paragraph 16 of the Court of Appeal's judgment in Shkembi that
        the Court considered that the appellant should  make  his  argument
        before  the  Tribunal  which  Parliament  had  provided   for   the
        determination of the appeal, rather  than  the  Court  taking  upon
        itself any other role than that  the  Court  considered  it  should
        take. Accordingly, we  do  not  agree  with  Mr.  Nathan  that  the
        appellant's case might have been resolved a  long  time  before  it
        came before us, if Mr. Ponsford's statement had been served sooner.
        Furthermore, it is plain to us  that  there  has  been  substantial
        compliance with Rule 32. Notwithstanding the absence  of  a  formal
        application, the appellant and his representatives could  not  have
        been any misapprehension as to whether the Respondent  intended  to
        rely on these documents. Mr. Ponsford's  statement  was  served  as
        long ago as September, 2006.  The hearing on 29th January, 2007 was
        adjourned specifically to enable the appellant's representatives to
        put questions to Mr. Ponsford. The nature of  the  evidence  to  be
        relied upon is plain to all, and has been for some time. We  cannot
        see that there is any prejudice to the admission of the  documents,
        given especially the fact that Mr. Nathan  confirmed  that  he  was
        ready to deal with the documents and  that,  in  that  respect,  he
        would not be prejudiced by the late admission of the documents.

45.  In all of the  circumstances,  we  concluded  that  Mr.  Nathan's  late
    objection to Mr. Ponsford's statement and Exhibits 1 and 2 is devoid of
    any merit. We exercise our  discretion  under  Rule  32  to  admit  the
    documents. In any event, we are entitled to rely  on  the  judgment  in
    Rudi, in particular, the  summary  of  a  similar  statement  from  Mr.
    Ponsford and the radio broadcast of 24th October,  2003.  The  judgment
    sets out, in all material respects, the evidence which Mr. Nathan takes
    objection to. There is reference at paragraph 18 of the judgment  of  a
    statement from Mr. Ponsford,  which  makes  the  main  points  made  in
    greater detail in the statement before us. The press release  which  is
    the subject of Exhibit 1 to  Mr.  Ponsford's  statement  before  us  is
    summarised at  paragraph  7  of  the  judgment.   The  "World  at  One"
    interview of 24th October, 2003, the transcript of which is the subject
    of Exhibit 2 before us, is summarised at paragraph 15 of the  judgment.
    We know of no authority which would preclude us  from  relying  on  the
    judgment  in  Rudi.   Indeed,   the   letter   from   the   appellant's
    representatives dated 23rd April,  2007  gave  the  Treasury  Solicitor
    notice of their intention to include this  judgment  in  the  case  law
    bundle. Mr. Nathan asked us to note that the  appellant's  appeal  pre-
    dates Rudi. However, that is not a reason for the Tribunal not to  take
    notice of the judgment in Rudi.

46.  Since this case has had a protracted history, we are prepared  to  draw
    our conclusions  about  the  rationale  for  the  Family  ILR  Exercise
    entirely from the summary of the  evidence  in  the  judgment  in  Rudi
    without taking into account Mr. Ponsford's statement and Exhibits 1 and
    2. Even on that basis, this appeal fails,  as  we  shall  explain.  The
    summary of the relevant evidence in the judgment  in  Rudi  as  to  the
    rationale for the  Family  ILR  Exercise  shows  that  the  policy  was
    intended, inter alia,  to  relieve  the  administrative  and  financial
    burden on the  Home  Office  caused  by  the  rapid  growth  in  asylum
    applications and a backlog in the removal of  those  whose  claims  had
    failed. Paragraphs 19 to 21 of the judgment in  Rudi  (which  we  quote
    below)  explain  the  administrative  (or   practical)   and   economic
    objectives of the policy, whilst paragraph 22  of  the  judgment  (also
    quoted below) explains the social considerations  taken  into  account.
    The exercise was directed at families with children for reasons set out
    at in the following paragraphs of the Rudi judgment:


    19.  (1)  Public money could be saved directly by enabling the families
         concerned, who were largely supported at  public  expense  thorough
         local authorities or NASS, to find  work  and  support  themselves;
         savings "could" amount to �15m per 1000 families.


    20.  (2)   Removal of families placed a particularly  heavy  burden  on
         the  HO,  administratively  and  financially,  and  was   generally
         considerably more difficult to achieve  than  in  the  case  of  an
         individual. Individual family  members,  who  had  previously  been
         considered as dependant on another's claim, would often later  make
         a separate claim, sometimes on the brink of removal. Removals would
         be aborted. The new one-stop appeal system would put an end to that
         for the future but serial claims and appeals had been a substantial
         hurdle to the removal of family groups with pre-October 2000 asylum
         claims


    21.  (3)   Pre-removal  detention  of  families  created  problems.  If
         detained close to removal, there might  be  insufficient  time  for
         them to take advice; if sufficient time were given, that could lead
         to unduly long  periods  of  detention  for  children.  There  were
         difficulties in finding detention facilities for families.


    22.  (4)   Compassionate reasons applied to families because some would
         have started to develop  ties  to  communities  and  children  were
         likely to have settled at school.  Mr  Ponsford  was  at  pains  to
         explain that the Exercise was not intended to cover  all  those  in
         the backlog who might have  a  compassionate  claim.  Unaccompanied
         children, when adults, could make a claim on compassionate grounds.



47.  It is clear that only those  families  which  had  applied  for  asylum
    prior to 2nd October, 2000 were be eligible for consideration under the
    Family ILR Exercise. Paragraphs 12  to  14  and  paragraph  28  of  the
    judgment explain the reason for this  cut-off  date.  These  paragraphs
    read:

    12.  The original Exercise was introduced  by  the  Home  Secretary  as
         "Clearing the Decks for Tough New Asylum Measures,"   in the  Press
         Notice of 24 October 2000 which with a broadcast interview  contain
         the announcement and rationale for the Exercise. It said:


         "Prior to the introduction of tough new  rules  to  build  on  the
             tremendous progress already made  in  halving  the  number  of
             asylum seekers entering Britain this  year,  longstanding  and
             highly expensive family asylum claims  will  be  eligible  for
             leave to  remain,  Home  Secretary  David  Blunkett  announced
             today.


         Up to fifteen thousand families who sought asylum in the  UK  more
             than three years ago, the majority of whom are being supported
             by the taxpayer, will be considered for permission to live and
             work here.


         The move comes ahead of  the  final  stages  of  the  Government's
             reforms of the asylum system which will ensure it is not  open
             to delays and abuse in the future."


    13.  The Notice then quoted Mr Blunkett who, having spoken of "enormous
         improvements to the asylum system" and  "the  difficult  decisions"
         which he had "not been afraid to take", continued:


         "However, the legacy of the historic inadequacies of the system is
             still with     us.  This does  not  manifest  itself  only  in
             statistics  but  in  the  lives  of  real  families   in   our
             communities.  As the Chief Inspector of Schools  said  earlier
             this  week,  children   from   asylum-seeking   families   are
             especially motivated and doing well in schools.  MPs from  all
             sides appeal to me for such families to be allowed to stay  in
             the UK every week.


         "Granting this group indefinite leave to remain and enabling  them
             to work is the most cost-effective way  of  dealing  with  the
             situation and will save taxpayer's money on support and  legal
             aid.  These are difficult decisions but I do not believe it is
             the best use of  taxpayer's  money  to  take  these  expensive
             longstanding individual appeals through the courts.  I want to
             ensure our relentless focus  is  on  steadily  increasing  the
             proportion of failed asylum seekers removed from now on."


    14.  Various statistics were cited in the Notice which are of relevance
         to the arguments. 12000 families who applied for  asylum  before  2
         October 2000 were  still  being  supported  by  the  HO,  the  vast
         majority of whom were thought likely to qualify.  Savings  of  �15m
         "would" be made for every 1000 families  moved  off  support,  plus
         legal aid savings. Up to 3000 self-supporting families  might  also
         qualify.  ILR  meant  that  they  could  live  and   work   without
         restrictions.


    28.  Another official made a further brief statement  to  confirm  that
         the relevant parts of Mr Waite's skeleton  argument  for  the  SSHD
         represented the SSHD's position, and were not simply the product of
         Mr Waite's advocacy. They responded to criticisms in the Claimant's
         skeleton argument of the rationale set out above. He elaborated the
         problem of family removals where a family member had claimed before
         2 October 2000. All members of a family could make an asylum  claim
         at any time and  hold  up  the  removals  of  family  members;  the
         certification of further asylum claims by those already  considered
         as dependants was not introduced until 2000. Most of  the   members
         of those families eligible for the Exercise were in a position also
         to make further individual  human rights claims, covering the  same
         ground perhaps as in the asylum appeal or in  a  dependant's  case.
         Delay increased the difficulty of removal.

48.  We draw particular attention to paragraph 28 of the judgment. When  all
    of this evidence is considered, it is clear that the reason for the 2nd
    October,  2000  cut-off  date  is  because,  in  the  case  of   asylum
    applications lodged prior to that date, applicants were  able  to  make
    further individual human rights claims. That is the date on  which  the
    HRA 1998 came into force, as well  as  the  one-stop  appeal  procedure
    introduced by the Immigration and Asylum Appeals Act,  1999  (the  1999
    Act).  The aim of the one-stop procedure is to make applicants give all
    reasons for wanting to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  as  early
    as possible. Individuals who had lodged asylum  applications  prior  to
    2nd October, 2000 were entitled to lodge human rights claims after they
    had exhausted their rights of  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  their
    asylum claims. This made this category of applicants considerably  more
    difficult to remove, as, in many cases, it was necessary to continue to
    maintain them at public expense whilst they pursued (if they wished to)
    further human rights  claims  and  appeals  on  human  rights  grounds.
    Accordingly, the cut-off  date  of  2nd  October,  2000  was,  and  is,
    inextricably  linked  with  the  Executive's  aim  of   achieving   the
    administrative and economic objectives of the policy. It  is  important
    to bear this in mind because individuals who (like the appellant in the
    instant case) lodged their asylum claims on or after the  cut-off  date
    came under a different statutory regime (the one-stop  procedure).  Any
    argument on their behalf that the Secretary of  State's  rationale  for
    the Family ILR Exercise is relevant when considering  their  Article  8
    claims  (in  particular,  when  considering  proportionality)  must  be
    considered in the  light  of  the  fact  that  the  administrative  and
    financial objectives of the policy intended  by  the  Executive  to  be
    achieved as exemplified by the imposition of the cut-off  date  of  2nd
    October, 2000 is based on  the  different  regimes  applicable  to  the
    appeals of those who lodged their asylum claims before the cut-off date
    and those who lodged their asylum claims on or after the cut-off dates,
    regardless of any consideration as to how  close  to  the  cut-off  any
    asylum claims of the latter group were actually lodged.

49.   Mr.  Nathan  contended  that  the  then  Secretary  of  State's  radio
    broadcast interview of 27th October, 2003 provides  a  "gloss"  on  the
    rationale for the Family ILR  Exercise.  What  is  meant  by  the  term
    "gloss" appears from the following extract  of  Mr.  Nathan's  skeleton
    argument (paragraph 11):

         "As to the suggestion that the written policy was never amended  to
             reflect Mr Blunkett's comments on  'Start  the  Week'  this  is
             correct but it is submitted irrelevant.  Those  comments  could
             not have justified any  positive  change  to  the  policy.   Mr
             Blunkett indicated his then belief, as the member of  both  the
             legislative and executive best positioned to  pass  comment  on
             such matters, that  at  that  time  he  believed  it  would  be
             disproportionate to uproot children who had  been  studying  in
             schools  in  the  UK  for  three  years  or  more.   The  usual
             consequence of such disproportionate action would have been for
             his  department  to  grant   a   family   in   that   situation
             discretionary leave to remain." [Our emphasis]

50.  It is contended that, due this "gloss" on the Family ILR Exercise,  the
    Family ILR Exercise was  therefore  a  relevant  consideration  in  the
    balancing exercise under Article 8 in that it strengthens his Article 8
    claim and that, by failing to take it  into  account,  the  Immigration
    Judge erred in law.  It is contended that, having regard  to  the  fact
    that the  Adjudicator  made  a  recommendation,  was  material  to  the
    Adjudicator's decision on proportionality.

51.  We will now set out relevant extracts from the radio broadcast of  27th
    October, 2003. The then Secretary  of  State  was  interviewed  on  the
    "Start the Week" programme on Radio 4 on 27th October, 2003.  With  the
    Secretary of State, was the former United States' Secretary  of  State,
    Madeleine Albright, a documentary maker [and Chairman  of  the  Medical
    Foundation], Mr Rex  Bloomstein,  author,  Francis  Spufford,  and  the
    interviewer, Andrew Marr.  The programme was concerned  with  diversity
    and faith.  The interviewer said to the then Secretary of State:-

        "And these asylum seekers who are going to be allowed to stay.  The
        crucial thing from your point of view  is  that  they  become,  and
        their children become, absolutely  British  citizens,  who  feel  a
        sense of  belonging  and  full  contribution,  and  indeed,  you're
        encouraging migration to this country."

     to which the then Secretary of State replied:-

        "I am encouraging legal migration.  I've expanded the  work  permit
        system to 200,000 which is now the greatest in  the  world.   We're
        encouraging through the gateway with the UN, people to come who are
        facing death and torture, rather than being trafficked by organised
        criminals.  But we're also trying to sort out what's happening here
        and the signals we send.


        So what we announced on Friday, was about saying these  people  are
        already embedded in  our  community  and,  it  would  be  not  only
        disproportionate but wrong to uproot those children from school and
        from the community.  And I took that difficult decision  because  I
        think we need to draw a line under that and we need  to  deal  with
        the future, not the past." [our emphasis]

52.  Reading the transcript as a whole, it is  clear  that  the  people  the
    then Secretary of State was talking about were the people who qualified
    under the Family ILR Exercise; he was very clearly not referring to all
    failed asylum seekers  who  happened  to  have  dependant  children  at
    school. When he spoke of it being "wrong to uproot those children  from
    school and from community", the then Secretary  of  State  was  talking
    about the children of people who qualified under the Exercise which  he
    had announced.  He was not suggesting, and it would  be  wrong  in  our
    view to interpret his words as if he were suggesting, that it would  be
    disproportionate to remove any immigrant family which had  children  at
    school.  We do not consider that the then Secretary of  State  intended
    to set out his entire rationale for the Family  ILR  Exercise  in  this
    particular radio broadcast interview.

53.  The then Secretary of State emphasised that a  line  had  to  be  drawn
    somewhere and he had decided that it should  be  drawn  in  respect  of
    those individuals who had applied for asylum before 2nd  October,  2000
    and who satisfied the other eligibility  criteria.  The  imposition  of
    this cut-off date emphasises the administrative and economic objectives
    of the policy. The then Secretary of State  was  not  saying  that  the
    social consideration - of  not  "uprooting  those  with  children  from
    school and from the community" - was the rationale for  the  policy  so
    that, in his  (the  then  Secretary  of  State's)  view,  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove any  immigrant  family  whose  children  had
    attended school in the United Kingdom for 3 years or more.

54.  Mr. Nathan contended that there is a tension between  the  judgment  in
    Shkembi and the judgment in Mongoto. In his submission,  the  judgement
    of Ouseley J on Rudi is inconsistent with the judgments in Mongoto  and
    Shkembi. The argument  that  Shkembi  is  inconsistent  with  Rudi  was
    considered by the Tribunal in KL (Article 8-Lekstaka-delay-near-misses)
    Serbia & Montenegro [2007] UKAIT  00044.  Unfortunately,  we  were  not
    referred to this case by either party. In KL,  the  Tribunal  dealt  at
    some length with the "near-miss" argument. The relevant paragraphs  are
    paragraphs 44 to 47 of the determination, which we now quote:

     "44.     Before proceeding further it will be helpful to  set  out  the
        main propositions regarding near-misses that can be extracted  from
        case law. It is  apparent  from  higher  court  decisions,  SB  [SB
        (Bangladesh) v. SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 28] in particular, that  there
        have been cases that have been taken  by  practitioners  to  assert
        opposing positions. In particular the case of R  (Shkembi)  v  SSHD
        [2005] EWCA Civ 1592 and that of Mongoto v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 751
        have been contrasted. In the former it was held in  effect  that  a
        policy which did  not  strictly  apply  could  supply  through  its
        rationale an exceptional case for an immigration judge to  consider
        on appeal. In the latter it was held, in  relation  to  the  Family
        Exercise policy, that where there was a  lawful  policy  to  assist
        limited categories of entrants, it would be  quite  wrong  for  the
        courts to build expectations approaching enforceable rights for the
        benefit of those to whom the policy did not apply. In Rudi  Ouseley
        J appeared to align himself with the Mongoto approach,  stating  at
        [79]:

         "An Immigration Judge would have to approach the  Family  Exercise
            on the footing that the Claimant fell outside it and  that  its
            scope was lawful. Much of the rationale  could  apply  to  many
            whose lives had developed over the prolonged periods for  which
            they remain in this country either without a decision or before
            removal action. But the approach in Mongoto to those  who  fall
            outside the scope of a particular policy to my  mind  precludes
            an Immigration Judge in  effect  expanding  it  to  cover  near
            misses or those to whom aspects of the rationale could apply. I
            accept that there may be cases in which  the  rationale  for  a
            policy may inform the judge of the significance of a particular
            point; there may be lacunae, but that is  very  different  from
            treating a policy as the basis  for  extension  by  analogy  or
            comparison. That is not what Shkembi decided. There  is  not  a
            near miss penumbra around every policy providing scope for  its
            extension in practice to that which it did not cover, and  this
            case is not a near miss but wholly outside  the  Exercise.  The
            rationale for the exercise does  not  apply  to  the  Claimant,
            although some of the points made about its purpose could  apply
            to any who have stayed for a while in this country after  their
            appeals on all grounds have been dismissed."

     45. In SB Waller LJ stated:

         "30. In paragraph [64], the Tribunal first said that, applying the
            approach of Collins J in Lekstaka, the fact that the  appellant
            "only just failed to qualify for admission" was a  fact  to  be
            counted in her favour. They were right to take  that  view.  We
            agree with the view expressed  by  Collins  J  in  Lekstaka  in
            paragraph 38 that:
                   "...  one  is  entitled  to  see,  whether  in  all  the
                 circumstances, this case falls within  the  spirit  of  the
                 Rules or the policies, even if not within the letter."
         That seems to us to be the right approach. As Simon Brown LJ  said
            in Ekinci at paragraph 16:
                  "Even if strictly he fails to qualify  so  that  the  ECO
                 would be prohibited from granting leave to enter, given the
                 obvious Article 8 dimension to the case the ECO would refer
                 the application to an Immigration Officer  who  undoubtedly
                 has a discretion to admit someone outside the Rules. And if
                 entry were to be refused at that stage, then indeed a s. 59
                 right of appeal would certainly arise in which,  by  virtue
                 of s.  65(3),  (4)  and  (5)  the  adjudicator  would  have
                 jurisdiction to consider the appellant's human rights."
         31.  The ultimate test is, of course, that set out in paragraph 59
                 of the  judgment  of  the  Court  given  by  Laws  L.J.  in
                 Huang...":
     46. It seems to us that the above  cases  are  not  in  conflict.  (The
        reliance  at  [31]  of  SB  on  the  test  of   truly   exceptional
        circumstances, cannot survive Huang [2007] UKHL 11, but we  do  not
        see that this makes any  substantive  difference  to  the  guidance
        given by SB in any other respect: we are fortified in that view  by
        what Carnwath LJ states at [16] of AG (Eritrea)). None of  them  is
        authority  for  the  proposition  that  the  immigration  rules  or
        policies can be rewritten by judges. Integral to each  of  them  is
        the distinction between (1) cases in which the rationale for a rule
        or policy applies fully to the case in question although  the  rule
        or policy does not technically cover it; and (2) cases in which the
        rationale for such a rule or policy does not apply or applies  only
        loosely. Even if a case comes within (1)  all  three  higher  court
        decisions recognise that at most a "near miss" is  a  factor  which
        has to be taken into account. Just because a case comes within  (1)
        does not mean that that a decision amounts  to  a  disproportionate
        interference with legitimate public  ends.  (If  we  are  wrong  to
        consider that Ouseley J's reasoning can be reconciled with Court of
        Appeal authority, then, of course, the latter must prevail, but  we
        see nothing said in SB  or  any  other  case  which  takes  matters
        further than Ouseley J envisages in Rudi).

     47. Whilst dealing with case law we should make clear  our  view  about
        the continuing value of   the  recent  reported  Tribunal  case  of
        TK(Immigration Rules-policy-Article 8) Jamaica [2007] UKAIT  00025.
        Although the reliance placed by the Tribunal in TK  on  the  "truly
        exceptional circumstances" test  has  since  been  shown  by  Huang
        [2007] UKHL 11 to be wrong, its guidance on  "near-misses"  remains
        valid. Even when an individual's circumstances fall squarely within
        the rationale of a relevant  immigration  rule  or  policy  and  so
        accord with its "spirit" albeit not its  "letter",  a  "near  miss"
        does not of itself mean that an expulsion  decision  constitutes  a
        disproportionate interference with an appellant's right to  respect
        for private or family life. "

55.  The Tribunal in KL did not agree that the judgment  in  Shkembi  is  in
    conflict with the judgment in Rudi. That was an argument advanced before
    us. We see no reason to take a different view from  that  taken  by  the
    Tribunal in KL. As we have said above, the radio broadcast interview  of
    27th October, 2003 was not a "gloss" on the policy as announced.  It  is
    not the case that the then  Secretary  of  State  was  saying  that  the
    rationale for the policy was that it would be disproportionate to uproot
    children who and been studying in schools  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    three  years  or  more.  The  policy  was  introduced  to  achieve   the
    administrative and economic objectives explained above,  taking  account
    of the social considerations  mentioned.  All  of  these  considerations
    collectively comprise the rationale for the policy.

56.  Given that the administrative and economic objectives  explained  above
    for the policy are predicated on the  fact  that  the  statutory  regime
    applicable to the appeals of those who made their asylum  claims  before
    the cut-off date is different from the statutory  regime  applicable  to
    the appeals of those who made their asylum claims on or after  the  cut-
    off date, it cannot be said, on any reasonable view, that the  rationale
    for the policy applies to those who lodged their  asylum  claims  on  or
    after the cut-off date, or that those who lodged their asylum claims  on
    or after the cut-off date come within the "spirit" of the policy even if
    they do not fall within the letter.

57.  Accordingly, we decide this case on the basis that,  given  the  entire
    rationale for the Family ILR Exercise (the administrative and  economic
    objectives  taken  in  conjunction  with  the   social   considerations
    explained), the policy is not relevant  to  any  consideration  of  the
    Article 8 claims of those who claim asylum  on  or  after  the  cut-off
    date.  The imposition of the cut-off date may well result in anomalies,
    in that, the policy  itself  as  well  as  the  press  releases,  radio
    broadcasts and statements we have referred to  above  refer  to  social
    considerations, such as links  which  children  and  families  who  may
    potentially qualify may have developed with the community and education
    which the children might be receiving, which may well apply in  varying
    degrees to those who claimed asylum  on  or  after  the  cut-off  date.
    However, the mere fact that there may be such anomalies does  not  mean
    that the policy is a relevant consideration in deciding the  Article  8
    claims for those who claimed asylum on or after the cut-off  date,  nor
    can it be said that, on the basis of such social considerations  alone,
    an individual who lodged his asylum claim on or after the cut-off  date
    has "nearly-missed" being eligible under the Family ILR Exercise.  This
    is because (as we have said) the cut-off date was  inextricably  linked
    with the achievement of the administrative and economic  objectives  of
    the policy. Accordingly, any social considerations which an  individual
    who lodged his asylum claim on or after the cut-off date may share with
    someone who lodged his asylum claim before the  cut-off  do  not  bring
    that individual within the ambit of the near-miss argument.

58.  Accordingly, the Adjudicator did not err in law when  he  decided  that
    the policy was not relevant to the appellant's Article 8 claim. We have
    reached the same conclusion, albeit for different reasons. He  did  not
    err in law by failing (when determining  proportionality)  to  consider
    what he had been told by Mr. Nathan about the then Secretary of State's
    radio interview on 27th October, 2003, because (as we  have  said)  the
    radio broadcast interview was not a "gloss" on the policy  and  because
    the policy was not relevant to his balancing exercise, which he himself
    had to conduct.

59.  Mr. Nathan  relied  on  the  fact  that  the  Adjudicator  had  made  a
    recommendation that removal of the appellant and his family be deferred
    until after 31st July, 2004.  Although is it clear that  he  sought  to
    rely  on  this  fact  in  conjunction  with  the  contention  that  the
    Adjudicator had erred in law by failing to consider the remarks of  the
    then Secretary of State in  the  radio  broadcast  interview,  we  will
    nevertheless consider the argument that  some  significance  is  to  be
    attached to the Adjudicator's recommendation. In  this  regard,  it  is
    necessary for consider the Adjudicator's determination of the Article 8
    claim as a whole.

60.   It  is  clear  from  the  second  sentence  of  paragraph  39  of  the
    determination that the Adjudicator made his own decision on Article  8;
    he (correctly) did not apply the Tribunal's  guidance  in  M  (Croatia)
    [2004] UKIAT 00024. He gave careful consideration to the  circumstances
    of the appellant and his family. However, he recorded that one  of  the
    difficulties for the appellant in the appeal was that there was  not  a
    great deal of evidence before him (the Adjudicator) as to the  family's
    circumstances. He noted that the family  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since November, 2000 and lived together as a  family  in  Bradford;  he
    accepted that the appellant's  son  had  made  friends  in  the  United
    Kingdom and was in a sixth form school.  He stated that:

         "Beyond that however there is no other  evidence  of  the  family's
        situation in the United Kingdom".

61.  At paragraph 44 of the determination, the Adjudicator  stated  that  he
    accepted that to disrupt the education of the  appellant's  son  was  a
    matter which he should take into account  as  removal  would  interfere
    with his private life and in particular with his  education.  He  noted
    that the evidence was that the appellant's son speaks good English  and
    is in sixth form, but (again) noted that there was no  evidence  as  to
    how long the appellant's son had been receiving education  in  England.
    The Adjudicator assumed that, at best, this would have been  for  three
    years, since the family's arrival in the United Kingdom. He regarded it
    as significant  that  the  appellant's  son  was  in  sixth  form.  The
    Adjudicator presumed  that  the  appellant's  son  would  conclude  his
    secondary education in July that year [2004]. He noted that  there  was
    no evidence as to what the appellant's son intended to do after August,
    2004, and whether he wished at that stage  to  seek  employment  or  to
    continue with his education.  At paragraph 45, the Adjudicator recorded
    that there were no other factors put forward by Mr. Nathan, that he had
    considered the position of the family and that of the  appellant's  son
    carefully. He concluded that removal would not be disproportionate.

62.  Given the paucity of evidence before the Adjudicator as to  the  nature
    and quality of private life, not only of the appellant, but also of his
    family members including his son, it is plain that  his  recommendation
    to the Secretary of State for removal to be deferred until  after  31st
    July, 2004 was made, not because he  considered  that  there  were  any
    private life elements which were sufficiently strong as  to  warrant  a
    recommendation, but simply in order to enable the  appellant's  son  to
    complete his secondary education before being required to leave.  It is
    plain that his primary decision was that  the  appellant  and  his  son
    should be required to leave, but that such removal should  be  deferred
    for a very short time. We do not consider that any significance  is  to
    be attached to the fact of the recommendation such  that  it  can  said
    that there is any error of law  in  the  Adjudicator's  reasoning  with
    regard to the Article 8 claim.

63.  We have concluded that for all these reasons the  Adjudicator  did  not
    err in law in  his  determination  which  will  stand.  The  appeal  is
    dismissed.





Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley
Signed: 16th August 2007

