

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Quaidoo (new matter: procedure/process) [2018] UKUT 00087(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9th January 2018                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before


                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between
                           BENJAMIN ASUAH QUAIDOO
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Yerokun of A & A Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


1. If, at a hearing, the Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  a  matter  which  an
appellant wishes to raise is a new matter, which by reason of section  85(5)
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the  Tribunal  may  not
consider unless the Secretary of State has given consent, and, in  pursuance
of the Secretary of State's Guidance,  her  representative  applies  for  an
adjournment for further time to consider whether to give such consent,  then
it will generally be appropriate to grant such an adjournment,  rather  than
proceed without consideration of the new matter

2. If an appellant considers that the decision  of  the  respondent  not  to
consent to the  consideration  of  a  new  matter  is  unlawful,  either  by
reference to the respondent's guidance or otherwise, the appropriate  remedy
is a challenge by way of judicial review.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 8th May 1989. He arrived
       in the UK on 15th February 2011 with entry clearance  as  a  visitor
       and overstayed. On 4th September 2015 the  appellant  made  a  human
       rights application based on his private life with  his  parents  and
       siblings and his four years residence in the  UK.  This  application
       was refused in a  decision  dated  4th  December  2015.  His  appeal
       against the decision was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Twydell in a determination promulgated on the 31st January 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  on
       26th September 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that the First-
       tier judge had erred in law in  failing  to  determine  all  matters
       before him and in refusing to grant an adjournment.

    3. The matter came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In the grounds of appeal and in oral submissions Mr  Yerokun  argued
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in failing to  adjourn
       the hearing, for two reasons.

    5. Firstly, it was argued that it was wrong not to adjourn the  hearing
       as there was no respondent's bundle served in  accordance  with  the
       directions. He argued that it was not correct that the appellant had
       agreed that they had all of the documents. They had  never  received
       the bundle at any  point,  and  the  solicitors  had  not  made  the
       original application to the  respondent  so  had  no  copy  of  that
       application.  The  respondent  had  made  an  application   for   an
       adjournment, as this was their normal practice when they had omitted
       to comply with directions, and this ought to have  been  granted  in
       all the circumstances.

    6. Secondly, it was argued that it was an error  of  law  not  to  have
       adjourned the hearing when the respondent made a second  application
       for  an  adjournment  at  1.45pm  in  connection  with  whether  the
       respondent consented to the new matter of the  appellant's  marriage
       being part of the appeal. It was argued that it  was  inaccurate  to
       have recorded in the decision that the  appellant  alone  asked  for
       this second adjournment regarding the new matter.  Counsel  for  the
       respondent was said to have wanted  the  matter  adjourned  as  that
       would have been in accordance with the guidance of the respondent to
       ask for an adjournment in these circumstances, enabling a considered
       initial decision to be made by the respondent dealing with  the  new
       matter, and also meaning that the one stop appeal process  could  be
       maintained by consent being given  to  the  new  matter  then  being
       included in the current appeal. It was  in  this  context  that  the
       submissions made by counsel for  the  respondent,  and  recorded  at
       paragraph 10 of the decision, were made. It  would  not  make  sense
       that these submissions were put forward if the  respondent  had  not
       been  advocating  for  an   adjournment   for   further   time   for
       consideration of their consent to the inclusion of the  new  matter.
       The position of the  respondent,  as  set  out  by  her  counsel  in
       relation to consent to the  admission  of  the  new  matter  at  the
       hearing,  was  that  she  did  not  consent  if  there  was  not  an
       adjournment, but believed it would be fairer to grant an adjournment
       particularly given the possible consequences for the appellant under
       s.96 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  if  the
       issue of the appellant's marriage and his wife's pregnancy  was  not
       dealt with in this appeal.

    7. The failure to adjourn  the  hearing  in  these  circumstances,  the
       appellant argued, was therefore not procedurally fair or  just,  and
       thus  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  principles   in   Nwaigwe
       (adjournment; fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC)  or  the  Presidential
       Guidance Note No 1 of 2014 at paragraph 8(b). Further the First-tier
       Tribunal wrongly applied s.96 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 in this context as the appellant was actually trying
       to raise the new issues in the context of the  appeal  but  was  not
       being allowed to do so.

    8. In a rule 24 notice the respondent stated that  as  she  refused  to
       consent to a new matter being raised then  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       had no jurisdiction. This decision was in accordance with  the  law,
       but meant that  the  appellant  could  nevertheless  raise  all  the
       excluded issues via a new application to the  respondent.  In  these
       circumstances there was no error of law or unfairness  with  respect
       to the refusal to adjourn.

    9.  Mr  Deller  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had   properly
       established that both parties and the Tribunal had all the  relevant
       documents that were in the respondent's bundle at the start  of  the
       hearing as is set out at paragraph 4 of the decision, and that there
       was no error of law  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  refusing  to
       adjourn due to the formal failure of the respondent to  comply  with
       directions.

   10. Mr Deller initially thought it might have been  the  case  that  the
       Secretary of State had advised her counsel to ask for an adjournment
       to consider further the issue of  whether  to  consent  to  the  new
       matter being admitted in  this  appeal,  and  had  only  refused  to
       consent to the inclusion of the new matter in light  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal's refusal to grant this  adjournment.  However,  after
       our adjourning the hearing before us over lunch  for  Mr  Deller  to
       investigate further, it transpired that this was not  the  case.  Mr
       Deller produced a copy of the relevant  notes  for  the  respondent.
       According to these, counsel for the respondent  had  telephoned  the
       Home Office twice. The first time was apparently prior to the  start
       of the hearing, and on this occasion counsel  had  been  advised  to
       request an adjournment so that  the  respondent's  bundle  could  be
       served. The second call was  regarding  the  issue  of  whether  the
       respondent consented to the inclusion of  the  appellant's  marriage
       being considered as a new matter at the hearing. The  notes  reflect
       that both counsel and the respondent took the view that they  should
       not consent to the new matter being included  in  the  hearing,  and
       that a new application should  be  made  by  the  appellant  to  the
       respondent who would consider this with the best  interests  of  the
       soon to be born child.

   11. Mr Deller therefore argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
       erred in  law  in  failing  to  deal  with  an  application  for  an
       adjournment by the respondent for further time to  consider  whether
       to consent to the inclusion of the new matter in this appeal  as  no
       such application had been made by  the  respondent.  The  respondent
       having refused to consent to the new matter being included, that was
       the end of this issue.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   12. The case of Mahmud (S.85 NIAA 2002  -  'new  matters')  [2017]  UKUT
       00488 (IAC) sets out guidance as to how the issue of a "new  matter"
       must be dealt with. The first requirement  is  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal must determine whether an issue is a new matter.  This  was
       done at paragraph 13 of the decision in  the  present  case.  It  is
       concluded that the appellant's marriage and imminent  birth  of  his
       child are new matters which,  given  the  lack  of  consent  of  the
       respondent, could not be dealt with in the appeal. It is clear  that
       the new matter was correctly dealt with by the  First-tier  Tribunal
       as a "factual matrix" which had not been  previously  considered  by
       the  Secretary  of  State  when  consideration  was  given  to   the
       application made by the appellant and/or any s.120 notices.

   13. The conclusion that this was a new matter was open to the First-tier
       Tribunal. The only previous reference in the  application  had  been
       that the appellant had met a lady he hoped to marry  without  giving
       any details of her identity, the marriage and/ or the pregnancy. The
       marriage  and  pregnancy  both  came  after  the  decision  appealed
       against, with no further details provided to the respondent  at  all
       until a bundle was  posted  to  her  the  day  before  the  hearing.
       Applying paragraph 31 of Mahmud it is clear  that  the  birth  of  a
       child will always be a new matter, and in the context of no  details
       having  been  previously  given  about  the  relationship  with  the
       appellant's wife we find  that  it  was  right  for  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to find that this marriage was likewise to be regarded as a
       new matter.

   14. There is no evidence that the respondent's refusal to consent to the
       admission of the new matter arose as  a  result  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal refusing a respondent's application to adjourn so that  she
       could have more time to consider this issue further. If, in a future
       appeal, a reasoned respondent's application is made for more time to
       consider consent to a new matter  with  reference  to  her  guidance
       published on the 9th October 2017 "Rights of Appeal  Version  6"  at
       page 26 "Handling New Matters Before the Appeal Hearing" then it  is
       our view that it  would  be  appropriate,  generally,  for  such  an
       adjournment request to be granted to  ensure,  where  possible,  the
       integrity of the one-stop appeal process  whilst  also  safeguarding
       the respondent from being taken by surprise and not  being  able  to
       take a view as first decision-maker.

   15. However in this case the respondent's notes  (from  the  screenshot)
       record that the second call from her counsel  regarding  consent  to
       admission of this new matter resulted in the unanimous decision that
       it was not appropriate to give consent to  this  being  included  in
       this appeal, and that instead it was appropriate for  the  appellant
       to make a fresh application to the respondent with  details  of  his
       soon to be born child whose best interests could then be  considered
       by the respondent. This accords with what is said by  the  Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 5 of his decision, where it  is
       clear that it was only the appellant that  made  an  application  to
       adjourn for the respondent to  consider  this  consent  further.  It
       would appear that counsel for the  respondent  did  raise  potential
       issues arising under s.96 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act  2002  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  context  of   the
       appellant's application to adjourn, as are set out at paragraph  10.
       However, this does not mean that he  was  advancing  an  adjournment
       application, but simply that he was fairly providing information  he
       thought might assist the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  their  decision-
       making on the appellant's application for an adjournment.

   16. As the First-tier Tribunal had properly decided that these new facts
       were a new matter and as the respondent had not consented to the new
       matter  being  dealt  with  under  s.85(5)   of   the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 then  there  was  no  basis  for  an
       adjournment to be granted giving the respondent further time to deal
       with that issue. It was not the case that there were late changes to
       the grounds or reasons for refusal which would have meant that  this
       adjournment was appropriate in accordance with paragraph 8(b) of the
       Presidential Guidance.  It was not in any way an  error  of  law  or
       unfair for the adjournment to be refused.

   17. If the appellant believed that the decision  of  the  respondent  to
       refuse to consent was unlawfully made, perhaps by reference  to  her
       guidance on the giving of such consent and/or  the  extent  of  fees
       that the approach of making a new application  would  be  likely  to
       incur, then the appropriate remedy would have been  judicial  review
       of the respondent's decision refusing consent; not  a  challenge  to
       the refusal to adjourn by the First-tier Tribunal.

   18. We are also satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal ensured  properly
       that both parties had all of the relevant papers at the start of the
       hearing. Although the respondent's bundle had not  been  served  and
       filed with the First-tier Tribunal in  accordance  with  directions,
       the judge was satisfied that both parties had  the  relevant  papers
       for the hearing which were included in that bundle, and that no  one
       was taken by surprise: see paragraph 4 of the decision. There was no
       unfairness in proceeding simply for want of  a  formal  respondent's
       bundle having been served on the appellant.

   19. It is also clear that the First-tier Tribunal made  no  findings  in
       relation to s.96 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
       2002, see paragraph 10 of the decision, and so there can be no error
       of law on the basis that this was improperly addressed.

   20. It should be reassuring to the  appellant,  that  the  Secretary  of
       State has confirmed that the new matters of his marriage  and  birth
       of his child will be considered by her if a new application is made,
       and that her representative before us, Mr Deller, was clear that  it
       would not be appropriate for  the  respondent  to  certify  any  new
       refusal under s.96 of the 2002 Act. We are also  of  the  view  that
       this would  not  be  appropriate  as  the  appellant  obviously  has
       satisfactory reasons why he did not raise the  new  matter  in  this
       appeal under s.96(1)(c) of the 2002 Act as the respondent refused to
       consent despite his wishing to do so.  We finally draw attention  to
       the fact  that  s.96  of  the  2002  Act  is  not  relevant  to  the
       interpretation of s.85 of the 2002 for the reasons set out in Mahmud
       at paragraph 27.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. We uphold the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal on human rights grounds.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  9th January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






