
[pic]
IAC-FH-GJ-V4

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of Mamour) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (FCJR) [2013] UKUT 00086(IAC)



|Heard at Field House                          |Judgment sent                |
|On 24 January 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                      The QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF
                            Mohamed Alam MAMOUR)

                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Becket Bedford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd
For the Respondent:    Fiona Paterson, instructed by Treasury Solicitor

                                  JUDGMENT

1.   This case concerns an application for judicial review  brought  by  the
    Applicant, who is a national of Afghanistan, against a decision by  the
    Respondent of 13 February 2012 augmented by a decision of 22 March 2012
    refusing his further representations as a fresh claim.  One  relatively
    unusual feature of it is that the Applicant was removed from the United
    Kingdom prior to being granted permission to apply for judicial  review
    at the oral renewal stage.

 2. A number of matters are of more relevance than  usual  to  the  way  in
    which the arguments have been developed before  me.   In  chronological
    order they are:-


    -    On 22 October the Applicant enters the UK and claims asylum.


    -    On 1 November 2005 the Applicant was  assessed  as  over  18,  his
         asylum claim was processed accordingly and then refused.


    -    On 16 December 2005 his appeal is dismissed by  Immigration  Judge
         Elvidge.  Although  finding  the  Applicant's  asylum   claim   not
         credible, the judge finds that he is a minor who is "likely  to  be
         of the age of 16". He also states that "[i]t may be in the light of
         this determination the respondent may grant the appellant some form
         of limited leave to remain until he is 18".


    -    The appellant does  not  appeal,  but  his  representatives  write
         asking that he be granted discretionary leave.


    -    In a file minute dated 9 August 2006 a Home Office official states
         that the Applicant had been found to be  over  18  by  Kent  Social
         Services, that the  report  relied  on  by  the  Immigration  Judge
         finding him to be 16 "has an error margin of 2 years" and that "the
         evidence is weighted in favour of applicant being aged 18+".  As  a
         result, the respondent does not proceed to grant the Applicant  any
         form of discretionary  leave.  (In  subsequent  correspondence  the
         reason is  incorrectly  stated  as  being  because  a  further  age
         assessment by Kent Social Services  has  confirmed  their  original
         view that he was 18: I return to this below.)


    -    Beginning with a letter sent  in  February  2007  the  Applicant's
         representatives make a number of further representations.


    -    In August 2010 the Applicant applies for judicial review; this  is
         eventually  withdrawn  after  the  Respondent  agrees  to  withdraw
         previous decisions.


    -    On 13 February 2012 (as already noted) the respondent  refuses  to
         treat these further representations as a fresh claim and on 7 March
         issues removal directions to remove the Applicant from the UK.


    -    On 12 March 2012 the Applicant applies for judicial review of  the
         refusal of his fresh claim and the Respondent's decision of 7 March
         2012 to issue removal directions.


    -    On 13 March 2012 Beatson J orders a stay of removal.


    -    On 24 April 2012 McKenna J refuses to grant  permission  to  apply
         for judicial review, stating that the  case  is  considered  to  be
         totally without merit and that his order is no bar to  removal.  He
         further transfers the application to the Upper Tribunal pursuant to
         the Lord Chief Justice Practice Direction of 17 October 2011.


    -    On 27 April 2012 the Applicant lodged notice  of  renewal  of  his
         claim for permission.


    -    On 20 June the Applicant submits "Grounds for stay on removal"  in
         respect of  imminent  directions  for  removal.   These  were  then
         cancelled.


    -    On 22 June Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson refuses to grant a stay on
         removal.
    -    On 9 July the Applicant's solicitors lodge  further  "Grounds  for
         stay on removal" repeating the original grounds but  also  alleging
         that the Respondent had not given the Applicant proper  service  of
         removal directions.


    -    On 9 July 2012 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  again  refuses  an
         application for a stay on removal.


    -    The Applicant is removed from the UK on 10 July 2012.


    -    On 23 July the Applicant's solicitors lodge "Renewed  grounds  for
         permission" which although stating that  the  Applicant  makes  his
         application on the same grounds as relied on previously, go  on  to
         submit that "C says his removal directions are unlawful in  that  R
         has breached her policy in failing to give C or his solicitors more
         than 2 days clear notice of the date for removal....C's  solicitors
         believe that C was not served with removal  directions  on  5  July
         2012 despite D's statement to the contrary."  A  witness  statement
         from a solicitor at Sultan Lloyd is appended  which stated that the
         Applicant had not been  given two clear days notice of the date  of
         removal, and had not been assisted  by  the   detention  centre  in
         understanding the removal directions served on  him  or  in  having
         access   to   telephone   facilities   to   contact    his    legal
         representatives.


    -    The oral renewal hearing is adjourned from 24 July 2012  to  await
         the expected Court of Appeal  judgment  in  KH  (Afghanistan)  (see
         below).


    -    On 14 September the Respondent files a witness statement  from  an
         employee of the UKBA stating that removal direction set for the  10
         July were served on the Applicant on 5  July,  that  the  Applicant
         understood them but  threw them on the floor and  refused  to  sign
         the papers. The same witness stated that there were  pay  hones  in
         the centre and detainees also have access to mobile phones and  can
         use computers and there the Applicant and his solicitors were  able
         to contact each other.


    -    On 18 September 2012, the day of the  oral  renewal  hearing,  UTJ
         Jordan grants permission although he refuses to  grant  an  interim
         order for the Respondent to use her best endeavours to  return  the
         Applicant to the UK.


    -    Circa 24 September 2012 (Mr  Bedford  advises  us)  the  Applicant
         lodged an application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
         Appeal against UTJ Jordan's decision.  Whilst   stating  that  they
         considered the latter had been correct to grant permission to apply
         for judicial review, his legal representatives take issue with  (i)
         his refusal to make an interim order;  and  (ii)  this  refusal  to
         grant a quashing order in respect of the removal directions  served
         on 5 July 2012 in light of their belief  that  the  Respondent  had
         prevented the Applicant from accessing  legal  or  free  advice  in
         sufficient time to enable him to adequately prepare an  application
         to stay his removal and/or to prepare an  application  against  the
         Tribunal's decision to refuse to stay his removal.

3.   Before me Mr Bedford submitted that the decision of the  Respondent  to
    refuse this further representation as a fresh claim was irrational.  It
    was manifest,  he  said,   that  the  Respondent's  considerations  had
    proceeded on a false  basis.   He  drew  attention  to  the  ruling  of
    Immigration Judge Elvidge in his determination of 22 October 2005  that
    the Applicant was 16, not 18.  The Respondent had proceeded  to  ignore
    that ruling on the basis that Kent Social Services had made  a  further
    age assessment which confirmed their original assessment  that  he  was
    over 18. UTJ Jordan's judgment showed that to be false; there had never
    been a fresh age assessment by Kent Social Services.  As  a  result  of
    this error the Respondent's  consideration  of  the  Applicant's  fresh
    claim failed to take account of  a  highly  material  consideration  in
    respect of his claim, namely that he had wrongly been denied a grant of
    discretionary leave until his 18th birthday as was  envisaged  by  Home
    Office policy on unaccompanied minors at that time. Mr Bedford did  not
    pursue before me his challenge to the  issuing  of  removal  directions
    made against the Applicant on 5 July 2012.

4.   At the outset of  her  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  Ms
    Paterson stated  that  the  Respondent  did  not  seek  to  defend  the
    Applicant's application.  She said that  the  Respondent  undertook  to
    withdraw her previous decision  and  issue  a  fresh  decision  on  his
    application for a fresh claim within the next few days.  So as  not  to
    prejudice the Applicant she proposed that I adjourn the proceedings for
    four weeks so the Respondent had time to make that fresh decision which
    the Tribunal  could  then  consider  in  the  context  of  the  current
    proceedings.

5.   Mr Bedford objected strongly to the  adjournment  request.   He  argued
    that (leaving aside the pending application for permission to appeal to
    the Court of Appeal against two other aspects of UTJ Jordan's judgment)
    the Respondent had had ample opportunity to withdraw the  decision  and
    make a fresh one.

6.   I decided to reject Ms Paterson's application to adjourn. It  has  been
    open to the Respondent from at least the date of the hearing before UTJ
    Jordan to withdraw her decision and no good reason has been  given  for
    why this was not done.

7.   In light of my decision to proceed, I asked  Ms  Paterson  whether  she
    still maintained her position that  the  Respondent  did  not  seek  to
    resist the Applicant's application.  She confirmed that she did but she
    wished to make it clear that the only error the Respondent was prepared
    to concede had been committed in the refusal decision of February  2012
    concerned the failure to appreciate that there  had  in  fact  been  no
    fresh age assessment conducted by Kent Social Services.

Discussion

8.   Having considered both parties' submissions I  am  satisfied  that  the
    February 2012 decision of the Respondent was Wednesbury unreasonable.

9.   Save for one matter it seems to me that there was  nothing  wrong  with
    the Respondent's treatment of the Applicant's further  representations.
    As regards his asylum claim, this had been rejected by  IJ  Elvidge  as
    not credible and the Applicant made no appeal  against  that  decision.
    In recent representations he has sought to argue that he  still  has  a
    valid asylum claim based on further documents sent from Afghanistan  by
    his paternal uncle recently.  However, the Respondent  addressed  those
    new materials in her refusal letters and the Applicant  has  failed  to
    challenge them in any of his subsequent grounds for permission to apply
    for judicial review.  As regards the Applicant's  claim  based  on  his
    right to respect for private  and  family  life,  the  Respondent  gave
    careful consideration to the materials relied on in support  and  found
    them wanting.  Given the Applicant's relatively short period of stay in
    the UK; his illegal entry; his failure to appeal the  rejection  by  an
    Immigration Judge of his asylum appeal; the  tenuous  evidence  he  had
    submitted as to his ties with friends, relatives, etc., I consider that
    this aspect of the Respondent's decision was based on seemingly  cogent
    reasons.

10.  However, in my judgement it remains that there  is  one  insurmountable
    difficulty with the Respondent's refusal decision, namely  her  failure
    to act without valid reason upon the Immigration Judge's  finding  that
    the Applicant was a minor, despite her own policy instructing  a  grant
    of discretionary leave in such circumstances (both parties were content
    for me to describe this as "the historic injustice" point).

11.  This difficulty has to be kept in context.   This  is  not  a  case  in
    which the Respondent failed to consider the historic injustice argument
    at all.  The Applicant in further representations had raised it and  in
    support had expressly sought to rely on the Court of Appeal judgment in
    (AA Afghanistan) [2007] EWCA Civ 12.

12.  The difficulty is rather in the way the  Respondent  chose  to  address
    this argument.  At [24] and [25] of the February 2012 refusal letter it
    was stated:

         "24.     You submit that  your  client  should  have  been  granted
             Discretionary Leave to remain in the United Kingdom  following
             the Immigration  Judge's  finding  that  Mr  Mamour  was  only
             sixteen years of age.


         25.  Reference has been given  to  the  case  of  AA  (Afghanistan)
             [2007] EWCA Civ 12 to consider whether [Mr  Mamour]  has  been
             disadvantaged by failing to have the opportunity  to  seek  to
             extend any leave granted under the Unaccompanied Asylum Seeker
             Child (UASC) policy.  Any entitlement  to  UASC  Discretionary
             Leave would have  expired  in  June  2009,  when  your  client
             reached the age of seventeen years and  six  months.   As  his
             asylum application was  refused  on  9th  November  2005,  any
             subsequent application for an extension  of  leave  would,  by
             now, likely  to  have  been  refused.   It  can  therefore  be
             concluded that your client has not  been  disadvantaged  as  a
             result of not being granted Discretionary  Leave  which  would
             not have expired and your request fails to create a  realistic
             prospect of success."

13.  I am in agreement with Mr Bedford that this passage is deficient in  at
    least two respects.  First, it treats the failure to make  a  grant  of
    Discretionary Leave as being no kind of disadvantage  at  all;  whereas
    the Court of Appeal in AA clearly regarded such a failure as in  itself
    a significant disadvantage.  Second, by not considering it as any  kind
    of disadvantage, the letter failed to weigh in the  assessment  of  the
    fresh claim in its  Article  8  aspect  any  detriment  caused  to  the
    Applicant by this disadvantage.  This amounted to failure to take  into
    account a potentially material relevant factor.

14.  For the above reasons I am satisfied that the Respondent's decision  to
    refuse the Applicant's further representations as  a  fresh  claim  was
    Wednesbury unreasonable.
Relief

15.  In the course of submissions I heard argument from both parties  as  to
    what remedies  and/or  relief  I  should  order  were  I  to  find  the
    Respondent's decision irrational.

16.  Mr Bedford  submitted  that  I  should  adopt  his  draft  order  which
    covered: (1) a quashing order; (2) an  order  or  "indication"  to  the
    Respondent that she should respond  to  my  decision  by  granting  the
    Applicant a fresh claim so that he had a statutory right of appeal to a
    First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in  accordance  with  para  353   of   the
    Immigration Rules;  and (3)  an  order  for  the  Respondent  to  "make
    arrangements forthwith to trace the claimant and immediately return him
    to the jurisdiction from Afghanistan".  He also submitted that I should



17.  Ms Paterson submitted that  it  would  go  beyond  my  judicial  review
    jurisdiction to do anything further than to make a quashing order.  She
    cited in support a judgment of Mr Stephen Morris QC sitting as a Deputy
    High Court judge:  The  Queen  on  the  application  of  Fatima  Farhan
    Mohammed [2012] EWHC 3091 (Admin) and in particular [102] and [103]:

         "102.    The courses of action open to this  court  upon  making  a
             quashing order are set out in CPR 54.19 and s.31 Senior Courts
             Act 1981 (as amended).  Since the relevant decision  maker  in
             the present case is not a court or tribunal, this  court  does
             not have the power to substitute  its  own  decision  for  the
             decision taken by the Defendant: see s.31(5)(b)  and  s.31(5A)
             SCA 1981.  Rather the court has power to remit the  matter  to
             the Defendant and to direct the Defendant  to  reconsider  and
             reach a decision in  accordance  with  the  findings  in  this
             judgment.


         103. It therefore falls to  the  Defendant  now  to  take  a  fresh
             decision on the representations made in the 4  September  2009
             letter."

18.  Having considered the competing arguments,  I  have  decided  that  the
    only remedy I should grant is an order to quash  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  of  February   2013   to   refuse   the   further
    representations as a fresh claim.

19.  With great respect to Ms Paterson, it is not  in  the  Civil  Procedure
    Rules (CPR) that I must locate my  powers  to  grant  relief.  Although
    closely modelled on the CPR the kinds  of  relief  open  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in judicial review proceedings are set out in  s.  15  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCEA 2007), which provides:

         "15      Upper Tribunal's 'judicial review' jurisdiction


         (1)      The Upper Tribunal has power, in cases arising  under  the
             law of England and Wales or under the law of Northern Ireland,
             to grant the following kinds of relief--
             (a)      a mandatory order;
             (b)      a prohibiting order;
             (c)      a quashing order;
             (d)      a declaration;
             (e)      an injunction."

20.  Section 15(4) further provides that:

         "(4)     In deciding  whether  to  grant  relief  under  subsection
             (1)(a),  (b)  or  (c),  the  Upper  Tribunal  must  apply  the
             principles that the High Court would apply in deciding whether
             to grant that relief on an application for judicial review."

21.      Further, both under both the CPR (as made clear by the Deputy  High
    Court judge in the above case) and the TCEA 2007 a quashing  order  may
    be added to by a decision to remit with a direction to  reconsider  the
    matter and reach a decision in accordance  with  the  findings  of  the
    Upper Tribunal:

         "17  Quashing orders under section 15(1): supplementary provision


         (1)      If the Upper Tribunal makes a quashing order under section
             15(1)(c) in respect of a decision, it may in addition-


             (a)     remit the matter concerned to the court,  tribunal  or
                  authority that made the  decision,  with  a  direction  to
                  reconsider the matter and reach a decision  in  accordance
                  with the findings of the Upper Tribunal, or


             (b)      substitute its  own  decision  for  the  decision  in
                  question.


         (2)      The power conferred by subsection  (1)(b)  is  exercisable
             only if-


             (a)      the decision in question  was  made  by  a  court  or
                  tribunal,


             (b)      the decision is quashed on the ground that there  has
                  been an error of law, and


             (c)      without the error, there would  have  been  only  one
                  decision that the court or tribunal could have reached."

22.  Whilst in my judgement it is  appropriate,  in  addition  to  making  a
    quashing order, to remit the matter to the Respondent for her to  reach
    a decision in accordance with my findings, I would  point  out  that  I
    consider my findings of limited effect. This is not a case in  which  I
    can conclude with confidence that the only  rational  response  of  the
    Respondent to the  Applicant's  further  representations  would  be  to
    accept his fresh claim.  I have not found any flaw in the  Respondent's
    rejection of the Applicant's attempt to revive his   asylum  claim  and
    this is not a case in which it can seriously be  suggested  that  there
    was any causative link between the "historic injustice" and the outcome
    of the Applicant's asylum claim: see  KA  (Afghanistan)  and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1014,  at
    [25] and, most recently, EU (Afghanistan) & Ors v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 32, at [7].

23.  On my findings the  flaw in the previous decision  was  confined  to  a
    failure to take account of one particular relevant factor and  in  that
    light  all that is required  is  a  fresh  assessment  of  the  further
    representations based on Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention  and
    possibly also of para  353B  considerations,  so  that  the  Respondent
    weighs in the balance the nature and extent  of  the  disadvantages  or
    "disbenefits" the Applicant has experienced as a result of the  failure
    to grant him discretionary leave.

24.  It follows  that  I  reject  Mr  Bedford's  request  that  I  order  or
    "indicate" to the Respondent that she should respond to my decision  by
    granting the Applicant a fresh claim so that he had a  statutory  right
    of appeal to a First-tier Tribunal judge in accordance  with  paragraph
    353 of the Immigration Rules. That would in any event be tantamount  to
    seeking to substitute my own decision for  that  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, contrary to s.17(2) of the 2007 Act.

25   As regards Mr Bedford's request that I make  an  order  directing  that
    the Respondent use best endeavours to return the Applicant,  I  observe
    in the first instance that it lies within my jurisdiction to make  such
    an order if I consider  it  appropriate  and  that  I  must  apply  the
    principles that the High Court would apply: see  s.  15(3)-(4)  of  the
    2007 Act.  In that regard I have had regard to the principles  set  out
    by the Court of Appeal in  R  (on  the  application  of  YZ  (China)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  1022.  The
    Court held that it was unhelpful to consider,  even  in  a  case  where
    removal was unlawful, that there  was  a  "presumption"  in  favour  of
    return, although it may well be a  strong  factor;  all  cases.  it  is
    emphasised, were fact-sensitive (see [49]).

26.  I am satisfied that I should not exercise my discretion  to  make  such
    an order.  As I have already made clear, this is not a case in which  I
    conclude that there is only one  way  in  which  the  Respondent  could
    remake her decision on the fresh claim: see R (S)  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 546.  Only  if  the  Respondent
    were to decide in the context of re-making that decision to  grant  the
    Applicant a fresh right of appeal would the matter of steps  to  effect
    the return of the Applicant to the United Kingdom become a real issue.

27.  For the above reasons:


    The decision of  the  Respondent  of  13  February  2012  refusing  the
    Applicant's further representations as a  fresh  claim  was  Wednesbury
    unreasonable. The matter is remitted  to  the  Respondent  for  her  to
    reconsider the matter in accordance with my findings.


     No other relief is granted.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey








