










   R (on the applications of Leila Simaei and Mehmet Arap) v Secretary of
  State for the Home Department (Dublin returns - Hungary) IJR [2015] UKUT
                                 00083 (IAC)



                               Upper Tribunal
                        Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review

                     Notice of Decision/Order/Directions


                                   Before

                       Mr Justice McCloskey, President

  In the matter of applications for permission to apply for judicial review


        The Queen on the applications of Leila Simaei and Mehmet Arap

                                                      Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent





      Upon the applications of the above named Applicants for permission  to
      apply for judicial review and having  heard  the  parties'  respective
      Counsel, Mr D O'Callahan (instructed by Duncan Lewis  Solicitors)  and
      Mr R Harland (instructed by the Treasury Solicitor) at a hearing on 05
      January 2015.


      In light of the  considerable  body  of  relevant  background  country
      information considered by the Respondent, it was open to her  to  find
      that there was neither systemic deficiency nor were there  substantial
      operational problems in the conditions in Hungary for  the  reception,
      processing and treatment of asylum seekers.




                                  JUDGMENT


      McCloskey J:


      Introduction


        1. These two Dublin Regulation cases were heard  together  as  they
           raise common issues and I consider it appropriate to  provide  a
           composite judgment. They were the subject of  an  earlier  order
           adjourning them for an oral hearing.


        2. The first case, that of Leila  Simaei  (hereinafter  "the  first
           Applicant"), is a renewed application for  permission  to  apply
           for judicial review, the initial application having been refused
           by Order of the Upper Tribunal dated 25 April 2014.  The  second
           case, that of Mehmet Arap (hereinafter "the  second  Applicant")
           was  the  subject  of  an  oral  permission  hearing  order  and
           conjoinder with the first case. Both Applicants are  challenging
           decisions of the Respondent  that  they  should  be  removed  to
           Hungary for the purpose  of  processing  and  determining  their
           respective asylum applications under the Dublin Regulation.


      The First Applicant

        3. The first Applicant challenges the Respondent's  decision  dated
           20 February 2014. By this decision this Applicant's asylum claim
           was certified under paragraph 5(4) of Part 2 of  Schedule  3  to
           the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.


        4. This Applicant is a  national  of  Iran,  aged  26  years.   The
           voluminous papers contain three witness statements made by  her.
           Within these, the most salient claims and allegations  are  that
           she was raped by her cousin when aged 24; she attempted  suicide
           soon afterwards; she could not confide  in  her  family  as  she
           feared they would  kill  her;  she  became  severely  depressed;
           sometime later she rejected a marriage proposal from a  security
           guard who, subsequently, subjected her to  multiple  threats  of
           kidnap and maiming; later, having brought herself to confide  in
           her mother about the rape, she left Iran, in early August  2013;
           she travelled through Turkey and onwards to Hungary,  where  she
           was detained for 8 days; then she was conveyed to a male refugee
           camp where she suffered conditions of cold  and  starvation  and
           was the subject of unwanted attention from the male inmates; she
           left the camp having spent about  1  �  months  there;  and  she
           entered the United Kingdom on 26 January 2014.


        5. In her first  witness  statement  the  Applicant  describes  her
           sojourn in the Hungarian detention centre as an  "ordeal".  This
           was only scantly particularised.  There was no suggestion of any
           physical abuse or ill treatment.  In [13] of her second  witness
           statement, she says:

                 "Even when I was in  the  detention  centre  in  Hungary  I
                 begged the Afghan men not to rape me as I at the time was a
                 Muslim like them.  However, that did  not  stop  them  from
                 raping me."


           This claim of rape was not made in her first  witness  statement,
           made  nine  months  previously.  In   an   intermediate   witness
           statement, made some three months after the first, this Applicant
           described a  rape  ordeal  involving  three  male  inmates.   She
           complained of a lack of protection from the centre  staff  and  a
           previous unsuccessful attempt to secure medical  attention.   She
           acknowledged  that  when  detained  in  the  United  Kingdom  she
           received excellent medical and counselling services  and  asserts
           that, in this context, she complained  of  "abuse"  (unspecified)
           and not "rape". She further asserted that she alleged rape  in  a
           letter  to  UKBA.   When  examined  by  Dr   Mounty,   Consultant
           Psychiatrist, on 17 March 2014, at which stage she had  made  the
           first of her three statements, this  Applicant  reported  "verbal
           abuse and perceived threats of further sexual violence whilst  in
           detention in Hungary", making no allegation of rape.

        6. Dr Mounty diagnosed PTSD:


                 "Overall, the  clinical  picture  is  one  of  severe  PTSD
                 symptoms and major depression, with associated anxiety  and
                 symptoms of complex PTSD."


           She considered this Applicant  to  be  a  reliable  and  genuine
           historian.  Dr Mounty continues:


                 "If Ms Simaei were returned to Hungary  she  would,  in  my
                 view,   be   almost   certain   to   experience   this   as
                 retraumatising, since her reported memories of the  country
                 are of neglect, lack of safety and  sexual  harassment.   A
                 forced return to  Hungary  would  therefore  be  likely  to
                 precipitate an abrupt deterioration in her  mental  health,
                 with an increase in her PTSD symptoms and in her  level  of
                 suicidal ideation."


           While this Applicant's evidence has  the  inconsistencies  noted
           above, it was incumbent on the Respondent  to  take  it  at  its
           reasonable zenith: EM (Eritrea) [2014] UKSC 12, at [8]. In  this
           application for judicial review, the court must do likewise.


        7. The certification decision is dated 20 February 2014,  following
           on from Hungary's acceptance of responsibility  on  11  February
           2014.  In response to  the  PAP  letter,  the  Respondent  wrote
           again, by letter dated 26 March 2014.   This  letter  identified
           the Applicant's case as having the twofold foundation of (a) the
           UNCHR report "Hungary: A Country of Asylum",  dated  April  2012
           and (b) a decision of the  Administrative  Court  of  Stuttgart,
           dated 02 April 2012.   It notes that there is no  evidence  from
           any source establishing systemic flaws or failures in the asylum
           reception and processing arrangements and procedures  prevailing
           in Hungary, sufficient to displace the  significant  presumption
           that  Hungary  complies  with  its  international   obligations,
           particularly those under the ECHR, the  Refugee  Convention  and
           the EU Charter. I interpose here the observation that  there  is
           no indication of any misdirection in law by  the  Respondent  in
           this significant passage.


        8. The first Applicant's challenge has evolved somewhat  since  its
           initiation, the grounds of challenge having been amended. In her
           pleaded case, two reports in particular are  identified,  namely
           the UNCHR report "Hungary: A Country  of  Asylum",  dated  April
           2012 and the  Jesuit  Refugee  Service  Europe  report  entitled
           "Protection Interrupted" (June  2013).   There  has  been  still
           further very recent evolution: infra.

     The Second Applicant

        9. The material facts of this Applicant's case are uncontroversial.
            He is an ethnic Kurd, now aged 20 years, who left Turkey in May
           2013.  He travelled to Hungary, where he claimed asylum and  was
           detained.  He absconded within a few days and travelled  to  the
           United Kingdom in May 2013.  In June 2013  he  was  returned  to
           Hungary, where he was accommodated  in  an  open  facility.   He
           preferred to sleep rough in a park and returned  to  the  United
           Kingdom, where he was apprehended again,  in  April  2014.   His
           case, in a nutshell, is that in the event of  being  transferred
           to Hungary again it is highly probable that he will be  detained
           and that the detention conditions will infringe his rights under
           Article 3 ECHR.


     General


       10. This litigation highlights the potential for rapid  fluctuation,
           both evidential and jurisprudential, one of the now  established
           phenomena of "Dublin" cases.  There are two comparatively recent
           decisions of the European Court of Human Rights.  The second  is
           Mohammed  v  Austria (Application No 2283/12), wherein  judgment
           was given  on  03  July  2014.   The  Applicant  challenged  his
           proposed removal to Hungary by the  Austrian  authorities.   His
           complaints were that  this  would  expose  him  to  inhuman  and
           degrading treatment,  that  he  would  face  imprisonment  under
           deplorable detention conditions and that he would be at risk  of
           refoulement to Serbia.  The evidence  considered  by  the  ECTHR
           included  a  statement  provided  by  the   Hungarian   Helsinki
           Committee (the "HHC") dated  April  2013,  a  Hungary  "country"
           report, dated April 2014, published on  the  Asylum  Information
           Database ("AIDA") and a statement prepared  by  the  UN  Working
           Group on Arbitrary Detention following a  visit  to  Hungary  in
           September/October 2013. The Court decided thus, in [75]:

                 "The Court therefore concludes  that  the  Applicant  would
                 currently not be  at  a  real,  individual  risk  of  being
                 subject  to  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3   of   the
                 Convention if expelled to Hungary."

            The following passage is of particular significance:

                 "[66]  The  Court  therefore  takes  note  of  the  various
reports on Hungary           ......

                       It also notes, however,  that  the  Hungarian  asylum
                       legislation and practice  has  significantly  changed
                       since the Applicant lodged  the  instant  application
                       [in  November  2012]  and  the  parties  made   their
                       submissions on the merits  of  the  case.  The  Court
                       therefore will only take into consideration the  most
                       recent  reports  and  respective  arguments  by   the
                       parties ............


                 [68]  The country reports showed  that  there  is  still  a
                       practice     of     detaining     asylum      seekers
                       .................   and  there  is  no  legal  remedy
                       against asylum detention.  However, the reports  also
                       showed that  there  is  no  systematic  detention  of
                       asylum seekers any  more  and  that  alternatives  to
                       detention are now provided for by law.   The  maximum
                       period of detention has been limited to  six  months.
                       Turning to the conditions of detention, it  is  noted
                       that while there are still reports of shortcomings in
                       the detention system, from an overall view there seem
                       to have been improvements .....


                 [69]  Moreover, the Court notes that the UNHCR never issued
                       a position  paper  requesting  EU  Member  States  to
                       refrain from transferring asylum seekers  to  Hungary
                       ..............."

           The date when this judgment was promulgated, 03 July 2014, is of
           obvious  significance.   This  followed  the   Court's   earlier
           decision in Mohammadi   v  Austria  (Application  No  71932/12),
           promulgated on 06 June 2013, in which a  similar  challenge  was
           also dismissed.

       11.  In  considering  the  evolution  of  reception  and  assessment
           conditions for asylum applicants in Hungary, it is necessary  to
           be cognisant of certain changes in its asylum laws.  These  came
           into operation first in January 2013 and, later,  in  July  2013
           when the Asylum Act was amended again.  The ECTHR gave  judgment
           in Mohammadi one year later and, in doing so, gave consideration
           to reports postdating the July 2013 reforms: see  [33]  -  [45].
           Notably, the Court considered the AIDA report of 30  April  2014
           in extenso: see [36] - [43].   Throughout  these  passages,  the
           Court refers to the HHC.  I consider the likely  explanation  of
           this to be that the AIDA Report was written by  members  of  the
           HHC and edited by the European Council on  Refugees  and  Exiles
           ("ECRE").  Thus HHC was, at the very least, the main  source  of
           the substantive  content  of  the  AIDA  Report.   Notably,  the
           further free standing HHC report  was  published  more  or  less
           simultaneously, in the form of its  "Information  Note"  of  May
           2014.


       12. The landscape has continued to evolve since judgment  was  given
           in Mohammed.  In November 2014, in HK (Sudan) v SSHD [2014] EWCA
           Civ 1481, a single Judge  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  decided  a
           renewed application for permission to appeal against a  decision
           of the Administrative Court whereby permission  was  refused  to
           the Appellant to challenge his proposed removal to Hungary under
           the Dublin Regulation.  As the ex tempore judgment records,  the
           Court had at its disposal  "a  considerable  body  of  evidence"
           relating  to  relevant  conditions  in   Hungary.    The   Judge
           considered, firstly, that the issues of the frequency of  access
           to sanitary facilities and the use of leashes and hand cuffs  on
           detainees during transfers did not attain the minimum  level  of
           severity threshold under Article 3  ECHR.   Attention  was  then
           focused on the issue of the fear of  violence  on  the  part  of
           detaining officers.  Consideration was given in particular to  a
           statement of the HHC "which has been obtained  recently".   This
           asserted that the treatment of asylum  applicants  in  detention
           centres is "appalling" and that physical violence  is  "common".
           The Judge reasoned that allegations of this kind were not  novel
           and had not succeeded in establishing a breach of Article  3  in
           Mohammed and Mohammadi.   Furthermore,  the  evidence  indicated
           that there had  been  improvement  in  detention  conditions  in
           Hungary.  Finally, the Judge characterised the HHC  evidence  as
           "generalised  and  vague".   He  concluded  that  it   was   not
           sufficient  to  overcome  the  threshold  for  challenging   the
           Respondent's  certification  decision  and  refused   permission
           accordingly.

       13. The Court of Appeal gave judgment in HK (Sudan) on  03  November
           2014.  A further "statement" was then commissioned from the  HHC
           by the Appellant's solicitors who also  represent  each  of  the
           Applicants in these proceedings.  It is dated 12 November  2014.
           It is evidently designed to supplement and clarify  earlier  HHC
           evidence, in particular a statement dated 27 October 2014  which
           was deployed in the Court of Appeal proceedings.  It repeats its
           earlier critique of the treatment of  detained  asylum  seekers.
           Once again, there are no details of the nature  of  the  alleged
           ill treatment or any injuries  sustained.   The  particulars  of
           this  assertion  are  limited  to  an  unspecified   number   of
           complaints by  detainees  of  "verbal  abuse  and  occasions  of
           physical abuse by  the  armed  security  guards".   This  simply
           repeats the earlier statement considered by the Court of Appeal.
            A specific instance of two detainees  allegedly  injured  as  a
           result of the use of paprika spray by  guards,  evidently  as  a
           species of crowd control measure  at  a  sporting  activity,  is
           instanced.  While  this  is  novel,  it  lacks  particulars  and
           mentions no injuries.  Three further specific examples, none  of
           them novel (infra), are provided.  The  continued  use  of  hand
           cuffs and leashes in escorting/transfer contexts is noted.

       14. To  summarise,  there  is  a  considerable  volume  of  evidence
           relating  to  reception  and  detention  conditions  in  Hungary
           generated during the past year.  This includes in particular the
           AIDA Report of April 2014, the HHC Information Note of May 2014,
           the witness statements of the HHC Legal Officer of  October  and
           November 2014, the witness statements on  behalf  of  the  three
           Hungarian  migrant  and  refugee  organisations,  all  dated  27
           October 2014 and the other related statements generated for  the
           purpose of the Court of Appeal hearing in HK  (Sudan).   I  note
           that the  two  UNCHR  employees  who  were  interviewed  by  the
           Applicants' solicitors in Budapest in October 2014 have declined
           to sign any witness statement or to confirm the accuracy of  any
           account of their interview.  While  I  have  noted  the  reasons
           proffered, this does not alter this fact.

       15. All of the evidence must be evaluated in the round.  Thus it  is
           appropriate to highlight the positive and  favourable  terms  in
           which conditions in reception facilities are  described  in  the
           AIDA/HHC Report of April 2014 (at pages  39  -  41  especially).
           This  includes  a   description   of   the   psychological   and
           psychotherapy services provided to traumatised asylum applicants
           by the  Cordelia  Foundation,  an  NGO.  As  regards  vulnerable
           persons, there is specific provision  in  the  Hungarian  Asylum
           Act, in the context of a broad definition (see pages  42  -  43)
           and a  requirement  that  due  consideration  be  given  to  the
           specific needs of such persons,  which  may  include  additional
           free health care services.  The report continues:

                 "It  is  the  duty  of  the  Office  of   Immigration   and
                 Nationality (OIN) to ascertain whether the  rules  applying
                 to  vulnerable  asylum  seekers  are  applicable   to   the
                 individual circumstances of the asylum seeker.  In case  of
                 doubt, the OIN can request expert assistance by a doctor or
                 a psychologist.  There is no protocol however  to  identify
                 vulnerable asylum seekers upon reception in a facility  and
                 therefore it depends very much on the actual asylum officer
                 whether the special needs of a particular asylum seeker are
                 identified  at  the  beginning  or  through  the  procedure
                 ..........."

           This section of the report also notes  the  limitations  on  the
           Cordelia Foundation voluntary psychological services and the  ad
           hoc nature of referrals to this agency.  For completeness, I add
           that the HHC Report of May 2014 does not  specifically  consider
           this discrete issue.

      Conclusions

       16. I have the benefit of a comprehensive skeleton argument prepared
           by Mr O'Callaghan (of Counsel)  on  behalf  of  the  Applicants,
           supplemented by an admirably concise and focused submission.  He
           indicated that the Applicants  were  relying  "heavily"  on  the
           further HHC witness statement of November 2014. As argued,  this
           was very much  the  centrepiece  of  the  Applicants'  case.  Mr
           O'Callaghan  acknowledged,  realistically,  that  there  is   no
           evidential foundation for suggesting that the first Applicant is
           likely to be detained  if  transferred  to  Hungary,  given  the
           unequivocal statement in the HHC Report of May 2014 that  single
           female asylum applicants "are hardly  ever  detained".   Rather,
           the likelihood in this Applicant's case is  accommodation  in  a
           reception  centre.    Characterising   this   Applicant   as   a
           "vulnerable" person, he submitted that she is at risk of inhuman
           and degrading  treatment  upon  return,  having  regard  to  her
           previous experience and her mental condition.  He emphasised the
           absence of any "triage" mechanism in the relevant centres.


       17. On behalf  of  the  Respondent,  Mr  Harland  (of  Counsel),  in
           summary, drew  attention  to  the  clear  graph  of  progressive
           improvement in reception conditions in Hungary, confirmed by  an
           analysis of the various  reports  compiled  from  time  to  time
           during the past two years; the relevant provisions  of  the  new
           Hungarian laws (noted above); the enhanced duty  which  will  be
           owed to this Applicant  under  Article  32  of  the  Dublin  III
           Regulation; the clear indication in the decision letter that the
           Respondent will provide relevant information to the  appropriate
           Hungarian authorities upon this Applicant's  transfer  to  their
           jurisdiction; and the evidence  of  her  previous  behaviour  in
           proactively seeking medical attention and treatment.

       18. Having subjected all of the evidence to appropriate scrutiny,  I
           find  the  Respondent's  argument  compelling.   In  short,  the
           available evidence  does  not,  in  my  judgment,  traverse  the
           threshold of establishing, even arguably,  that  the  Article  3
           ECHR baseline is  overcome,  that  is  to  say  that  there  are
           substantial grounds for believing that this  Applicant  will  be
           exposed to a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment, in the
           discrete and narrow respect advanced,  in  the  event  of  being
           removed to Hungary under the Dublin Regulation.  The evidence as
           a whole establishes that the relevant  services  and  facilities
           which will  be  at  her  disposal,  while  not  notionally  gold
           standard viewed through the  lens  of  the  world  of  the  most
           advanced western nations, should, in conjunction  with  her  own
           likely behaviour, which can be reasonably predicted by reference
           to her past  behaviour  in  seeking  attention  and  assistance,
           ensure that her treatment will not fall below the Article 3 ECHR
           threshold.

       19. In the case of the  second  Applicant,  Mr  Arap,  I  accept  Mr
           O'Callaghan's submission that, being a returned asylum applicant
           who absconded previously, he is  likely  to  be  detained.   The
           evidential foundation for this submission is sufficient.   There
           is no suggestion  that  the  mere  fact  of  detention,  in  the
           abstract, would engage the Article 3  ECHR  threshold.   Rather,
           there is heavy reliance on the evidence, particularly  the  most
           recent HHC statement, relating to  the  possibility  of  violent
           conduct on the  part  of  officers  employed  at  the  Hungarian
           detention centres.  In common with the Court  of  Appeal  in  HK
           (Sudan), I find  this  evidence  diffuse,  unparticularised  and
           vague.  It has  barely  evolved  at  all,  as  the  exercise  of
           juxtaposing the HHC Report of May 2014 and the HHC statement  of
           November 2014 confirms.  It is strikingly devoid of  detail  and
           substance.   I  consider  that  it  falls  measurably  short  of
           attaining the requisite threshold.  I make the  same  conclusion
           in respect of the secondary aspect  of  this  Applicant's  case,
           which relates to the use of leashes  and  handcuffs  in  certain
           limited  circumstances.   On  this  issue  I  concur  with   the
           assessment of the Court of Appeal in HK (Sudan).

       20. I  conclude  that  evidentially  neither  Applicant's  case  is,
           arguably, sufficient to displace the strong  presumption,  which
           is one of the pillars of the Dublin regime,  that  Hungary  will
           comply   with   its    relevant    international    obligations.
           Furthermore, in strict EU  law  terms,  the  evidence  fails  to
           establish  an  arguable   relevant   systemic   shortcoming   or
           substantial operational  problems  in  the  conditions  for  the
           reception, processing and  treatment  of  asylum  applicants  in
           Hungary.  It follows that I dismiss both applications.

       21. I emphasise that I have decided these challenges on their merits
           and have not considered this court bound by the decision  in  HK
           (Sudan) since, being an ex tempore judgment of a single judge of
           the Court of Appeal in a judicial review permission  appeal,  it
           does not rank as a binding precedent. Finally,  I  commend  both
           Counsel for the clarity and economy of their arguments.


     Order

       22. The applications for permission are dismissed.


       23. I shall provide a separate ruling on costs, given the issues  of
           principle which have been raised on behalf of the Applicants and
           the consequential directions requiring  further  submissions.  I
           have also been alerted to the  linkage  with  another  UTIAC  in
           which similar issues of principle have been raised.


       24. When judgment was handed  down  initially  in  these  cases,  in
           draft, I refused an application for permission to appeal to  the
           Court of Appeal on the ground  that  these  are  intensely  fact
           sensitive cases raising no issue of general principle and  there
           is no sustainable suggestion that incorrect principles have been
           applied.

           Signed:
                 [pic]
           The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
            President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber

            Dated:  29 January 2015


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A refusal by the Upper Tribunal  of  permission  to  bring  judicial  review
proceedings,  following  a  hearing  is  a   decision   that   disposes   of
proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).
