
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Mujahid) v First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber) and the Secretary of State for the Home Department (refusal
of human rights claim) [2020] UKUT 00085 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                  THE QUEEN
                  (ON THE APPLICATION OF MUHAMMAD MUJAHID)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                             FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL
                      (IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                            Interested Party

Representation:

For the applicant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel, instructed by Latitude Law

For the interested party:  Mr S Murray, Counsel, instructed by the
                      Government Legal Department
The respondent did not appear and was not represented.

(1) A person (C) in the United Kingdom who makes a  human  rights  claim  is
asserting that C (or someone connected with C) has, for whatever  reason,  a
right recognised by the ECHR, which is of such a kind that removing C  from,
or requiring C to leave, would be a violation of that right.

(2)  The refusal of a human rights  claim  under  section  82(1)(b)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  involves  the  Secretary  of
State taking the stance that she is not obliged by section 6  of  the  Human
Rights Act 1998 to respond to the claim by granting C leave.

(3) Accordingly, the Secretary of State does not decide to  refuse  a  human
rights claim when, in  response  to  it,  she  grants  C  limited  leave  by
reference to C's family life with a particular family member, even though  C
had sought indefinite leave by reference to long  residence  in  the  United
Kingdom.

                                  JUDGMENT


A.  THE QUESTION

 1. Where an individual who is in the United Kingdom makes  an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain, in circumstances where the  application
    is treated as a human rights claim, does the Secretary of State  refuse
    the human rights claim - thereby giving rise to a right  of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal under  section  82(1)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - if the Secretary of State decides not
    to grant indefinite leave to remain but grants the  individual  limited
    leave to remain, by reference to the Secretary of  State's  obligations
    under the Human Rights Act 1998?

 2. I have concluded that the answer to this question is no.  I  have  been
    much assisted by the helpful written and oral submissions  of  Mr  Pipe
    and Mr Murray.

B.  THE APPLICATION FOR INDEFINITE LEAVE TO REMAIN

 3. The applicant, a citizen of Pakistan, arrived in the United Kingdom  in
    October 2006 as a student.  He was granted further leave to  remain  in
    that capacity.  In 2010 he was granted leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study) Work Migrant, followed by leave  as  a  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant, until 30 August 2016.

 4.  On  8  August  2016,  the  applicant  submitted  a  Tier  1  (General)
    application for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Before the expiry of  his  extant  leave,  the  applicant  varied  that
    application so that it became an application for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain based on ten years' long residence, by  reference  to  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The solicitors' letter which accompanied the  application  stated  that
    the applicant had a wife, adult son and minor  daughter  resident  with
    him in the United Kingdom.  They also were citizens of  Pakistan.   The
    son and daughter had been in the United Kingdom since 8 December  2010.
    The letter said that since he came to the United Kingdom, the applicant
    "has developed a vast social network of friends, i.e. a strong  private
    life".  He "has always considered this country as his only home".   The
    letter contended as "an irrebuttable fact that he has developed a  very
    strong private and family life during the course of  his  residence  in
    the UK".

 6. The applicant signed his name after section 6 of the application  form,
    which contained a declaration by him regarding a  variety  of  matters.
    Two of the paragraphs read as follows:-

         "I accept that where I do  not  qualify  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain but fall for a grant of limited leave, my  application  will
         be treated as an application for limited leave and I may  be  asked
         to pay an  immigration  health  surcharge,  under  the  Immigration
         (Health Charge) Order 2015.  I accept that the Secretary  of  State
         will treat this application as invalid, retain the application  fee
         and not grant leave, if a requirement to pay  a  surcharge  is  not
         met.

         ...

         I accept that, in the event that I do not meet the requirements for
         indefinite leave, my application  may  also  be  considered  as  an
         application for limited leave to remain  and  understand  that  the
         Secretary of State will not grant a period of limited leave  unless
         the requirement to pay  an  immigration  health  charge  under  the
         Immigration (Health Charge) Order 2015 has been met."

C.  THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S RESPONSE

 7.  On  28  February  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  responded  to  the
    application.  The Secretary of State's letter said that:-

          "... you do not qualify  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
         reasons for this are set out in Annex A to this letter.

         However, we are satisfied that you would fall to be granted limited
         leave  to  remain  of  30  months  on  the  basis  of   exceptional
         circumstances D-LTRPT1.2, were you to make a valid application  for
         such leave.  The detailed reasons for this are set out in Annex A.

         In these circumstances, in accordance with the consent you gave  on
         the application form, we are now treating your  application  as  an
         application for limited leave to remain.  However, under  paragraph
         6(1)(c)(ii) of the Immigration (Health Charge) Order 2015, we  will
         be obliged to treat your application for limited leave to remain as
         invalid if  you  do  not  comply  with  a  requirement  to  pay  an
         immigration health surcharge by the date specified.  In respect  of
         your application, in order for it to be valid and  for  you  to  be
         granted limited leave to remain, you must pay an immigration health
         surcharge of �500 within 10 days of the date of this letter.

         Annex B to this letter sets out what the surcharge is for, how  the
         amount you must pay has been calculated and how you must pay it.

         What this means for you

         If you do not pay the immigration health surcharge by the specified
         date, your application for limited leave to remain will be  treated
         as invalid.  This means that you will not be granted limited  leave
         to remain and your application fee will not be refunded.  You  will
         not be able to appeal this decision and you may liable for  removal
         from the United Kingdom."

 8. Annex A explained that the applicant would not  be  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain because the Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
    applicant had given discrepant accounts to, respectively,  her  and  to
    Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, regarding his earnings in respect of
    certain tax years.  The Secretary of State accordingly  took  the  view
    that the applicant had either misrepresented his earnings  to  HMRC  in
    order  to  reduce  his  tax  liability  or  else  had  provided   false
    information about his earnings to the Secretary of State  in  order  to
    obtain leave to remain, or both.  As a result, the Secretary  of  State
    considered that the application for indefinite leave fell to be refused
    by reference to the applicant's character and conduct, having regard to
    paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.

 9. The Secretary of State, however, considered the  resulting  application
    for limited leave to remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  including
    Appendix FM and "on  the  basis  of  exceptional  circumstances".   The
    Secretary of State was satisfied that limited leave to  remain  for  30
    months should be granted  to  the  applicant,  once  he  had  paid  the
    immigration health  surcharge.   This  was  "on  the  basis  that  your
    daughter ... who arrived in the UK on 8/12/2010, has resided in the  UK
    for over 7 years".

10.  The  applicant  paid  the  surcharge.   On  21  March  2019,  he  was,
    accordingly, issued by the Secretary of State with the following notice
    of decision:-

         "You applied for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  10
         years lawful residence but your application has been refused.   You
         have been granted leave to remain until 21 September 2021.

         ...

         .    You are not entitled to appeal this decision.  Section  82  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  does  not
             provide a right of appeal where an applicant still  has  leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom and so is entitled to
             stay here.

         .    You have been granted permission to stay  until  21  September
             2021.  Please ensure that you  understand  the  conditions  of
             your stay.

         You are not required to leave the United Kingdom  as  a  result  of
             this decision."

D.  THE APPLICANT'S NOTICE OF APPEAL

11. The applicant filed a notice of appeal  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), seeking to challenge the decision  of
    28 February 2019.

12. On 26 March 2019, a First-tier Tribunal Judge issued a  decision  under
    rule  22(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  This  provides  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal "may not accept the notice of appeal" where  "there
    is no appealable decision".

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied that  the  applicant  "does
    not have a right of appeal to this Tribunal".  It is,  however,  common
    ground  that  the  reason  the  judge  gave  for  that  conclusion  was
    erroneous, insofar as she based it upon a finding  that  the  applicant
    "did not make an application to remain on human rights grounds".

14. The applicant commenced judicial review proceedings against the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision to issue the rule 22 notice.  On 15 July 2019,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin,  acting  as  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, issued a "decision on validity".  Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
    correctly noted that the passage at the end of the Secretary of State's
    letter of 21 March 2019 was incorrect in asserting that section  82  of
    the 2002 Act "bars out a right of  appeal  when  someone  has  existing
    leave to remain.  It does not".  She also recognised that the applicant
    had, in fact made a human rights claim.  Nevertheless:-

         "...he has succeeded in that on the basis  that  the  Secretary  of
         State has granted him leave to remain until  2021  because  of  his
         having a qualifying child.  He has not succeeded on  the  basis  he
         applied but the Secretary of State has  granted  his  human  rights
         application.  The decision therefore cannot be said to be a refusal
         of a human rights claim and thus is not a decision that  carries  a
         right of appeal pursuant to s.82."

15. Permission to bring judicial review  proceedings  was  refused  on  the
    papers on 7 August 2019  but  granted  following  oral  renewal  on  23
    September 2019.

E.  PRIMARY LEGISLATION

16. The relevant primary legislation is as follows:-

         "82. Right of appeal to the Tribunal

         (1)  A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where -

             ...

              (b) the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
                  rights claim made by P, ...

         ...

         84.  Grounds of appeal

         ...

         (2)  An appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
             claim) must be brought on the  ground  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

         ...

         113. Interpretation

             (1)  In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears-

             ...

                  "human rights claim" means a claim made by a person to the
                  Secretary of State at a place designated by the  Secretary
                  of State that to remove the person from or require him  to
                  leave the United  Kingdom  ...  would  be  unlawful  under
                  section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  (c.  42)  (public
                  authority not to act contrary to Convention)."

F.  HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE

17. The Home Office Guidance: Rights of Appeal (Version 7.0) (30 July 2018)
    explains to the Secretary of State's caseworkers  "what  amounts  to  a
    human rights claim and how you identify and consider such claims".  For
    our purposes, the relevant passages are as follows:-

         "How to identify a human rights claim

         In the UK: application under the Immigration Rules

         The  applications  listed  in  this  section  and  made  under  the
         Immigration Rules are human rights applications  and  the  starting
         position is that there is a right of appeal against refusal.

         ...

         The relevant applications are those made under:

         .    Paragraph 276B (long residence)

         ..."

G.  BALAJIGARI V SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT [2019] EWCA  Civ
    673


18. Paragraphs 2 to 4 of the judgment  of  Underhill  LJ  in  Balajigari  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department & Others [2019] EWCA Civ 673
    describe the nature of the cases with which the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    there concerned:-

         "2.  These four appeals have been heard together because  they  all
             arise  out  of  the  same  Home  Office  practice,  which  has
             attracted considerable controversy.  The  background  was  set
             out  in  a  recent  Home   Office   publication,   Review   of
             Applications  by  Tier  1  (General)  Migrants  Refused  under
             Paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules ("the Review"),  and
             can be sufficiently summarised as follows.


         3.   At the times relevant to this appeal  migrants  who  had  been
             given leave to enter or remain under the  Points-Based  System
             ("PBS") provided for by Part 6A of the  Immigration  Rules  as
             "Tier 1 (General) Migrants" ("T1GMs") were entitled  to  apply
             for indefinite leave to  remain  ("ILR",  otherwise  known  as
             "settlement") after five years.  It was  a  condition  of  any
             such application that they  demonstrate  a  minimum  level  of
             earnings in the previous year.  Such an applicant will already
             have had one or more finite  periods  of  "further"  leave  to
             remain, for the purpose of which he or she will also have  had
             to declare earnings at a required minimum level.


         4.   The Home Office became concerned that there was  a  widespread
             practice of applicants for leave to remain as a T1GM  claiming
             falsely inflated earnings, particularly from  self-employment,
             in order to appear to meet the required minimum; and from 2015
             it began to make use of its powers under section 40 of the  UK
             Borders and Immigration Act 2007 to  obtain  information  from
             Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs ("HMRC") about the  earnings
             declared by applicants  in  their  tax  returns  covering  the
             equivalent period.   This  information  disclosed  significant
             discrepancies in a large number of cases.   It  also  revealed
             what appeared to be a pattern of taxpayers who had in  earlier
             years submitted tax returns showing  earnings  that  attracted
             little or no liability to tax subsequently submitting  amended
             returns showing much  higher  levels  of  earnings,  over  the
             required minimum, in circumstances which suggested  that  they
             were  aware  that   the   previous   under-declaration   might
             jeopardise a pending application for leave to  remain.   There
             were also instances of returns being submitted belatedly where
             none had been submitted at the time and where  an  application
             for leave was pending.  (A similar pattern was detected in the
             case of T1GM migrants applying for ILR after ten  years  under
             the long-residence provisions of the Rules;  but  we  are  not
             directly concerned with those in these appeals.)"

19. The next passage from the judgment in Balajigari to  which  I  need  to
    refer begins at paragraph 77:-

         77.  It is the Appellants' case that a decision to refuse leave  to
             remain under paragraph 322(5) on  the  basis  that  they  have
             dishonestly misrepresented their earnings, whether to HMRC  or
             to the Home Office, necessarily  engages  their  rights  under
             article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights: that is,
             that the first and second stages  of  "the  Razgar  test"  are
             satisfied (see R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 2 AC 368, at para. 17 of the
             opinion of Lord Bingham (p. 389)).


         78.  The reason why the issue is significant is not so much because
             the engagement of article 8  would  give  the  Appellants  any
             greater   substantive   rights   or   additional    procedural
             protection: as to this, see para. 92 below.  Rather,  it  goes
             to the basis on which a T1GM applicant who is refused  ILR  on
             paragraph 322(5) grounds can challenge the  decision  in  law.
             It might also mean  that  it  is  open  to  them  to  bring  a
             challenge by way of appeal rather than by judicial review.  We
             address these points more fully under head C below.


         79.  Mr Biggs submitted that a  decision  to  refuse  T1GM  ILR  on
             paragraph 322(5) grounds engaged article 8 for three  distinct
             reasons.


         80.  His first reason focused on liability for removal from the UK.
              A T1GM applicant for ILR would by definition have been in the
             UK for several years and would almost certainly have developed
             a sufficient private life for his or  her  removal  to  engage
             article  8.   He  submitted  that  although  a  refusal  under
             paragraph 322(5) was not as such a  removal  decision  it  was
             "functionally" equivalent to such a decision. In the  majority
             of cases, although the application will have been  made  prior
             to the expiry of the applicant's existing  leave,  that  leave
             will have expired by the time that  the  refusal  decision  is
             made and the applicant will be reliant  only  on  leave  under
             section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971:  that  leave  would
             expire following the refusal - to be precise, at  the  end  of
             the 14-day period allowed for seeking an administrative review
             or at the conclusion of the review if sought.   The  applicant
             would have, from that moment, no right to be  in  the  UK  and
             would be liable to removal at any time.  The  decision  letter
             in each of  the  cases  before  us  attached  an  "Enforcement
             Warning", one of the headings  in  which  was  "Liability  for
             Removal". This read:


                  "Persons who require, but no longer have, leave  to  enter
                  or remain may be liable to removal from the United Kingdom
                  under section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999
                  (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).


                  You may be detained or placed on reporting conditions.


                  You do not have to leave the  United  Kingdom  during  the
                  time period in which  you  may  apply  for  administrative
                  review.  If you apply for administrative review you do not
                  need to leave the United  Kingdom  until  we  decide  your
                  application.  If  you  do  not  apply  for  administrative
                  review, or extend your leave to remain on  another  basis,
                  you will soon be giving [sic] further notice that you must
                  leave the United Kingdom."
             Mr Biggs acknowledged that, as  the  final  sentence  of  that
             passage  makes  clear,  if  the  applicant   did   not   leave
             voluntarily further formal steps would  be  taken  to  enforce
             removal: specifically, current  Home  Office  practice  is  to
             notify a person liable to removal of a "removal window" during
             which enforcement action will be taken.  But he submitted that
             those steps were simply administrative consequences - which it
             is said would occur "soon" - of the  substantive  decision  to
             refuse ILR, which is what terminates the applicant's leave  to
             remain.
         81.  Secondly, Mr Biggs relied on the  legal  consequences  for  an
             applicant who remained in the UK  without  leave,  which  have
             been  rendered  more  severe   by   the   so-called   "hostile
             environment" provisions  introduced  by  the  Immigration  Act
             2014. It is, in the first place, a criminal offence to  be  in
             the UK  without  leave  to  remain:  see  section  24  of  the
             Immigration Act 1971.  As regards  practical  consequences,  a
             person without leave faces severe restrictions on their  right
             to  work  (see  section  24B  of  the  1971  Act),   to   rent
             accommodation (section 22 of the 2014 Act),  to  have  a  bank
             account (section 40 of the 2014 Act) and  to  hold  a  driving
             licence (sections 97, 97A and  99  of  the  Road  Traffic  Act
             1988); nor will they be entitled to free  treatment  from  the
             NHS (section 175 of the National Health Service Act 2006).  He
             submitted that those consequences are bound to have a  serious
             impact on a migrant's private life irrespective of any removal
             action.


         82.  Thirdly, Mr  Biggs  submitted  that  a  formal  allegation  of
             dishonesty made by an organ of the state is bound to  have  an
             adverse impact on the reputation of the person about  whom  it
             is made.   He  submitted  that  it  is  well-established  that
             article 8 protects a person's right to  their  reputation:  he
             referred to the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  In  re
             Guardian News and Media Ltd [2010] UKSC 1, [2010] 2 AC 697."

20. The court, at paragraphs 83 to 89, accepted  the  first  of  the  bases
    advanced by Mr Biggs for concluding that a decision to refuse leave  to
    remain under paragraph 322(5) necessary engaged Article 8 of the  ECHR.
    A person refused  leave  will,  typically,  have  no  other  basis  for
    remaining in the United Kingdom  and  is,  accordingly,  liable  to  be
    removed.

21.  So far as concerned those who, as a result  of  the  paragraph  322(5)
    decision would not be left without leave to remain, the court  held  as
    follows:-

         "90. We return to the case where the effect of the refusal  of  the
             application for  T1GM  ILR  does  not  in  itself  render  the
             applicant liable to removal forthwith (subject  to  suspension
             pending administrative review), either  because  a  period  of
             limited leave  granted  previously  has  not  yet  expired  or
             because the applicant is  entitled  to  leave  on  some  other
             basis.  This is less straightforward, but we  do  not  believe
             that the position is fundamentally different.   The  Secretary
             of State's decision that the  applicant's  case  falls  within
             paragraph 322(5) necessarily means that any existing leave can
             be curtailed under paragraph 323 and that any application  for
             leave to remain on a different basis would fall to be refused:
             Part 9 applies of course to leave to remain (or enter) on  any
             ground.  Indeed logically the  Secretary  of  State  ought  to
             curtail any existing leave to remain in such a case, since the
             basis of ground (5) is that the migrant's presence in  the  UK
             is undesirable (and that there are  no  discretionary  grounds
             why he or she should  be  granted  leave  nonetheless).   That
             being so, it seems to us that an applicant  in  this  category
             is,  in  substance,  equally  "liable  to  removal"  with   an
             applicant who at the moment of refusal only enjoyed section 3C
             leave.  Any other result would inevitably lead to  cases  with
             arbitrarily different results.  In the nature  of  things  any
             period of unexpired limited leave for T1GM ILR  applicants  is
             likely to be short, and it would be unsatisfactory to say that
             article 8 was engaged in a case where a refusal  rendered  the
             applicant liable to removal forthwith but not where he or  she
             still had a few days limited leave to run."

22. The final passage to  which  reference  needs  to  be  made  begins  at
    paragraph 96:-

         "96. The starting-point is that a refusal of ILR is not  in  itself
             an  appealable  decision  under  section   82   (1)   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  However,  by
             section 82 (1) (b), a right of appeal  is  provided  in  these
             terms:


                  "A person ('P') may appeal to  the  [First-tier]  Tribunal
                  where... the Secretary of State has decided  to  refuse  a
                  human rights claim made by P...".


         97.  For these purposes, "human rights claim" is defined in section
             113 (1) of the 2002 Act (as amended by paragraph 53 (2) (a) of
             Schedule 9 (4) to the Immigration Act 2014) as follows:


                  "... a claim made by a person to the Secretary of State at
                  a place designated by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  to
                  remove the person from or require him to leave the  United
                  Kingdom or to refuse him entry  into  the  United  Kingdom
                  would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
                  1998  (public  authority  not  to  act  contrary  to   the
                  [ECHR])".


         98.  The procedural requirements  for  making  such  a  claim  were
             recently reviewed by this Court in R (Shrestha) v Secretary of
             State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 2810. In  short,
             section 50 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006
             enables  the  Secretary  of  State  to  require  a  particular
             procedure to be followed, including the form to  be  used  and
             the fee to be paid; and paragraph 34 of the Immigration Rules,
             made under that provision, sets out mandatory requirements for
             an  application  for  leave  to  remain  (which  includes   an
             application  made  on  human  rights   grounds).    Where   an
             application fails to comply with those requirements (including
             by not referring to a claim for leave on human rights  grounds
             at all), there is no "human rights  claim"  refusal  of  which
             would give rise to a right of appeal.  The Secretary of  State
             has, however, conceded that in  the  context  of  an  imminent
             removal an appeal will lie to the FTT against a refusal  of  a
             human rights claim even if not made in proper form: see paras.
             31-33 of the judgment of Hickinbottom  LJ  in  Shrestha.   The
             basis of the concession (which originated in Ahsan: see  para.
             14 of the judgment of Underhill LJ) is not articulated, but it
             would appear to be justified on the basis that  the  Secretary
             of State can waive the formal requirements in the Rules.


         99.  Against that background, the  most  straightforward  situation
             will be where the applicant has included a human rights  claim
             in his or her original T1GM  ILR  application.   The  relevant
             form includes a box in which an applicant can rely on  matters
             other than the relevant Part 6A grounds,  and  (although  this
             was not a matter on which we were addressed)  we  can  see  no
             reason in principle why an applicant should not complete  that
             box in the alternative so as to raise a  human  rights  claim;
             the point may also be capable of being raised in the  covering
             letter. If they have done so the refusal  of  the  application
             will constitute a refusal of that claim and can be appealed as
             such.  Having said  that,  it  is  in  the  nature  of  things
             unlikely that an applicant for T1GM ILR will have  thought  it
             necessary to make an alternative article 8 claim of this kind:
             typically they will regard their application  as  standing  or
             falling on  whether  they  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
             relevant PBS category.  We would thus  assume  that  cases  of
             this kind are uncommon.


         100. In the usual case where the applicant has not included a human
             rights claim in their original ILR application it follows from
             Shrestha that if they wish to generate a right to an appeal on
             human rights grounds following its refusal they will  need  to
             make a fresh application, using the  proper  form  (again,  we
             were not addressed on which that would be), the gist of  which
             will be that they have been rendered  liable  to  removal,  in
             breach of their article 8 rights and  in  circumstances  where
             they were otherwise entitled to ILR, on the basis  only  of  a
             wrong  and/or  unfair  finding   of   dishonesty.    Such   an
             application might  be  prompted  by  the  Secretary  of  State
             serving a "one-stop" notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act.
               If,  as  presumably  would  be  the  case  except  in   rare
             circumstances, the Secretary of State maintained his  original
             decision and refused the application, the applicant would then
             be  entitled  to  an  in-country  appeal,   subject   to   the
             possibility of it being certified as "clearly unfounded" under
             section 94 (1) of the 2002 Act.


         101. The alternative course to secure an appeal would  be  for  the
             applicant to wait until steps are taken  to  enforce  removal.
             It appears from the concession referred to at para.  98  above
             that if at that stage he or she makes a human rights claim  in
             order to resist removal the Secretary of State will not insist
             on a formal application being  made  and  will  proceed  to  a
             decision against which they can  appeal  (subject,  again,  to
             certification under section 94 (1)).


         102. Neither of those routes to an  appeal  is  very  satisfactory.
             The first requires the applicant to go through  the  formality
             of making, and paying for, a further application in  order  to
             decide substantially the same question, with no  certainty  as
             to how soon the decision will be made.   The  second  requires
             him or her to wait for  an  indefinite  and  possibly  lengthy
             period before being able to obtain an appealable decision.  It
             would be open to the Secretary of State to  waive  the  formal
             requirements, treat the initial claim  as  including  a  human
             rights claim which he had refused and  thus,  subject  to  the
             applicant having an appropriate opportunity to put that  human
             rights claim in order, afford the applicant a right of  appeal
             to the FTT.  Ms Anderson made  it  clear,  however,  that  the
             Secretary  of  State  was  not  minded  to  waive  the  formal
             requirements generally so as to facilitate appeals (as opposed
             to applications for judicial review) in  all  cases.   As  the
             legislation now stands, that appears to be a stance that he is
             entitled to take."

H.  DISCUSSION

23. Although the parties were in agreement that the applicant  had,  on  16
    June 2017, made an application that fell  to  be  treated  as  a  human
    rights claim, it is necessary to consider why this is so.  As  we  have
    seen, the  solicitor's  accompanying  letter  specifically  raised  the
    applicant's private and family life under Article 8 of the ECHR.   Even
    if it had not done so, however, the Secretary of State's  Guidance,  as
    we have also seen,  meant  the  Secretary  of  State's  caseworker  was
    required  by  her  to  treat  the  application  as  a   "human   rights
    application".

24. In Baihinga (r.22;  human  rights  appeal:  requirements)  [2018]  UKUT
    00090, the Upper Tribunal held that an application for leave  or  entry
    clearance may constitute a human rights claim, even  if  the  applicant
    does not, in terms, raise human rights.  It is not, of course, for  the
    Secretary of State in her Guidance to seek to re-write  the  provisions
    of primary legislation.  Accordingly, the mere fact that the  Secretary
    of State  requires  her  caseworkers  to  treat  an  application  under
    paragraph 276B (long residence) as a human rights claim  cannot  itself
    make that application fall  within  the  definition  of  "human  rights
    claim" in section 113 of the 2002 Act, if it would not otherwise do so.



25. That is not, however, the effect of the Guidance.  Rather, the Guidance
    illuminates the point that paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules  is
    intended to enable the Secretary of State,  in  the  discharge  of  her
    immigration functions, to act compatibly with Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    and, thus, section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  which  makes  it
    unlawful for a public authority to act in a way  that  is  incompatible
    with a Convention right.  A person who has spent  at  least  ten  years
    continuously lawfully resident in the United Kingdom is, as  a  general
    matter, very likely to have established a private life of a  kind  that
    would,  in  the  absence  of  countervailing  considerations,  make  it
    disproportionate for the Secretary of State to remove or  require  that
    person to leave the United Kingdom.  A long residence application under
    paragraph 276B is, therefore, properly to be regarded as a human rights
    claim.

26. The essence of Mr Pipe's submissions on  behalf  of  the  applicant  is
    that, in her decision of 28  February  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the application under paragraph 276B for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of long residence.   She  therefore  refused  the
    human rights claim made by the applicant.  Mr  Pipe  submits  that  the
    fact the Secretary of State's decision goes on  to  indicate  that  the
    applicant qualifies for limited leave to remain, on the basis that  his
    daughter has resided here for over 7 years, does not alter the position
    that the refusal of ILR under paragraph 276B constitutes a  refusal  of
    the human rights claim.

27. The emphasis placed by Underhill LJ, at paragraph 98 of the judgment in
    Balajigari, on the procedural requirements for making  a  human  rights
    claim is important.  Citing Shrestha, the court noted that  section  50
    of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  enables  the
    Secretary of State to require a particular procedure  to  be  followed;
    and that paragraph 34 of  the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out  mandatory
    requirements for an application for leave to remain, which includes  an
    application made on human rights grounds.  Where an  application  fails
    to comply with those requirements, there is "no  'human  rights  claim'
    refusal of which will give rise  to  a  right  of  appeal".   The  only
    circumstances in which that would not  be  so  are  those  recorded  by
    Higginbottom LJ in paragraphs 31  to  32  of  Shrestha;  namely,  where
    actual removal of the person concerned from the United Kingdom is close
    or imminent.

28. The Secretary of State's ability to regulate the way in which  a  human
    rights claim can be  made  was  recognised  by  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Robinson v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  UKSC  11.
    Although dealing with paragraph 353 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which
    concerns how and when new submissions can  constitute  a  human  rights
    claim, following an earlier unsuccessful human rights/protection claim,
    the Supreme Court's judgment is  a  recognition  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's ability to regulate the gateway to the appellate system.

29. With these observations in mind, the significance  of  the  declaration
    signed by the applicant  in  his  paragraph  276B  application  becomes
    apparent.  Although it is unclear why the declaration in section  6  of
    the application form contains both of the paragraphs I  have  cited  at
    paragraph 6 above, their significance is plain.  Once the Secretary  of
    State determined that the applicant  did  not  qualify  for  indefinite
    leave to remain, the application of  16  June  2017  became,  with  the
    applicant's express acceptance, an application for limited leave, which
    the decision of 28 February 2019 stated would result in  the  applicant
    being granted limited leave to remain, on what were on any view Article
    8 grounds, subject to the payment of the immigration health  surcharge.



30. It is not possible to construe the decision  of  28  February  2019  as
    comprising, as Mr Pipe submitted, two  discrete  decisions;  namely,  a
    decision to refuse the applicant's human rights claim by  reference  to
    paragraph 276B and a decision to grant a separate application, which he
    had been deemed to have made, for limited leave  to  remain.   Although
    some support can be derived for that submission from  the  use  of  the
    word "also" in the second of the cited passages of the Declaration, the
    first of those passages unequivocally states that the application "will
    be treated as an application for limited leave".  That is precisely how
    the decision of 28 February 2019 proceeds:-

         "In accordance with the consent you gave on the  application  form,
         we are now treating your application as an application for  limited
         leave to remain."

31. Importantly, Mr Pipe's submission is  fundamentally  incompatible  with
    the scheme of the primary legislation governing an appeal under section
    82(1)(b).  It is clear from the definition of "human rights  claim"  in
    section 113(1) of  the  2002  Act  that  the  presumed  removal  of  an
    individual from, or the presumed  requirement  on  that  individual  to
    leave, the United Kingdom is an essential element in order for there to
    be an appeal.  A person who makes a human  rights  claim  is  asserting
    that they (or someone connected with them) have, for whatever reason, a
    right recognised by the ECHR, which is of such  a  kind  that  removing
    that person or requiring them to leave would be  a  violation  of  that
    right.  In the case  of  a  qualified  right,  such  as  Article  8,  a
    violation may result from the fact that it would be disproportionate to
    remove or to require the person to leave.

32. Accordingly, the refusal of a human rights claim made by a  person  who
    is in the United Kingdom can occur only where the Secretary of  State's
    case, in response to the claim, is  that  she  does  not  consider  her
    obligations under section 6 of the 1998 Act require her to  respond  to
    the claim by recognising the  human  right  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and so granting the individual leave to remain.

33. The upshot of the Secretary of State's letters of 28  February  and  21
    March 2019 was that the Secretary of State did  respond  positively  to
    the applicant's human rights claim.  Although she did so on only one of
    the bases advanced in the application  and  the  solicitor's  letter  -
    namely, family life with one particular family member (the daughter)  -
    the Secretary of State,  in  granting  limited  leave  to  remain,  was
    acknowledging that their Article 8 rights were such as to preclude  her
    from removing the applicant  or  requiring  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  Indeed, as we have seen, the notice of decision of  21  March
    2019 ends with the express statement of the Secretary of State that the
    applicant is "not required to leave the United Kingdom as a  result  of
    this decision".

34. I do not consider that there is anything in Underhill LJ's judgment  in
    Balajigari that casts doubt on these findings.  Balajigari, as  can  be
    seen from paragraphs 2  to  4  of  the  judgment,  was  concerned  with
    applications for indefinite leave  to  remain  by  persons  as  Tier  1
    (General)  Migrants  under  the  points-based  system.   Although  T1GM
    migrants applying for ILR after ten  years  under  the  long  residence
    provisions of the Rules were mentioned in paragraph 4 of the  judgment,
    the court said that it was not "directly concerned with those in  these
    appeals".

35.  More particularly, Balajigari did not involve applicants who had  been
    granted limited leave to remain, in response to their ILR applications.
     It is the case that, at paragraph  90,  Underhill  LJ  considered  the
    hypothetical position of  a  T1GM  ILR  applicant,  who  would  not  be
    required to leave, in reality, as  a  result  of  the  refusal  "either
    because a period of  limited  leave  granted  previously  has  not  yet
    expired or because the applicant is entitled to  leave  on  some  other
    basis".  Underhill LJ considered  that  this  scenario  although  "less
    straightforward" was nevertheless not  "fundamentally  different"  from
    the others described.   This  was  because  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision that the applicant fell within paragraph  322(5)  "necessarily
    means that any existing leave can be curtailed under paragraph 323  and
    that any application for leave to remain on  a  different  basis  would
    fall to be refused".  The paragraph continues by noting that  logically
    the Secretary of State ought to curtail any existing leave:

       "since the basis of ground (5) is that the migrant's presence in  the
       UK is undesirable ...   That  being  so,  it  seeks  to  us  that  an
       applicant in this category  is,  in  substance,  equally  'liable  to
       removal' with an applicant who at the moment a refusal  only  enjoyed
       section 3C leave".

36. In the present case, the Secretary of State has done what the Court  of
    Appeal considered logically ought not to have  happened.   In  reality,
    however, I find that the Secretary of  State's  position  is  perfectly
    defensible.  Paragraph 276B(ii) of the Immigration Rules means that  an
    applicant will not be  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  if  the
    Secretary of State identifies:-

         "(ii)    ... reasons why it would be  undesirable  for  him  to  be
             given indefinite to remain on the grounds of  long  residence,
             taking into account his:-

             (a)  age; and

             (b)  strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

             (c)    personal   history,   including   character,   conduct,
                  associations and employment record; and

             (d)  domestic circumstances; and

             (e)  compassionate circumstances; and

             (f)  any representations received on the person's behalf; and

         (iii)    the applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general
             grounds for refusal."

         ..."

37. The Secretary of State could, and perhaps in  retrospect  should,  have
    taken into account  the  issues  regarding  the  discrepancies  in  the
    applicant's earnings, when considering paragraph  276B(ii)(c),  instead
    of having recourse to paragraph 322(5).  Nevertheless,  the  result  is
    not  illogical.   The  Secretary   of   State's   decision   is   that,
    notwithstanding  the  problematic  behaviour  she  considers  she   has
    identified, the  applicant's  family  life  case,  centred  around  the
    position  of  the  daughter,  is  such   that   it   would   still   be
    disproportionate in Article 8 terms for the applicant to be removed  or
    required to leave the United Kingdom.

38.  In this regard, it is noteworthy that section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act
    provides that, in the case of a person who is not liable to deportation
    (which the applicant is not), the public interest does not require  the
    person's removal where:-

         "(a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

39. Mr Murray drew attention to the following provision of the Secretary of
    State's Rights of Appeal Guidance:-

         "There will be applicants  who  have  immigration  leave  on  human
         rights grounds, who make a new and  different  human  rights  claim
         which if refused will have a right  of  appeal.   For  example,  an
         applicant who has extant leave as a partner, which they  no  longer
         qualify for, seeks a variation of that leave on the basis that they
         are the parent of a child.  That constitutes  a  new  human  rights
         claim.  The refusal of such a claim will give rise to  a  right  of
         appeal."

40. It is significant that this passage  does  not  suggest  the  right  of
    appeal would arise only if the Secretary of State not only refused  the
    variation of leave but also decided to cancel  the  extant  leave.  The
    reality is that, rather like the scenario  discussed  in  paragraph  35
    above, the Secretary of State could curtail leave, as the  requirements
    of that leave are no longer satisfied. But what  matters  is  that  the
    application is for leave to be granted by reference to the human rights
    position of the applicant, as it now is. This serves to underscore  the
    point, made above, that the refusal of a human  rights  claim  involves
    the Secretary of State taking the stance that she  is  not  obliged  by
    section 6 of the 1998 Act to respond to the claim by granting leave.

41. This application is dismissed.  I invite submissions as to the form  of
    the order and any incidental matters.


                      Signed                     Date






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
