
MB (Rule 30 Procedure Rules) DRC [2008] UKAIT 00088

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 10 September 2008


                                   Before:


                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                                     MB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr P Nathan, Counsel instructed by
Scudamores Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Rule 30 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  as
amended by the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  (Amendment)
Rules 2008, should be read in conjunction with rule 31(4)(c). If there is  a
reply the Tribunal must take it into account.  If there is no reply this  is
a matter which the Tribunal may take into account in the light  of  all  the
facts in the case.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a  citizen  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.
    There has been an order for the reconsideration of the determination of
    a panel (Immigration Judge Sharp and  Dr  T  Okitikpi)  dismissing  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision of 2 October 2007  to  make  a
    deportation  order  against  him.   The   respondent   concluded   that
    deportation would be conducive to the public good having considered all
    the factors relating to the appellant and in particular the contents of
    paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules.

2.    The appellant's immigration history is complicated.  The panel set  it
    out in paragraphs 2 to 9 of the determination in the following terms:

        "2.      This is not straightforward in view of the fact  that  the
           appellant has used a number of different names whilst living  in
           this country the main two of which are PA and  MB.   It  is  the
           appellant's case that his true name is MB  who  was  born  on  -
           March 1983 and hence  I  will  firstly  review  the  immigration
           history of the appellant as that person.


        3. It is the appellant's case that as  MB  he  entered  the  United
           Kingdom on 16th November  1994  with  his  adoptive  mother  and
           siblings  and  was  granted  temporary  admission  to  join  his
           adoptive father BN who had arrived in the UK on 30th April  1993
           and had claimed asylum.


         4.      On 17th October 1999  the  appellant  as  MB  was  granted
           indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  dependant
           of his adoptive father under the special measures introduced for
           clearing the asylum backlog.  On 1st February 2002 in  the  same
           name he submitted an application for naturalisation as a British
           citizen and there were no criminal convictions declared  on  his
           application.


        5. On 23rd June 2005 the Home Office wrote to the appellant in  the
           name of B advising him that they were aware  that  he  had  used
           another identity namely that of PA and asked for an  explanation
           as to why these two identities were being used.  On  9th  August
           2005 the representatives of the appellant as MB namely  Ormerods
           responded by a letter advising that the appellant had denied all
           knowledge of ever having used the identity  of  PA  and  claimed
           that his [sic] was a mistake of the Home Office.


        6. In his capacity as PA the appellant claimed to have  arrived  in
           the UK on 19th August 1996 as an  unaccompanied  minor  and  was
           granted a visitor's visa until 18th September 1996  and  on  the
           day of arrival sought asylum at the  Asylum  Screening  Unit  in
           Croydon.  His application for asylum was refused on 8th December
           1998 but he was granted exceptional leave to  remain  until  8th
           December 2002.  On 30th January  2003  in  the  name  of  PA  he
           submitted an application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on
           exceptional grounds which application was refused in the reasons
           for deportation letter from the Home Office dated 10th  November
           2007.


        7. In [sic] should be said  in  relation  to  his  application  for
           asylum in 1996 he was represented by solicitors Simmons Muirhead
           & Burton on [sic] 50 Bradwick Street, Soho,  London  W1.   They,
           amongst other things, submitted on his behalf a statement by  PA
           in correspondence dated 28th October 1996 in which PA sets out a
           vivid account of how  his  parents  were  killed  by  Government
           soldiers and he managed to escape and make his way to the UK.


        8. There are other documents in the Home Office file showing how PA
           applied for a travel document on 20th January 1999  as  well  as
           his application for indefinite leave to remain on  14th  January
           2003.  The application for naturalisation in his capacity as  MB
           dates [sic] 1st February 2002 is also in the file.


        9. It is of note that there is a further letter from Ormerods dated
           13th  March  2006  which  was  sent  to  the   Immigration   and
           Nationality Directorate in their capacity as acting for  him  as
           MB.   They  refer  to  MB's  application  for  citizenship   and
           reiterate that PA was nothing to do with their client and cannot
           be associated with any  application  that  PA  was  making.   It
           emphasises  that  their  client  MB  has  already  been  granted
           indefinite leave to remain and wishes to pursue his  application
           for citizenship"


3.    The panel set out the offences leading to  the  deportation  order  in
    paragraphs 10, 11 and 12 of his determination in the following terms:

        "10.      On 19th June 2007 the appellant was sentenced to  fifteen
        months' imprisonment at the Wood Green Crown Court.  This was for a
        number of offences and was made up as follows.  For an  offence  of
        dangerous driving he received four  months'  imprisonment  with  no
        separate penalty for  failing  to  surrender.   For  driving  while
        disqualified he received four  months'  imprisonment  consecutively
        with no separate penalty for having  no  insurance.   For  handling
        stolen goods he received three months' imprisonment  consecutively.
        For a further two charges of theft he received a [sic] four months'
        imprisonment each  concurrently  but  consecutive  to  other  [sic]
        sentences.  For failing to surrender he received another concurrent
        one months' [sic] imprisonment and he was disqualified from driving
        for twelve months.


        11.      He was charged and convicted in the name of PA and it  was
        said that his date of birth  was  not  known.   In  his  sentencing
        remarks the judge referred to  him  having  a  history  of  driving
        matters and stealing motor cars.  The sentencing remarks were brief
        and make no reference to any pre-sentence report.


        12.      There is within the papers a printout of  the  appellant's
        previous convictions as at 24th December 2006 which show  that  the
        person known as PA had claimed to have  been  born  in  Croydon  in
        April 1981 with an address at Sutton and which sets out  some  nine
        names under which he has been known and  four  different  dates  of
        birth.  None  of  these  includes  MB.   The  list  of  convictions
        consists of three fraud and kindred offences, six theft and kindred
        offences, one offence relating to police, courts and  prisons,  six
        miscellaneous offences as well as one non-recordable offence."


4.    The appellant attended the  hearing  and  gave  evidence  as  did  his
    sometime partner, SN.  Both parties were represented, the appellant  by
    Mr Nathan who appeared before me.

5.    The panel found that the appellant was not  a  credible  witness.   In
    paragraph 83 of the determination it said:

           "83.  ... he is  an  inveterate  liar  and  manipulator  and  is
               therefore not to be trusted in relation to anything he  says
               ..."

6.    In relation to the  Article  8  grounds,  the  panel  found  that  the
    appellant had established a private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the ten years he had been here.  He had had an  intermittent
    relationship with his girlfriend and their child.  The  extent  of  the
    appellant's private and family life was such as potentially  to  engage
    the  operation  of  Article  8.   The  panel  went   on   to   consider
    proportionality, concluding that the appellant was  young  and  healthy
    and would be able to re-adapt to life in his country  of  origin.   His
    girlfriend had visited the DRC and had relatives there.   Even  if  she
    did not want to go there there were no insurmountable obstacles to  her
    doing so.  The panel considered such evidence as there was  as  to  the
    appellant's son's medical condition before concluding that it would  be
    proportionate to remove the appellant to the DRC.

7.    In relation to paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules the panel  found
    that, taking into account the appropriate factors  and  the  particular
    facts of the appellant's case there were no  exceptional  circumstances
    which outweighed the presumption that his deportation was  required  in
    the public interest.

8.    The appeal was dismissed in relation to the grounds  claiming  asylum,
    humanitarian protection, deportation under the Immigration Rules and in
    relation to Articles 2, 3 and 8.

9.    The grounds for reconsideration submit, firstly, that the panel  erred
    in law in failing to grant an adjournment to enable  the  appellant  to
    produce a Probation  Officer's  report  and  in  failing  to  give  the
    appellant the promised "benefit of the doubt".  Secondly, it is  argued
    that the panel  failed  to  take  into  account  the  position  of  the
    appellant's son and his family life together with the country  material
    as to the death rate for children in sub-Saharan Africa.

10.   Mr Nathan raised the preliminary point that  the  respondent  had  not
    filed a reply under the  provisions  of  rule  30  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 as amended  by  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 2008.  Rules  30
    and 31 provide:


        "Reply


        30. -


        (1)      When the other party to the appeal is served with an order
        for reconsideration, he must file with the Tribunal and serve on
        the applicant a reply setting out his case if he contends that -
        (a)      there was no error of law in the decision on the appeal;
        or
        (b)      there was an error of law in the decision on the appeal,
        but it was not a material error of law.
        (2)      The other party to the appeal must file and serve any
        reply not later than 5 days before the earliest date appointed for
        any hearing of or in relation to the reconsideration of the appeal.
        (3)      In this rule, 'other party to the appeal' means the party
        other than the party on whose application the order for
        reconsideration was made.


        Procedure for reconsideration of appeal


        31. -
        (1)      Where an order for reconsideration has been made, the
        Tribunal must reconsider an appeal as soon as reasonably
        practicable after that order has been served on both parties to the
        appeal.
        (2)      Where the reconsideration is pursuant to an order under
        section 103A -
        (a)      the Tribunal carrying out the reconsideration must first
        decide whether the original Tribunal made a material error of law;
        and
        (b)      if it decides that the original Tribunal did not make a
        material error of law, the Tribunal must order that the original
        determination of the appeal shall stand.
        (3)      Subject to paragraph (2), the Tribunal must substitute a
        fresh decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.
        (4)      In carrying out the reconsideration, the Tribunal -
        (a)      may limit submissions or evidence to one or more specified
        issues;
        (b)      must have regard to any directions given by the
        immigration judge or court which ordered the reconsideration; and
        (c)      when making a decision under paragraph (2)(a) -
        (i)      must take into account the section 103A application and
        any reply; and
        (ii)     may take into account any other matter which it considers
        relevant.
        (5)      In Rule 30 and this rule, a 'material error of law' means
        an error of law which affected the Tribunal's decision upon the
        appeal."

11.   Mr Nathan argued that rule 30 was  mandatory  and,  having  failed  to
    serve a reply, the respondent should not be allowed to argue that there
    was no error of law or that any error of law was not material.   Whilst
    contending that the rule was mandatory, he accepted  that  no  sanction
    was specified but argued that the rule would in effect be a nullity  if
    there were no sanctions for failure to comply.  Ms  Kiss  outlined  the
    Secretary of State's position, which I asked her to  commit  to  paper.
    She did so in the following terms:

        "The failure to serve a rule 30 response does not mean that the SoS
        (ECO) has conceded the merits of the grounds; we wish  to  continue
        to argue the case.


        The draft consultation document  left  a  response  under  rule  30
        optional.


        The change to a mandatory response was opposed on 12 May 2008.  The
        SoS has not had time to alter staff levels/recruit/train  staff  to
        facilitate compliance.  Those issues are under consideration.


        As there is no sanction under the Procedure Rules  for  failure  to
        comply with the amended rule 30 and its imposition is questionable;
        there is no power in the  AIT  Procedure  Rules  to  interpret  the
        failure as any form of concession.


        The Tribunal is invited to  apply  AIT  Procedure  Rule  59(1)  and
        extend the time limit for a reply so  that  the  Tribunal  can  now
        accept verbal representations on this point.


        The reason for extending the time limit is that justice  would  not
        be served if these representations were refused."


12.   Ms Kiss relied on rule 59 of the Procedure Rules which provides:

        "Errors of procedure


        59.  - (1) Where, before the Tribunal has determined an appeal  or
        application, there has been an error of procedure such as a failure
        to comply with a rule -


        (a)      subject to these Rules, the error does not invalidate any
        step taken in the proceedings, unless the Tribunal so orders; and


        (b)      the Tribunal may make any order, or take any other step,
        that it considers appropriate to remedy the error.


        (2) In particular, any determination made in an appeal or
        application under these Rules shall be valid notwithstanding that -




        (a)      a hearing did not take place; or

        (b)      the determination was not made or served, within a time
        period specified in these Rules."

13.   I consider that the provisions of rules 30 and 31 need to be read in
    conjunction with the overriding objective set out in paragraph 4, which
    provides:


        "Overriding objective


        4. The overriding objective of these Rules is to secure that
        proceedings before the Tribunal are handled as fairly, quickly and
        efficiently as possible; and, where appropriate, that members of
        the Tribunal have responsibility for ensuring this, in the
        interests of the parties to the proceedings and in the wider public
        interest."


14. I am conscious that judicial treatment of  appellants  and  respondents
    should be even-handed.  However, this does not mean that in  all  cases
    they should be  treated  in  exactly  the  same  way.   The  overriding
    objective of fairness, with the other objectives,  is  likely  to  mean
    that, where there is a reconsideration at the respondent's request,  an
    unrepresented appellant who is likely to have little or no appreciation
    of the requirements of the Procedure Rules, should not be shut out from
    arguing that there is no error of law  or  no  material  error  of  law
    merely because he has failed to serve a reply.  On the other  hand  the
    respondent, whether the Secretary of State, an Immigration  Officer  or
    an Entry Clearance Officer, experienced in such matters  and  with  the
    resources of the State available to them is less likely to have a  good
    reason for not complying with rule 30, although I accept there may be a
    satisfactory explanation in some cases.

15.   In this case Ms Kiss has provided an explanation for the  respondent's
    failure to serve a reply.  I find that the explanation is  not  a  good
    reason for the respondent's failure to serve a reply.  Whether  or  not
    the consultation paper indicated that a reply would be optional,  there
    is no doubt that since the amended Procedure Rules came into effect  on
    12 May 2008 the Secretary of State has known that there is  a  rule  as
    binding on her as it is on everyone else.  The changes to the Procedure
    Rules took effect immediately  and  the  changes  affected  proceedings
    already current except where compliance would be impossible because the
    deadline could not be met.    In this case notice that  reconsideration
    had been ordered was sent out on 20 June 2008 and  there  is  no  doubt
    that rule 30 applies.

16.   I have considered whether "an error of procedure such as a failure  to
    comply with the rule" in rule 59 applies only to errors or failures  by
    the Tribunal or whether, as I have concluded,  it  applies  equally  to
    errors or failures on the part of parties to the proceedings and  those
    representing them.  There is nothing in rule 59 which indicates that it
    is limited to errors or  failures  by  the  Tribunal,  in  contrast  to
    paragraph 60, which  is  clearly  limited  to  correction  of  clerical
    errors, accidental slips or omissions by the  Tribunal.   I  find  that
    rule 59(1) could be applied to the situation in which either party,  in
    this case the respondent, has failed to serve  a  reply.   Furthermore,
    although not mentioned by the representatives,  rule  45(4)(c)  of  the
    Procedure Rules provides:

        "(4)     Directions of the Tribunal may, in particular - ...


        (c)      vary any time  limit  in  these  Rules  or  in  directions
        previously given by the Tribunal for anything to be done by a party
        (including, where the Tribunal considers that there are exceptional
        reasons for doing so, extending a time limit which has expired);"


      The provisions of rules 59 and 45(4)(c)  give  the  Tribunal  separate
    discretions to extend time for the service of a reply (even if the time
    limit has expired) or to do whatever is needed to remedy the error.

17.   It would be possible, in the  exercise  of  the  discretion  that  the
    Rules confer, for me to make an order extending the time for service of
    a reply.  I might have considered it appropriate to do so  if  Ms  Kiss
    had provided a better explanation than the generic one put  forward  or
    if she had produced a written reply at the hearing, subject to  a  need
    to consider whether to adjourn and give the appellant further  time  to
    address any reply.  I find that it would not be a proper exercise of my
    discretion to extend the time for filing a  reply  where  there  is  no
    reply and what Ms Kiss seeks is to substitute oral submissions.

18.   I drew the representatives' attention to  the  reported  determination
    in SP (Time for reply - Rules 30(2) and 45(4)(c)) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT
    00010 which was a decision under the 2005 Procedure Rules prior to  the
    2008 Rules.  The former Rule 30(1) provided:

        "30(1). When the other party to the appeal is served with an  order
        for reconsideration, he must, if  he  contends  that  the  Tribunal
        should uphold the initial determination for reasons different  from
        or additional to those given in the determination,  file  with  the
        Tribunal and serve on the applicant a reply setting out his case.
        (2)      The other party to the appeal  must  file  and  serve  any
        reply not later than five days before the earliest  date  appointed
        for any hearing of or in relation to  the  reconsideration  of  the
        appeal.
        (3)      In this Rule, "other party to the appeal" means the  party
        other  than  the  party  on  whose  application   the   order   for
        reconsideration was made."


19.   The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  provisions  of  rule  30(2)  were
    mandatory.  The Tribunal went on to consider  the  provisions  of  rule
    45(4)(c) which stated:


        "(4)     Directions of the Tribunal may in particular - ....


        (c)      vary any time  limit  in  these  Rules  or  in  directions
        previously given by the Tribunal for  anything  to  be  done  by  a
        party."

20.   The Tribunal concluded, in paragraph 24 of the determination:

        "24.      On  the  face  of  it  this  might   appear   to   permit
        consideration of the late reply in this case.  However, we  are  of
        the view that a  careful  reading  of  rule  45(4)(c)  indicates  a
        prospective rather than a retrospective variation, in the light  of
        the words "anything to be done  by  a  party."   No  direction  was
        sought, and no explanation for the lateness of service of the reply
        was provided.  Though it is clear from rule 45(4)(c) that variation
        of the time limit in rule 30 is possible, we conclude that a  power
        to make to prospective directions in no sense connotes a  power  to
        condone, ex post facto, a failure to comply with  the  requirements
        of the Rules."


21.   As can be seen  from  paragraph  16  above,  following  this  reported
    determination, the wording of rule 45(4)(c) has been amended to add the
    words  "(including,  where  the  Tribunal  considers  that  there   are
    exceptional reasons for doing so, extending  a  time  limit  which  has
    expired)".


22.   Whilst the Procedure  Rules  contain  no  specific  sanction  for  the
    failure to comply with rule 30, I find the answer in the provisions  of
    rule 31(4)(c).  If there is a reply the  Tribunal  must  take  it  into
    account.  In the absence of a requirement that the Tribunal  must  take
    into account the failure to serve a  reply,  I  conclude  that  such  a
    failure comes within the provisions of rule 31(4)(c) and that this is a
    matter which may be taken into account.  Whether and if so  the  extent
    to which it is taken into account depends on all the facts of the case.
     These should include the merits of the  grounds  for  reconsideration.
    If it is clear that there is not a  material  error  of  law  then  the
    absence of a reply should not shut out a finding that there is no  such
    error of law or the consequences of this conclusion.   The  failure  to
    serve a reply may tip the balance against the party who has  failed  to
    follow the requirements  of  rule  30,  if  that  party  seeks  at  the
    reconsideration hearing to deploy arguments that the other party  could
    not reasonably be expected to anticipate.

23.   In this case I have come to the conclusion, for  reasons  to  which  I
    will return, that there are no material  errors  of  law.   Even  after
    taking into account the respondent's unsatisfactory explanation for her
    failure to file a reply, I found that the respondent's failure to serve
    a rule 30 reply should not, on  the  particular  facts  of  this  case,
    preclude her from arguing that there was no error of law  or  that  any
    error of law was not material.  I therefore heard Ms Kiss' submissions.



24. This reconsideration was listed for hearing at 10am and  the  appellant
    was due to be produced from custody.  At 10am he had  not  arrived.   I
    adjourned to find out what had happened to him.  By 10.40 he had  still
    not arrived.  The adjournment gave Ms Kiss the opportunity  to  produce
    the written note of the respondent's reasons for  not  having  filed  a
    reply and  Mr  Nathan  the  opportunity  to  consider  the  authorities
    submitted by Ms Kiss.  As this was a  first  stage  reconsideration  at
    which the appellant's oral evidence was not required I started  hearing
    submissions from the representatives.  Part-way through the hearing, at
    11.40am, the appellant arrived.  I explained to him what  had  happened
    up to that point and the purpose of the  reconsideration  hearing.   Mr
    Nathan wanted to ask the appellant whether the post-sentence  Probation
    Officer's report, which was not available at  the  hearing  before  the
    panel, had been found and whether he had  brought  it  with  him.   The
    question was put to the appellant who answered both  questions  in  the
    negative.  I refused to allow Mr Nathan to ask  the  appellant  further
    questions, this being a first stage reconsideration hearing.

25.   At the  beginning  of  the  hearing  Ms  Kiss  produced  a  number  of
    authorities namely Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL  11,  OH  (Serbia)  v  SSHD
    [2008] EWCA Civ 694, OP (Jamaica) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 440 and  three
    judgements of the European Court of Human Rights.  Mr Nathan asked  for
    an adjournment to enable him to consider these cases.  I  indicated  my
    surprise that competent and experienced Counsel would not have properly
    prepared the case by  arming  himself  with  all  relevant  authorities
    whether in this jurisdiction or from the ECHR.  Mr Nathan conceded that
    he was familiar with the judgement of the House of Lords in Huang.   Ms
    Kiss said that she would not be relying on the three  ECHR  cases.   Mr
    Nathan had had time to read the others during the adjournment.  He  did
    not repeat the adjournment request.

26.   The panel dealt with Mr Nathan's adjournment request in paragraphs  25
    - 27 of the determination in which it said:

        "25.     The appellant requested an adjournment on the  basis  that
        no  pre-sentencing  report  had  been  provided  pursuant  to   the
        directions that the respondent should provide the  same  and  hence
        there  was  no  assessment  as  to  the  appellant's  risk  to  the
        community.  It was furthermore  said  that  the  appellant's  son's
        medical condition was a relevant factor and there was  no  evidence
        relating to whether there were facilities in the DRC  suitable  for
        his condition.  There was also a question mark as to the  reference
        to the appellant being  seemingly  on  bail  for  rape  during  the
        judge's sentencing remarks which needed to be clarified.


        26.      The respondent accepted that there was no evidence of  any
        rape charge being pursued whatever the position may  have  been  at
        one stage and we indicated that we would ignore  any  reference  to
        any possible rape offence.  The respondent furthermore stated  that
        the absence of a pre-sentence report did not in itself  warrant  an
        adjournment and the  same  applied  to  the  lack  of  evidence  in
        relation to medical facilities in the DRC.


        27.      We refused the adjournment.   We  consider  that  all  the
        matters that might have been covered in  the  documents  that  were
        said to be required could be dealt with by the  appellant  and  his
        witnesses in evidence and in any event we were entitled to consider
        the objective evidence in  relation  to  the  DRC  on  the  Country
        Information Report.  We were  of  the  view  that  the  case  could
        proceed without injustice to the appellant."

27.   The appellant's  representatives  have  now  obtained  a  pre-sentence
    probation report which is amongst the papers before me.  I  will  refer
    to it later in this determination.  However, it  does  not  assist  the
    appellant to the extent that his Counsel had argued because it does not
    show that he was thought to be at low risk of re-offending.

28.   In his cross-examination the appellant said  that  there  was  another
    probation report or assessment.  This is referred to in paragraph 38 of
    the determination where the panel said:

          "38.    He gave further evidence-in-chief.  He  explained  how  he
          was an enhanced prisoner and was  appointed  a  "listener"  namely
          someone who  listens  to  other  inmates.   He  was  in  full-time
          education in prison and a part-time listener.  He  said  that  the
          probation service provided a written assessment which was that  he
          was at a low risk of re-offending.  He explained he had a copy  of
          the assessment in his bag which he did not have with  him  because
          he had left it at Harmondsworth."

29.   Mr Nathan told me that this report had  not  been  found.   I  am  not
    persuaded that it ever existed.  There were compelling reasons for  the
    judge's conclusion that the appellant was not a credible witness.

30.   I looked at the pre-sentence Probation Officer's report.  Although  it
    was not available to the panel it was necessary to look at it in  order
    to consider whether there should have been an adjournment  and  whether
    the report would have made any material difference.   I  find  that  it
    would not.  The pre-sentence report is dated  2  April  2007.   In  the
    paragraph headed "Assessment of the risk of harm" it is said:

        "I assess the risk of harm to the public as low as although PA  has
        a previous conviction for Robbery, this offence was committed  over
        ten years ago.  He poses a medium risk of harm to other road users.




        In view of the fact that PA has several  previous  convictions  for
        different offences,  I  assess  there  is  a  medium  risk  of  him
        committing offences of a similar or different nature."


    The recommendation was for a supervision order for a period  of  twelve
    months and a requirement to complete the  "Think  First  Programme".  I
    note that, notwithstanding the  recommendation,  the  judge  imposed  a
    sentence of fifteen months' imprisonment.


31.    In  the  grounds  for  reconsideration  Mr  Nathan   apologises   for
    overlooking the deadline and the late submission of the application for
    reconsideration.  He  also  indicates  that  his  notes  taken  at  the
    hearing, including the notes of the evidence and submissions, have been
    lost.  Nevertheless, he argues that the panel erred in law  by  failing
    to honour the statement that it would give the appellant  "the  benefit
    of the doubt".  I am not persuaded that so broad a statement  went  any
    further than to indicate that the panel would apply the normal criteria
    applicable in such a  case.   The  appropriate  standard  of  proof  is
    sometimes referred to, not wholly accurately, as  giving  an  appellant
    the benefit of the doubt.  In any event, in this case and in the  light
    of such a strong adverse credibility finding, I fail to see that  there
    was any real doubt from which the appellant might benefit.  The rest of
    the first ground for reconsideration is no more than an attempt  by  Mr
    Nathan to re-argue the case without identifying any material  error  of
    law.


32.   The panel addressed the position of the appellant's son in  paragraphs
    90, 91 and 92 of the determination in which they said:

        "90.     What however must be now considered is the extent to which
        the fact that the  parties  have  a  son  with  a  certain  medical
        condition is a relevant factor.  We accept that the son does have a
        problem with his heart which has necessitated  an  early  operation
        and may need an operation when he is aged 5.   However  he  has  no
        restrictions in his way of life and despite being  monitored  on  a
        three monthly basis his life continues  as  normal.   There  is  no
        reason to think that apart from his heart condition  he  could  not
        adapt at his young age to living in the  country  of  his  parent's
        origin even though his way of life will be different from  that  he
        would enjoy should he  remain  living  with  his  mother  in  state
        accommodation and living at the state's expense.


        91.      We are of the view that the son's medical condition is not
        sufficient to prevent the  appellant's  removal.   We  accept  that
        paragraph 28 of the Country  Information  Report  in  its  74  sub-
        paragraphs shows that medical facilities are far  from  ideal  with
        life expectancy being 42 years for men and 47 for  women  according
        to the 2003 figures.  We also accept that there  are  a  wealth  of
        diseases suffered by all members of the  community,  in  particular
        children.  We  note  that  there  are  a  number  of  international
        organisations seeking to assist  in  medical  programmes  including
        vaccination programmes for  children.   However  it  is  not  clear
        whether the son would have the same regular opportunity  for  being
        checked for his heart condition in the same manner that he does  in
        this country and that it may not be as  easy  to  arrange  for  any
        operation that might become necessary in due course.


        92.      However it must be commented  that  much  of  the  medical
        concentration is upon the major diseases such as  cholera,  malaria
        and HIV and AIDS.  In paragraph 28.36 it refers to the  2001  Swiss
        Report  reporting  how  "a  wide  range  of  medical  treatment  is
        available in Kinshasa.  There are few diseases (even chronic  ones)
        or operations that cannot be dealt with in the country as  long  as
        the patient has the financial means."  The Swiss report  refers  to
        there being a number of medical facilities in Kinshasa ranging from
        public hospitals to private hospitals  and  clinics  together  with
        company hospitals and dispensaries in  addition  to  hospitals  and
        dispensaries run by  churches  or  Non-Governmental  Organisations.
        The position therefore is  not  that  it  would  be  impossible  to
        receive any treatment that may be needed especially  if  there  are
        funds available."

33.   It was  open  to  the  panel  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's son's medical condition was not sufficient to  prevent  the
    appellant's removal.  Whilst the appellant's sometime partner said that
    their son needed an operation her credibility was not enhanced  by  her
    admitted criminal convictions some or all of which were the  result  of
    crimes  committed  whilst  acting  in  concert  with   the   appellant.
    Significantly,  there  was  no  medical  evidence  to  show  that   the
    appellant's son would require an operation or even particular  care  or
    medication.  It is  clear  that  the  panel  considered  the  potential
    problems and reduced life expectancy for children in the  DRC.   I  was
    not referred to the opinions of the House of  Lords  in  Beoku-Betts  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 39 and Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40  but  do  not
    consider that the panel's assessment or conclusions  were  contrary  to
    the guidance given.

34.   The appellant has a long criminal record for a  variety  of  offences.
    The panel was entitled to conclude that he was an inveterate liar.   He
    has used a number of  aliases.   He  has  employed  solicitors  to  put
    forward manifestly untrue claims for asylum in different names.  I find
    that there is no material  error  of  law  and  I  uphold  the  panel's
    determination.



Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Moulden

