
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of AZ) v Hampshire County Council (AAJR) [2013] UKUT
00087(IAC)



|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre        |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3, 4 and 5 December 2012                     |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                     The Queen on the application of AZ
                (by his litigation friend, Kathleen Upsdale)

                                                                    Claimant

                                     and

                          HAMPSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr Adam Fullwood, instructed by Jackson & Canter,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Charles Bourne and Mr Benjamin Tankel, instructed
                    by Hampshire County Council



                                  JUDGMENT


 1. The claimant (to whom I shall hereafter refer to as AZ)  challenges  an
    age assessment dated 6 January 2012 carried  out  by  Hampshire  County
    Council  (the  defendant).  The  age  assessment  concluded  that   the
    claimant's date of birth is 6 January 1993 (indicating  that  AZ  would
    have been 19 years old at the time of the assessment).  AZ claims  that
    he was born on 10 January 1996 and that he was,  therefore,  four  days
    short of his 16th birthday on 6 January 2012.

 2. AZ had arrived in the United Kingdom in  September  2011.   It  is  not
    disputed that he is a citizen of Iran and is of Kurdish ethnicity.   AZ
    claimed asylum on 29 September 2011 and, in the autumn  of  that  year,
    moved to live in the north of England,  first  in  Liverpool  and  then
    Manchester.  AZ had first come to the attention of social  services  in
    Aldershot on 28 September 2011 when two social workers  from  Hampshire
    County Council (Mr Roger Warren and Mr Neil  Connolly)  interviewed  AZ
    and carried out an age assessment at the police station  in  Aldershot.
    Following correspondence between the defendant and AZ's solicitors, the
    defendant agreed to carry out a fresh age assessment on 6 January 2012.
    This Tribunal has heard evidence  regarding  both  assessments  in  the
    course of the hearing.

 3. Permission was  granted  by  Mr  Justice  Foskett  on  24  April  2012.
    Directions were subsequently made in the Upper Tribunal by  Mr  C  M  G
    Ockelton (Vice President) on 30 May 2012.  The hearing  took  place  at
    Manchester Civil Justice Centre on  3-5  December  2012  when  Mr  Adam
    Fullwood of Counsel appeared for AZ and Mr Charles  Bourne  of  counsel
    and Mr  Benjamin  Tankel  of  Counsel  appeared  for  Hampshire  County
    Council.

 4. Neither party to these proceedings carries any burden of proof.  It  is
    for the tribunal to determine whether the applicant was a child at  the
    material time with reference to all relevant evidence and applying  the
    standard of proof of the balance of probabilities (see R (CJ) v Cardiff
    County Council) [2011] EWCA Civ 1590). My attention has been drawn to a
    number of recent authorities to which I shall  refer  in  the  analysis
    which appears below.  The Court of Appeal in R (CJ) observed:



   1. In R (A and M) v Croydon and Lambert Borough Councils [2009] UKSC 8,
      [2009] I WLR 2557, the Supreme Court settled the question whether,  in
      the event of a challenge to the decision of a local  authority  as  to
      the claimant's age, the High Court was required either  to  reach  its
      own decision as to the claimant's age or, alternatively, the challenge
      was  by  way  of  review   of   the   local   authority's   assessment
      on Wednesbury principles  alone.  Baroness  Hale  gave  the  leading
      judgment with which the other members of the Supreme Court agreed.  At
      paragraphs 26  and  27  Baroness  Hale  explained  the  difference  in
      approach required for the evaluative judgment whether a child was  "in
      need" within the mean of section 20 of the 1989 Act and  the  decision
      upon the precedent question of fact whether the  individual  concerned
      was a child. She said this:
           "26. ... the 1989 Act draws a  clear  and  sensible  distinction
           between different kinds of  question.  The  question  whether  a
           child  is  "in  need"  requires  a  number  of  different  value
           judgments ... but where the issue is not what  order  the  court
           should make but what service should the local authority  provide
           it is entirely reasonable to  assume  that  Parliament  intended
           such  evaluative  questions  to  be  determined  by  the  Public
           Authority, subject to the control of the courts on the  ordinary
           principles of judicial review. Within the limits of fair process
           and "Wednesbury reasonableness" there are no clear-cut right or
           wrong answers.
           27. But the  question  whether  a  person  is  a  "child"  is  a
           different kind of question. There is a right or a wrong  answer.
           It may be difficult  to  determine  what  that  answer  is.  The
           decision-makers may have to do their best on the basis  of  less
           than perfect or conclusive evidence but that  is  true  of  many
           questions of fact which regularly come before the  courts.  That
           does not prevent them from being questions for the courts rather
           than for other kinds of decision-makers."
      Lord Hope, in his concurring judgment, said at paragraph 51:
           "51. It seems to me that the question whether or not a person is
           a child for the purposes of section 20 of  the  1989  Act  is  a
           question of fact which must ultimately be decided by the  court.
           There is no denying the difficulties that the social  worker  is
           likely to face in carrying out an  assessment  of  the  question
           whether an unaccompanied asylum seeker is or is  not  under  the
           age of  18.  Reliable  documentary  evidence  is  almost  always
           lacking in  such  cases.  So  the  process  has  to  be  one  of
           assessment. This involves  the  application  of  judgment  on  a
           variety of factors, as Stanley Burnton J recognised in R (B)  v
           Merton London Borough Council [2003] 4 All ER 280, para 37. But
           the question is not whether the person can properly be described
           as a child. Section 105 (1) of the Act provides:  "in  this  Act
           ... 'child' means, subject to paragraph  16  of  Schedule  1,  a
           person under the age of 18". The question is whether the  person
           is, or is not, under the age of 18. However difficult it may  be
           to resolve the issue, it admits of only one answer. As it  is  a
           question of fact, ultimately this  must  be  a  matter  for  the
           court."

 5. In their opening comments to the Tribunal, Mr Fullwood  and  Mr  Bourne
    were essentially agreed upon the approach the Tribunal should  take  in
    the proceedings although they did not agree  as  to  the  weight  which
    should  be  given  to  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  the  claimant's
    demeanour and appearance.  Mr Bourne submitted that the  assessment  of
    demeanour was important but, relying on R (AE) v Croydon London Borough
    Council [2012] EWCA Civ 547 (per Aikens LJ at paragraph  44)  submitted
    that the Tribunal's assessment should start with a consideration of the
    credibility of the evidence of the claimant.

 6. I heard oral evidence from witnesses for  both  the  claimant  and  the
    defendant. One of the defendant's witnesses (Donna Humphrey) was unable
    to attend to give  oral  evidence.   These  proceedings  are,  perhaps,
    unusual in that there is no  independent  "expert"  evidence  as  such;
    neither party has sought to adduce evidence of a purely medical  nature
    (other than a very brief report from the treating general  practitioner
    of AZ) or evidence of an independent  social  worker  or  psychologist.
    Other than the evidence of AZ himself, I heard from witnesses  who  had
    been involved in carrying out the age  assessments  on  behalf  of  the
    defendant or, in the case of officers of the Children's  Society,  have
    worked with AZ in Manchester.

 7.  AZ  gave  evidence  in  Kurdish  Sorani  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter. He adopted his written  statements  of  4  April  2012,  3
    November  2011  and  31  October  2012  as  his  evidence-in-chief.  AZ
    explained that he had recently  (October  2012)  become  a  student  at
    Manchester Academy.  He had been accepted as a  student  there  on  the
    basis that he was 16 years old. He attends college on 5 days  per  week
    and is studying, inter alia, English, mathematics and computer studies.
     Although attendance at college has  improved  AZ's  general  mood,  he
    continues to see his GP and is taking anti-depressants. He has  made  a
    friend at college (K)  who  is  16  years  old.   AZ  complained  of  a
    "language barrier" which he said prevents him making other  friends  at
    college or elsewhere. AZ currently lives on his own and complained that
    he has difficulty in caring  for  himself.  AZ  has  a  support  worker
    (Caroline Alison) whom he sees every other day.  If  he  did  not  have
    Miss Alison's assistance, his life would be "very difficult".

 8. AZ was asked by Mr Fullwood about the second assessment carried out  by
    Hampshire County Council. AZ said that he had not felt well at the time
    of the assessment (he had to travel from  Manchester  to  Hampshire  by
    train which he said had been tiring). In the course of the  assessment,
    he had asked for a break. Following the short break, the social workers
    conducting the interview had returned and given their decision  on  his
    age.  He said that he remembered the social  workers  saying  something
    about "childhood milestones" but the meaning of that expression had not
    been explained to him.

 9. Cross-examined by Mr Bourne, AZ said that he had an ID card when he had
    lived in Iran. He could not say when he had received the  card  but  he
    had not brought it with him to the United Kingdom.  He  had  last  seen
    the card in 2011 in Iran. Mr Bourne suggested to AZ that ID  cards  are
    required by law in Iran from the age of 15 years. AZ did  not  know  of
    that legal requirement and said that, "everybody should have a card  or
    he would face trouble at a checkpoint".

10. AZ could not explain why he had not brought the card with  him  to  the
    United Kingdom.  He said that his uncle had arranged for his journey to
    the United Kingdom.  Asked why he could not have obtained the card from
    his family in Iran, AZ become distressed and said,  "I  cannot  contact
    them".

11. AZ said that he had worked with his family on his  father's  farm.  The
    number of workers  employed  on  the  farm  changed  according  to  the
    seasons.  His father "grew cucumbers, tomatoes,  sunflowers  and  other
    things".  AZ had little formal education; he  said  that  he  found  it
    "strange that my father would not allow me an education".  It  was  put
    to AZ by Mr Bourne that he had told the Hampshire County Council social
    worker Mr Warren that he had come to the United  Kingdom  in  order  to
    learn English.  AZ replied, "I happy to swear on the Koran that was not
    what I said.  I fled because I was in big trouble".

12. Mr Bourne referred AZ to a passage (paragraph 24, C23) of  Mr  Warren's
    statement. Explaining how he had taken AZ back to the station following
    the assessment of 6 January 2012, Mr Warren had written, "I had to take
    [AZ] to the train station to await for a direct train to take him  back
    to Manchester ... While we were both waiting for  the  train  [AZ]  was
    able to speak in English, far more  fluently  than  he  had  originally
    informed me he was able to.  ...  We spoke about the  current  politics
    in Iran and AZ was able to make himself very understood with his spoken
    English (sic). AZ said that he  could  not  remember  any  conversation
    about politics although he had remembered asking Mr Warren about his ID
    card.

13. In AE (see above) the Court of Appeal found that, "In  the  absence  of
    any documentary evidence over  his  age  nor  any  reliable  dental  or
    medical evidence, the starting point for the Deputy  Judge's  task  for
    assessing the age of AE was the credibility of his own evidence."  [44]
    Caution should be exercised in the approach  to  the  evidence  of  the
    claimant as the court noted in R (on the application  of  B)  v  Merton
    London Borough Council [2003] 4AER 280 at [28]

    Given the impossibility of any decision maker being  able  to  make  an
    objectively verifiable determination of the age of an applicant who may
    be in the age range of, say, 16 to  20,  it  is  necessary  to  take  a
    history from him or her with a view to determining whether it is  true.
    A history that is accepted as true and is consistent with an age  below
    18 will enable the decision maker in such a case  to  decide  that  the
    applicant is a child. Conversely, however,  an  untrue  history,  while
    relevant, is not necessarily indicative of a lie as to the age  of  the
    applicant.  Lies  may  be  told  for  reasons  unconnected   with   the
    applicant's case as to his age, for example to avoid his return to  his
    country of  origin.  Furthermore,  physical  appearance  and  behaviour
    cannot be isolated from the question of the veracity of the  applicant:
    appearance, behaviour and  the  credibility  of  his  account  are  all
    matters that reflect on each other.

14. AZ's evidence should not, of course, be examined in isolation from  the
    other evidence; I have had regard to the evidence as a totality  before
    making any findings of fact.

15. With those principles in mind, I have to say that  Mr  Bourne  did  not
    persuade me that AZ has lied to the Tribunal or the defendant regarding
    his true age.  It is true that AZ appeared to dispute the  sequence  of
    events described  by  the  social  workers  who  carried  out  the  age
    assessment on 6 January 2012.  He denied that he  had  been  given  the
    opportunity to respond to the assessment which the social  workers  had
    proposed and he also appeared to dispute the length of  time  that  the
    assessment had taken.  He  said  that,  following  the  fifteen  minute
    break, the conclusion of the assessment had been announced to  him  and
    that he had not (contrary to the evidence of the social  workers)  been
    asked to answer more questions after the break.

16. These discrepancies are significant but one  must  ask  what  relevance
    they make to the central question facing  the  Tribunal,  that  is  the
    assessment of AZ's age.  It is clear from the evidence that AZ resented
    having to travel to  Hampshire  in  January  2012  for  a  further  age
    assessment. I  find  that  he  is  likely  to  have  arrived  for  that
    assessment  in  a  defensive  and  even  hostile  mood  and  that   his
    recollection now of how  he  was  treated  has  been  coloured  by  his
    memories of the assessment and, perhaps not unsurprisingly, by what was
    for him a negative and damaging outcome of the assessment  itself.  The
    discrepancy between the social workers' evidence of the assessment  and
    that of AZ is not, in my opinion, so damaging to AZ's credibility  that
    I should discount entirely the reliability  of  the  remainder  of  his
    evidence. In other words, I do not find that the differing accounts  of
    the assessment interview penetrate  to  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    credibility as a witness.

17. One unusual aspect of this application is that neither party has sought
    to lead detailed evidence about the asylum claim which AZ has  made  to
    the Home Office.  There has been no attempt to use any  evidence  which
    he has given in support of that  claim  to  undermine  or  support  his
    claimed date of birth. Whilst I acknowledge that the Tribunal's role in
    these proceedings is inquisitorial, I did not consider it  appropriate,
    in the absence of any lead from the representatives, to ask for details
    regarding the asylum claim.  What we are left with is evidence from  AZ
    himself and others whom he has encountered here. That evidence has been
    focused (in the case of the defendant's evidence) on the assessment  of
    AZ's age and, in the case of the witnesses supporting AZ, the detailing
    of his daily life and his social and educational progress.

18. Mr Bourne did submit that the answers which AZ had given regarding  his
    ID card were "fishy" and he drew attention to the fact that  no  effort
    had been made by AZ and his representatives to contact  the  family  in
    Iran and obtain the ID card. There is force in that submission  but  it
    is AZ's case that he has been  unable  to  contact  his  family.   That
    evidence is perhaps supported by the fact  that  AZ  became  distressed
    when he was asked about his family and also when one considers that  he
    has received and continues to receive  treatment  for  depression,  one
    cause of which his doctor identifies as the extreme isolation which  he
    has suffered whilst living in the United Kingdom.   The  defendant  has
    not disputed the brief medical evidence of AZ's depression and  I  find
    it hard to believe that AZ would have become ill as  described  in  the
    report if he was, in fact, maintaining regular contact with his  family
    in Iran.  I accept his evidence that he has been unable to contact  his
    family in Iran and has, therefore, been unable to obtain the ID card or
    a copy of it.   Further,  I  did  not  find  AZ's  evidence  in  cross-
    examination regarding the ID card to be evasive as Mr Bourne submitted.
     Indeed, Mr Bourne made much of AZ's reluctance to talk about his  life
    in Iran in both cross  examination  and  in  his  interviews  with  the
    Hampshire social workers.  Mr Bourne submitted that the Tribunal should
    draw an adverse inference from  AZ's  reluctance  to  answer  questions
    about Iran. I reject that submission. In common  with  the  defendant's
    witnesses, my only direct experience of AZ  has  been  to  observe  him
    answering questions put to him through an interpreter.   I  agree  that
    the written accounts of his interview with  the  social  workers  might
    lead one to conclude that AZ had been evasive. However, my  very  clear
    impression of AZ, derived from witnessing his oral testimony,  is  that
    he was not being deliberately evasive but  rather  responding  with  an
    awkwardness and lack of confidence typical of teenage males.  Whilst  I
    am well aware of the dangers  of  attaching  excessive  weight  to  the
    demeanour of a witness who gives evidence through  an  interpreter  and
    who is from a culture and background of which I have  little  knowledge
    or experience, I found that the demeanour of AZ was characterised by  a
    physical  awkwardness  which  was  not,  in  my  opinion,  knowing   or
    calculated.  I find that AZ has given  truthful  answers  to  questions
    which have been put to him by the defendant's social workers and before
    the Tribunal.  Insofar as any conclusion may be  drawn  from  his  body
    language and demeanour, I find  that  these  are  consistent  with  his
    claimed age.

19. As I record below, the Hampshire County  Council  social  workers  have
    based their own assessment of AZ's age  to  a  large  extent  upon  his
    physical appearance.  The January 2012 age  assessment  recorded  that,
    "AZ's appearance and physical development  suggests  he  has  completed
    puberty. He is shaving full facial hair.  His voice  appears  to  be  a
    stable adult pitch".  My own observation of AZ was that,  although  not
    slender, he was "rangy".  He is tall and has long  limbs  and  quite  a
    long face.  His voice was as described in the assessment report. Whilst
    I remind myself of the danger  of  attaching  too  much  weight  to  my
    observations of AZ, I did not find that there was  anything  about  his
    appearance which was manifestly  inconsistent  with  his  claimed  age.
    Indeed, one of the defendant's witnesses (Ms Ife) admitted  that,  upon
    first seeing AZ, she believed that he was under 18 years  of  age  (see
    paragraph 54 below).

20. The most obvious inconsistency between  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
    defendant and that of AZ concerns the conversation (about  politics  in
    Iran) which allegedly took place between Mr Warren and AZ following the
    age assessment on the journey back to the station. AZ denied  that  any
    such conversation took  place.  Having  regard  to  all  the  evidence,
    including that of Mr Warren (which I have considered in greater  detail
    below) I accept AZ's version.  AZ  has  given  no  indication  whatever
    elsewhere in his dealings with  the  Children's  Society  or  Hampshire
    Social Workers that he has any knowledge  of  or  interest  in  Iranian
    politics or, indeed, sufficient ability  in  the  English  language  to
    discuss that subject with the fluency claimed  by  Mr  Warren.   If  Mr
    Warren's account is accurate, then AZ has concealed an ability to speak
    English and the level of education  and  knowledge  which  he  has  not
    disclosed to any other individual save Mr Warren. I  did  not  consider
    that to be credible. If AZ could speak English as fluently as Mr Warren
    suggested, then it is difficult to see why he  should  have  become  so
    isolated and depressed whilst living in this country.

21. Whilst I stress that I have not considered AZ's evidence in  isolation,
    I have considered it appropriate to record my  findings  regarding  his
    credibility at this point in my determination.   I  find  that  AZ  has
    given truthful answers to questions put to him before the Tribunal,  by
    Hampshire social workers and the Children's Society.  I make no comment
    regarding his asylum claim because details of  it  have  not  been  put
    before me.  I find that AZ has always given the same date of birth.   I
    find that neither AZ's physical appearance nor his  demeanour  indicate
    that his date of birth is other than that claimed by  him.  That  is  a
    conclusion which I find is supported by my findings on the remainder of
    the evidence (which I shall record below).

22. I heard evidence from Dr Antony Edkins who is the  executive  principal
    and senior partner of United Learning, the sponsor  of  the  Manchester
    Academy,  Moss  Side,  Manchester.   Dr  Edkins  adopted  his   written
    statement of  8  November  2012  as  his  evidence-in-chief.   In  that
    statement he comments as follows on AZ:

         "[AZ'S] behaviour in the short  time  I  have  known  him  has  not
         altered my view [that he is 16  years  old].   His  appearance  and
         demeanour fit with that of a  typical  year  12  student  (that  is
         someone who had reached the age of 17 in the  academic  year  which
         runs  from  1/9/12  to  31/8/13)  and  he  seems  to  be  naturally
         comfortable with  this  year  group.  From  what  we  know  of  his
         background, the story is consistent.  He speaks Kurdish well.   His
         writing and reading skills are poor in any language  -  and  he  is
         showing the usual, albeit slower, progress in learning English as a
         foreign language."

23. Dr Edkins said that the Manchester Academy  teaches  38  "looked-after"
    children. These are children who arrived in the United Kingdom  without
    parents or other relatives.  Dr Edkins explained that he looked on  the
    "international language" of mathematics as a guide to assessing the age
    of a particular pupil; he believed that the level of attainment  of  an
    individual in mathematics gave an indication of that individual's  age.
    However, he acknowledged that teenagers between the ages of 13-19 years
    can "vary enormously" in terms of intellectual development.

24. I found Dr Edkins to be a  helpful  witness  but  his  testimony  added
    little to assist the Tribunal in assessing the appellant's age.  Having
    told me that the "international language of mathematics"  would  assist
    in assessing the  child's  age  Dr  Edkins  was  unable,  under  cross-
    examination, to explain exactly how it operates in AZ's case, given his
    lack of formal education and  fluency  in  English.   I  attach  little
    weight to that part of his evidence.  Likewise, whilst I am aware  that
    the Manchester Academy has a student base which is predominantly  drawn
    from ethnic minorities (Dr Edkins told me that, of 900  students,  only
    45 were classed as "Anglo-Saxon British") I did not  consider  that  Dr
    Edkins had any special or expert knowledge or  experience  which  would
    enable him to assess the age of a teenage Iranian  Kurd.   What  I  did
    find compelling in Dr Edkins' evidence was  what  he  said  about  AZ's
    interaction with his peers at the Manchester Academy.  I  accept  that,
    although he is principal of the academy, Dr Edkins is not "desk bound".
     He explained how he spent a lot of time  observing  students  both  in
    lessons and interacting with each other.  He described AZ's interaction
    with others in his year 12 class as a "natural fit".  He also  referred
    to AZ's "sheepish look" which he considered to be  very  common  in  16
    year old boys.

25. These observations are  useful  and  should  attract  probative  weight
    because they give a more  objective  indication  of  AZ's  age  than  a
    subjective opinion based  on  AZ's  appearance  and/or  demeanour.  The
    observations reveal AZ within a social  context,  more  particularly  a
    context inhabited by individuals known to be in the Year 12  age  range
    or group.  The Upper Tribunal was aware of the value of  such  evidence
    in the case of R (AM) v Solihull Metropolitan  Borough  Council  [2012]
    UKUT 00118 (IAC):


        Our second observation relates to mental maturity and demeanour. So
        far as mental development is concerned, it is very difficult indeed
        to see how any proper assessment can be made  from  a  position  of
        ignorance as to the individual's age. Most  assessments  of  mental
        development  are,  in  essence,  an  assessment  of   whether   the
        individual is at average,  or  below  or  above  average,  for  his
        chronological age. Without knowing the age, a person who appears to
        have a mental age of (say) 15 may be 15, or he may be a  bright  13
        or 14 year old, or a dull 16 or 17 year old. There is simply no way
        of telling. So far as demeanour is concerned, it seems to  us  that
        there may be value to be obtained from  observations  of  demeanour
        and interaction with others made over a  long  period  of  time  by
        those who have opportunity to observe an individual going about his
        ordinary life. But we find it difficult  to  see  that  any  useful
        observations  of  demeanour  or  social  interaction  or   maturity
        can be made in  the  course  of  a  short  interview  between  an
        individual and a strange adult. There may  of  course  be  cultural
        difficulties in such an interview but there are the ordinary social
        difficulties as well.

        The asserted expertise of a social worker conducting  an  interview
        is  not  in  our   judgement   sufficient   to   counteract   those
        difficulties. A person such as a teacher or even a  family  member,
        who can point to consistent attitudes, and a number  of  supporting
        instances over a considerable period of time, is  likely  to  carry
        weight that observations made in the artificial surroundings of  an
        interview cannot carry.

        Reactions from the individual's peers are  also  likely  to  be  of
        assistance if they are available. We do not  suggest  that  other
        young people are qualified specifically to give evidence about  the
        age of a colleague of theirs, nor should they be encouraged  to  do
        so. But those who work with groups of young  people  see  how  they
        react with one another and it seems to us likely that  evidence  of
        such interaction, if available, may well assist in  making  an  age
        assessment, particularly if any necessary  allowance  for  cultural
        differences can be made.


26. Although I have taken account of the fact that Dr Edkins's acquaintance
    with AZ has not been lengthy, I do attach weight to that  part  of  his
    evidence which arose from his observations of AZ  interacting  with  16
    year old boys in his social milieu at the Manchester Academy.

27. I heard evidence from Annie Clarkson who adopted her written  statement
    of 11 July 2012 as her evidence-in-chief.  Miss Clarkson is a qualified
    social worker and has, since August 2011, been senior project worker of
    the Children's Society  Hope  Young  Refuge  Service,  Stretford  Road,
    Stretford, Manchester.  AZ was referred to the  Children's  Society  in
    November 2011 by Refuge Action, Manchester on the grounds that he was a
    "vulnerable child living with adults, isolated". AZ has been  supported
    by the Children's Society since 17 November 2011. The Society engages a
    Kurdish Sorani interpreter for their  work  with  AZ  and  support  has
    "focused on wellbeing and mental health  support;  help  to  us  access
    services  including  GP  appointments,  hospital  mental  health  team;
    attempts to gain a college place for AZ to learn  English;  orientation
    support including finding his way around Manchester, public  transport,
    money; information about opportunities to meet other people of his age;
    support and navigating the immigration system,  including  support  and
    access to appointments." [statement, 3.3]

28. Miss Clarkson gives details in her statement [4.2] of thirteen meetings
    (each lasting for at least one  hour)  with  AZ.   Commenting  on  AZ's
    physical appearance  and  demeanour,  Miss  Clarkson  noted  that  "his
    physical appearance is consistent with other Kurdish young males of the
    same  age  who  we  work  with  and  those  from  similar   backgrounds
    (Iranian/Iraqi Syrian). I would describe  him  as  gangly  rather  than
    muscular. He often stands or sits as if he is 'awkward' with his body."
     She noted the stress AZ appears to experience when talking  about  his
    family in Iran.

29. She was asked by Mr Fullwood about  Mr  Warren's  alleged  conversation
    with AZ regarding Iranian politics  (see  above).  She  said  that  she
    considered such a conversation would be  "impossible".   Cross-examined
    by Mr Bourne, Miss Clarkson said that AZ was able to utter single words
    in English but had great difficulty constructing a sentence.

30. Mr Bourne asked Miss  Clarkson  regarding  a  passage  in  her  written
    statement [6.8] where she states that, "[AZ] is not confident in mixing
    with other young people. He presented as shy with his peers". Mr Bourne
    suggested that AZ was shy because he was aware that he was  older  than
    they were.  Miss Clarkson did not  agree  with  that  proposition.  She
    considered that AZ had an inherent shyness which  could  lead  him,  on
    occasion, to appear petulant and unhelpful when answering questions put
    to him by adults.

31.  I  heard  evidence  from  Kathleen  Upsdale.   Miss  Upsdale  is  AZ's
    litigation friend. She adopted her written  statement  as  evidence-in-
    chief. Miss Upsdale works for the Children's Society Hope Young Refugee
    Service in Manchester and has been  a  qualified  social  worker  since
    2008.  She has had several meetings with AZ including one which  lasted
    for several hours (statement, paragraph 7). The interviews between Miss
    Upsdale and AZ are conducted with the assistance of  a  Kurdish  Sorani
    interpreter.  In her statement, Miss Upsdale notes that AZ is "tall ...
    but not muscular ... skinny.  He looks as though he has yet to  develop
    adult male physique. He has body hair and a  deep  voice  but  this  is
    consistent with other young Kurdish males of 15 or 16 years old that  I
    have worked with." [8] By her assessment, AZ was  "a  vulnerable  child
    who is not coping in adult accommodation" [9].

32. Miss Upsdale confirmed that she is no longer AZ's allocated  caseworker
    but she continues to have informal conversations  with  him.  She  said
    that, in July 2012, AZ had become particularly stressed and had  ceased
    engaging with case workers at the  Children's  Society.   She  gave  up
    acting as his allocated caseworker as she considered  that  "perhaps  a
    change of face would help".  She believed that the change in caseworker
     had had a beneficial effect and AZ is now engaging constructively with
    other officers of the Children's Society.

33. Miss Upsdale was asked  about  the  alleged  conversations  between  Mr
    Warren and AZ  concerning  Iranian  politics.  She  said  that  such  a
    conversation would "not be possible unless it was just one word".

34. Cross-examined by Mr Bourne, she explained that she had worked  with  a
    number of 15  and  16  year  old  Kurdish  males.    She  acknowledged,
    however,  that  any  age  assessment  was  difficult  and  became  more
    complicated when details  of  the  subject's  cultural  background  lay
    outside the assessor's personal experience or knowledge.

35. I  heard  evidence  from  Caroline  Alison,  who  adopted  her  written
    statement of 1 November 2012 as her evidence in chief.  Miss Allison is
    a senior project worker at the Children's Society  Hope  Young  Refugee
    Service, Manchester.  Her statement gives  particulars  of  the  Refuge
    Council Age Assessment Awareness Training Course which she attended  in
    March 2012.  She has been working with AZ since August  2012  when  she
    was allocated as his caseworker by the  Children's  Society  (see  Miss
    Upsdale's evidence above).  She records in her statement that, "working
    with AZ on a one-to-one basis has further cemented my opinion  that  AZ
    is 16 years of age. I have observed AZ in a different environment and I
    have observed AZ's behaviour in his differing moods." [9]  Miss Allison
    went on to state as follows:

         "AZ's physical appearance is  consistent  with  other  Kurdish  and
         Middle Eastern young men around the age of 16 that I have  met  and
         worked with.  Other young people of the  same  age  and  background
         have accepted AZ at his age.  In my experience, other young  people
         are often able to judge if somebody is  similar  to  their  age  by
         their appearance and  behaviour.   I  have  previously  experienced
         situations where young people have queried the age of  other  young
         people they have met - this has not happened with AZ.  It has  been
         difficult  to  get  AZ  to  participate  in  group  activities   by
         witnessing him interact with young people of the same age in  their
         offices; in his Bedspace, accommodation and in college."

36. She also notes [10] that  "AZ  is  very  happy  to  start  college  [at
    Manchester Academy] and is friends with another  Kurdish  male  who  is
    16."

37. Miss Allison told Mr Fullwood that she had some difficulty  encouraging
    AZ to mix with other 16 year olds but, in recent weeks, he had shown  a
    much greater willingness to do so.   Very  recently,  he  had  attended
    football training and she had observed him undertaking  that  activity.
    She said, "[AZ] acts and looks like others in that group of 16-18  year
    olds."

38. Cross-examined by Mr Bourne, Miss Allison said that  she  believed  the
    Manchester Academy had "really helped" AZ.  One of the reasons she gave
    for forming that opinion  was  that  he  was  now  engaging  within  an
    institution  where  "someone  has  believed  his  claimed  age".    She
    considered that AZ had benefited from being with his  peer  group.  She
    rejected Mr Bourne's suggestion that an inexperienced and  immature  19
    year old would be able to mix easily with a group of 16 year olds.   In
    her experience, teenagers were very quick to  reject  individuals  whom
    they considered to be too old or too young to engage with them in group
    activities.

39. I found all the Children's Society officers who  gave  evidence  before
    the Tribunal to be impressive witnesses. It is true that  none  of  the
    officers of the Society have particularly lengthy experience as  social
    workers but their oral evidence was marked by a serious and  thoughtful
    assessment  of  their  respective  engagement  with  AZ;  none  of  the
    witnesses made any attempt to exaggerate his youth. As with Dr  Edkins,
    I found particularly compelling evidence which went  beyond  subjective
    "gut feeling" but which offered a picture of AZ interacting with  other
    teenage males.  Quite rightly, no attempt has been  made  to  ask  AZ's
    friends and acquaintances how  old  they  think  he  may  be;  such  an
    approach  would  be  wholly  inappropriate.   However,  I  thought   it
    particularly significant that all the Children's Society witnesses  (a)
    had some experience of working with  Kurdish  teenage  males;  (b)  had
    observed AZ interacting with individuals known to be between 16 and  17
    years old; (c) had received no enquiries or complaints from other  boys
    that AZ had been placed in an inappropriate  age  group,  and  (d)  had
    considered that AZ's wellbeing and, in particular,  his  mental  health
    had improved markedly once he had been  given the opportunity (and felt
    confident enough) to engage  with  16/17  year  males.  The  Children's
    Society witnesses have had the advantage of working closely with AZ and
    meeting him on a number of occasions, both on his own and with males of
    a similar age. I find that this adds weight to their evidence. It is an
    advantage which has been denied  to  the  defendant's  witnesses  whose
    knowledge of AZ has  been  restricted  to  the  rather  artificial  and
    possibly stressful conditions of an age assessment.

40. The first witness to give  evidence  for  the  defendant  was  Mr  Neil
    Connolly, who adopted his written statement as  his  evidence-in-chief.
    Mr Connolly qualified as a social worker in 2011 but had served for  23
    years in the British Army, including nine  years  as  an  army  welfare
    worker.  He joined Hampshire County Council in March 2008  and  it  had
    been whilst working for the Council  that  he  qualified  as  a  social
    worker.  At the time of the first age assessment of  AZ,  he  had  been
    working on a short term secondment with  the  Referral  and  Assessment
    Team in  Aldershot.  He  had  attended  an  age  assessment  course  in
    September 2011.

41. Mr Connolly had, together with Mr Rogers Warren, a social  worker  from
    the Basingstoke area of the local authority, completed  the  first  age
    assessment on 28 September 2011 at Aldershot.   Mr  Connolly  confirmed
    that there had been no appropriate adult present at the interview  with
    AZ. In his written statement, Mr Connolly describes  AZ's  attitude  at
    the interview as "guarded" and that he "did not present as someone  who
    was being open in communicating all information.  This  was  especially
    the case when asked about wider family and his experiences at home.  He
    was also vague about working at home  with  his  father  and  any  farm
    duties." [14] Mr Connolly and Mr  Warren  had  decided,  following  the
    discussion with AZ, that he was over the age of 18 years.  He estimated
    AZ's date of birth as 20 October 1992.

42. In answer to questions put to him by Mr Bourne, Mr Connolly  said  that
    he had been "concerned" that no appropriate adult had been  present  at
    the interview. He and Mr Warren had been told by officers at the Police
    Station that appropriate adults would only  attend  interviews  arising
    from criminal matters. Cross-examined by Mr Fullwood, Mr Connolly  said
    that he had not worked with  Mr  Roger  Warren  before  the  first  age
    assessment. The assessment had started late in the day (6 pm).  He  was
    aware that AZ had been detained at a  police  station  all  day  having
    arrived in the morning. However, he did not consider that factor to  be
    important because he believed that the "police would have looked  after
    him". It had been impossible on the day of the  assessment  to  find  a
    Kurdish Sorani interpreter so he and  Mr  Warren  had  made  use  of  a
    telephone translation service.

43. Mr Connolly had taken notes of the  age  assessment  meeting  with  AZ.
    However, when the report had been written, both he and Mr Warren relied
    on Mr Warren's notes only.   Mr  Fullwood  asked  Mr  Connolly  why  he
    considered AZ was not a reliable witness.  Mr Connolly referred to  the
    "lack of information about the farm" in Iran and  also  to  "a  general
    reluctance to tell us things about his family".  He said that   AZ  had
    avoided "eye contact".  I asked Mr Connolly to explain what information
    he considered had been missing from AZ's account of his life  in  Iran.
    Mr Connolly said "he should have been able to take about his life,  his
    health care and his schools in Iran". Mr Fullwood  pointed  out  to  Mr
    Connolly  that  AZ  had  not  been  educated  in  Iran  and,  whist  he
    acknowledged that  fact,  Mr  Connolly  felt  that  AZ  "had  genuinely
    withheld information from us".

44. I heard evidence from Mr Roger Warren who adopted his written statement
    as his evidence in chief. Mr Warren is a qualified  social  worker.  He
    holds a degree in social work from the University of Portsmouth (2009).
     He attended an age assessment awareness training course  in  September
    2011.  He has conducted five age assessments prior  to  that  which  he
    carried out with Mr Connolly in respect of AZ in September 2011. In his
    written statement, he observed that  AZ  is  not  "boyish  in  physical
    presentation" [11].  He also  noted  AZ's  lack  of  eye  contact  with
    himself and Mr Connolly  [12].   He  noted  that  the  interpreter  had
    considered that "AZ understood all of the questions fully as he  had  a
    good level of understanding of Kurdish but [he] was not  answering  the
    questions fully. He was avoidant [sic] and vague  not  giving  required
    answers to easy/simple questions."

45. Mr Warren had made the arrangements in January 2012 for  AZ  to  travel
    from Manchester to Basingstoke for the second age  assessment.  He  had
    met AZ on his arrival in Basingstoke.  On his second encounter with AZ,
    Mr Warren had "no reason to doubt my  original  age  assessment"  [22].
    Following the assessment, Mr Warren had taken AZ back  to  the  station
    and "whilst we both waited for the train,  AZ  was  able  to  speak  in
    English far more fluently than he had originally  informed  me  he  was
    able to ... We spoke about the current politics in Iran and AZ was able
    to make himself very understood with his spoken English [sic]".  [24] -
    [25]

46. Cross-examined by Mr Fullwood,  Mr  Warren  said  that  his  discussion
    regarding Iranian politics with AZ had "not been a full-blown political
    conversation".   He said that AZ's use of English "was not fluent".  Mr
    Fullwood asked Mr Warren about the passage  in  his  written  statement
    [11] where he noted that, "AZ's hair was black and  cut  close  at  the
    backs  and  the  sides  and  he  has  olive  skin  typical  of  Iranian
    nationality." Mr Warren acknowledged that he is not a dermatologist but
    he emphasised that his observations of  AZ's  physical  appearance  had
    contributed to the age assessment.

47. Mr Warren was asked about AZ's apparent reluctance to  talk  about  his
    life and family in Iran. At paragraph 14 of his written  statement,  Mr
    Warren noted that "AZ was able to confirm that his  father  was  called
    Saadi Hasamzaee, his mother is called  Sabij,  two  sisters  two  years
    older Leila and four years older Marian.  He was also able to inform he
    has no relative or friends in the UK with no contacts at all."  In  his
    evidence, Mr Connolly  had  said  that  AZ  had  given  vague  evidence
    "especially ... when asked about wider family and  his  experiences  at
    home" [14].  Mr Warren, on the other hand, said that he  considered  AZ
    had "offered a good amount of information. I note that  he  had  become
    distressed when talking about his family and I commend him for that".

48. Mr Fullwood asked Mr Warren at what point during the interview  he  had
    formed the view that AZ was not credible. Mr Warren said, "we were  not
    receiving the facts. In particular, we  had  no  documents".   (cf.  Mr
    Connolly's evidence: "He provided no documentary evidence  to  back  up
    his claim of being under 18" [11]).  Mr Warren was asked why he had not
    adjourned the age  assessment  appointment  to  enable  AZ  to  produce
    documents which might support his claimed age. Mr Warren  said,  "I  am
    experienced. I thought that  his  inability  to  produce  evidence  was
    reluctance on his part".

49. I have no doubt whatever that Mr Connolly  and  Mr  Warren  have  taken
    every  effort  to  fulfil  their  professional  duties  and,  had  they
    genuinely formed the view that AZ was under the age of  18,  that  they
    would have sought to protect him as a vulnerable  minor.  However,  the
    conduct of both Mr Warren and Mr Connolly at the first  age  assessment
    in September 2011 was problematic. It is  not  clear  to  me  that  the
    assessment should have proceeded at  all  given  the  late  hour,  AZ's
    obvious fatigue and the fact that no appropriate adult was  present.  I
    am aware of the very considerable practical difficulties in which  such
    age assessments are often carried out. Mr Warren and  Mr  Connolly  did
    not have the luxury afforded to the officers of the Children's  Society
    in observing AZ over a period of time or in a variety of  moods.  I  am
    sure that many of the subjects  of  such  age  assessments  are  tense,
    nervous, tired and occasionally hostile, often (as was  the  case  with
    AZ) having spent some  time  in  police  custody.   For  a  variety  of
    reasons, I recognise that there is a need to carry out such assessments
    as quickly as possible and difficulties can arise when an assessment is
    delayed or not completed at a single sitting. In my view, however,  the
    assessment and the conclusions which Mr Connelly  and  Mr  Warren  drew
    from it are not reliable.

50. I am aware that, even when an assessment does not  survive  a  judicial
    review, the data upon which it was based may  assist  in  a  subsequent
    assessment by a court or tribunal. I attach very little weight  to  the
    contents of the first age assessment  of  AZ.   First,  no  appropriate
    adult had been present.  Whether or not the assessment was  technically
    flawed because no adult had been present, the weight  which  should  be
    attached to the responses given by AZ in the absence  of  an  adult  to
    reassure and, where appropriate, assist him is, in  my  view,  limited.
    Secondly, Mr Warren  and  Mr  Connolly  decided  to  proceed  with  the
    assessment, without an appropriate adult present, and despite the  fact
    that AZ had just completed a  difficult  and  arduous  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom and had  spent  the  whole  day  in  a  police  station.
    Thirdly, discrepancies between the  evidence  of  Mr  Connolly  and  Mr
    Warren (for example and most significantly, as to the level  of  detail
    of his life in Iran provided by AZ) leads  me  to  find  that  the  age
    assessment was rushed and the notes taken inadequate (Mr  Connolly  did
    not take or, at least, retain any notes at all).

51. The first age assessment marks the first appearance of the  defendant's
    assertion, repeated several times thereafter in the evidence,  that  AZ
    is not a credible witness because he sought to  evade  questions  about
    his life Iran. I have considered that argument above (see above) and  I
    have rejected it.  In my opinion, any apparent evasion on AZ's part has
    arisen from the mixture of petulance and  shyness  which  he  exhibited
    when giving his oral evidence to the Tribunal.  He is certainly not, in
    my opinion, a knowing adult who has sought  to  evade  questions  which
    might  have  exposed  his  true  age.  The  defendant's  assertion  is,
    moreover, undermined by Mr Warren's written evidence which records  the
    considerable detail provided by AZ about  his  close  family  in  Iran,
    including the ages of his  parents  and  the  ages  and  names  of  his
    siblings.

52. I was also concerned by the readiness of Mr Warren and Mr  Connolly  to
    reject AZ's claimed age because he  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom
    without documents which might prove that  age.   Immigration  Tribunals
    are  very  familiar  with   undocumented   asylum   seekers   and   the
    jurisprudence which warns against attaching too much importance to  the
    absence of corroborative documentary evidence.  Mr Bourne's  submission
    that, whilst he has been living in the United  Kingdom,  the  appellant
    could have taken  steps  to  obtain  documentary  evidence  from  Iran,
    carries more weight than the rather cruder approach to the  appellant's
    lack of documents advanced by Mr Connolly and Mr Warren, but  it  is  a
    submission which I have rejected.

53. I heard evidence from Jill Ife who adopted her written statement as her
    evidence-in-chief.  Miss Ife is employed by Hampshire County Council as
    a social worker. She has been trained in conducting age assessments  by
    the Refugee Council and had carried out six age  assessments  prior  to
    seeing AZ in Basingstoke in January 2012.    In her  written  statement
    [28] Miss Ife noted that "AZ appeared to use strategies when  uncertain
    as to how to answer questions. He initially avoided the question of why
    he wanted to be in the UK. When asked again he refused eye contact  and
    lowered his head. The interview was stopped by the appropriate adult as
    it was felt AZ  was  becoming  distressed.  However,  on  resuming  the
    interview, the same question was asked and he responded  with  a  vague
    answer of no plans".   Miss  Ife  noted  that  AZ  became  increasingly
    confident as the interview proceeded.

54. Miss Ife told the Tribunal that her "initial feeling" upon first seeing
    AZ was that he was  under  18  years  of  age.   Cross-examined  by  Mr
    Fullwood, she accepted that AZ remains "vulnerable" but considered that
    his vulnerability was a product of his personality and lack of maturity
    rather than an indicator of his chronological age.  She said, "I  think
    he may present younger than his years".  The answers given  by  AZ  had
    "lacked detail" and this had led her  to  believe  that  he  was  being
    "guarded" in answering questions put to him.  Pressed by  Mr  Fullwood,
    Miss Ife said it was AZ's demeanour (including his  guarded  manner  in
    answering questions) rather  than  the  lack  of  information  actually
    provided in those answers which had led her to doubt the reliability of
    those answers.

55. I found Miss Ife to be a helpful witness.  I accept her  evidence  that
    she had not seen the first age assessment before she conducted her  own
    in January 2012.  I accept that she only had dealings  with  Mr  Warren
    regarding AZ in order  to  arrange  the  logistics  of  AZ's  visit  to
    Basingstoke.  The conclusions  of  Miss  Ife's  assessment,  therefore,
    should be given some weight given that they largely coincide with those
    of the first age assessment.  I was, however, concerned by two  aspects
    of Miss Ife's evidence.  First, I consider  it  significant  that  Miss
    Ife's first impression of AZ when she first met him  was  that  he  was
    under the age of 18 years.  Elsewhere in the defendant's evidence, much
    has been made of AZ's physical appearance (in particular, of  the  fact
    that he is tall and "rangy") in supporting an  assessment  that  he  is
    more than 18 years old.  Secondly,  Miss  Ife's  reasons  for  doubting
    those first impressions arose mainly  from  what  she  considered  AZ's
    "guarded" approach to answering questions. Significantly, she does  not
    appear to have been unhappy with  the  actual  answers  given  and  the
    information provided by AZ but, rather, she still believed that he  was
    withholding information from her.  I have difficulty  reconciling  Miss
    Ife's evidence of AZ's "guarded" manner with the fact that, as recorded
    in the assessments and the evidence of those who conducted them, AZ did
    provide answers  to  the  questions  about  his  family  in  Iran.  The
    defendant's witnesses have not said which questions about Iran  AZ  has
    failed or  refused  to  answer.  Further,  even  if  AZ  had  not  been
    forthcoming in his answers, none  of  the  defendant's  witnesses  have
    shown any  willingness  to  consider  possible  explanations  for  such
    conduct (shyness, petulance, teenage  obstreperousness)  other  than  a
    conscious desire to lie about his true age. As I have stated above,  my
    own impression of observing AZ and hearing him give evidence  was  that
    he was not trying to withhold information or construct answers which he
    believed would assist  his  case  but  rather  that  he  has  a  social
    awkwardness which has been compounded by  his  need  to  give  evidence
    through an interpreter.

56. Miss Ife had  conducted  the  second  age  assessment  jointly  with  a
    colleague, Donna Humphrey, who was unable to attend  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal to give oral evidence.   I  have  considered  Miss  Humphrey's
    written statement and have attached some  weight  to  it  although  the
    weight which the statement attracts is diminished by the fact that  she
    was unable to submit for cross-examination.  I note that Miss  Humphrey
    considered there were times during the interview with AZ  when  he  was
    "unclear and I felt that this was deliberately so". [11] Miss  Humphrey
    records [13] that "[AZ's] interaction with  us  and  the  other  adults
    present and from his physical appearance it was in my opinion  that  he
    was a young adult but an adult nevertheless.  I judge  his  age  to  be
    19+.  I did  think  he  was  probably  a  vulnerable  person  from  his
    responses and his manner.  I did not consider him a child." Unlike Miss
    Ife, Miss Humphrey did not appear to have considered AZ to be  a  child
    when she first encountered him.

57.  Essentially,  all  the  defendant's  witnesses  have   founded   their
    assessment of AZ's age on (i) his  physical  appearance  together  with
    (ii) their belief that what  they  perceived  to  be  his  deliberately
    guarded manner indicated that he had something to hide about  his  true
    age. From this latter point, they have drawn  the  conclusion  that  he
    must be over 18 years  old.   I  find  that  (i)  AZ's  appearance  and
    demeanour are consistent with his claimed age; (ii) he has answered the
    questions put to him regarding his life in Iran and  that  his  answers
    contain adequate detail; (iii) that the guarded manner observed by  the
    defendant's officers was, if it exists at  all,  the  product  of  AZ's
    personality and teenage awkwardness and not of any attempt  by  him  to
    hide the truth about his age (iv) even if  AZ  had  been  reluctant  to
    cooperate  fully  with  the   defendant's   officers,   it   would   be
    unsatisfactory and unsafe to reason from that observation that  AZ  was
    over 18 years old.

58.  I  heard  oral  submissions  from  Counsel  and   then   reserved   my
    determination.  Both Mr Fullwood and Mr Bourne have  provided  detailed
    skeleton arguments to which I have had regard. I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to discuss the submissions in detail.

59. Drawing together the findings and observations which I have set out  in
    my analysis above, I find that AZ is a witness of truth. The first  age
    assessment was, for the  reasons  I  have  given,  unsatisfactory  and,
    whilst the second age assessment was conducted in a  more  satisfactory
    manner, I have concluded that its conclusion is wrong.  This is  not  a
    case where a claimant has claimed to be unaware  of  his  own  date  of
    birth; AZ has throughout asserted the same date  of  birth  and,  given
    that I find that his own evidence is reliable and  supported  by  other
    evidence as detailed above, I find accordingly that AZ was born  on  10
    January 1996.

60. Although I reserved my decision, I invited Counsel for both parties  to
    address me in the alternative regarding costs.  Having regard to  those
    submissions, my order for costs is set out below.

DECISION

61. On the basis of my assessment, I make a declaration that  the  claimant
    was born on 10 January 1996.

62. The defendant shall pay the claimant's costs  to  be  assessed  if  not
    agreed. There shall be detailed  assessment  of  the  claimant's  costs
    pursuant the Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989.





 Signed  [pic]

Dated:  20 January 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


