
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                        JF (Domestic Servant) Philippines [2008] UKAIT 00085

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
On 13 May 2008

                                   Before

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


                                   Between

                                     JF
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MANILA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr M Mullen, instructed by Messrs Lee & Tallamy
For the Respondent:  Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. The essential ingredients of a "household" are a property  element,  a
      family element and a living (ie home) element.
   2. The essential common feature for all types  of  "domestic  worker"  is
      that the service provided by the employee has to be within  a  private
      household and to be personal  to  the  employer  or  through  him  for
      another member of his household.
   3. "Use of a household for himself  on  a  regular  basis"  must  require
      frequent or habitual use of those premises by  the  employer  himself.
      Also, "use" in the context of a "household" requires that the employer
      lives in the premises at least for part  of  his  time.  Meeting  this
      condition requires considerably  more  than  the  employee  being  the
      caretaker of  a  property  owned  by  the  employer,  which  he  might
      intermittently visit, even  if  the  property  is  one  occupied  more
      regularly by other members of his household.
   4. A family coming to the UK can bring with them a  domestic  worker  who
      has been employed by them for over a year as part of their  household,
      whether it is a visit or is part of a one-step  or  phased  migration.
      There could be some limited delay, if  properly  explained.  It  would
      however exclude a domestic worker who, after the family  has  migrated
      to the UK, remains in the overseas home beyond a  short  and  properly
      explained time lapse, unless the property continues to be a  household
      used by the employer  for  himself  on  a  regular  basis;  the  other
      requirements of the Rule have been  met:  and  the  employee  will  be
      travelling with the employer or another member of his  household.  [As
      to the significance of the connection between  employer  and  employee
      see DD (paragraph 159A: connection/employment) Sri Lanka [2008]  UKAIT
      00060].


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines. The Respondent  obtained
     an order for reconsideration of the determination of Immigration  Judge
     Gillespie, who allowed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's
     decision on 30 August 2007 to refuse the Appellant entry clearance as a
     domestic worker in a private household pursuant to  paragraph  159A  of
     the Immigration Rules.

The Facts

  2. The material facts are not in dispute and can be summarised as follows.
      The Appellant was born in the Philippines in 1983. The Sponsor and her
     husband, who is a British citizen, were married in the  Philippines  in
     1997 and subsequently had two children. In 2001 the  Sponsor's  husband
     came to the UK to work in the National Health Service. At that time the
     Sponsor rented a home in Baguio City, where she lived with the children
     until 2002. In 2002 she came to the UK to join her  husband  and  began
     working in the same hospital as him.  The two children remained in  the
     house in the Philippines. In February 2004 the Sponsor and her  husband
     employed the Appellant to take care of their children and to  keep  the
     house.

  3. In April or May 2005, the Sponsor returned to the Philippines  for  two
     months to make arrangements to bring the two children to the UK to live
     here with her and her husband. An application for entry  clearance  was
     made for the children and also for the Appellant to accompany them as a
     domestic worker.  The application by the Appellant was refused  by  the
     Respondent without any appeal being made against this  decision.  After
     the children had gone  to  the  UK  with  the  Sponsor,  the  Appellant
     remained in the Philippines to look after the house, which is also used
     since 2005 by the Sponsor's parents, when they are not in the provinces
     where her father is a village councillor.

  4. In early August 2007, the Sponsor returned to the Philippines and a new
     application was made on 8 August 2007, soon after her arrival, to bring
     the Appellant to the UK as a domestic worker under paragraph 159A.  The
     Sponsor  considered  that  the  Rule  required  her  to  accompany  the
     Appellant on her journey to the UK and this she intended to do. In  the
     event the Sponsor remained in the Philippines  for  some  three  months
     before returning to the UK.

  5. As stated above, this application was refused by the Respondent  on  30
     August 2007 giving rise to the present appeal. The Respondent  was  not
     satisfied that the Appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph  159A,
     specifically because:-

           "You state that since 2005 you have been  employed  by  your  UK
           employer's father.  I note that your UK employer has been in the
           UK for a considerable amount of time and their children went  to
           the UK in 2005.  Therefore I am not satisfied that you have been
           employed by your UK  employer  for  the  past  12  months  in  a
           household used by them on a regular basis."

  6. The actual terms of paragraph 159A are as follows.

           The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
           the United Kingdom as a domestic worker in a private household
           are that he:
                 (i) is aged 18-65 inclusive;
                 (ii) has been employed as a domestic worker for one year or
                 more immediately prior to application for entry clearance
                 under the same roof as his employer or in a household that
                 the employer uses for himself on a regular basis and where
                 there is evidence that there is a connection between
                 employer and employee;
                 (iii) that he intends to travel to the United Kingdom in
                 the company of his employer, his employer's spouse or civil
                 partner or his employer's minor child;
                 (iv) intends to work full time as a domestic worker under
                 the same roof as his employer or in a household that the
                 employer uses for himself on a regular basis and where
                 there is evidence that there is a connection between
                 employer and employee;
                 (v) does not intend to take employment except within the
                 terms of this paragraph; and
                 (vi) can maintain and accommodate himself adequately
                 without recourse to public funds; and
                 (vii) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for
                 entry in this capacity.

The Judge's Determination

  7. The Judge, having heard oral evidence from  the  Sponsor,  reached  the
     following material conclusions.

           "(b) Rule 159(ii)
           The Appellant has been employed as a  domestic  worker  for  one
           year or  more  immediately  prior  to  the  application  in  the
           household, meeting the provisions of this Rule.   The  following
           requirements are essential elements of this Rule.
                 (i) Employed as a domestic worker.
                 I accept the evidence of the Sponsor who  is  a  thoughtful
                 and respectable person.  I have no doubt that her  evidence
                 is the truth.  The entry clearance officer found  cause  to
                 doubt the word of the Appellant and the intentions  of  the
                 Sponsor.  This finding is premised upon certain portions of
                 the Appellant's application form, which suggests  that  the
                 Appellant was employed by the Sponsor's father since  2005.
                 I am satisfied however that  these  reflect  the  practical
                 perception of the Appellant, an unlettered person, that she
                 was from the time the Sponsor left the Philippines employed
                 by her father.  This perception was no  doubt  and  in  all
                 probability born of the circumstance that  her  wages  came
                 frequently from the hand of the father  and  that  she  was
                 keeping house for the father and his wife. The fact remains
                 however  as  the  Sponsor  has  credibly  and  satisfactory
                 described that she  was  responsible  for  the  payment  of
                 wages, for rental of the household and  for  the  continued
                 employment of the Appellant, having previously engaged  her
                 herself as a childminder and housekeeper.  On this evidence
                 the Appellant is and has been employed by  the  Sponsor  in
                 United Kingdom as a domestic worker since 2004.
                 (ii)  For  one  year  or  more  immediately  prior  to  the
                 application.
                 On the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor,  which  I  accept,  the
                 Appellant  has  been  employed  for  one   year   or   more
                 immediately prior to the  application.   She  was  in  fact
                 employed by the Appellant [sic] for some years prior to the
                 application.
                 (iii) Under the same roof as the employer
                 This requirement is not met - the Sponsor did not  live  in
                 the household where the Appellant is employed at any  time,
                 save during periods when she might have been  visiting  the
                 Philippines.
                 (iv) Or in a household that the employer uses  for  himself
                 on a regular  basis  and  where  there  is  evidence  of  a
                 connection between employer and employee.
                 This requirement is enacted  disjunctively  to  and  as  an
                 alternative to that in  (iii)  above  and  is  considerably
                 wider in ambit. Treating it purely semantically, there  are
                 two rungs to the requirement.
                       A. That the Appellant is employed in a household that
                       the employer uses for himself  on  a  regular  basis.
                       The evidence shows that the  Sponsor  has  used  this
                       house for herself or her purposes continuously  since
                       2001.  She has rented it herself, in  her  own  name,
                       since 2001.  She has lived in  it  between  2001  and
                       2002.  She has housed her children in it between 2002
                       and 2005.  She has employed the Appellant  in  it  as
                       childminder, between 2004 and 2005.  She has  visited
                       it and stayed in it over a period of months  in  2005
                       and 2007.  She has maintained it  when  she  has  not
                       been present throughout the period since  2005  using
                       the Appellant as a housekeeper.  She has used it  for
                       her purposes providing it as a home for  her  parents
                       since 2004.  She has on this  evidence  used  it  for
                       herself on a regular basis since 2001 which  shows  a
                       period of well over a year prior to the date  of  the
                       application.
                       B.  That there is evidence of  a  connection  between
                       the Sponsor in the Appellant.  There  is  irrefutable
                       evidence from the Sponsor of such a connection, which
                       I accept.  The connection is strong and is  reflected
                       in the foregoing summary.
                       I therefore hold of the  two  rungs  of  subparagraph
                       (iv), namely that the Sponsor uses the household  for
                       herself  on  a  regular  basis  and  that  there   is
                       connection between the employer  and  employee,  have
                       been met.

            (c)  Rule 159A(iii)
           The Appellant intends to travel to the  United  Kingdom  in  the
           company  of  the  employer,  the  employer's  spouse,   or   the
           employer's minor child.  The Sponsor has explained  in  evidence
           that she is aware of this specific requirement. She travelled to
           the Philippines in 2005 and in 2007 in order that the  Appellant
           might travel to the United  Kingdom  in  her  company.   It  was
           clearly the intention at the  time  of  the  decision  that  the
           Appellant would travel to the United Kingdom in the  company  of
           the employer."


  8. It is not disputed that all the other requirements  of  paragraph  159A
     apart from these two subparagraphs were met by the Appellant. Thus  the
     Judge allowed the appeal.  The order for reconsideration  was  made  on
     the basis of the Respondent's grounds of application, which  were  that
     the Judge had misdirected himself in law as to the  proper  meaning  of
     the requirements of subparagraph 159A(ii).

The Submissions

  9. It was argued in the Respondent's grounds and by Mr  Ousley  before  us
     that the Sponsor had stopped using the house  in  the  Philippines  for
     herself on a regular basis when she left in  2002.   Her  children  had
     lived there up until 2005.  She only visited the house once  after  her
     visit in 2005 (when she arranged to take the children to  live  in  the
     UK) and that was in  2007  when  a  few  days  after  her  arrival  the
     Appellant made her second application for  entry  clearance.  In  those
     circumstances it could not  be  said  by  a  Judge  properly  directing
     himself as to the meaning of Rule 159A that the Appellant was "employed
     for one year or more immediately prior to  the  application  for  entry
     clearance as a domestic worker in a household that  the  employer  uses
     for herself on a regular basis". Mr Ousley maintained that it cannot be
     correct to say that housing other adults thereafter in that  house  who
     are not part of the Sponsor's own  household  is  tantamount  to  using
     those premises for herself. Thus in letting her parents use the  house,
     however frequently, the Sponsor was not using the  house  for  herself.
     The Immigration Judge had misinterpreted the Rule and had not  properly
     considered the significance of the words "uses  for  himself"  in  sub-
     paragraph 159A(ii). The purpose of the  Rule  is  to  enable  a  family
     household to travel to the UK accompanied by genuine domestic  workers.
     That explained the requirement for evidence of not less than  one  year
     of employment by the domestic worker in  the  Sponsor's  household  and
     additionally that the Sponsor must  use  the  household  regularly  for
     himself. It  also  explains  subparagraph  (iii)  of  the  Rule,  which
     requires that the domestic worker should travel  to  the  UK  with  her
     employer  or  spouse  or  minor  child.   In  the  year  prior  to  the
     application and indeed in the year prior to that also the Appellant was
     employed simply as the caretaker of a property which was barely used at
     all by the Sponsor.  Mr Ousley invited the Tribunal  to  conclude  that
     the Judge had made a material error of  law  in  his  understanding  of
     requirements of the Rule. As there was no dispute over the  facts,  the
     Tribunal should reach its own conclusions on the proper  interpretation
     of those requirements and their application to the facts. He  submitted
     that the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision should be
     dismissed.

 10. Mr Mullen, in response, very helpfully provided us  with  his  skeleton
     argument, which he expanded in his oral submissions  to  us.   He  also
     pointed us to section 12 of chapter 5 of the IDI, in which the  purpose
     of the various aspects of the Rule is explained in the following terms.

           "2.2 ...... The  purpose  of  the  minimum  period  of  previous
           employment with the employer (or with the employer's  spouse  or
           minor child forming part of the same  household)  is  to  ensure
           that there is a genuine existing employer/employee  relationship
           and to prevent the recruitment of overseas domestic  workers  by
           people in the UK.  A  short  gap  in  the  12  months  does  not
           necessarily disqualify the applicant  unless  it  indicates  the
           lack of a genuine existing employer/employee relationship.


           2.3 Prior to coming to the UK  a domestic worker must have  been
           carrying out duties in a private household, i.e. under the  same
           roof of the person  receiving  the  services  or  working  in  a
           household that the employer uses himself on a regular basis  and
           where there is evidence that there is a connection  between  the
           employer and employee.


           2.4  ....  Overseas  domestic  workers  may  include   cleaners,
           chauffeurs, gardeners, cooks, those carrying out  personal  care
           for the employer or  a  member  of  the  employer's  family  and
           nannies if they are providing a personal service relating to the
           running of the employer's household.


           2.5 The domestic worker is expected to travel with the employer,
           his employer's spouse or his employer's minor child.  However  a
           domestic worker may be  admitted  if  travelling  independently,
           provided that there is no  excessive  time  lapse  and  provided
           satisfactory evidence, e.g.  a  letter  from  the  employer,  is
           produced, explaining why he is travelling alone.

 11. With regard to what was meant by "used on a regular basis "  Mr  Mullen
     referred us to NG Bulgaria [2006] UKAIT 00020 where it was said that it
     meant "habitually or customarily used" and was intended to ensure  that
     there was a genuine connection  between  the  household  in  which  the
     relevant applicant was employed and his employer.  He  maintained  that
     the established facts satisfied this requirement.

 12. Mr Mullen also referred us to the case of  BO  (Nigeria)  [2007]  UKAIT
     00053 to support his submission that if there had been a  break  in  an
     established pattern of  visits  within  the  last  year  prior  to  the
     application for entry clearance because of a hiatus or  aberration  for
     which there was a good reason, it was legitimate to overlook it.

 13. With regard to "using the household for himself" he maintained  that  a
     "household" can apply to the bricks and mortar, and the  IDI  indicated
     this could  cover  the  situation  where  the  Sponsor  was  using  the
     "employer's household" for her minor children and for her parents.

 14. Thus he submitted that  since  the  Appellant  was  looking  after  the
     Sponsor's children during 2004-5 and  her parents  thereafter,  it  was
     reasonable to consider that this fell within the spirit  of  the  Rule.
     When one combined this with the visits of two to three months  in  2005
     and again in 2007, it was plain that the Sponsor had used the  property
     regularly for herself since  employing  the  Appellant.   There  was  a
     hiatus in her visits in 2006 but this was because of the need  to  take
     professional qualifications in the UK. However the length  of  the  two
     visits in 2005 and 2007 represented a  pattern  of  personal  use  that
     should be regarded as comparable to more numerous  visits  for  shorter
     periods of time.

 15. Thus the Appellant satisfied the requirements of the Rule and Mr Mullen
     urged us to find that there was no material error of law in the Judge's
     determination which should be upheld.

The Interpretation of the Rule

 16. Essentially the two representatives disagree about  the  interpretation
     of the relevant parts of the Rule, in particular subparagraphs  (ii)  -
     and to an extent sub-paragraph (iii) to which we shall come later - and
     how they relate to the unchallenged  facts.  It  is  therefore  to  the
     meaning of these subparagraphs and the words and phrases used  in  them
     that we now turn. In this task we are now assisted by the  guidance  of
     the Court of Appeal in MB (Somalia) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  102  as  to  the
     correct approach, which is as follows.
          23. Should the plain and ordinary meaning of the rule be modified
          in order to give effect to a  purposive  construction?  I  accept
          that any rule, like any other instrument, should be construed  so
          as to further its purpose. That purpose can usually be identified
          from the terms of the instrument itself. An  example  of  a  rule
          whose purpose can be so identified is para  289A(iv)  of  HC  395
          which was considered by this court  in  Ishtiaq  v  Secretary  of
          State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 386: see para 31 of
          my judgment. But  the  purpose  of  para  317  is  to  state  the
          requirements for indefinite leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
          United Kingdom as the  parent,  grandparent  or  other  dependent
          relative of a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom.
          Fixing those requirements involves policy questions as  to  which
          class of dependent relative should be included and on what terms.
          It involves striking a  balance  between  (i)  the  interests  of
          families in circumstances where dependent relatives want to  join
          those on whom they are dependent and who are present and  settled
          in this country and (ii) the need  for  an  effective  system  of
          immigration control. Where that balance is struck is a matter for
          the Secretary of State. His judgment as to  how  to  balance  the
          competing interests forms the basis of the policy which finds its
          expression in the rules and IDIs that  he  publishes.  The  court
          will not interfere unless the policy  is  unlawful  (for  example
          because it is irrational) or its  application  in  an  individual
          case violates the individual's rights under the Convention.
          24. There is a difficulty with the observations of Collins  J  in
          Arman Ali. The purposive construction to which  he  refers  is  a
          construction which avoids imposing  a  "greater  impediment  than
          necessary to the ability of those  settled  in  this  country  to
          enjoy family life here". It  seems  to  me  that  this  fails  to
          recognise  that,  although  they  are  subject  to   a   negative
          resolution by either House of Parliament, the rules are laid down
          by the Secretary of State "as to the practice to be  followed  in
          the  administration  of  this  Act":  see  section  3(2)  of  the
          Immigration Act 1971. They  are  statements  of  policy:  see  MO
          (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2007]
          UKAIT 00057  para 14. To say that a rule should not be  construed
          as imposing a greater impediment to family life than is necessary
          simply begs the question  whether  an  impediment  is  necessary.
          Whether it is necessary involves the policy questions to which  I
          have referred and  which  are  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
          determine. For similar reasons, I do not find  the  statement  by
          Dillon LJ that the rule is one of broad humanity points the  way,
          because that raises the question: how humane is  the  rule?  That
          question  too  raises  the  policy  questions  to  which  I  have
          referred.
          25. That is not to say that, if the plain  and  ordinary  meaning
          yields an absurd result, the court should not strain to avoid it.
          This is what Kennedy J did in Zainib Bibi. It  is  to  be  noted,
          however, that he assimilated the 62 year old separated mother  to
          the class of [other] people below the age of 65, rather  than  to
          the class of widowed mothers aged 65 or over. This meant that she
          had  to  meet  the  stringent  "most  exceptional   compassionate
          circumstances" requirement....
          59. The first concerns the reasoning of Collins J  in  Arman  Ali
          [2000] INLR 89  at  102B, cited by Dyson LJ at paragraph 18. Like
          Dyson LJ (paragraph 24) I disagree with Collins J's insistence on
          a purposive construction  of  the  Immigration  Rule,  if  it  is
          thought that such an approach would produce a result in  any  way
          different from the application of the Rule's  ordinary  language.
          As Dyson LJ indicates, the purpose of the Rules generally  is  to
          state the Secretary of State's policy with regard to immigration.
          The Secretary of  State  is  thus  concerned  to  articulate  the
          balance to  be  struck,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  between  the
          requirements of immigration control on the one hand  and  on  the
          other the claims of aliens, or classes of aliens,  to  enter  the
          United Kingdom on this or that particular basis. Subject  to  the
          public law imperatives of reason  and  fair  procedure,  and  the
          statutory imperatives of the Human Rights Act 1998, there can  be
          no a priori bias which tilts  the  policy  in  a  liberal,  or  a
          restrictive direction. The policy's direction is entirely for the
          Secretary of State,  subject  to  Parliament's  approval  by  the
          negative procedure provided for by the  legislation.  It  follows
          that the purpose of the Rule (barring  a  verbal  mistake  or  an
          eccentric use  of  language)  is  necessarily  satisfied  by  the
          ordinary  meaning  of  its  words.  Any  other  conclusion   must
          constitute a qualification by the court, on  merits  grounds,  of
          the Secretary of State's policy; and that would be unprincipled.
 17. In line with this guidance and in seeking  to  establish  the  ordinary
     meaning of the words in the Rules,  we  must  also  bear  in  mind  two
     further points. First, although we may have to examine individual words
     and phrases  separately  in  the  first  instance  to  ascertain  their
     ordinary meaning, they are all integral parts of a coherent  whole  and
     in the final analysis must be interpreted together and  in  the  round,
     that is to say in their context in the Rule and indeed the Rules  as  a
     whole. Second, subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) are  intended  to  cover  a
     variety of different scenarios, as we shall describe. In  that  context
     whilst all the stated requirements have to be satisfied by an applicant
     in every case, some of those requirements would  appear  to  have  more
     obvious relevance to some of the scenarios than others.

Employed as a domestic worker

 18. The term "domestic worker" is not defined in the  Rules  but  paragraph
     2.4 of the IDI explains what the Respondent means by it in the  context
     of this Rule. It is a relatively broad definition,  which  may  include
     for example cleaners, cooks, those carrying out personal care  for  the
     employer or a member of the employer's family, and nannies if they  are
     providing a personal service to the employer's private  household.  The
     list given is not intended  to  be  comprehensive,  but  the  essential
     common feature for all types of "domestic worker", in line with what we
     would understand to be the ordinary meaning of the expression, is  that
     the service provided by  the  employee  has  to  be  within  a  private
     household and to be personal to the employer or through him for another
     member of his household. This  latter  extension  is  implicit  in  for
     example  the  inclusion  in  the  list  of  a  "nanny"  whose  services
     necessarily will be personal to a minor child of the  employer  in  his
     household rather than directly to the employer himself.  We shall  come
     later to what is meant by "employer's household".

Employed for one year or more immediately prior  to  application  for  entry
clearance

 19. The words themselves are clear and the IDI illuminates the Respondent's
     purpose in requiring a minimum  period  of  this  kind.  Paragraph  2.2
     states that the minimum period of previous  employment  as  a  domestic
     worker with the employer (or with the employer's spouse or minor  child
     forming part of the same household)  is  to  ensure  that  there  is  a
     genuine  existing  employer/employee  relationship   and   to   prevent
     recruitment of overseas domestic workers by people in the UK. That also
     is clear and informative. So too, from the terms of the Rule itself, is
     the requirement that the assessment must focus upon the period  of  one
     year running backwards from the date of the  submission  of  the  entry
     clearance application, or further if it is necessary. There is  also  a
     limited concession outside the Rules that employment with other defined
     members of the household of  the  employer  (as  at  the  time  of  the
     application) can be aggregated together in order the make up the  year.
     This reinforces our  earlier  conclusion  that  the  personal  services
     provided by the domestic worker can be for the employer or  to  another
     member of his household.

Employed under the same roof as his employer

 20. The most straightforward range of scenarios to which the  Rule  applies
     is where an employer lives overseas with his household and his domestic
     worker but wishes to travel with them all en bloc to the UK. At one end
     of this spectrum this may simply be for a visit  to  the  UK   with  no
     intention of anyone remaining here long-term. At the other end  of  the
     spectrum, it may be as part of a permanent one-step migration to the UK
     by the family together with its domestic worker. In these circumstances
     the domestic worker will have had to be working at all  material  times
     under the same roof as the employer and the  service  provided  by  the
     employee to the employer or to other members of  his  household  during
     the course of employment must be of the personal nature implicit in the
     meaning of domestic worker as described above. There  is  therefore  no
     need, given the purpose  of  the  Rule,  to  provide  for  any  further
     conditions  beyond  the  minimum  one  year  qualification  period   in
     subparagraph (ii), and the need for the employee to travel at the  same
     time as the  employer  or  another  member  of  his  household  as  per
     subparagraph (iii) - and the Rule does not do so.

Employed in a household that the employer uses  for  himself  on  a  regular
basis

 21. This is an alternative requirement to that of being employed under  the
     same roof as the employer, and it is there in the Rule to enable  entry
     into the UK for  a  domestic  worker  in  other  scenarios  than  those
     described in paragraph 20 above. For example, there could be  a  phased
     migration by a family to the UK, where one family member comes  on  his
     own first, to get established here, and then is joined in due course by
     other members of the family together with their domestic worker who has
     been looking after them.  Another example is where the employer's whole
     family is resident in a household in the UK but  he  maintains  a  home
     overseas which is used regularly by them and where the domestic  worker
     is employed to look after the employer and the members of his household
     when they are there. Another scenario is  where  (in  a  country  where
     polygamy is legal) a sponsor may have two wives  and  their  respective
     children, each living in separate homes, one in the UK  and  the  other
     overseas, with the Sponsor moving between them. These examples are  not
     intended as a comprehensive list but describe situations with which  we
     are  commonly  faced  in  our  jurisdiction.   For   these   scenarios,
     subparagraph 159A(ii) introduces additional safeguards to  ensure  that
     the Rule is not misused by persons living in the UK in order simply  to
     recruit overseas domestic workers thereby circumventing other parts  of
     the Immigration Rules.

 22. These additional safeguards comprise two separate components,  both  of
     which must be satisfied. The first  is  the  domestic  worker  must  be
     employed  in  a  "household  of  the  employer",  which,   as   it   is
     distinguished from working "under  the  same  roof  as  the  employer",
     necessarily implies  that  an  employer's  household  may  embrace  two
     separate properties. The second is  that  the  employer  must  use  his
     household in which the domestic worker is employed "for  himself  on  a
     regular  basis".  This  can  only,  in  its  ordinary  meaning,  be  in
     distinction from working in a property which is part of the  employer's
     household but is not used regularly by the employer for  himself,  even
     though it may be used by other members of his household.

 23. At this point we need to be clear about  what  is  meant  by  the  term
     "household". It is not defined in the Rules. So what  is  its  ordinary
     meaning? The Oxford English Dictionary  describes  it  "as  the  people
     living  in  a  house,  especially  a  family."  This  definition  could
     potentially extend to employees who live with and look after the family
     who live in the house. However the property element, the family element
     and the living (ie home) element are the essential ingredients  in  the
     meaning of a "household" for the purpose of this Rule. Thus an employee
     who works for the family but lives elsewhere is not  a  part  of  their
     household. Nor can the term "household" apply to the bricks and  mortar
     alone. It is a family living a property that creates the nucleus  of  a
     household.

 24. In relation to the family element, it means members of  the  employer's
     family who normally live together. Thus the household  of  an  employer
     could embrace the employer, his spouse and the children who are part of
     the  same  family  unit  (i.e.  not  divorced,  separated   or   living
     independently). It may embrace them even if some of them may from  time
     to time live away from the main house used by the employer, e.g.  where
     children are at a boarding school, or where  some  family  members  are
     still living abroad as part of the process of a  phased  migration.  It
     could also embrace a situation  where  an  employer  has  two  separate
     households in different countries with (in countries where polygamy  is
     permitted) wives and  children  in  each.   It  does  not  exclude  the
     possibility of other  family  members  being  part  of  the  employer's
     household, provided they are part of  the  family  unit  that  normally
     lives together and they do not form a separate household of their own.

 25. This definition as described above is the ordinary meaning in which the
     word "household" is used in the Rule.

 26. There is however an additional and important safeguard to  achieve  the
     purpose of the Rule. The domestic worker, if he does not work under the
     same roof as his employer, must be employed in a  household  which  the
     employer uses for himself on a regular basis. Mr Mullen referred us  to
     paragraph 2.2 of the IDI where there is talk of the  employer,  or  his
     spouse, or his minor child "if they form part of the  same  household",
     and argued that this implied that  services  provided  regularly  by  a
     domestic worker to any  member  of  the  employer's  household  can  be
     counted as regular use of  those  services  by  the  employer  himself.
     However the reference in the IDI is only in the context of  being  able
     to take into account previous employment with another  member  of  that
     household, and is in any event a concession outside the Rules. There is
     nothing in this Rule to suggest, as Mr Mullen has submitted, that other
     family  members,  be  they  members  of  the  employer's  household  or
     otherwise, can be  substituted  for  the  employer  in  satisfying  the
     ordinary meaning of the unambiguously  stated  qualification  that  the
     employer must use the household "for himself" on a regular basis.

 27. Moving on then to what is meant by use on a "regular  basis",  we  have
     been assisted by the Tribunal's guidance in the two cases to  which  we
     were referred by Mr Mullen.

 28. In NG Bulgaria, the Tribunal held as follows.


      12.   The term "regular" which appears in paragraph  159A(ii)  is  not
          defined in the Immigration Rules.   It  does  not  appear  in  the
          interpretation section  at  paragraph  6  of  the  Rules.   It  is
          therefore to  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  its  ordinary
          dictionary meaning,  giving  the  Immigration  Rules  a  purposive
          interpretation, rather than seeking to  interpret  them  with  the
          strictness that might apply if they were statutory provisions.  In
          this regard, we have given consideration to the definition of  the
          word "regular" which appears in the current  edition  of  the  New
          Shorter Oxford English Dictionary.  The dictionary definition sets
          out a range of different meanings, but for  present  purposes  the
          only meanings which are arguably relevant are those  which  appear
          in  paragraphs  3  and  4  of  the  definition  respectively.   At
          paragraph 3, the following definition appears:


              "Recurring or repeated at fixed intervals, recurring at short
              uniform intervals. Habitually or customarily  used,  received
              or observed; habitual, constant".


            At paragraph 4, "regular" is defined as meaning:


              "Observing  fixed  times  for  or  never   failing   in   the
              performance of certain actions or duties."


      13.   Stated  shortly,  Mr  Stanage's  submission  was  that  for  the
          purposes of paragraph 159A(ii), use of a household "on  a  regular
          basis" did not require that such use should be frequent.   He  did
          not offer any suggestion as to what else the expression  might  be
          intended to mean in this particular context.   Mrs  Petterson,  on
          the other hand, adopted the opposite submission,  namely  that  in
          this context, "regular" implied frequent or habitual.


      14.   We have little (if any)  hesitation  in  preferring  the  latter
          submission.  In some contexts, an event may properly be  described
          as happening "regularly", even though it happens infrequently.  To
          adopt the example which was raised during the course  of  argument
          before us, Halley's Comet comes close to the Earth once  in  every
          76 years.  The reappearance of the Comet is an event which can  be
          predicted with a high degree  of  accuracy  many  decades,  indeed
          centuries, in advance.  To that  extent,  the  appearance  of  the
          Comet may fairly be described as  one  which  takes  place  "on  a
          regular basis".


      15.   However, that is plainly not the meaning that the expression "on
          a regular basis" is intended to bear in the context  of  paragraph
          159A(ii).  On the contrary, it is clearly  intended  to  bear  the
          alternative meaning contained in paragraph  4  of  the  dictionary
          definition set out above, namely "habitually or customarily used".
           That was the view adopted by the  Designated  Immigration  Judge,
          albeit not in precisely those terms.  It is a view  which  in  our
          opinion he was right to adopt.  The purpose of  the  reference  to
          "on a regular basis" in paragraph 159A(ii) is to ensure that there
          is a  genuine  connection  between  the  household  in  which  the
          relevant applicant is  employed  as  a  domestic  worker  and  his
          employer.  That requirement would scarcely be served  if  it  were
          sufficient for the employer to  use  that  household  only  on  an
          infrequent basis.  By way of example,  it  might  be  argued  that
          attendance at the household on but a single occasion each year  on
          25 January to celebrate Burns Night could properly be described as
          "regular" attendance, but only in the sense  of  being  attendance
          which recurred at a fixed interval, and clearly not in  the  sense
          of being attendance for habitual or customary use.  In the context
          of paragraph 159A(ii), it is plainly the latter sense in which the
          term is being used.


 29. We agree. Thus, to satisfy "use of a household for himself on a regular
     basis" must require frequent or habitual use of those premises  by  the
     employer himself. Also, as indicated in paragraph 23  above,  "use"  in
     the context of a "household" requires that the employer  lives  in  the
     premises at least for part of his time. Meeting this condition requires
     considerably more than the employee being the caretaker of  a  property
     owned by the employer, which he might intermittently visit, even if the
     property is one  occupied  more  regularly  by  other  members  of  his
     household. Nor would it extend for example to an employee who works for
     an employer as a cleaner in a block of flats which  the  employer  lets
     out for money. It requires in plain terms the  regular  (i.e.  habitual
     and customary) use of a home by the employer  personally.  It  is  that
     which establishes the connection between the employer and the  employee
     and which provides a significant protection against the abuse  of  this
     Rule by those in the UK who wish to employ a foreign domestic worker in
     circumvention of other Rules. Mr Mullen submitted  that  less  frequent
     but longer stays should be given at least equal if not more weight than
     more frequent but shorter trips. We  would  not  be  prescriptive.  The
     proper approach is to assess whether on the evidence in any  particular
     case the personal presence  of  the  employer  in  that  household  can
     properly be described as regular.

 30. This approach was adopted and developed in  BO  Nigeria  to  cover  the
     separate problem, which might arise if in the year immediately prior to
     the application for entry clearance there  was  for  a  good  reason  a
     temporary and untypical interruption in the frequent or habitual use of
     the premises by the employer. The Tribunal said as follows.

          8. In considering these submissions, we would first observe  that
          there is no justification in the wording of  the  Rule  to  limit
          consideration of the use by the Sponsor of her home in Nigeria to
          a short period before the application, such as to the  hiatus  in
          June 2006 due to pregnancy, as Mr Ousley has sought  to  do.  The
          purpose of the Rule is to enable an employer who has  employed  a
          domestic worker for at least a year  in  a  home  overseas  which
          he/she uses on a regular basis, to bring that employee to the  UK
          to work for him/her here.  The Tribunal in NG was concerned  with
          a potential ambiguity in the meaning of "regular", as to  whether
          it could embrace the infrequent occupation of a  home  but  in  a
          regular pattern. It correctly concluded that  it  did  not.  That
          clearly reflects the  purpose  of  the  Rule.  It  is  not  about
          property rights but  about  the  establishment  of  a  connection
          between the employer and the employee, and it says  so  expressly
          in sub-paragraph (ii).

          9. To establish the evidence of such a  connection,  subparagraph
          (ii) requires that the employee should have been employed by  the
          employer  for  one  year  or  more  immediately  prior   to   the
          application for entry clearance.  To assess whether  an  adequate
          connection has been made, an Immigration Judge  should  therefore
          look at least at the final year of the relationship but may  also
          take into account a longer period to ascertain the extent of  the
          connection,  and  should  do  so  if  there  is  some   temporary
          aberration in the  final  year  from  the  established  long-term
          pattern.

          10. In this case the Appellant made her application  on  16  June
          2006  and  her  employment  with  the  Sponsor  began   at   some
          unspecified date in 2004.  The Immigration  Judge,  in  paragraph
          5(e) of the determination assessed the evidence before him of the
          Sponsor's visits in the 16 month period from March 2005  to  June
          2006 as follows.  There was one month  from  March  2005.   There
          were two months between July and September  2005.   There  was  a
          further month from December 2005 to January  2006.   Finally,  in
          May 2006, there was a one month visit until June 2006.   Thus  in
          the period of 16 months from the beginning  of  2005  until  June
          2006 the Sponsor had spent a total of five months at her home  in
          Nigeria, where the Appellant was employed and  included  in  that
          period was a temporary hiatus when the Sponsor was pregnant.

 31. Again we agree. There is nothing in this approach which diminishes  the
     fundamental importance of there being a minimum period  of  one  year's
     employment  in  the  employer's  household  immediately  prior  to  the
     application for entry clearance, and of the need  for  regular  use  of
     that household by the employer himself.  Having said that however, even
     here the Respondent has in paragraph 2.2  of  the  IDI  allowed  for  a
     little discretionary flexibility outside the Rules consistent with  his
     overall purpose if there is a short break in the period  of  employment
     which overall exceeds one year.

And where there is evidence that there is a connection between employer  and
employee.

 32. This is the final aspect of sub-paragraph  (ii)  and  there  may  be  a
     superficial ambiguity in what it means.  After  all,  if  there  is  an
     employment contract, oral  or  written,  between  an  employer  and  an
     employee there must by definition be some connection between them.  The
     employee at the least  will  provide  the  services  specified  by  the
     employment contract and in return the employer will pay  wages  to  the
     employee. However this limited interpretation would make these words in
     the Rule entirely superfluous, which would be  unlikely.  The  ordinary
     meaning of this requirement is to stress the need in cases  under  this
     Rule for clear evidence of the connection between the employer and  the
     employee, having regard to all  the  matters  that  we  have  described
     above.

 33. That then is our assessment of the ordinary  meaning  of  sub-paragraph
     159A(ii) and how it should be interpreted when considering the facts in
     any individual case.

 34. Sub-paragraph (iii) was not raised in the Respondent's grounds and will
     not therefore form any part of our  assessment  of  whether  the  Judge
     erred materially in law  in  his  determination.  However  it  will  be
     relevant if we conclude that the Judge did so err and we have to  reach
     our own assessment. It was therefore canvassed with the representatives
     in the course of their submissions.

Intends to travel to the UK in the company of his employer,  his  employer's
spouse or civil partner or his employer's minor child

 35. This requirement is potentially ambiguous. On the  one  hand  it  could
     mean that the domestic worker when first coming to the UK  must  travel
     with a member or members of the employer's household at the  same  time
     as they visit or migrate to the UK. On the other hand it  could  simply
     mean that a member of  the  employer's  household  must  accompany  the
     domestic worker when first coming to the UK, as  the  Sponsor  believed
     and Mr Mullen has urged upon us.

 36. The purpose of the Rule, as  we  have  described,  is  to  prevent  the
     recruitment of overseas  domestic  workers  by  people  in  the  UK  in
     circumvention of other Rules. When  this  requirement  is  applied  for
     example to temporary visits by an overseas resident and his  family  to
     the UK with his domestic worker,  its  importance  is  obvious.  It  is
     visible evidence  of  the  connection  between  the  employer  and  the
     employee. It will also serve, in this and other  scenarios,  to  enable
     the authorities at the  point  of  entry  establish  more  readily  and
     reliably the entitlement of an individual domestic worker to enter  the
     UK under Rule 159A. This is why it only applies on the first visit.  In
     effect it is a reinforcement of  the demand in  subparagraph  (ii)  for
     good evidence of the relationship.

 37. The IDI in paragraph 2.5 confirms our understanding of what  is  meant.
     It re-states that the domestic worker when first coming to  the  UK  is
     expected to travel with members of the employer's household. It  offers
     a concessionary relaxation outside the Rule that  the  domestic  worker
     may be admitted if travelling independently.  Then  it  introduces  two
     important qualifications. The first is that the  domestic  worker  must
     produce satisfactory evidence from the employer explaining  why  he  is
     travelling alone. That is neutral to  the  ambiguity  and  could  apply
     equally on either interpretation.  The  second  qualification  is  that
     "there is no excessive time lapse".  That can only mean  in  context  a
     lapse of time after the relevant member of the employer's household has
     come to the UK.

 38. This means that a family coming  to  the  UK  can  bring  with  them  a
     domestic worker who has been employed by them for over a year  as  part
     of their household, whether it is a visit or is part of a  one-step  or
     phased migration. There  could  be  some  limited  delay,  if  properly
     explained. It would however exclude a domestic worker  who  remains  in
     the overseas home beyond a short  and  properly  explained  time  lapse
     after the family have left for the UK.  Thus  a  person  who,  after  a
     family has migrated to the UK, becomes effectively a caretaker  of  the
     property for a period of time cannot take continue to advantage of  the
     Rule unless it can be demonstrated that the property continues to be  a
     "household" which the employer has continued to use for  himself  on  a
     regular basis after the migration; that all the other  requirements  of
     the Rule have been met; and that the employee will be  travelling  with
     the employer or another member of his household to the UK on a separate
     occasion.

 39. This interpretation of sub-paragraph (iii) is consistent with  that  of
     sub-paragraph (ii) in the sense that the interpretation of the words of
     sub-paragraph (iii) help to see that sub-paragraph (ii) means  what  we
     say. The employee who does not (need to) travel with  the  employer  is
     perhaps unlikely to  be  a  member  of  a  relevant  household  of  the
     employer. It is on this basis that we now go on to assess  whether  the
     Immigration Judge erred materially in law in the determination.

Material Error of Law

 40. Mr Mullen accepted, when asked by us, that the Appellant  was  employed
     from February 2004 until April/May 2005 to take care of  the  Sponsor's
     two children and to keep the house in the Philippines, but  thereafter,
     when the children had moved to the UK, the Sponsor only kept the house.
     It had been the intention of the Sponsor to bring the Appellant to  the
     UK with the children in 2005 but this was thwarted by  the  refusal  of
     the Respondent of her application for entry clearance. We do  not  know
     the reason for this refusal but that is not material. What  matters  is
     that there was no  appeal  against  this  decision.  This  is  material
     because the Appellant's position in terms  of  her  employment  changed
     significantly from that point onwards.

 41. In April/May 2005 the Appellant was looking after the Sponsor's and her
     husband's two minor children for them. The Sponsor and her husband  had
     continuing joint custody and control of those children,  and  organised
     and financed the arrangements for them. The minor children were a  part
     of the Sponsor's household even if they were temporarily  living  apart
     from the Sponsor and her husband, as a consequence of  the  three-stage
     phased migration of the family  to  the  UK.  The  Appellant  had  been
     recruited by the Sponsor in 2004 and the Sponsor herself stayed at  the
     home in the Philippines for two months in 2005.  Thus it may be that at
     that time (i.e. in April/May 2005) the Appellant had been employed  for
     one year or more as a domestic worker in a household which the  sponsor
     used for herself on a regular basis and where there  is  evidence  that
     there is a connection between the Sponsor and the Appellant.

 42. However, as we have said, the Appellant  did  not  appeal  against  the
     refusal of her entry clearance application in 2005.   She  remained  to
     look after the house in the Philippines, whose main users then were the
     Sponsor's parents, who have their own household, a separate family unit
     from that of the Sponsor, in the provinces. The Judge was  required  to
     look at the situation as it was in August 2007, by which time over  two
     years had passed since the earlier decision.

 43. The Judge's analysis is contained in paragraph 5 of the  determination.
     He accepted that there was a contract of employment for more  than  one
     year immediately prior to the application  for  entry  clearance.   His
     reasoning in subparagraph 5(b)(iv)A was that the Sponsor had  used  the
     house for herself or her purposes  continuously  since  2001.   It  was
     rented in her name.  She lived in it between 2001 and  2002.   She  had
     her children in it between 2002 and 2005.  She employed  the  Appellant
     as a childminder between 2004 and 2005. She  visited  it  in  2005  and
     2007.  She maintained it when she was not present, using the  Appellant
     as a housekeeper.  She used it for her purposes, providing it as a home
     for her parents since 2004.  On this evidence she used it  for  herself
     on a regular basis since 2001 and this usage shows a connection between
     the Sponsor and the Appellant.  On this reasoning,  he  concluded  that
     the Appellant has satisfied the requirements of  subparagraph  (ii)  of
     the Rule.

 44. Essentially we agree with Mr Ousley that this reasoning by the Judge is
     inadequate and  reveals  material  errors  of  law  for  the  following
     reasons.

           1. The Judge's analysis of the facts described above misses  out
              important elements that should have been  factored  into  his
              assessment. In particular he overlooked the context that many
              of the events relied upon by him to establish  a  pattern  of
              usage by the Sponsor were part of a phased migration  to  the
              UK by the Sponsor's family which  began  in  2001,  when  the
              Sponsor's husband left for the UK (at which point the Sponsor
              rented property in which she and  children  lived  until  the
              migration was complete)  and  ended  in  2005.   The  Sponsor
              herself left for the UK in 2002 to  join  her  husband.   She
              returned in 2005 in order to bring her children to the UK and
              thus complete the family migration.  The  Appellant  did  not
              accompany the family on its migration in  2005  and  the  two
              years that passed until  the  second  application  for  entry
              clearance is plainly an excessive time lapse to enable her in
              2007  to  claim  to  be  a  part  of  that  migration   under
              subparagraph (iii) of the Rule.


           2. The Appellant can therefore only succeed if she can show that
              in the year immediately prior to her  second  application  in
              August 2007 she was  employed  as  a  domestic  worker  in  a
              household which the employer used for herself  on  a  regular
              basis. The usage of the property prior to  the  departure  of
              the children in 2005 is clearly not reliable evidence of  the
              Sponsor's  pattern  of  usage  of  the  property  after   the
              migration  was  complete.  The  nature  of  the   Appellant's
              contract of employment altered materially after the  children
              left  for  the  UK  in  2005.   Prior  to  that  her  primary
              responsibility was to look after the Sponsor's children in  a
              household of the Sponsor. After 2005 the house  was  used  by
              the Sponsor's parents when they were in the  city.  But  they
              were not members of the Sponsor's household. They  had  their
              own separate household in the provinces where the father  was
              a councillor.  Indeed, although the  Judge  was  entitled  to
              conclude in sub-paragraph 5(b)(i) of the  determination  that
              the Appellant was in fact always employed by the Sponsor from
              the UK, it is nevertheless  instructive  that  the  Appellant
              herself considered she was employed by the Sponsor's  father.
              The Judge said that this reflected the  practical  perception
              of the Appellant.  Quite  so!   This  perception  as  to  the
              nature of her work  reflects  the  reality  of  her  role.  A
              reasoned assessment was required from the Judge as to whether
              the property  in  the  Philippines  could,  on  the  ordinary
              meaning of the Rule,  even  constitute  a  household  of  the
              Sponsor after her children had left it, as opposed  to  being
              only a property owned by the Sponsor for the benefit  of  her
              parents. There was no such analysis.


           3. The Judge also failed to take into account in  his  reasoning
              the important fact that the Sponsor left the  Philippines  in
              2005 with her children on completion of the family  migration
              to the UK, and did not return until  August  2007,  some  two
              years later, when within a few days  the  Appellant's  second
              application for entry clearance was made.  Thus  the  Sponsor
              used the property for herself for less than a week in the two
              years prior to the submission of the second  entry  clearance
              application and even then the last use was not  part  of  any
              regular pattern, but was for  the  purpose  of  bringing  the
              Appellant to the UK. It is  difficult  to  see  how,  in  the
              absence of clear findings of fact to explain this lengthy and
              unbroken absence, this very limited usage is consistent  with
              "use by the Sponsor for herself on a regular  basis".  It  is
              suggested to us by Mr Mullen that this was some hiatus caused
              by the need to take qualifications in the UK in  2006.   That
              may be so, but there are no findings of fact  or  conclusions
              by the Judge in the determination on this point, and it is  a
              very material omission.


 45. For these reasons we consider that the Judge erred  materially  in  law
     and that his decision must be set aside, though his findings  of  fact,
     which are unchallenged, can be maintained.

Our Conclusions

 46.  Given the established findings of fact, we are now in a position to be
     able to cure the errors of law in the determination by reaching our own
     conclusions on the basis of the interpretation of  the  Rule  which  we
     have set out above.

 47. As we have said, we are not assessing the position as it  was  in  2005
     when the first application for entry clearance was made. It may be that
     at that time the Appellant may have been employed for just over a  year
     as a domestic worker in a household which the Sponsor used for  herself
     on a regular basis and where there was evidence of a connection between
     the two of them sufficient to satisfy subparagraph (ii)  of  the  Rule.
     It may be that there were other factors leading to the refusal and  the
     Appellant's decision not to appeal against it. We do not know the basis
     of the refusal at that time and we cannot speculate  either  about  the
     reason for it, or why the Appellant did not then appeal.   We  have  to
     looking at the position as it  was  in  August  2007  when  the  second
     application for entry clearance and the  Respondent's  decision  on  it
     were made.

 48. The lapse of time since  the  family  migration  in  2005  is  far  too
     excessive to enable the Appellant to be considered as a  part  of  that
     migration. The last members of the sponsor's family to migrate  to  the
     UK did so in 2005.  The Appellant did not accompany them.  There is  no
     satisfactory explanation for the two-year  time  lapse  in  making  the
     second entry clearance application.

 49. The Appellant was employed in 2004 in the final year  of  a  four  year
     process of phased immigration to the UK by the Sponsor, her husband and
     their minor children.  She was then employed to work in a  house  owned
     by the Sponsor to look after the children after the  parents  had  left
     for the UK. It could  then  have  been  described  as  a  part  of  the
     Sponsor's household. The Appellant worked there in  that  capacity  for
     just over 12 months, at which time the  children  left  to  join  their
     parents in the UK. Thereafter, the nature of the  Appellant's  contract
     of employment was quite different. She was no longer  a  nanny  to  the
     sponsor's children. The services she provided on a personal basis  were
     to the Sponsor's  parents,  who  were  not  members  of  the  Sponsor's
     household. Even though the  Appellant  continued  to  be  paid  by  the
     Sponsor, the Appellant was in reality from  2005  the  caretaker  of  a
     property owned by the Sponsor but used  by  her  parents,  rather  than
     being a domestic worker in a household used by the Sponsor herself on a
     regular basis. In  the  two  years  prior  to  the  submission  of  the
     application in 2007, the Sponsor lived in the property for only  a  few
     days right at the end and in that  time  was  engaged  in  helping  the
     Appellant, who is herself, unlettered, to make  her  application.  This
     does not in our view  constitute  frequent  and  habitual  use  by  the
     Sponsor, but was in reality an attempt by people whose lives and family
     were by then focused in the UK to recruit an overseas  domestic  worker
     in circumvention of the Rules.

 50. It may be, as submitted by Mr Mullen, that during 2006 the Sponsor  and
     her husband were engaged in taking professional qualifications  in  the
     UK. However this in our judgement  reflected  the  changed  reality  in
     their circumstances following the migration of their family here. Their
     family focus and interests had changed and were thereafter based in the
     UK. This in our assessment explains why in the two years they  did  not
     visit the Philippines for even  a  short  time  consistent  with  their
     studies. This falls  far  short  of  showing  that  the  house  in  the
     Philippines was part of the  sponsor's  private  household,  which  the
     Sponsor used on a regular basis for herself in the  one  year  or  more
     prior to the application for entry clearance in 2007,  as  required  by
     the Rule.

 51. So far as sub-paragraph (iii) of the Rule we accept  that  the  Sponsor
     intended to travel to the UK with the Appellant in 2007, but this  does
     not avail her given our findings in relation to subparagraph (ii).

 52. We therefore conclude that the Appellant has failed  on  a  balance  of
     probabilities to discharge her burden of proof that she meets  all  the
     requirements of paragraph 159A of the Immigration Rules.

 53. Thus we have decided to dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
     Respondent's decision of 30 August 2007.


                                  DECISION

      The Immigration Judge made a material  error  of  law.  The  following
      decision is accordingly substituted:


      "The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 30 August
      2007 to refuse entry clearance is dismissed."




      Signed
      Dated 12 August 2008



      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
On 13 May 2008

                                   Before

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


                                   Between

                                     JF

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MANILA

                                                                  Respondent



                            FUNDING DETERMINATION

The Tribunal is satisfied, in view of the  Appellant's  success  before  the
Immigration Judge,  that  her  costs  in  respect  of  the  application  for
reconsideration by the Respondent, the preparation for  reconsideration  and
the reconsideration are to be paid out of the relevant fund, as  defined  in
Rule 33 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005




      Signed
      Dated 12 August 2008




      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


