

|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 29 November 2004        |        |AL [Azeris and Mixed        |
|                           |        |Marriages] Armenia [2005]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00087                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|21 April 2005                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Moulden (Vice President)                                   |
|Mr R A McKee                                                      |
|Mr C P O'Brian                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State. The Respondent is  a  citizen
      of Armenia. The Appellant has been  given  permission  to  appeal  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr F Pieri, allowing the Respondent's
      appeal on both Refugee Convention and human rights grounds against the
      Appellant's decision to give  directions  for  his  removal  from  the
      United Kingdom, following the refusal of asylum.


   2. Miss R Brown, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, represented the
      Appellant. Mr S  Winter,  a  Solicitor  from  Hamilton,  Burns  &  Co,
      appeared for the Respondent.

   3. The Respondent arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  11  July  2001  and
      claimed asylum. His wife and two  sons  are  his  dependants  for  the
      purpose of the appeal, although Mr Winter thought that one  son  might
      have made a separate claim which had not been decided by the Secretary
      of State.  The  notice  containing  the  decision  against  which  the
      Respondent appeals is dated 17 October 2001. The appeal was heard  and
      determined by an Adjudicator but, following the grant of permission to
      appeal to the Tribunal, was remitted for hearing afresh by a different
      Adjudicator. It was in these circumstances  that  it  came  before  Mr
      Pieri  in  Glasgow  on  10  February  2004.  His   determination   was
      promulgated on 13 February 2004 and permission to appeal granted on 10
      May 2004.

   4. The Adjudicator set out the facts of the case in paragraphs 8 to 17 of
      the determination in the following terms,

        "8.      He is an Assuri. He married his wife in 1980.  They  lived
        in Yerevan in Armenia. At that time Armenia was still part  of  the
        Soviet Union. His wife has Azeri origins. She is a Muslim. He is an
        Orthodox Christian.


        9. In 1988 the conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia over Nagorny
        Karabakh began. His wife's ethnic origins were discovered  in  1995
        when she and the Appellant applied for  new  passports.  Their  old
        Soviet passports  showed  their  ethnic  origins.  The  authorities
        delayed in issuing new  passports  when  they  noticed  his  wife's
        ethnic  origins  and  to  this  day  they  have  not  received  new
        passports.  His  wife's  ethnic  origins  became  known  to   their
        neighbours and to her employers. She lost her employment and  began
        to suffer at the hands of her neighbours.


        10. The Appellant's children were attacked  by  neighbours  and  at
        school because they came from a mixed marriage. One son was stabbed
        in the thigh in 1996. He was also chased onto a roof by a group  of
        children. He was saved from being pushed off the roof by a man  who
        was working there.


        11. The Armenian police  failed  to  take  action  to  protect  the
        Appellant and his family although the Appellant did complain to the
        police about what was happening.

        12. In 1997 a neighbour, Hovik, who is a powerful man and  involved
        in the military, took the Appellant to a forest and  beat  him  up.
        Hovik was helped in this by three policemen and two civilians.  The
        Appellant was so badly beaten he remained  in  hospital  for  three
        months.


        13. The Appellant's wife was attacked. In 1997, during an  assault,
        she lost her front teeth. She was subjected to an  acid  attack  by
        female neighbours in 1997. In 1998 Hovik attacked her in  the  flat
        she and the Appellant lived  in  and  stabbed  her.  The  Appellant
        succeeded in pushing him away and he fell from the balcony  to  the
        street.


        14. In 1998 the Appellant heard that Hovik was planning to steal  a
        ballot box to assist in an election fraud. The  Appellant  reported
        this to the authorities. Hovik  suspected  the  Appellant  and  the
        Appellant (sic) of informing on him. The Appellant and  his  family
        relocated to Zangilan. He went there to hide.


        15. Hardly anybody lived in the Zangilan area  when  the  Appellant
        and his family went there. It was an area that had  been  taken  by
        force by Armenia from Azerbaijan. There were army units  there  but
        hardly any civilians. The civilian population  gradually  increased
        however and the army introduced passport checks. The Appellant  and
        his wife did not have passports and so they feared that they  might
        be killed.


        16. Hovik began looking for the Appellant and his  wife.  He  began
        visiting military units. The Appellant saw him from a distance  one
        day. The Appellant  and  his  wife  then  gathered  together  their
        valuables and went with their family to  Goris,  a  town  about  70
        kilometres from Zangilan. From there, with the help  of  a  friend,
        they soon secured the services of an agent and left Armenia  on  30
        June 2001. They made their way to the United  Kingdom  and  claimed
        asylum on arrival.


        17. In his oral evidence the Appellant said this. His father was an
        Assyrian and his mother Armenian. His wife was born in Armenia  and
        has never been to  Azerbaijan.  His  wife's  grandparents  died  in
        Azerbaijan. During the time of the Soviet Union passports contained
        the holders' ethnic origins. His neighbours had found out that  his
        wife was an Azeri in 1995. Many of his neighbours had children  and
        relatives  who  were  killed  in  the  war  between   Armenia   and
        Azerbaijan. Feelings ran high  because  of  this.  Hovik  had  been
        involved in that conflict. When the Appellant had  moved  with  his
        wife and family to Zangilan he had acquired some  livestock  and  a
        piece of land and had found  an  abandoned  house  which  they  had
        managed to make habitable. The whole area had been abandoned by the
        previous population. The Appellant had some money. His parents  had
        brought some gold to Armenia when they had moved there  from  Iran.
        He and his brother had sold his parents' former  home  and  he  had
        divided the sale proceeds equally between them. In addition  up  to
        1992 when he was paid off he had held a good job. He and  his  wife
        could not have gone to Azerbaijan as he is a Christian and he would
        have encountered problems there. He could not find safety  anywhere
        in Armenia. In Zangilan his neighbours had suspected that his  wife
        might be an Azeri. Had their suspicions been confirmed  they  would
        have harassed the Appellant and his wife.  The  Appellant  and  his
        wife were afraid of what might happen should his  wife's  ethnicity
        be discovered."


   5. The Adjudicator found that the Respondent and his  wife  had  given  a
      true account of the events except when they said that Hovik was  still
      looking for them in 2001 and that the Respondent saw him in  the  area
      of Zangilan in 2001.  In  this  respect  they  had  embroidered  their
      account of the events. He went on to say,


        "In these circumstances, my summary of the  account  given  by  the
        Appellant and his wife at paragraph 8 to 17 and paragraph 20 of the
        determination, with the exception of the claim that Hovik was still
        looking for the Appellant and his wife in 2001 and was seen by  the
        Appellant in 2001, can be taken as findings in fact."

   6. At paragraph 20 of the determination, the Adjudicator said,


        "Before giving evidence at this appeal the Appellant's wife,  Anush
        Mikhilova set out her account  in  a  statement  provided  for  the
        purposes of this appeal. She adopted the terms of that statement as
        her evidence in chief. In that statement she generally corroborates
        the evidence of the Appellant. In her oral evidence she  also  said
        this. The situation had become so  bad  in  Yerevan  that  she  was
        frightened to leave the house to go  to  the  shops.  Although  her
        parents were  born  in  Armenia,  her  grandparents  were  born  in
        Azerbaijan and she and her parents were regarded as Azeri. She  and
        her husband had lived in Zangilan from 1998 to 2001."


   7. The Adjudicator listed the country material before him in paragraph 24
      of the determination and, in paragraphs 26 to 28, made  more  detailed
      reference to the US Department of State Report  (for  2002),  a  UNHCR
      Report on international protection considerations  regarding  Armenian
      asylum seekers  and  refugees  dated  September  2003  and  the  UNHCR
      position paper on mixed Azeri - Armenian couples from Azerbaijan.  The
      Adjudicator reached the following conclusions in paragraphs 37 - 42 of
      the determination,


        "37. The question is whether there is a real risk of the  Appellant
        and his wife and children again suffering ill-treatment should they
        return to Armenia now. I have mentioned the document from the UNHCR
        which tells me that in the past years the UNHCR has not  been  made
        aware of any mistreatment of ethnic Azeris. That document says that
        Azeris feel relatively safe and secure so long as  they  remain  in
        their own community. It also says that their neighbours  are  aware
        of their ethnic background but this  does  not  normally  pose  any
        problems. It however  also  says  that  it  is  believed  that  the
        remaining Azeris keep a low profile. As  I  have  mentioned,  there
        must be a reason for this. Then there is the US Department of State
        Report. That tells me that anti Muslim feeling persists  among  the
        populace and that the few remaining Muslims in the country  keep  a
        low profile. It seems to be a reasonable inference that they keep a
        low profile as they fear what might happen to them if they do  not.
        The US Department of State Report also repeats the point  that  the
        few Azeris still remaining in Armenia maintain a  low  profile.  It
        says this is done in the face of societal discrimination. Again, as
        I have mentioned, the catalyst for racial hatred  remains  in  that
        skirmishes  continue  between  Armenia  and  Azerbaijan  and  those
        misguided enough to harbour feelings of racial hatred tend  not  to
        lose those feelings quickly.


        38. When I come to consider all the evidence in the round and place
        the Appellant's past experiences in the context of  the  background
        material I reach the conclusion that there is a real  risk  of  the
        Appellant and his family suffering ill treatment of the  sort  they
        suffered in the past should they return now to Armenia. There is  a
        real risk of that ill-treatment amounting to persecution. It  would
        be on account of the Appellant's wife's ethnic origins. It would be
        on account of membership of a particular social group,  namely  the
        Appellant's family. There is also a real risk of this ill-treatment
        reaching the threshold required to breach Article 3  of  the  Human
        Rights Convention.


        39. It is true that were the Appellant and his wife and  family  to
        return to Armenia and keep the Appellant's  wife's  ethnic  origins
        secret they would have nothing to fear. It seems  to  me,  however,
        that there can  be  no  better  indicator  of  persecution  than  a
        requirement of secrecy.


        40. The risk to this Appellant and his wife and family, as  I  read
        the  background  material,  exists  throughout  Armenia.   Internal
        relocation is not the answer.

        41. The background material supports the proposition  that  in  the
        past the Armenian authorities  have  been  complicit  in  the  ill-
        treatment of Azeris. In the past therefore there cannot  have  been
        any question of  a  sufficiency  of  State  protection.  If  it  is
        suggested that the situation has changed since then the  background
        material, as I read it, does not support that. It does  not  really
        address any possible change. The closest  the  background  material
        gets is the assertion in the report from the UNHCR that there is no
        evidence of systematic discrimination by  the  Armenian  government
        against the few remaining  ethnic  Azeris.  In  the  context  of  a
        situation where apart from a few hundred, all  ethnic  Azeris  have
        left the country nothing can be made of this. The  opportunity  for
        ill-treatment in those circumstances  is  greatly  diminished.  The
        absence of cogent evidence of change is  enough  to  undermine  any
        question of sufficiency of protection.


        42. In the whole circumstances, therefore this Appellant
        succeeds."

   8. There are two grounds of appeal but permission  was  granted  only  in
      respect of the second which is;


        "It is submitted that the Adjudicator's finding at paragraph 37  is
        that Azeris keep a low profile because there is a general  risk  of
        persecution is speculative."

   9. At the hearing, Ms Brown did not  hesitate  to  grasp  the  nettle  of
      having to establish a material error  of  law  in  the  light  of  the
      Judgement of the Court of Appeal in CA v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1165. She submits that on the  country
      information it was  perverse  for  the  Adjudicator  to  come  to  the
      conclusion that the Respondent would be at risk on return  because  of
      his wife's ethnicity.


  10. Miss Brown has provided us with the US Department of State Report  for
      2003. We note that the 2002 Report was before  the  Adjudicator.  Many
      but not all of the passages are identical. She also provided the UNHCR
      position paper on mixed Azeri/Armenian couples dated April 2003 (which
      was before the Adjudicator), the report from the Research  Directorate
      of the Immigration and Refugee Board in Ottawa, Canada, dated May 2002
      (which was before the Adjudicator) and the "Report on  Roving  Attach�
      Mission to Azerbaijan, Armenia and Russia" prepared  by  the  Research
      Directorate of the Immigration and Refugee Board in Ottawa,  following
      a  visit  during  June  to  July  2000  (which  was  not  before   the
      Adjudicator). We also have the UNHCR CDR background paper on  Refugees
      and Asylum Seekers from Armenia dated August  1995,  although  neither
      representative made any reference to this. Mr Winter provided us  with
      a copy of the Respondent's bundle which was  before  the  Adjudicator.
      When it was discovered that the witness statements of  the  Respondent
      and his wife had been removed he provided us with copies of these.  He
      also submitted a skeleton  argument  and  an  expert  report  from  Dr
      Balekjian with his CV, which were not before the Adjudicator.


  11. Miss Brown argued that, on the  information  before  the  Adjudicator,
      there was an error of law. We can only consider information not before
      the Adjudicator if there is a material error of law.

  12. The US Department of State Report for 2003 shows  that  Armenia  is  a
      country with a population of approximately three  million  people  and
      that,

        "The government's human rights record remains poor, although  there
        were some improvements in a few areas, serious problems remained."

  13. It is said that most cases of police brutality go  unreported  because
      of fear of police retribution.


  14. The same report states,

        "As a result of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict with Azerbaijan, most
        of the country's Muslim population was forced to leave the  country
        by 1991, and the few remaining Muslims in the country  kept  a  low
        profile. There was no formally operating Mosque, although Yerevan's
        one surviving 18th Century Mosque was in practice open for  regular
        Friday prayers on a tenuous legal basis. Although  the  Mosque  was
        not registered as a religious  facility,  the  government  did  not
        create any obstacles for Muslims who wished to pray there."


  15. The important difference between this passage and the similar  passage
      in the earlier report is the inclusion in  the  earlier  but  not  the
      later  of  the  words,  "Anti-Muslim  feeling  persisted   among   the
      populace".


  16. The 2003 State Department report goes on to say,

        "The population was approximately 95 percent ethnic  Armenian.  The
        Government did  not  discriminate  against  the  small,  officially
        recognised "national" communities although the economic and  social
        situation of  such  groups  has  deteriorated  substantially  since
        independence in 1991. The Government included Russians, Ukrainians,
        Belarusians, Jews, Kurds, Yezidis,  Assyrians,  Georgians,  Greeks,
        and Germans in the  category  of  "national"  communities.  Several
        hundred Azeris or persons of mixed Azeris heritage still living  in
        the country maintained a  low  profile  in  the  face  of  societal
        discrimination.

  17. The UNHCR position paper of April 2003 states,


        "Today, it is widely believed that most of the remaining Azeris are
        of mixed marriage background and/or elderlies. The  number  is  not
        known. It is also believed that the remaining  Azeris  keep  a  low
        profile. According to NGO's they feel relatively safe and secure as
        long as they remain in their own community.  Their  neighbours  are
        aware of their ethnic background but this does  not  normally  pose
        any problem. The key issue is that they  have  never  left  Armenia
        since the conflict started and are simply accepted as part  of  the
        community. There is no guarantee, however, that the same  level  of
        acceptance would be there if  an  Azeri  individual  should  return
        after several years of absence or arrive there having never been in
        Armenia. In the past years, UNHCR has not been made  aware  of  any
        mistreatment of ethnic Azeris. However, this does not categorically
        assert that there is no security risk for ethnic Azeris.  Precisely
        because of their ethnicity, remaining Azeris  maintain  a  discrete
        posture. They may not wish to unnecessarily  expose  themselves  by
        reporting mis/maltreatment by Armenians. Therefore,  in  comparison
        with ethnic Azeris who have remained in Armenia, one cannot exclude
        the possibility of the higher risk for ethnic Azeris  -  even  with
        Armenian spouses returning to Armenia after many years  of  absence
        or sent there having never been in Armenia."

  18. The same report also states,


        "As for  ethnics  Azeris  who  were  married  to  ethnic  Armenians
        originally from  Azerbaijan,  there  is  no  reasonable  ground  to
        categorically conclude that mixed marriage couples from  Azerbaijan
        can find effective protection and a durable solution, especially if
        they have never been present in Armenia in the past.  Against  this
        background, UNHCR strongly recommends  not  to  reject  claims  for
        asylum submitted by  Azeri  citizens  of  mixed  origin  and  mixed
        couples from  Azerbaijan  on  the  sole  basis  that  they  have  a
        possibility to settle in Armenia.

  19. The May 2002 report from the Research Directorate of  the  Immigration
      and Refugee Board in Ottawa states,


        "According to the UNHCR and the  Centre  for  Democracy  and  Human
        Rights  in  Armenia  (CDHR)]  the  [Armenian]  authorities  do  not
        interfere in mixed marriages. However, harassment by neighbours  in
        cases where the husband is of Azerbaijani origin  cannot  be  ruled
        out (Jan. 1999).


        The United States Immigration and Naturalization Service, citing an
        interview with a staff advisor for the Commission on  Security  and
        Cooperation in Europe, noted that the interviewee  was  unaware  of
        "Any  instances  of  mistreatment  by  Armenians  of  mixed  ethnic
        heritage" (20 July 2000) the Research  Directorate  was  unable  to
        find reports of  police  advising  Azerbaijanis  to  leave  Armenia
        because local authorities could  not  protect  them  among  sources
        consulted for this Response.


        The HRCA representative highlighted the Fund Against  Violation  of
        Law and the Helsinki Association of Armenia,  both  in  Yerevan  as
        "NGO's which help, or could help... local Azeris"  (12  May  2002).
        The Research Directorate's attempts to contact  representatives  of
        these organisations were unsuccessful.

  20. The report from  the  Research  Directorate  of  the  Immigration  and
      Refugee Board in Ottawa following the  visit  between  June  and  July
      2000, (which was not before the Adjudicator), states,


        "4.4 The general human rights situation for Azeris in Armenia.


        At the 1989 census the population of Armenia was 3,287,677 of  whom
        2.6% were Azeris, i.e. about 85,000 people. No sources  could  give
        accurate information on the number of Azeris  nowadays.  The  UNHCR
        believed that there were perhaps a few hundred, and that there were
        more Armenians in Baku than there  were  Azeris  in  the  whole  of
        Armenia. The UNHCR also reported that the Azeris were mainly  women
        who were or had been married to Armenian men, and that  there  were
        no Azeri men in Armenia. The Norwegian Refugee Council stated  that
        there were Azeris in Armenia but  they  were  very  few,  and  were
        mainly  people  living  in  mixed  Armenian/Azeri  marriages.   The
        Sakharov Armenian Human Rights Foundation believed that there  were
        a few Azeris, most frequently Azeri women married to Armenian men.


        The President's advisor on ethnic minorities, Razmik  Davojan,  and
        the OSCE said that Azeris were not registered as a minority group.


        The Department for Migration and  Refugees  did  not  believe  that
        Azeris  had  security  problems  in  Armenia,  or  that  they  were
        persecuted or discriminated against.  Minor  problems  might  arise
        with neighbours but these would not lead to physical violence.  The
        Department considered that if  Azeris  were  afraid  this  was  for
        psychological reasons and not because of security problems.


        The UNHCR commented that Azeris in Armenia were tolerated but  that
        they kept a low profile. The OSCE shared this  opinion.  The  UNHCR
        were not aware of attacks by the authorities.


        The UNHCR felt that the Azeris did not really have any problems but
        might do so if they actively expressed their ethnic identity.


        The Norwegian Refugee Council was not aware of any  persecution  of
        Azeris in Armenia although Azeris  did  not  conceal  their  ethnic
        identity. The Council considered that Azeris who  had  fled  during
        the  conflict  would  be  able   to   return   without   particular
        difficulties. The Armenians showed no animosity towards Azeris.


        The Helsinki Association had no information  about  Azeris  in  the
        country and no knowledge of any difficulties they might have.


        The Sakharov Armenian Human Rights Foundation did not  believe  the
        Azeris had problems in Armenia. The same  applied  to  the  Iranian
        Azeris, many of whom were Azeris from Azerbaijan who had  emigrated
        to Iran and then came to Armenia to do business in the  free  trade
        zone on the border with Georgia. They bought goods and sold them on
        in Yerevan. They spoke Azeri, without that  causing  any  problems.
        There was no hatred of Azeris in the country. Any  antagonism  came
        from the political establishment. However,  the  situation  between
        Azeris and Kurds was tense, despite their having the same religious
        background.


        The representative of the Russian minority  did  not  believe  that
        Azeris  were  discriminated  against.  He  himself  had  an   Azeri
        neighbour.


        The UNHCR did not know the number of children from mixed marriages.
        The UNHCR believed that the situation was perhaps  better  for  the
        children  of  mixed  marriages  but  could  not  be  sure  as   the
        organisation did not have knowledge of them.


        It was common for Armenian asylum applicants in Western  Europe  to
        claim to be persecuted ethnic Azeris from Armenia."


  21.  The  Adjudicator  seeks  to  set  the  problems  encountered  by  the
      Respondent and his family in context in paragraph 26  and  27  of  the
      determination in the following terms,


        "26.  Armenia  is  certainly  a  country  with  problems.  The   US
        Department of State Report tells me this:


           The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary; however,
           in practice judges are subject to pressure  from  the  Executive
           branch and some are corrupt.


           Members of the security forces routinely beat  detainees  during
           arrest and interrogation. Arbitrary arrest and  detention  is  a
           problem. The government rarely investigates abuses by members of
           the security forces.

           As a result of the Nagorno  Karabakh  conflict  with  Azerbaijan
           most of the country's  Muslim  population  has  been  forced  to
           leave. Anti-Muslim feeling persists among the populace  and  the
           few remaining Muslims in the country keep a low  profile.  There
           is no formally operating Mosque although Yerevan's one surviving
           eighteenth century Mosque in practice opens for  regular  Friday
           prayers on a tenuous legal basis.

           As a result of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict,  and  particularly
           in the period from 1988 to 1994, ethnic minorities on both sides
           have frequently been  subjected  to  societal  and  governmental
           discrimination and intimidation often  accompanied  by  violence
           intended to drive them  from  the  country.  Almost  all  ethnic
           Azeris living  in  Armenia  have  fled  to  Azerbaijan.  Several
           hundred Azeris or persons with mixed Azeri heritage  still  live
           in the country maintaining a low profile in the face of societal
           discrimination.

        27.  The  report  from  the  UNHCR  on   International   Protection
        Considerations regarding Armenian Asylum Seekers  and  Refugees  of
        September 2003 tells me this:


           From 1988 to 1992 ethnic Azeris  and  couples  of  mixed  ethnic
           origin, when not  expelled,  were  systematically  subjected  to
           harassment  and  acts  of  violence   such   as   physical   and
           psychological violence, threats to life, abductions, deprivation
           of  property,  and  social  benefits.  These  acts  were  either
           perpetrated by the local authorities themselves  or  by  certain
           circles of  society,  encouraged  and  tolerated  by  the  local
           authorities  themselves  or  by  certain  circles  of   society,
           encouraged and tolerated by the local authorities.


           Only a few hundred Azeris (mixed couples, elderly and sick) have
           remained in Armenia. Most ethnic Azeris have changed their names
           to conceal their ethnic origin and/or  keep  a  low  profile  in
           society.  Currently,  there  is  no   evidence   of   systematic
           discrimination  by  the  Armenian  government  against  the  few
           remaining ethnic Azeris or mixed couples. It  is  reported  that
           they are mostly living in  rural  areas.  Their  neighbours  are
           aware of their identity but are tolerant.

        28. The UNHCR report on mixed Azeri-Armenian couples tells me this.
        It is believed that  the  remaining  Azeris  keep  a  low  profile.
        According to NGO's they feel relatively safe and secure as long  as
        they remain in their own community. Their neighbours are  aware  of
        their ethnic  background  but  this  does  not  normally  pose  any
        problems. In the past years UNHCR has not been made  aware  of  any
        mistreatment of Azeris."

  22. The expert report from Dr Balekjian dated 27 October  2004  which  was
      not before the Adjudicator, states, in its conclusion,


        "The safety and security for the life, property and human rights of
        ethnically mixed (Armenian/Azderi) couples or families is  not  and
        cannot be yet guaranteed with reference to official declarations or
        good intentions by the State authorities of Armenia or  Azerbaijan.
        Lacking resources and effectiveness, state authorities  in  Armenia
        and Azerbaijan is (sic) not yet sufficiently effective  to  control
        the deep-rooted, irrational, mutual hatred which motivates citizens
        in both countries and which makes them not hesitant to take the law
        into their hands and act criminally, ruthlessly."


  23. Unfortunately, Dr Balekjian asks himself the wrong  question.  In  the
      second paragraph of his report he states,


        "The question to be evaluated is whether a  married  couple,  where
        the husband is Armenian and the  wife  Azerbaijani  (Azeri),  would
        enjoy security and peace as an ethnically mixed couple if they were
        to live in Armenia or Azerbaijan."


  24. Leaving aside the point that we do not  have  to  decide  whether  the
      couple could live in Azerbaijan, this is not the correct test.


  25. We need to determine whether the Respondent is at risk of  persecution
      or infringement of his Article 3 human rights on return to Armenia. We
      gain little assistance from Dr Balekjian's report. Although  there  is
      broad reference  to  some  sources,  particular  conclusions  are  not
      sourced. It is not clear when Dr Balekjian was last in Armenia. We are
      not persuaded that the way in which Armenian Officers were treated  on
      a visit to Azerbaijan  is  likely  to  be  mirrored  if  Azeris  visit
      Armenia. Dr Balekjian puts this no higher than "It is  not  excluded".
      We are not persuaded by the comparison  with  Jehovah's  Witnesses  in
      Armenia. Furthermore, his conclusions are not at all clear.

  26. We find that the Adjudicator erred in law in a number of respects.

  27. Firstly, he concluded from the country information  that  Azeris,  who
      are likely to be Muslims, keep a low profile because "they  fear  what
      might happen to them if they do not".  Whilst this is described  as  a
      reasonable inference it is in fact speculation based  on  the  out  of
      date as opposed to the up-to-date country information before him.  The
      up-to-date country information  showed  that  if  Azeris  keep  a  low
      profile it is more likely to  be  the  result  of  caution  and  habit
      inculcated in more difficult times.  In any event, even if some Azeris
      have a subjective fear, this does not necessarily  equate  to  a  well
      founded objective fear.

  28.  Secondly,  in  paragraph  37  the  Adjudicator  reached  a   perverse
      conclusion not open to him on the evidence.  The  country  information
      shows that Armenians married to Azeris are not likely to be  at  risk,
      as opposed to the opposite conclusion.  Whilst the US State Department
      report before the Adjudicator refers to anti-Muslim  feeling  it  does
      not refer to persecution of Muslims. The UNHCR  report  says  that  in
      recent years they have not been made  aware  of  any  mistreatment  of
      ethnic Azeris

  29. Thirdly,  the  statement  that  "those  misguided  enough  to  harbour
      feelings of racial hatred tend not to lose those feelings quickly"  is
      speculative and no substitute for a careful assessment  of  up-to-date
      country material.

  30. Fourthly, there is a lack of  clear  reasons  for  the  statements  in
      paragraph 38 of the determination that "there is a real risk  of  that
      ill-treatment amounting to persecution" and "there is also a real risk
      of this  ill-treatment  reaching  the  threshold  required  to  breach
      Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention".

  31. Fifthly, the Adjudicator sets too low a threshold for both persecution
      and infringement of Article 3 human rights.  The  country  information
      before him showed that ethnic Azeri  women  in  mixed  marriages  with
      Armenian men faced, at worst, discrimination and harassment.

  32. Sixthly, he failed to apply the country information to his findings of
      fact.  It is clear that if the claimant and his family are at risk  it
      is not because his wife's Azeri ethnicity is  readily  apparent.   The
      conflict started in 1988 and, during a period of greater tension,  her
      ethnicity was not discovered until 1995  when  they  applied  for  new
      passports and her old Soviet passport  revealed  her  ethnic  origins.
      After they moved to Zangilan her ethnic origins were  not  discovered.
      It has not been suggested that any aspect of her  appearance,  speech,
      dress, religious observance or anything else is likely to  reveal  her
      ethnic origins.  It has not been suggested that she has  any  wish  to
      assert her ethnic origins.

  33. On the information before us we find that Azeris who  are  settled  in
      their local community in Armenia are not likely to be at  risk.  Those
      Azeris who have left Armenia but have settled family or  community  to
      return to are not likely  to  be  at  risk.  Azeri  women  married  to
      Armenian men are not likely to be at  risk.  The  situation  might  be
      different for Azeri men, or Armenian women married to  Azeri  men.  In
      all cases the particular circumstances will need to be assessed to see
      whether there are factors which increase or reduce potential risk.

  34. The Respondent's wife  has  always  lived  in  Armenia.  There  is  no
      indication that she practices the Muslim faith, at least publicly.  We
      have no evidence of the  faith  in  which  their  children  have  been
      brought up. Neither the Respondent nor  his  wife  has  ever  been  to
      Azerbaijan.


  35. The Respondent  is  not  likely  to  be  at  risk  of  persecution  or
      infringement of  his  Article  3  human  rights  because  of  his  own
      nationality, religion or ethnicity.  He is an Armenian national and  a
      Christian whose father was Assyrian and mother Armenian.  He, his wife
      and children are not likely  to  be  at  risk  because  of  her  Azeri
      ethnicity.


  36. We allow the Secretary of State's appeal.











      Mr P. R. Moulden
      Vice President


