
IB (Propiska-update and corruption) Ukraine UKIAT 00095

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

Heard at :  Field House
On :        15th February 2005
Prepared :  18th February 2005

                                                    Determination notified :
                                                             20th April 2005


Before :
                      Mr P.R. Moulden (Vice-President)
                                Mr R.A. McKee
                               Mr R. Hamilton

Between :
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                                                                  Respondent

Representation :

For the appellant :    Miss K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the respondent :   Mr Peter Jorro of counsel, instructed by O'Keeffe
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.  The Secretary of State appeals, with leave granted as long ago  as  11th
February 2003, against the determination of an adjudicator, Mr B.S.  Grewal,
promulgated on 18th December 2002, allowing the  appeal  of  the  respondent
(hereafter referred to as 'the claimant') against the refusal  on  16th  May
2001 to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom, consequent upon  the
refusal of his asylum application.

2.  As we indicated at the outset of the  hearing  before  us,  it  was  not
altogether clear what the  decision  was  against  which  the  claimant  had
appealed to an adjudicator.  What appears  to  have  happened  is  that  the
refusal to vary leave was not communicated  to  the  claimant  by  his  then
solicitors, and that he did not get to hear about it until he  was  detained
a year later at Haslar Holding Centre.  His new solicitors, Duncan  Lewis  &
Co., then lodged  an  appeal  out  of  time  on  25th  July  2002,  with  an
explanation for its lateness.  The Home Office  could  either  have  treated
the appeal as having been given in time, or  have  made  an  'out  of  time'
allegation to the Appellate Authorities,  who  would  have  dealt  with  the
matter as a Preliminary Issue under the  Procedure  Rules  2000.   The  Home
Office in fact did neither of those things, but instead issued a  notice  on
2nd August 2002 telling the claimant that he  was  now  an  overstayer,  and
that directions had been given for his removal to the Ukraine,  the  country
of his nationality.

3.  It seemed to us that, by skipping one stage in  the  process,  the  Home
Office had purported to deny the  claimant  an  opportunity  of  having  his
appeal heard under s.69(2) of the 1999 Act,  leaving  him  instead  with  an
appeal under s.69(5).  But the claimant  could  not  have  given  notice  of
appeal on 25th July 2002 against a decision which was not  taken  until  2nd
August 2002.  Miss Pal  took  instructions  on  the  matter,  and  helpfully
withdrew the notice of removal issued on  2nd  August  2002,  accepting  the
late notice of appeal against the refusal to vary the claimant's  leave,  as
decided on 16th May 2001.

4.  The claimant in fact arrived here as a visitor as long ago  as  December
1996, and waited for four and a half years before a decision  was  taken  on
his asylum claim.  As well as being refused, the claim  was  also  certified
under the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  as  disclosing  no  'Convention
reason'.  The adjudicator, however, did not agree with the certificate,  and
believed the claimant's account in its entirety.

5.  In brief, his account was that he was growing  vegetables  on  what  had
been a state-run collective farm.  The chairman of the  collective  demanded
bribes for letting the  claimant  continue  with  his  work,  and  when  the
claimant reported this to the authorities, they all ganged up  against  him.
The town mayor turned out to be a personal friend of the farm chairman,  the
court procrastinated and eventually threw out  his  case,  the  GAI  traffic
police even stopped the claimant in the road and prevented him  from  taking
his vegetables to market.  The farm boss called in the  mafia  to  'put  the
frighteners' on the claimant, and make him pay up the  money  which  he  was
said to owe.  The claimant was beaten so badly that his  ribs  were  broken,
but the man who was holding the documentary evidence which the claimant  and
other tenants on the farm had got together  to  incriminate  the  farm  boss
fared even worse.  He was murdered, and his  house  was  burned  down.   The
police, who were in cahoots with the mafia and the farm boss, did nothing.

6.  This was how the adjudicator saw it.  "I am firmly of the view that  the
persons harassing and intimidating the appellant  and  who  were  making  it
impossible for him to earn a livelihood were colluding with the  authorities
and in fact were  agents  of  persecution.   Having  perused  the  objective
evidence I have concluded that the appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution by state and non-state agents, the police,  the  Mafia  and  the
Ukrainian government.  The appellant was expected to bribe the landlord  and
when the appellant complained to the court the result was that his land  was
taken away and he was prevented from earning a living  as  the  market  road
was blocked.  The chairman of the collective farm used his  links  with  the
Mafia to threaten and intimidate the appellant.  The  appellant  sought  the
help of the militia and the mayor of the town.  The appellant  went  to  the
courts but as there was obviously a link between the court, the  police  and
the Mafia there appeared (sic) that the case  was  closed.   Eventually  the
appellant started collecting  evidence  and  take  (sic)  the  case  to  the
regional Adjudicator but his evidence was destroyed when the person who  was
retaining the evidence was killed and his house was burnt down."

7.  The adjudicator found  the  claimant  to  be  a  credible  and  reliable
witness who was telling the  truth.   The  cumulative  effect  of  the  ill-
treatment he had suffered amounted to persecution, against which  there  was
"total absence of sufficiency of protection", and the Convention reason  was
'imputed  political  opinion'.   The  adjudicator  noted   from   the   CIPU
Assessment for October 2002 which was before him that  "since  independence,
the level of organised  crime  and  corruption  in  the  Ukraine  has  risen
sharply,"  there  being  "a  close  working  relationship  between   corrupt
officials and organised crime."  After citing copious examples of this  from
the background evidence, the adjudicator went on to find that  the  claimant
would still face a real risk of persecution or Article  3  ill-treatment  on
return.

8.  The Grounds of Appeal to the Tribunal do not contest  the  adjudicator's
credibility findings.  Instead, they contend :
   1)  that  after  such  a  long  absence  from  the  Ukraine,  his  former
      persecutors would no longer "have an issue" with the claimant ;
   2) that no political opinion would have been imputed to him ;
   3) that the adjudicator had not considered internal flight ; and
   4) that the adjudicator had not taken account of the fact, noted  in  the
      refusal letter, that the claimant had left  the  Ukraine  through  the
      normal channels with a properly-issued passport, which showed that the
      authorities had no adverse interest in him.

9.  The Vice-President, who granted leave to appeal  on  all  four  grounds,
was particularly impressed with  grounds  (1)  and  (4).   At  the  hearing,
however, Miss Pal did not rely  on  grounds  (2)  and  (4),  and  based  the
Secretary of State's appeal on the effluxion  of  time  since  the  claimant
left the Ukraine in December 1996,  and  the  feasibility  of  an  'internal
flight option' to a different part of  the  country  from  his  own  Donetsk
region.

10.  That neither of these  would  avail  the  claimant  on  return  to  the
Ukraine was the expert opinion of Dr Robert Chenciner, who has provided  two
expert's reports, the first dated 8th January 2004, the second completed  on
12th February 2005, just before the hearing.  Dr Chenciner  also  gave  oral
evidence before us, in which he repeated the gist of his  reports  in-chief,
and defended his views in cross-examination.  A senior associate  member  of
St Anthony's College, Oxford, and an honorary member of the Russian  Academy
of Sciences, Dr Chenciner has first-hand knowledge of the  Caucasus  region,
and has been an OECD election observer in Russia,  Kazakhstan  and  Belarus,
in  which  countries  he  has  become  familiar  with  the  propiska  system
inherited from the Soviet Union,  and  its  relationship  to  the  electoral
register.  He has not himself been to the Ukraine, but is familiar with  the
problem of corruption throughout the successor  states  to  the  old  Soviet
Union, a problem  which  he  has  studied  with  Professor  Louise  Shelley,
"Director  of  TraCCC,  the  US  transnational  crime  quango".   His   main
informant in the Ukraine is Dr Roman Zyla,  who  now  resides  in  Kiev  but
holds a doctorate of London University on corruption in the Ukraine.

11.  We can conveniently set out Dr Chenciner's evidence  in  summary  form.
Victims of extortion in the Ukraine, such as the claimant was  put  through,
are not allowed to get away with  it  if  they  refuse  to  pay  up.   Debt-
forgiveness would set a bad example to the  many  others  who  have  to  pay
bribes and protection-money.  Although Ukrainian gangsters do not  have  the
efficient record-keeping systems of Chinese gangs, they have long  memories,
and would indeed remember the claimant if he were to return  to  his  native
Donetsk region.  He would be made to pay his "debt" with  compound  interest
over the intervening years, amounting to tens of thousands of dollars.   The
local police, who are hand-in-glove with the  mafia,  would  do  nothing  to
protect him, as his past experience has already shown.

12.  But what if the claimant were  to  relocate  to  another  part  of  the
Ukraine?  In the old days, a propiska was needed (a stamp in one's  internal
passport).  The propiska system has now been officially abolished, but  that
is just  a  cosmetic  measure,  introduced  in  order  to  comply  with  the
requirements of the longed-for EU membership.  In practice,  something  very
like the old system  is  still  in  place,  and  indeed  provides  an  extra
opportunity for  police  and  officials  to  demand  bribes  for  the  extra
paperwork involved.  One must still de-register  from  one's  old  place  of
abode, and re-register with the police and Interior  Ministry  officials  in
one's new locality.  (These normally share the  same  building,  along  with
the SBU ~ the old KGB.)  The police in the new location will check with  the
police in the old location.  In the claimant's case, the police  in  Donetsk
are likely to pass on what they have been told by  the  police  in  the  new
location to their friends in the mafia,  who  will  either  track  down  the
claimant to his new abode, or 'sell  him  on'  to  the  local  mafia  there.
After eight years' sojourn in the West, the  claimant  will  be  assumed  to
have amassed considerable wealth, of which he should be relieved forthwith.

13.  Miss Pal considered  this  scenario  very  far-fetched,  and  drew  our
attention to 4.6 of the Writenet  Report  dated  November  2004,  which  was
commissioned by the Protection Information Section of the UNHCR  and  boasts
the (not exactly catchpenny) title, 'Ukraine : Situation Analysis and  Trend
Assessment'.  Here we read, "The propiska  system,  a  carry-over  from  the
Soviet era when registration at the  place  of  residence  was  required  to
procure jobs and social benefits, in practice has not been  exercised  since
2001."

14.  However, Mr Jorro pointed to the  result  of  a  request  by  a  Senior
Presenting Officer to the British Embassy in Kyiv, "as to  the  practice  of
the Ukrainian government regarding the registration  of  citizens  following
the abolition of the propiska system."  The reply, dated  15th  April  2004,
confirms, "It is  indeed  correct  that  the  original  'propiska'  law  was
replaced by the law of Ukraine 'On Freedom of Movement and Choice  of  Place
of Residence' effective 11/12/03. ... The  new  law  indeed  eliminates  the
propiska system, which basically provided  formal  permission  to  live  and
work in a particular place.  Now, under the new law, such permission  is  no
longer  required.   However,  the  legal  imperative  for  registration   of
citizens remains very much in place.  On the basis  of  the  foregoing,  the
citizens  resident  in  Ukraine   must   be   registered   somewhere,   such
registration no doubt being absorbed into the Ukrainian  central  databases.
We are  not  able  to  comment  on  the  integrity  or  otherwise  of  these
databases, nor on the possibility of information 'leaking out' to those  who
may seek to gain advantage from it."

15.  We agree with Mr Jorro that this backs up what Dr Chenciner says  about
the necessity for the claimant to  register  with  the  police  wherever  he
decides to relocate in the Ukraine, and the likelihood of information  about
him "leaking out" to those who would wish to settle their account with  him.
 In one respect, the letter from the British Embassy goes  further  than  Dr
Chenciner, who told us about criminals keeping records in their heads or  on
the back of envelopes, whereas they would appear  to  have  access,  through
corrupt officials, to central databases.

16.  In cross-examination, Miss Pal put it to Dr Chenciner  that,  according
to his informant, Dr Zyla, "there are many Ukrainians that live  in  Ukraine
without propiskas.  They pay regular small amounts to the local  police  and
SBU secret police to leave them alone.  But that applies only to the  people
who are not of interest to the  SBU  for  other  reasons."   Could  not  the
claimant simply refrain from registering in the part of  the  Ukraine  where
he chose to relocate, and keep the local police happy with small bribes?

17.  Dr Chenciner's rejoinder was that the people who  do  this  are  mostly
migrant workers in the black economy, while  the  claimant,  returning  from
the West, would arouse greater interest.  Besides, as he goes on to  say  in
his report, "To survive without propiska [the claimant] would  have  to  pay
repeated bribes to the corrupt police and  be  denied  accommodation,  work,
healthcare, education and police protection, such as it is."   It  seems  to
us that a parallel can be drawn with the muhtar  system  considered  by  the
Tribunal in IK [2004] UKIAT 00312 when giving 'country guidance' on  Turkey.
 The Tribunal held that, given the range of basic  activities  and  services
for which a 'certificate of registration' was required,  it  would  in  most
normal circumstances be unduly harsh to expect even a young, fit,  unmarried
person to live without appropriate registration  for  any  great  length  of
time, as a means of avoiding persecution.

18.  On this issue, Miss Pal prayed in aid VS (Registration  on  Relocation)
Ukraine CG [2004] UKIAT 00242, where the Tribunal also had the benefit of  a
report by Dr Chenciner.  For this and from the  CIPU  Report,  the  Tribunal
concluded that "although the old Soviet propiska system has officially  been
abolished in Ukraine, something very  similar  to  it  is  still  in  place.
Moreover the registration is  not  computer  based  at  national  level  but
depends upon local records.  The need for registration  relates  essentially
to accessing public services, but apparently many  Ukrainians  live  without
due registration, and pay a small bribe  to  their  local  police  to  avoid
problems."  The Tribunal go on to find that a bribe would have  to  be  paid
to the police even if one does apply to register,  but  that  the  amount  -
perhaps around $200 - is not excessive.  "We do not consider that  the  need
for registration or the cost involved if bribes are required are  sufficient
to prevent internal relocation or to make it unduly harsh."

19.  The Tribunal in that case did not have the benefit of  the  information
from the British Embassy about centralized databases, but in any event  this
would seem to make little difference if the police in  the  new  area  check
with the police in the old area when a person  seeks  to  register  his  new
abode.  The appellant in VS 242  had  no  fear  of  criminals  or  of  being
tracked down to his new place of abode, but was arguing that  simply  living
somewhere else would be unduly harsh.  That is not this  case,  which  turns
on the risk to the claimant of being tracked down by his former  persecutors
even if he does move elsewhere.

20.  The adjudicator's determination in the  present  case  was  promulgated
well before 9th June 2003, therefore we are guided by the  Court  of  Appeal
in  Subesh  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  56  that,  if  we  are  to  set   aside   his
determination, we must find the adjudicator to have been so 'clearly  wrong'
in his conclusions on fact and/ or law that  we  are  required  to  adopt  a
different view.  We do not find the adjudicator to have been clearly  wrong.
 His credibility findings have not  been  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
State, and  on  the  background  evidence  before  him  the  "close  working
relationship  between  corrupt  officials  and  organised  crime"  had,   if
anything, increased since the claimant's departure  from  the  Ukraine.   We
agree with Dr Chenciner's opinion in his recent  report  that,  despite  the
election  victory  of  President  Yushchenko  in  the  'Orange  Revolution',
progress  in  reforming  the  organs  of  the  state,  with  their   endemic
corruption, is likely to be slow, and does not  at  present  remove  a  real
risk to the appellant should he return to the Ukraine.


DECISION


The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee

                                                          18th February 2005
