
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



  MA & Others (EU national; self-sufficiency; lawful employment) Bangladesh
                             [2006] UKAIT 00090


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                         Date of Hearing:  12
September 2006
                                             Promulgated on:  08 December
                                       2006

                                   Before:

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb



                                   Between


                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:          Mr M Chatwin, Counsel instructed by
Fernandes Vaz, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


An EU (EEA) national child cannot rely upon income  derived  from  a  parent
lawfully working in the UK during a period of limited leave restricted to  a
specific purpose or who is on temporary admission and  not  prohibited  from
working in order to  establish  a  right  of  residence  based  upon  'self-
sufficiency'.   Consequently,  the  parent/carer  can  derive  no  right  of
residence under EU law in such circumstances either.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. These reconsiderations concern the joined appeals of  an  EU  national
     child and her parents.  The first and second  appellants  are  married
     and are  nationals  of  Bangladesh.   The  third  appellant  is  their
     daughter who was born in Dublin on 4, November 2001 and so, by  virtue
     of the jus soli rule then  applied  by  the  Republic  of  Ireland  to
     questions of nationality, is a citizen of the Republic of Ireland.

  2. On 11 July 2005,  applications  were  made  on  behalf  of  the  third
     appellant for a residence permit under EU law and, in the cases of the
     first and second appellants, for leave to remain as her parents  under
     paragraph 257C of the  Immigration  Rules  (Statement  of  Changes  in
     Immigration Rules, HC 395).  The third appellant claimed  a  right  of
     residence in the UK as a self-sufficient EU citizen under  Article  18
     EC Treaty and Directive  90/364.   The  first  and  second  appellants
     claimed that they had a derivative right of residence in the UK as the
     third appellant's parents and her primary carers.

  3. On 13 March 2006, the Secretary of State refused the  applications  on
     the basis that he was not satisfied that the appellants would be  able
     to support themselves without recourse to public funds  or  by  taking
     employment.  The latter  was  prohibited  for  the  first  and  second
     appellants by virtue of paragraphs 257C and 257D  of  the  Immigration
     Rules.  The appellants appealed.  In a determination promulgated on 11
     May 2006, Immigration Judge  Turcan  dismissed  their  appeals.   They
     sought reconsiderations which were ordered  by  a  Senior  Immigration
     Judge on 25 May 2006.

The facts

  4. The facts of these appeals are not now disputed.   The first appellant
     was given leave to enter the UK as a student on 3 March 1998  and  his
     leave, we are told, was  subsequently  extended  in  stages  until  31
     December  2005.   During  that  time,  he  studied  for  the  Bar   at
     Northumbria University and was called to the Bar in  March  2004.   In
     2005-2006, he undertook further study for an MBA at  the  Commonwealth
     College of Law and Business Studies in London and at the time  of  the
     hearing before the  immigration  judge  was  about  to  complete  that
     course.

  5. On 21 February 2000, he married the second appellant in Bangladesh and
     she was given leave to enter the UK on 6 July 2000, we assume  as  his
     spouse.   The second appellant became pregnant and gave birth to their
     daughter (the third appellant) in Dublin on 4 November 2001.

  6. During their time in the UK, both the first and second appellant  have
     worked.  At the hearing before the immigration judge, the evidence was
     that the first appellant worked part-time for  Boots  and  the  second
     appellant worked as a  customer  service  assistant  for  Sainsbury's.
     There was evidence of their financial position including bank  account
     details.  It was accepted by the immigration judge that as a matter of
     fact their income was enough to make the family self-sufficient in the
     sense that they did not need to rely upon public funds.  It  was  also
     accepted that the family were covered by medical insurance through the
     first appellant's Boots BUPA Scheme.  It was  not  disputed  that  the
     first and second appellants were working lawfully under the  terms  of
     their leave as a student and spouse of a student.

  7. The immigration judge concluded that the first and  second  appellants
     did not have a right to work in the  UK  which  would  allow  them  to
     sustain the self-sufficiency of the third appellant.  Their  continued
     work, as carers  of  the  first  appellant,  would  be  prohibited  by
     paragraphs 257C and 257D of the Immigration Rules and those provisions
     were not contrary to EU law.

Adjournment application

  8. At the hearing before us, Mr Gulvin sought an adjournment.  He told us
     that he was not in a position to make submissions on the Home Office's
     position on the issue of reliance on lawful income to establish 'self-
     sufficiency' and he  wished  to  obtain  instructions  from  the  Home
     Office's policy section.   Mr  Chatwin  objected  and  invited  us  to
     continue.  Whilst we appreciated Mr Gulvin's personal difficulties, we
     did  not  consider  that  there  had  been  inadequate  time  for  the
     respondent to prepare his case for the  reconsiderations.   It  seemed
     clear to us that the Home Office's policy is probably crystallised  in
     the prohibitions on employment in paragraphs 257C and  257D.   Indeed,
     in another reconsideration listed before us, the  Secretary  of  State
     sought reconsideration in an appeal which gave rise to the  very  same
     issues and, it is clear from the  grounds  that  that  is  indeed  the
     Secretary of State's position.  For these reasons, and mindful of  the
     requirements of rule 21 of the  2005  Procedure  Rules,  we  were  not
     satisfied that the appeals could  not  be  justly  determined  and  we
     refused the adjournment application.

The legal issue in these appeals

  9. As we have indicated, the facts are no  longer  in  dispute  in  these
     appeals which raise a pure question  of  law:  namely  whether  an  EU
     national child can establish that she is self-sufficient (and thus has
     a right of residence in the UK) based upon  income  derived  from  the
     employment of her parents while they are here for a temporary purpose.
       The appellants claim that the immigration  judge  erred  in  law  in
     deciding that the first appellant could not rely on this  income.   As
     to her parents, it is said that they derive a right  of  residence  in
     order to care for her whilst she is exercising her own right to reside
     in the  UK.   The  appellants  rely  principally  upon  the  Court  of
     Justice's landmark decision in Chen and another v SSHD (Case C-200/02)
     [2005] INLR 1.

 10. The Secretary  of  State  contends  that  the  immigration  judge  was
     correct. Mr Gulvin submitted that the third appellant could derive  no
     EU  right  from  the  current  income  of  her  parents.   Thus,   the
     prohibition on their future employment found in the immigration  rules
     is lawful and she was not, therefore, self-sufficient.   Reliance  was
     placed upon the Tribunal's recent decision in GM and AM (EU  national;
     establishing self-sufficiency) France [2006] UKAIT 00059.

The relevant EU and domestic legal provisions

 11. Throughout this determination we refer to the rights of free  movement
     and residence of EU nationals although the  EEA  Regulations  in  fact
     apply to the slightly broader category of "EEA national" as defined in
     regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations 2006.

 12. As is readily apparent from her circumstances, the third appellant (as
     a young child) does not rely upon any economic right to  move  to  and
     reside in the UK as, for example, a worker  or  self-employed  person.
     Rather, she relies upon the right of free movement and residence of an
     EU national found in Article 18 of EC Treaty which is in the following
     terms:

           "1. Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move  and
           reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject
           to the limitations and conditions laid down in this  Treaty  and
           by the measures adopted to give it effect.

           2. If action by the Community should prove necessary  to  attain
           this objective and this Treaty has not  provided  the  necessary
           powers,  the  Council  may  adopt  provisions  with  a  view  to
           facilitating the exercise of the rights referred to in paragraph
           1. The Council  shall  act  in  accordance  with  the  procedure
           referred to in Article 251."


 13. As Article 18(1) makes clear, the right to move and reside is  subject
     to limitations and conditions laid down in measures adopted to give it
     effect.  Those measures were originally laid  down  in  EEC  Directive
     90/364 but were replaced with effect from 30 April 2006  by  Directive
     2004/38.

 14. Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 2004/38 states that:

           "All Union citizens shall have the right  of  residence  on  the
           territory of another Member State for a period  of  longer  than
           three months if they:
           ...
           (b) have sufficient resources for themselves  and  their  family
           members not to become a burden on the social  assistance  system
           of the host Member State during the period of residence and have
           comprehensive sickness insurance in the host Member  State;  ...
           ".

 15. The Directive further provides that  the  exercise  of  the  right  of
     residence should not impose an "unreasonable  burden"  on  the  social
     assistance system of the host Member State during an initial period of
     residence for three months (Recital 10 and Art 14(1))  or  during  the
     extended period of residence beyond three months (Recital 16  and  Art
     14(2)).

 16. In addition,  Article  7(2)  of  the  Directive  confers  a  right  of
     residence upon certain persons (not themselves EU nationals)  who  are
     family members of an EU national who has a right  of  residence.   For
     present purposes, those family members include direct relatives in the
     ascending line providing they are dependent upon the EU national  (Art
     2(2)(d)).

 17. Directive 90/364  was  transposed  into  UK  law  by  the  Immigration
     (European Economic Area) Regulations 2000,  SI  2000/2326.    However,
     with effect from 30 April  2006,  the  latter  were  replaced  by  the
     Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006,  SI  2006/1003
     (the "EEA Regulations 2006") in order  to  give  effect  to  Directive
     2004/38.   The  EEA  Regulations  2006  take  effect  retrospectively.
     Schedule 4, paragraph 5(1) of  those  Regulations  provides  that  any
     appeal pending on 30 April 2006 against an EEA  decision  taken  under
     the 2000 Regulations shall be treated as a pending  appeal  against  a
     corresponding EEA decision under the  EEA  Regulations  2006.    As  a
     consequence, they are the relevant domestic provisions to  be  applied
     by us and the third appellant's appeal is treated as being  an  appeal
     against a refusal to issue a registration certificate.

 18. The EEA Regulations 2006 define those EEA nationals who are "qualified
     persons" and entitled to recognition of their  free  movement  rights.
     Regulation 6(1)  includes  within  that  category  "a  self-sufficient
     person".  In turn, Regulation 4(1)(c) states that:

           "(c) "self-sufficient person" means a person who has-


                 (i) sufficient resources not to  become  a  burden  on  the
                 social assistance system of the United Kingdom  during  his
                 period of residence; and


                 (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in  the  United
                 Kingdom; ... ."

 19. It is this provision which effectively is prayed in aid by  the  third
     appellant.  The level of resources required is that which is enough to
     avoid eligibility to social assistance in  the  UK.   Regulation  4(4)
     states:

           "(4)  For  the  purposes  of  paragraphs  (1)(c)  and  (d)   and
           paragraphs (2) and (3), the resources of  the  person  concerned
           and, where applicable, any family members, are to be regarded as
           sufficient if they exceed the maximum level of resources which a
           United Kingdom national and his family members may possess if he
           is to become eligible for social  assistance  under  the  United
           Kingdom benefit system."

 20.  Thus,  the  right  of  movement  and  residence  is  dependent   upon
     establishing (1) self-sufficiency in the sense of sufficient resources
     to avoid reliance on the social security system; and (2) comprehensive
     health insurance (see, Ali v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  484  and  see  now,
     W(China) and X(China) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1494).

 21. In keeping with Directive 2004/38, the EEA Regulations 2006  confer  a
     derivative right of free movement and residence  upon  certain  family
     members of an EU national exercising a right such  as  that  found  in
     Article 18 EC Treaty.  Where  that  is  the  case,  the  whole  family
     (including the family members) must  be  self-sufficient.   Regulation
     4(2) requires that the EU national's "family members" are also covered
     by comprehensive sickness insurance and the total  resources  of  that
     individual and his family are adequate to avoid them becoming a burden
     on the social assistance system.  It provides as follows:

           "4(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), where family members
           of the person concerned reside in the United Kingdom  and  their
           right to reside is dependent upon their being family members  of
           that person-


           (a) the requirement for that person to have sufficient resources
           not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of  the
           United Kingdom during his period  of  residence  shall  only  be
           satisfied if his resources and those of the family  members  are
           sufficient to avoid him and the family members becoming  such  a
           burden;

           (b) the  requirement  for  that  person  to  have  comprehensive
           sickness insurance cover in the United  Kingdom  shall  only  be
           satisfied if he and his family members have such cover."

 22. Apart from spouses (and civil partners), the rights of "family member"
     apply,  for  example,  to  direct  ascendants  (such  as  parents   or
     grandparents) of an EU national but only if they  are  dependent  upon
     that EU national (see, reg 7(1)(c) and Art 2(1)(d) respectively).   It
     is, of course, not suggested in this case that the  third  appellant's
     parents are dependent upon her.  Indeed, it is  the  converse.   Thus,
     the first and second  appellants  are  not  directly  covered  by  the
     Directive or EEA Regulations 2006.  Instead, they rely upon the  Court
     of Justice's decision in Chen.

 23. Chen also concerned an EU national child living  in  the  UK  who  had
     Irish nationality as a result of being born in Northern Ireland.   She
     lived with her parents who were Chinese nationals.   As  a  result  of
     income derived from her parents' Chinese business, the child's  mother
     had sufficient resources to support herself and the child.  They  also
     had comprehensive health insurance.  As regards the child,  the  Court
     of Justice held that she had a right of residence as a self-sufficient
     person by virtue of  Article  18  of  the  EC  treaty  and  the  (then
     applicable) Directive 90/364.  It was not necessary  that  she  should
     have the resources personally.  It  was  sufficient  that  there  were
     adequate resources available to her from her mother that made her self-
     sufficient.   As regards her mother (who was her primary  carer),  the
     Court recognised that she was also entitled to reside  in  the  UK  in
     order to permit the child to exercise or enjoy its own EU right.   The
     Court of Justice said (at para [45]):

           "... a refusal to allow the parent,  whether  a  national  of  a
           Member State or a national of a non-member country, who  is  the
           carer of a child to whom Article  18  EC  and  Directive  90/364
           grant a right of residence, to reside with  that  child  in  the
           host Member State would deprive the child's right  of  residence
           of any useful effect. It is clear  that  enjoyment  by  a  young
           child of a right of residence necessarily implies that the child
           is entitled to be accompanied by the person who is  his  or  her
           primary carer and accordingly  that  the  carer  must  be  in  a
           position to reside with the child in the host Member  State  for
           the duration of such residence ... ."

 24. In relation to self-sufficiency, there is no doubt that the  Court  of
     Justice required that the child and her carers had adequate  resources
     not to be a burden on the social security system and were  covered  by
     medical insurance (see GM and AM, at paras [41]-[42] and W(China)  and
     X(China) v SSHD).

 25. Finally, we set out, as relevant to this appeal, paragraphs  257C  and
     257D of the Immigration Rules which deal with the requirements for the
     grant of leave to enter or remain as a parent/carer of what  might  be
     termed a "Chen child".  It was,  of  course,  under  these  provisions
     (particularly para 257C(iv)) that the parents' applications for  leave
     to remain were refused.

           "257C The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
           enter or remain as the primary  carer  or  relative  of  an  EEA
           national self-sufficient child are that the applicant:


           (i) is:
                 (a) the primary carer; or
                  (b) the parent; or
                  (c) the sibling,
                 of an EEA national under the age of 18 who has a  right  of
                 residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  2006   EEA
                 Regulations as a self-sufficient person; and


           (ii) is living with the EEA national or is seeking entry to  the
           United Kingdom in order to live with the EEA national; and ....


           (iv) can, and  will,  be  maintained  and  accommodated  without
           taking employment or having recourse to public funds;  and ...."


 26. Paragraph 257D states that

           "Leave to enter or remain  is  to  be  subject  to  a  condition
           prohibiting employment and recourse to public funds."

Analysis

 27. The crucial issue in these appeals is whether the third appellant  has
     established a right to reside in the UK based  upon  self-sufficiency.
     If she has, the rights of the first and second  appellants  follow  on
     the  basis  of  the  Chen  decision,   subject   to   any   applicable
     restrictions.

 28. Mr Chatwin submitted that the appellants are entitled  to  succeed  on
     the basis of Chen.  They are factually self-sufficient based upon  the
     income available to  the  third  appellant's  parents  and  they  have
     medical insurance coverage.  They are not dependent upon public  funds
     and, if allowed to  continue  working,  will  remain  self-sufficient.
     Both parents are working lawfully.  Mr Chatwin relied  upon  paragraph
     [30] of the Chen decision which he said indicates that no  restriction
     can be placed upon the sources of the  income  relevant  to  establish
     self-sufficiency.  The Court stated that:

           "it is sufficient for the nationals of Member States  to  'have'
           the  necessary  resources,  and  that  provision  lays  down  no
           requirement whatsoever as to their origin."

 29. He also relied upon the Court of Justice's decision  in  Commission  v
     Belgium (Case C-408/03) decided on 23 March 2006 where the Court  held
     that it was wrong to exclude the income of the EU  national's  partner
     in determining whether the EU national was self-sufficient.   Further,
     he referred us to the Tribunal's decision in GM  and  AM   (especially
     para [52]) which, he submitted, allowed regard to  be  had  to  income
     derived from parents who have an independent tight to reside and  work
     in the UK.  Finally, Mr Chatwin submitted  that  paragraphs  257C  and
     257D could not stand under EU law to the extent  that  they  prevented
     reliance upon future employment in this situation.

 30. It seems to us that Mr  Chatwin's  submissions  break  down  into  two
     distinct parts.  First, the third appellant is argued  to  be  already
     self-sufficient on the basis of her parents' income derived from their
     existing lawful income in the UK.  As a result, she  has  a  right  of
     residence in the UK and, derived from  that  right,  so  also  do  her
     parents as her carers (the 'lawful income' point).  Second, given  the
     existence of those rights, the third  appellant's  parents  cannot  be
     prevented from working in order to sustain,  it  is  said,  the  third
     appellant's right (and consequently their own) and to that extent  the
     prohibitions in paragraphs 257C and 257D of the immigration rules  are
     unlawful (the 'prohibition on work' point).


     The 'lawful income' point

 31. We begin with a number of preliminary points.

 32. First, in establishing  'self-sufficiency'  there  is  no  doubt  that
     reliance may be placed upon resources from someone other than  the  EU
     national himself (Chen - where it was the parents of the  EU  national
     child; Commission v Belgium - where it  was  the  partner  of  the  EU
     national).

 33. Second, those resources may at least in some circumstances  be  income
     derived from  employment  or  self-employment.   It  would  be  unduly
     restrictive to see  'self-sufficiency'  as  allowing  reliance  to  be
     placed only on other kinds of resources such as a private income or  a
     pension.  In any event, ultimately those  may  indirectly  be  derived
     from employment at some point as in the case of a pension.   Thus,  in
     Chen, it was income arising from the employment of the child's  mother
     by her parents' company in China which provided the resources to  make
     her and  her  parents  self-sufficient.   Likewise,  in  Commission  v
     Belgium it was the income  derived  from  the  EU  national  partner's
     employment in Belgium  which,  it  was  held,  should  be  taken  into
     account.

 34. Third, it is equally clear that in  none  of  the  decided  cases  has
     income earned by a family member of the EU national in the host Member
     State been taken  into  account  where  that  family  member   thereby
     acquired or sought to sustain a right of residence  derived  from  the
     right of residence of the EU national who  is  "dependent"  upon  that
     income to establish or sustain his own right of residence.   In  Chen,
     it was income of the "family member" who sought to derive a right from
     the EU national but that income was not  earned  in  the  host  Member
     State, namely the UK.  In Commission v Belgium,  the  "family  member"
     earned the income in the host member State but did not seek to  derive
     any right of residence from the EU national.  As the Tribunal observed
     in GM and AM (at para [52]):

           "What is important about [Commission v Belgium] for our purposes
           is that the ability (or right) to work of the partner of the  EU
           national and therefore to support the EU national was not itself
           dependent upon a recognition of that EU national having a  right
           to reside under  Directive  90/364.   The  partner  (who  was  a
           Belgium national) had a pre-existing right to reside and work in
           Belgium independently of the EU national.  On that basis, it was
           disproportionate to exclude this legitimate source of income  in
           establishing the EU national's right of residence. "

 35. The EU national's partner was not  seeking  to  derive  any  right  to
     reside or work in Belgium from the EU national.  She  possessed  those
     rights already - and would continue to do so - as a  Belgian  national
     herself.  There was in that case no  element  of  'boot-strapping'  or
     circularity whereby the right of the family member to reside and  work
     was established only through the EU national whose right was  likewise
     dependent upon the family member working.

 36. Fourth, we do not accept Mr Chatwin's submission based upon  paragraph
     [30] of the Chen decision.  As the Tribunal pointed out in GM and  AM,
     the Court's comment in paragraph [30] must be read in the  context  of
     that case where it was argued -  but  rejected  -  that  only  the  EU
     national's own resources could  be  taken  into  account.   The  Court
     cannot be taken to have endorsed the view put forward in these appeals
     that any resources available to the EU  national  may  be  taken  into
     account.  As the Tribunal in GM and AM  noted  in  para  [51]  of  its
     determination:

           "we have no  doubt  that  there  must  be  some  limitations  on
           acceptable sources, for example if the funds  are  derived  from
           criminal activity or where the relied upon resources are derived
           from illegal work in breach of domestic law.


 37. The same conclusion was reached in the recent decision of the Court of
     Appeal of W(China) and X(China)  v  SSHD  decided  after  the  hearing
     before us.  The Court concluded that an  EU  national  child  had  not
     established she was self-sufficient  and  therefore  had  a  right  of
     residence under Article 18 EC Treaty and Directive  90/364  where  she
     relied upon income from the  employment  of  her  father  who  was  an
     illegal entrant and not entitled to work in the UK.  We are aware that
     this is the same issue raised in a number of cases  currently  pending
     before the AIT to which  the  decision  is  directly  relevant.    The
     essence of the Court of Appeal's reasoning is found at paragraph  [16]
     of Buxton LJ's judgment (with whom Sedley and Dyson LJJ  agreed).   He
     said:

           ""16... As interpreted by the ECJ in Chen, the article 18  right
           of [the child] and the associated right of  her  custodians  can
           only be lawfully asserted under the strictly limited  conditions
           imposed by Directive 90/364. Those conditions are pre-conditions
           not merely to the exercise but also more  fundamentally  to  the
           existence of the  right  in  any  particular  case:  article  18
           stating in terms that "the right" to move and reside is  subject
           to the limitations and conditions laid down in, e.g.,  Directive
           90/364. The right accordingly does not exist if [the child] does
           not  have  access  to  the  relevant  resources.  There  is   no
           suggestion that under article 18 the host state  is  obliged  to
           take positive steps to make resources available to  an  entering
           EU citizen: [Counsel for  the  appellants]  understandably  drew
           back from any suggestion that the  state  would  be  obliged  to
           provide support for a custodian without resources in the  shape,
           for instance, of disablement benefit. By  the  same  token,  the
           state is not obliged to adjust its domestic law in order to make
           available to the EU citizen resources that would  not  otherwise
           be available to him, so that he can fulfil the pre-condition  to
           the existence in his case of the article  18  right:  the  right
           which has to exist before he can require the state to adjust its
           domestic law in deference to it."

 38. The Court makes clear that the requirement of 'self-sufficiency'  goes
     to the "existence" of the EU national's  right:  that  right  and  the
     derivative rights of the  parents  can  only  be  established  if  the
     "strictly  limited  conditions"  imposed  by  the  EU  Directives  are
     satisfied.  We accept that the Court of  Appeal's  decision  does  not
     deal explicitly with  the  question  of  whether  an  EU  national  is
     entitled to rely upon income derived from lawful employment (or  self-
     employment) of her parents in the UK - the issue which arises in these
     appeals.  However, the passage we have set out above comes  close,  in
     our view, to rejecting reliance by an  EU  national  upon  any  income
     derived from employment of a family member in the host  Member  State.
     The reasoning dismisses the  legitimacy  of  an  argument  based  upon
     'circularity' whereby family members assert an entitlement  (to  work)
     and thereby establish the EU  national's  right  and  then  themselves
     derive a right of residence and to  work  in  the  future.   That,  of
     course, is the very same  argument  that  was  also  rejected  by  the
     Tribunal in GM and AM.

 39. Although not determinative of these appeals, the  Tribunal's  decision
     in GM and AM provides helpful  guidance  on  the  approach  we  should
     adopt.  The facts of that case are similar  to  the  instant  appeals.
     The principal appellant was a French national child living in the  UK.
     Her father, who was a failed asylum-seeker, obtained  an  offer  of  a
     job.  He argued that, if allowed to work, he and his daughter would be
     self-sufficient.  As an EU national, she had the right  to  reside  in
     the UK and, on the basis of Chen, he had a derivative right to  reside
     as her primary carer.  He argued that the  prohibition  on  employment
     and taking it into account in paragraphs 275D  and  257C  respectively
     were contrary to EU law.  The Tribunal disagreed  and  concluded  that
     neither the child nor (derivatively)  her  father  had  established  a
     right to reside under EU law.

 40. In GM and AM, the Tribunal said this at paras [62] and [63]:

           "62. The  solution  may  be  found  in  an  examination  of  the
           underlying purpose that leads Community  law  to  recognise  the
           derivative right of free  movement  for  family  members  of  EU
           nationals exercising Treaty rights.  Those  rights,  of  course,
           apply to family members even  if  they  are  not  themselves  EU
           nationals.  The real purpose of the right to accompany (or join)
           and reside with the EU national is that without such a right the
           EU national could be inhibited from exercising his EU  right  of
           free movement and residence.  The starting point is that the  EU
           national has a right and therefore all principles  of  Community
           law work to avoid difficulties in its exercise.  It follow  from
           that that in a typical  case  the  EU  national's  right  exists
           independently of the presence of  family  members  in  the  host
           country.  That was also the situation  in  Chen.   Although  the
           parent/carer had to be in the UK in order for  the  EU  national
           child to exercise her right of  residence,  that  right  existed
           independently of the presence of the family member.  The child's
           self-sufficiency was derived from her parents but it would  have
           existed even if they had not been in the UK  -  it  was  derived
           from their business in China.  The rationale of Chen is that the
           presence of the parent/carer enabled the child to  exercise  the
           right it undoubtedly - and independently - had.

           63. What is being said in this case is quite  different.   Here,
           it is said that the parent/carer is entitled to be in the UK and
           work because only then will the  child  be  self-sufficient  and
           hence establish her EU right of  residence.   Thus,  the  family
           member's presence in the UK (and right to work) is  relied  upon
           not in order to avoid a 'clog' or 'chill' on  the  exercise  the
           right of the EU national child but rather  in  order  to  create
           that very right itself - the right from which the family  member
           then  seeks  to  derive  his  own  right  to   reside   as   her
           carer/parent.   Only if the parent/carer resides in the UK  with
           the EU national child can it be said that the child  has  an  EU
           right at all.  The argument is then exposed for  what  it  is  -
           entirely circular.  Even more problematically, it is a  circular
           argument that begins in the wrong place because it begins with a
           person who has no right to begin with, unlike in Chen.  There is
           nothing in Court of Justice's jurisprudence,  in  particular  in
           Chen, or anything in principle which should cause us  to  decide
           that a non-EU family member should be able to reside in  the  UK
           with an EU national child  (not  to  allow  it  to  exercise  an
           existing right but rather) in order to establish  the  right  in
           the first place.  Any right of the family member must be derived
           from an existing right of the EU national which he  or  she  has
           individually and separately.  That is simply not this case."

 41. In our view, the arguments rejected by the Tribunal  in  this  passage
     are very close - if not quite identical - to the way Mr  Chatwin  puts
     his case in these appeals.

 42. First, the presence of the child's parents  in  the  UK  is  not  only
     necessary for her to exercise her  right  of  residence  but  also  to
     establish it.  This is so whether one looks at the income derived from
     their current employment or,  if  permitted  despite  the  Immigration
     Rules, in the future.   The  underlying  purpose  of  recognising  the
     derivative rights of  family  members  to  accompany  or  join  an  EU
     national exercising Treaty rights in another EU country is not engaged
     here anymore than it was in GM and AM.  In our view, the EU national's
     right must be established independently of the presence of the  family
     members in the UK before they  may  derive  any  rights  from  EU  law
     themselves.  This, it may be said, is because the right is  the  right
     of the EU national.  It is an individual right,  not  a  family  right
     (although it  has  consequences  for  the  family);  and  it  must  be
     established on an individual, not a family basis.

 43. Second, we do not see any basis for deciding that income derived  from
     the first and second  appellants'  current  employment  can  establish
     their daughter's right to reside.  The circularity in establishing the
     child's rights and then the parents' rights is  no  less  apparent  in
     these appeals.  Here, the child's self-sufficiency is  dependent  upon
     her parents working.  They only have a temporary basis  for  doing  so
     for so long as they have limited leave  and  are  permitted  to  work.
     Once that leave runs out, there would be no lawful basis for  working.
     Indeed, it seems to us that it is only because of  these  applications
     and subsequent appeals that the leave did not  terminate  in  December
     2005 but was continued under s.3C of the Immigration Act  1971.    The
     only basis for their right to work would then have to be derived  from
     EU law.  The moment that occurred and they derived a right  to  reside
     and - it would have to be said - to  continue  working,  the  position
     would be indistinguishable from that in GM and  AM.   The  circularity
     would be complete - their right to work would now sustain the  child's
     right and through her their own derived right would continue.


 44. Third, our conclusion accords  with  a  proper  understanding  of  the
     notion of 'self-sufficiency' and the distinction between free movement
     in reliance upon economic and, alternatively, non-economic rights.

 45. An EU national who claims to be self-sufficient  is  not  asserting  a
     right to enter and reside in another EU state on the basis of economic
     activity in that country.  If he were, he would be seeking  to  enter,
     for example, as a worker or self-employed person.   Rather, he  relies
     upon his resources which exist independently of any economic  activity
     in the host Member  state.   Once  that  is  established,  his  family
     members have a derivative right to accompany or join him.  If they did
     not, the EU national's right of free movement might  be  inhibited  or
     effectively denied to him.  In addition, the  central  EU  legislative
     instruments give family members a right  to  work  in  that  the  host
     Member state.   But, their right to work is not a recognition  of  the
     right to engage in economic activity per se.  Rather, it is  simply  a
     reflection of the underlying principle of  EU  law  because  otherwise
     they (and hence the EU national) might be inhibited from moving within
     the EU if family members were not allowed to carry on, what for  them,
     is an  important  aspect  of  their  everyday  lives.    The  economic
     activity of the family members does not establish - nor  could  it  in
     the context of an EU national worker or self-employed person - the  EU
     national's right.  That arises  a  priori  and  independently  of  any
     economic activity by the EU national or his  family  in  the  host  EU
     country.

 46. By contrast, in the Chen-type case the EU national can only  establish
     his right by reliance upon economic activity in the host Member state,
     not, of course, economic activity by himself but rather by his  family
     members.  We see no reason  to  distort  the  usual  situation  simply
     because the EU national is a child and is dependent  upon  others  for
     support and, unusually, is already present in the host EU country with
     his family members rather than seeking to enter  it  with  is  family.
     Here too, the right  of  free  movement  based  upon  self-sufficiency
     cannot depend upon resources derived from employment engaged in by the
     EU national or his family members in the UK.

 47. It is true that in GM and AM the Tribunal said at a number  of  points
     in its determination that it was not concerned with a case  where  the
     income relied upon to establish the  child's  right  was  lawfully  or
     independently obtained (see, e.g. paras [52] and [65]).  However, that
     should not, in our view, be taken as anything more than a reminder  by
     the Tribunal that it was not concerned with such a case on  the  facts
     before it.  The issue in these  appeals  was  not  argued  before  the
     Tribunal in GM and AM and it cannot be taken as expressing a  view  on
     the proper outcome to these appeals.

 48. In the result, therefore, the reasoning of the Tribunal in GM  and  AM
     is applicable where an EU national child places reliance  upon  income
     derived from a parent lawfully working in the UK during  a  period  of
     limited leave restricted for a specific purpose or, which is not  this
     case, who is on temporary admission and not prohibited  from  working.
     In such circumstances, a Member State  is  entitled  to  restrict  the
     rights of employment of non-EU nationals, in particular to  limit  the
     duration  of  their  permission  to  work  just  as  it  is   entitled
     effectively to prohibit their  ability  to  work  (see,  W(China)  and
     X(China)).   When it does so, that individual cannot derive a right to
     reside as a "family member" of an  EU  national  because  that  income
     cannot be taken into account in order to establish the  EU  national's
     right of residence on a self-sufficient basis.

     The 'prohibition on work' point

 49. We can deal with this point shortly.  First, it follows from  what  we
     have already decided that the requirement in paragraph 257C(iv) of the
     Immigration Rules that the "family members" of a Chen-child should  be
     self-sufficient without engaging in employment is entirely  consistent
     with EU law.  Second, because the third appellant cannot  establish  a
     right of residence based upon her parents' income, there is  no  basis
     upon which the future prohibition on working set out in paragraph 257D
     of the Immigration Rules can be challenged as unlawful.   Perhaps  the
     most obvious basis would  be  through  reliance  upon  Article  23  of
     Directive 2004/38, which  provides:

           "Irrespective of nationality, the  family  members  of  a  Union
           citizen who  have  the  right  of  residence  or  the  right  of
           permanent residence in a Member State shall be entitled to  take
           up employment or self-employment there."


 50. This provision does not, of course,  apply  directly  in  a  Chen-type
     situation as the parents do not fall within the definition of  "family
     members" in Directive 2004/38.  We will, however, assume that  it  can
     be applied by analogy in keeping with the approach  of  the  Court  of
     Justice in Chen itself.   However, Article 23  only  bites  so  as  to
     confer a right of employment upon the family members of an EU national
     where they have established a right of residence (see  GM  and  AM  at
     paras [58]-[60] and W(China) and X(China) at  para  [18]).   It  is  a
     right derived from their right to reside in the UK.   The  latter,  of
     course, is precisely what the parents in these appeals have failed  to
     do for the reasons we have already given.  It cannot, therefore,  have
     any application to these appeals to assist their claim that the  third
     appellant is self-sufficient.  In this respect,  the  appellants  are,
     therefore, in precisely the same situation as were the  appellants  in
     GM and AM.  They seek to establish EU rights based upon  the  parents'
     future right to work.  As in GM and AM, they cannot do so.

Decision

 51. For the forgoing reasons, the immigration judge's decision was correct
     in law and the decision to dismiss the appeals stands.






                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                                             Date:
