
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Muneeb Asif (Paragraph 276B - disregard - previous overstaying) [2021] UKUT
00096 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by video (Skype for Business) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2020                          |On 10 March 2021              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                 MUNEEB ASIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Rehman, Counsel, instructed by Lawfare
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


On the proper construction of  paragraph  276B  any  period  of  overstaying
between periods of leave that has been disregarded in accordance  with  sub-
paragraph (v)(a) or (b) is treated as lawful residence for  the  purpose  of
sub-paragraph (i).


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The issue

      1. In Hoque & Ors v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 ("Hoque") the Court of Appeal was tasked  with
         interpreting  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration   Rules   which
         establishes the requirements to be  met  by  an  applicant  seeking
         Indefinite Leave to Remain ("ILR") on the ground of long  residence
         in the United Kingdom ("UK"). A majority  of  the  Court  concluded
         that sub-paragraph 276B(i)(a), which requires an applicant to  have
         had "at least 10 years continuous lawful residence", was to be read
         in conjunction with sub-paragraph  276B(v)  which  provides  for  a
         'disregard' in respect  of  "any  previous  period  of  overstaying
         between periods of leave".

      2. The issue before this Tribunal is whether any "previous  period  of
         overstaying" that has  been  "disregarded"  should  be  taken  into
         account when determining whether an  applicant  has  fulfilled  the
         requirements for "10 years continuous lawful residence."

The relevant Immigration Rules

      3. Paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules contains a list of definitions
         of terms used in the Immigration Rules. "In breach  of  immigration
         laws" means without valid leave where such leave is required, or in
         breach of the conditions of leave.  "Overstayed"  or  "overstaying"
         means the applicant has stayed in the  UK  beyond  the  time  limit
         attached to the last period of leave granted or beyond  the  period
         of their leave extended under sections 3C or 3D of the  Immigration
         Act 1971.

      4.  Paragraph  276A  defines  "continuous   residence"   and   "lawful
         residence".  So  far  as  material  for  this  appeal,  "continuous
         residence" means "residence in the United Kingdom for  an  unbroken
         period". Paragraph 276A(b) states:

             (b)  'lawful residence' means residence which is continuous
             residence pursuant to:

                  (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or

                  ...

      5. Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules reads, in material part:

             The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the United
             Kingdom are that:

                  (i)(a)   he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful
                  residence in the United Kingdom.

                  ...

                  (v)  the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of
                  immigration laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of
                  these Rules applies, any current period of overstaying
                  will be disregarded. Any previous period of overstaying
                  between periods of leave will also be disregarded where -

                        a) the previous application was made before 24
                           November 2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of
                           leave; or

                        b) the further application was made on or after 24
                           November 2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules
                           applied.

      6. Although paragraph 276B(i) contains a further subsection (a), there
         is no subsection (b). For the remainder of  this  decision  I  will
         refer to paragraph 276B(i) only.

      7. Paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules applies where:

             (1)  the application was made within 14 days of the
             applicant's leave expiring and the Secretary of State
             considers that there was a good reason beyond the control of
             the applicant or their representative, provided in or with the
             application, why the application could not be made in-time; or

             (2)  the application was made:

                  (a)  following the refusal of a previous application for
                  leave which was made in-time; and

                  (b)  within 14 days of:

                      (i)  the refusal of the previous application for
                      leave; or

                      (ii) the expiry of any leave extended by section 3C
                      of the Immigration Act 1971; or

                      (iii)    the expiry of the time-limit for making an
                      in-time application for administrative review or
                      appeal (where applicable); or

                      (iv) any administrative review or appeal being
                      concluded, withdrawn or abandoned or lapsing.

      8. The respondent's Long Residence Guidance, version 16, published  on
         28 October 2019 states, in material part:

             Gaps in lawful residence

             You may grant the application if an applicant:

             .    has short gaps in lawful residence through making
             previous applications out of time by no more than 28 calendar
             days where those gaps end before 24 November 2016

             .    has short gaps in lawful residence on or after 24
             November 2016 but leave was granted in accordance with
             paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules

             .    meets all the other requirements for lawful residence

      9. The Guidance gives examples of gaps in lawful  residence  where  it
         may be appropriate to grant an application. The first two  examples
         are instructive:

             Example 1

             An applicant has a single gap in their lawful residence due to
             submitting an application 17 days out of time. All other
             applications have been submitted in time, throughout the 10
             years period.

                  Question:     Would you grant the application in this
                           case?

                  Answer:  Grant the application as the rules allow for a
                           period of overstaying of 28 days or less when
                           that period ends before 24 November 2016.

             Example 2

             An applicant has 3 gaps in their lawful residence due to
             submitting 3 separate applications out of time. These were 9,
             17 and 24 days out of time.

                  Question:      Would you grant the application in this
                           case?

                  Answer:  Yes. Grant the application as the rules allow for
                           periods of overstaying of 28 days or less when
                           that period ends before 24 November 2016.

Hoque

     10. The appellants in Hoque all came to the UK with leave to  enter  as
         students and were granted further periods of leave to remain.  They
         had all resided in the UK for over 10 years. They all  applied  for
         ILR on the basis of their long residence. The  respondent  rejected
         their applications as their leave to remain had expired  when  they
         made their applications and  they  were  overstayers.  Whether  the
         respondent's  decisions  were  lawful  depended  on   the   correct
         interpretation of paragraph 276B.

     11. In Underhill's LJ judgment, with whom Dingemans  LJ  agreed,  three
         separate elements were identified in paragraph 276B(v).  The  first
         element was the primary requirement that an "applicant must not  be
         in the UK in breach of the immigration laws". The second and  third
         elements related to circumstances in which periods  of  overstaying
         may be "disregarded."  The  second  element,  concerning  the  '1st
         disregard', related to current overstaying by an applicant  at  the
         time of their application for ILR. The  third  element,  concerning
         the '2nd disregard', related to "previous ...  overstaying  between
         periods of leave." Central  to  Underhill's  LJ  judgment  was  the
         distinction between "open-ended" overstaying, in which there  is  a
         current period of overstaying in respect  of  the  ILR  application
         (which concerns the 1st disregard), and  "book-ended"  overstaying,
         which involves previous periods of overstaying between  periods  of
         leave (concerning the 2nd disregard) [9].

     12. The joint appeals in Hoque all  concerned  open-ended  overstaying,
         the  appellants  contending  that  they  benefitted  from  the  1st
         disregard relating to 'current overstaying' and therefore  fell  to
         be treated as having been continuously lawfully  resident  for  the
         requisite 10 year period as required by  paragraph  276B(i),  which
         fell to be read in conjunction with the whole of paragraph  276B(v)
         [22].

     13. Underhill LJ first analysed the issues and the  material  reasoning
         in the earlier Upper Tribunal's decision of R (on  the  application
         of Ahmed) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (para 276B -
         ten  years  lawful  residence)  [2019]  UKUT  00010  (IAC)  ("Juned
         Ahmed"), which dealt with open-ended overstaying, and  the  earlier
         Court of Appeal permission decision  in  Masum  Ahmed,  R  (on  the
         application of) v The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
         [2019] EWCA Civ 1070; [2019] Imm AR  1316  ("Masum  Ahmed"),  which
         concerned book-ended overstaying. At [27] Underhill LJ set out  the
         essential reasoning of Floyd LJ and Haddon-Cave LJ in  Masum  Ahmed
         for rejecting the argument that paragraph 276B operated  so  as  to
         cure shorts gaps between periods of leave so as to entitle  persons
         to claim '10 years continuous lawful residence'. At [27]  Underhill
         LJ set out paragraph 15(4) of the decision in Masum Ahmed:

             15(4) The critical point is that the disregarding  of  current
             or previous short periods of overstaying for the  purposes  of
             sub-paragraph (v) does not convert such periods  into  periods
             of lawful LTR; still less are such periods to be "disregarded"
             when  it  comes  to  considering  whether  an  applicant   has
             fulfilled the separate requirement of establishing  "10  years
             continuous lawful residence" under sub-paragraph (i)(a).

     14. It was clear to Underhill LJ (at  [29]  and  [30]),  based  on  the
         structure and language of paragraph  276B,  that  the  requirements
         identified at sub-paragraphs (i)-(v)  were  intended  to  be  free-
         standing and self-contained, but he considered that the  effect  of
         sub-paragraph (v) was "seriously problematic".

     15. At [31] His Lordship noted that sub-paragraph (i), by contrast with
         sub-paragraph (v):

             "...  requires  that  the  applicant  "has  had"  ten   years'
             continuous  lawful  residence.  That  formulation   does   not
             necessarily require that the lawful residence is continuing at
             the date of decision. No doubt typically  that  would  be  the
             case, but it would also  be  satisfied  in  a  case  where  an
             applicant has accrued the relevant period in the past but  has
             become an overstayer since then. In my view the purpose of the
             requirement in sub-paragraph (v) is evidently to  ensure  that
             overstayers are not entitled to  ILR  in  those  circumstances
             (subject to the effect of the disregard).

     16. Paragraph 276B(v) was  concerned  with  addressing  an  applicant's
         position at the date of  the  decision  in  respect  of  their  ILR
         application. If an applicant had accumulated  10  years  continuous
         lawful residence but was an overstayer when they applied  for  ILR,
         that overstaying would be disregarded if paragraph 39E applied with
         the result that the requirement in sub-paragraph (v) was treated as
         being satisfied ([32] & [33]).

     17. Underhill LJ found there was "a frank disconnect" between  the  2nd
         disregard in sub-paragraph (v) and  the  requirement  to  which  it
         appeared to be applied [34]. On its true construction, Underhill LJ
         found that the 2nd disregard did not belong to 276B(v), but instead
         belonged to 276B(i) ([34] & [35]), a conclusion that was  supported
         by reference to the drafting history ([36] &  [37]).  Applying  the
         interpretative principle established in  Pokhriyal  v  SSHD  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 1568; [2014] Imm AR 711 Underhill LJ found further support
         for his  construction  in  the  Home  Office's  Guidance  on  "Long
         Residence", version 15, issued  on  3  April  2017,  which  enabled
         caseworkers to grant  an  ILR  application  in  circumstances  that
         reflected the third element  in  paragraph  276B(v).  His  Lordship
         concluded that Masum Ahmed was consequently wrongly decided [40].

     18. At [43] Underhill LJ accepted the Secretary of  State's  submission
         that the 2nd disregard could not however assist the appellants  who
         were open-ended overstayers as the 1st disregard only qualified the
         requirement in sub-paragraph (v)  and  not  sub-paragraph  (i).  He
         concluded, at [45], that Juned Ahmed had been correctly decided and
         that, "... on no  possible  reading  can  [the  1st  disregard]  be
         construed  as  qualifying  the  definition  of  continuous   lawful
         residence" (at [49]).

     19. Underhill LJ then considered, at [50], whether it was  unreasonable
         or disproportionate under Article 8  ECHR  for  the  respondent  to
         treat  open-ended  and  book-ended  overstaying  differently.   His
         Lordship did not consider it unreasonable or disproportionate:

             "In the case of  a  book-ended  gap  the  applicant  has  been
             granted further leave, and has attained ten years'  residence,
             since the period of overstaying; and the only reason  why  the
             overstaying occurred was that they did not make in-time the ex
             hypothesi well-founded application which in due course led  to
             the grant of leave. It is in those circumstances  unsurprising
             that the Secretary of State should think it right to allow the
             period between the expiry of the previous leave and the  grant
             of the further leave to count as continuous lawful residence -
             assuming  of  course  that  the  applicant  can  satisfy   the
             requirements  of  paragraph  39E.  The  case   of   open-ended
             overstaying is necessarily different  because,  ex  hypothesi,
             there will have  been  no  grant  of  leave  on  the  original
             application: it will have remained,  in  effect  as  a  place-
             marker, until the point where it is varied by the making of an
             application based on ten years' continuous  lawful  residence.
             That is an essentially different situation from one where  the
             application has in fact been granted. It is also one  that  is
             capable of being abused, since an applicant could in principle
             make a wholly unfounded application as he  or  she  approached
             the end of the ten-year period and count on the time taken  to
             determine it (perhaps prolonged by a variation)  in  order  to
             get to the point where an  application  under  paragraph  276B
             could be made." [My emphasis]

     20. Dingemans LJ agreed with Underhill's LJ construction  of  paragraph
         276B(v). At [102] his Lordship stated:

             "I cannot accept the arguments of the appellants, or that part
             of the judgment of McCombe LJ, which treat the  exception  set
             out in the first part of paragraph 276B(v) "except that, where
             paragraph 39E of these Rules applies, any  current  period  of
             overstaying will be disregarded" as qualifying the requirement
             set out in paragraph 276B(i). This exception is self-contained
             within sub-paragraph 276B(v) and does  not  appear  either  by
             punctuation or formatting as an exception or  proviso  to  the
             whole of paragraph 276B. In my judgment sub-paragraph  276B(v)
             is an independent requirement, with  its  own  internal  first
             exception to that  requirement,  which  first  exception  says
             nothing about  sub-paragraph  276B(i).  Further  even  if  the
             "current period  of  overstaying"  is  "disregarded"  for  the
             purposes of paragraph 276B(i) there is nothing which  converts
             that period of overstaying into "lawful residence" as  defined
             in paragraph 276A(b)."

     21. McCombe LJ delivered a minority judgment. Contrary to the  majority
         decision  he  accepted  the  appellants'  arguments  that  the  1st
         disregard in sub-paragraph (v) should also condition  sub-paragraph
         (i). He considered however the wording of paragraph  276B(v)  as  a
         whole, including the 2nd disregard. At [64] his Lordship stated:

             "The first  sentence  of  para.  276B(v)  (dealing  with  "any
             current period of overstaying") says expressly that "breach of
             immigration  laws"  by  reason  of  "any  current  period   of
             overstaying" will be "disregarded" where  para.  39E  applies,
             i.e. in a case where the new application is  made  within  the
             specified short time after expiry of previous leave. In  other
             words, for those purposes the  applicant  is  not  treated  as
             being in the UK "without leave". This must be so  because  the
             relevant part of the definition of "breach of the  immigration
             laws", in para. 6, is that it means "without valid leave where
             such leave is required ...". It seems to me clear that for the
             purpose of that paragraph  he  is  to  be  treated,  in  those
             circumstances, as having existing leave within the meaning  of
             para. 276A(b)(i). If so, it should  mean  that  his  residence
             continues to be "lawful" for the purposes of para.  276B(i)(a)
             [sic]. Given the approach that one is  required  to  adopt  in
             seeking to understand the Rules, in my judgment, the  ordinary
             reader of para. 276B would be in difficulty in  distinguishing
             the idea of "lawful residence" in 276B(i) from not  being  "in
             the UK in breach of immigration  laws"  in  276B(v)  by  being
             resident here."

The facts of the present appeal

     22. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 10 September  1986.
         He entered the United Kingdom on 14 October 2009 as a  student.  He
         was granted further periods of leave valid until 3 March  2013.  He
         made an in-time application for further leave as a Tier  1  Migrant
         on 3 February 2013. This application was refused but the  appellant
         availed himself of a right of appeal. It is not necessary to  dwell
         on the particular appeal  history  and  it  is  accepted  that  the
         appellant withdrew his appeal on 3 July 2014. His  leave,  extended
         by virtue of s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971, ceased on this  day.
         The appellant made a further application for leave to remain on  25
         July 2014. It is not in dispute  that  this  application  was  made
         within 28 days of the expiry of his previously extended s.3C leave.



     23. The application made on 25 July 2014 was  initially  refused  on  8
         September 2014. This decision was judicially reviewed and, pursuant
         to a jointly signed consent order sealed by the Upper  Tribunal  on
         15  October  2015,  the  respondent  agreed   to   reconsider   the
         appellant's Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) application of 25 July 2014. As a
         result of the consent order the judicial review was  withdrawn  and
         the appellant's application was granted on 23  November  2015.  The
         appellant was subsequently granted  further  periods  of  leave  to
         remain, the last as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) valid  until  15  March
         2021.

     24. On 28 October 2019 the appellant applied for ILR based on  his  10-
         year residency. This constituted a human rights  claim.  The  human
         rights claim was refused on 13 November 2019. The respondent  noted
         that the application made on 25 July 2014 had  been  made  22  days
         after  the  applicant's  previous  leave  expired.  The  respondent
         maintained that any time spent following the submission of an  out-
         of-time application waiting for consideration  of  the  application
         was not considered lawful even if leave was  subsequently  granted.
         On this basis the respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellant
         had lawful leave for a 507-day period between 3 July  2014  and  23
         November 2015. The respondent was not consequently  satisfied  that
         the  appellant  could  demonstrate  10  years   continuous   lawful
         residence in the UK.

     25. The respondent did not consider  it  appropriate  to  exercise  her
         discretion pursuant to her guidance dealing  with  Long  Residence.
         Nor was the respondent satisfied that the appellant met any of  the
         requirements for further leave  to  remain  pursuant  to  paragraph
         276ADE of the Immigration Rules (dealing  with  Article  8  private
         life claims). Nor was the respondent satisfied that there were  any
         exceptional  circumstances  such  that  a  refusal  to  grant   the
         appellant's application would lead to a breach of Article  8  ECHR.
         The appellant appealed the respondent's decision to the  First-tier
         Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     26. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Dhaliwal ("the  judge")
         on 7 February 2020. As it was agreed between the parties  that  the
         only issue for determination was  whether  the  appellant  met  the
         requirement of 10 years continuous lawful residence, there  was  no
         need for oral evidence.

     27. In her decision promulgated on 9 March 2020  the  judge  considered
         the decisions of the Upper Tribunal in Juned Ahmed and the Court of
         Appeal's decision refusing permission to appeal in Masum Ahmed and,
         in reliance on those decisions, concluded that the appellant  could
         not rely on paragraph 276B(v) to support his claim to have achieved
         10 years continuous lawful residence. The judge stated, at [12]:

             "The disregarding of current or short periods  of  overstaying
             does not convert them into periods of lawful residence neither
             does it mean  periods  of  overstaying  are  disregarded  when
             considering whether 10 years continuous lawful  residence  has
             been fulfilled. The lawfulness of continuous residence must be
             unbroken."

     28. And at [13] the judge stated:

             "The Appellant relies on 39E in that where an application  was
             made within 28 days, the period must be disregarded.  I  agree
             with that contention but based on the case law, that period is
             disregarded in so far as the  Appellant  does  not  become  an
             overstayer, it does not convert  unlawful  leave  into  lawful
             leave as suggested in R (on the application of  Ahmed)  [2019]
             EWCA Civ 1070. Thus, the period from 3 April 2014 to  25  July
             2014 can be disregarded but it does not  become  lawful  leave
             either. I agree with the Respondent's position so far  as  the
             first gap concerned. In essence, this means that even at  this
             early stage, the 10-year lawful residency is broken."

     29. It is apparent from the immigration history that the judge  wrongly
         concluded that the appellant withdrew his appeal on 3  April  2014;
         the appeal was withdrawn on 3 July 2014.

     30.  The  judge  then  found  that  the  respondent  reconsidered   the
         lawfulness of her decision of 8  September  2014  and  granted  the
         appellant leave to  remain  on  23  November  2015,  but  that  the
         appellant did not have any leave to remain following the expiry  of
         his leave on  3  July  2014  until  23  November  2015.  The  judge
         indicated that she did not have any power  to  convert  a  previous
         unlawful period into a lawful period. The appeal was dismissed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     31. The appellant advanced  various  grounds  in  his  application  for
         permission to appeal, including a challenge to the judge's reliance
         on Juned Ahmed and Masum Ahmed. By the time of the "error  of  law"
         hearing Hoque had been handed  down  and  the  parties  submissions
         evolved accordingly.

     32. In his  skeleton  argument  and  his  oral  submissions  Mr  Rehman
         submitted that, following Hoque, periods of overstaying subject  to
         the 2nd disregard were counted as lawful residence for the purposes
         of paragraph 276B(i). This approach was supported in particular  by
         reference to Underhill's LJ decision at [50].

     33. Mr  Rehman  made  additional  written  submissions  concerning  the
         judge's  approach  to  the  entire  period   of   the   appellant's
         overstaying, and in respect of the exercise of discretion  relating
         to gaps in lawful leave.

     34. Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  there  was  an  18-month  gap  in  the
         appellant's lawful residence and that Hoque was not  authority  for
         the  proposition  that  periods  of  unlawful  residence  could  be
         converted to lawful residence. There was  an  intrinsic  difference
         between disregarding periods of overstaying  and  converting  those
         periods into lawful leave for the  purpose  of  sub-paragraph  (i).
         Disregarding meant not taking into account at all.

Discussion

     35. There was no dispute at the "error of law" hearing that the  judge,
         through no fault of her own, erred in law in effectively concluding
         that the 2nd disregard  in  paragraph  276B(v)  did  not  apply  to
         paragraph 276B(i)(a).

     36. The appellant entered the UK on 14 October 2009  and  had  existing
         leave until 3 July 2014, a period of 4 years, 8 months and 19 days.
         On 23 November 2015 the appellant was granted leave to remain,  and
         he had lawful leave to remain from that date up to (and beyond) the
         date of his ILR application on 28 October 2019. This is a period of
         3 years, 11 months and 5 days. The combined  periods  amount  to  8
         years, 7 months and 24 days. The only way the appellant can be said
         to have had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence is if the
         period during  which  he  was  an  overstayer,  when  he  made  his
         application within 28 days  of  his  earlier  leave  expiring,   is
         treated as lawful residence.

     37.  Although  the  definition  of  "lawful  residence"  in   paragraph
         276A(b)(i) requires the residence to be pursuant to existing  leave
         to  enter  or  remain,  the  requirement  of  "at  least  10  years
         continuous  lawful  residence"  in  paragraph   276B(i)   must   be
         understood in the context of the application of the 2nd  disregard.
         Paragraph 276B must be construed sensibly, according to the natural
         meaning of the words used, recognising that the  Immigration  Rules
         are statements of the respondent's administrative policy  (Mahad  v
         ECO [2009] UKSC 16, at [10]; [2010] Imm AR 203).

     38. The respondent's submissions are  superficially  attractive.  If  a
         matter is disregarded then it is not  counted  or  not  taken  into
         consideration. If an applicant has been an overstayer but has  made
         applications within the prescribed periods set out in paragraph 34E
         then the period of overstaying is not counted against them, but nor
         can it be regarded as lawful residence in light of  the  definition
         in paragraph 276A(b)(i). For the following  reasons  I  am  however
         unable to accept the construction advanced by the respondent.

     39. The observation of Underhill LJ at [50], set out above at [18],  is
         illuminative.  His  Lordship  was  satisfied  that  the  respondent
         treated the period between the expiry of  an  applicant's  previous
         leave and the grant of further  leave  as  counting  as  continuous
         lawful residence (the reference to the respondent's treatment  must
         be  in  relation  to  her  Long  Residence   Guidance).   On   this
         construction the disregard relates to  the  unlawful  nature  of  a
         person's residence occasioned by their being an  overstayer  rather
         than the actual length of residence as an overstayer. In making his
         observation Underhill LJ was clearly mindful of the Court's view in
         Masum Ahmed (at [15(4)]) that disregarding  such  periods  did  not
         convert them into periods of lawful leave (at [12] above) as he set
         out the relevant extract in his own judgment, and  he  demonstrably
         considered the definitions of "lawful  residence",  "in  breach  of
         immigration laws" and  "overstaying"  (see  [11]  -  [13]).  It  is
         inescapable that Underhill LJ rejected the view expressed in  Masum
         Ahmed and that he concluded that it is the unlawfulness  occasioned
         by being an overstayer that is being disregarded  rather  than  the
         chronological gap between grants of leave.

     40. Although McCombe LJ disagreed with the judgments  of  Underhill  LJ
         and Dingemans LJ, elements of his reasoning, at [64] (set out above
         at [20]), support Underhill's observations. McCombe  LJ  considered
         that the consequence of periods of overstaying being  "disregarded"
         was that a person who made their application  within  the  relevant
         prescribed time limits after their leave expired was to be  treated
         as having valid leave, and therefore was to  be  treated  as  being
         lawfully resident. Although this reasoning  may  sit  uncomfortably
         with the comments of Dingemans LJ set out at [19] above, it is  not
         inconsistent with the views of Underhill LJ considered above or the
         majority decision in Hoque that the 1st disregard only  related  to
         current overstaying. I find this aspect of McCombe's  LJ  reasoning
         to be persuasive and adopt it.

     41. Both  McCombe  LJ  and  Underhill  LJ  considered  it  appropriate,
         applying the principle established in Pokhriyal, to have regard  to
         the Secretary  of  State's  published  guidance  where  a  rule  is
         ambiguous and the interpretation in the guidance is more favourable
         to applicants. Adopting the same approach,  and  having  considered
         the respondent's extant guidance as set out at [8] and [9] above, I
         find that the respondent's practice, as disclosed in  her  guidance
         and  the  examples  contained  therein,  does  treat   periods   of
         overstaying that meet the requirements  of  the  2nd  disregard  as
         constituting lawful residence for the purpose of paragraph 276B(i).
         This constitutes further support for the construction  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant.

     42. On  the  proper  construction  of  paragraph  276B  any  period  of
         overstaying that has  been  disregarded  in  accordance  with  sub-
         paragraph (v)(a) or (b) is treated  as  lawful  residence  for  the
         purpose of sub-paragraph (i).

     43. As the  appellant's  application  made  on  25  July  2014  was  in
         accordance with paragraph 276B(v)(a), the period of his overstaying
         is treated as lawful residence in accordance  with  the  principles
         established in Hoque. The  appellant  consequently  meets  all  the
         requirements of paragraph 276B. As he meets the requirements of the
         immigration rules pertaining to his human rights  application,  his
         human rights appeal is allowed (applying TZ (Pakistan) [2018]  EWCA
         Civ 1109; [2018] Imm AR 1301).

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an
error on a point of law and is set aside.

The appellant's human rights appeal is allowed.


D.Blum   4 March 2021

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
