
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

               YS and SJ ('Degree level' study) Mauritius [2006] UKAIT 00094

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 19 September 2006
                        Promulgated on 08 December 2006
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                              SHAKUNTALA JAUNKY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:           Dr Kublah, Counsel instructed by Sasdev & Co
For the Respondent:          Mr Tam QC, instructed by Treasury Solicitor

The requirement of  'a  course  of  study  at  degree  level  or  above'  in
paragraph 60(i)(b) of HC 395  has  to  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with
paragraph 6 of the Rules and also sections 214-216 of the  Education  Reform
Act 1988.  The condition can be met only if the claimant has  been  accepted
for a course leading to a  degree  awarded  by  an  institution  capable  of
awarding degrees recognised by the Act.   "Dublin  Metropolitan  University"
is not such an institution.  The requirements of paragraph  60(i)(b)  relate
to the award that is to be the outcome of the course: they  are  not  to  be
confused with those of paragraph 57(i), which relate to the provider of  the
course itself rather than the award.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The Appellants

 1. The first appellant is a citizen  of  Mauritius.   He  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 23 January 2005 without entry clearance.  He applied,
    and was granted, six months  leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor.   On  23
    February he applied for leave to remain as a student at Croydon College
    of Business Management to pursue a course for a BSc  in  computing  and
    information systems.  At that stage he supplied copies of a certificate
    of enrolment, a letter of acceptance and a certificate of payment,  all
    dated 18 February 2005, from the College.  Later, he supplied a copy of
    a letter dated 4 October 2005  from  "Dublin  Metropolitan  University"
    confirming  his  registration  as   an   external   student   of   that
    organisation.

 2. His application was refused by the respondent on  29  March  2006,  the
    reasons for the refusal being that the  respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the first appellant had been accepted for a  course  of  study  at
    degree level or above.

 3. The second appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  8  October  2004
    without entry clearance.  She applied for and was  granted  six  months
    leave to enter as a student.  Following an application made within  the
    currency of that leave, she was granted leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom as a student until 31 December 2005.  On that date she  applied
    for further leave to remain as a student at Edgware College, to  pursue
    a course for a BA (Hons) in business administration.  In confirming the
    details of her registration and admission, the College  also  confirmed
    that the second appellant's course was to lead to an award  by  "Dublin
    Metropolitan University".  On 30 March 2006 the respondent refused  the
    second appellant's application, the reason for the refusal  being  that
    the respondent was not satisfied that the  second  appellant  had  been
    accepted for a course of study at degree level or above.

 4. In each case the basis for the respondent's reason for the refusal  was
    that paragraph 60(i) of HC 395, as then in force and as it  applied  to
    these appellants, required that a person seeking extension of stay as a
    student had been "accepted for a course of study  at  degree  level  or
    above".  "Dublin Metropolitan University" did and does  not  appear  on
    the lists maintained by the Department  for  Education  and  Skills  of
    recognised United  Kingdom  bodies  awarding  United  Kingdom  degrees.
    Consequently, courses leading to qualifications  described  as  degrees
    awarded by that body were not, in the respondent's  view,  courses  "at
    degree level or above".

"Dublin Metropolitan University"

 5. The evidence before us indicates that "Dublin Metropolitan  University"
    is a company registered in the Republic of Ireland with an  address  in
    Durmcliffe, Co. Sligo.  It  has  a  website,  which  gives  no  contact
    details or address except via email.   It  is  not  recognised  by  the
    higher education  authority  in  Ireland  and  appears  to  possess  no
    property in Ireland used or  suitable  for  use  in  the  provision  of
    educational  courses.   It  has  no  approval  from  the  Minister  for
    Education and Science enabling it to use the word "university"  in  its
    name: the use of that word without approval by  a  college  established
    after July 1996 (as "Dublin Metropolitan University"  appears  to  have
    been) is contrary to Irish law.  There is  some  suggestion  that  this
    institution conducts some activities in the Republic of Cyprus.

 6. There is nothing before us  to  suggest  that  a  "degree"  awarded  by
    "Dublin Metropolitan University" represents any educational attainment.
     Nevertheless, a substantial number of students currently in the United
    Kingdom appear to have registered for such "degrees".  Their  doing  so
    may possibly be not unconnected with the  changes  in  the  Immigration
    Rules in the period 2004 to 2006, to which we make reference below.

Procedural History

 7. These appeals, together with 37 others,  were  listed  before  a  panel
    consisting of a Senior Immigration Judge and an Immigration Judge on 10
    May  2006.   As  the  heading  of  her  directions  shows,  the  Senior
    Immigration Judge appears to have thought that the appeals were  to  be
    determined by way of reconsideration: she may have been  encouraged  in
    this view by the fact that Mr Bruce Tattersall, Counsel for some of the
    appellants,  applied  for  a  Costs  Order.   She  expressly   reserved
    consideration of that issue until the termination of the  appeals.   We
    can deal with it now: as these are not reconsiderations, no question of
    a Costs Order arises.

 8. At the hearing on 10 May 2006, the 39 cases before  the  Tribunal  were
    identified as falling into two groups, and the appeals of  the  present
    appellants were identified as "lead" cases in each  group.   The  first
    appellant is an example of those who  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as
    visitors and later sought leave to  remain  as  students  in  order  to
    acquire "degrees" awarded by  "Dublin  Metropolitan  University".   The
    other  group  is  defined  in  the  directions  given  by  the   Senior
    Immigration Judge as  "those  who  enter  the  UK  as  students  having
    obtained student visas at an entry clearance post in Mauritius and then
    sought further leave to enter  or  remain  as  students".   The  second
    appellant was identified as a member of that group and her  appeal  was
    selected to represent them as a "lead"  case.   The  second  appellant,
    however, is not a member of that group as defined.  Although her  entry
    to the United Kingdom was with leave as a student,  she  had  no  prior
    entry clearance, as we  have  indicated  in  paragraph  3  above.   The
    distinction between the two  appellants  before  us  is,  therefore,  a
    distinction without a difference.

 9. As we understand the provisions of the relevant Immigration Rules, both
    as they were in force at the date of the decisions now under appeal and
    following subsequent amendment, the question  of  whether  a  student's
    proposed course is of "degree level or above" arises only in  the  case
    of those non visa-nationals who arrive in the  United  Kingdom  without
    entry clearance as students.  Thus the Secretary of State's reasons for
    refusal in the present appeals could not apply to  a  person  who  fell
    within the group intended to be represented by  the  second  appellant.
    On the other hand, we do not see that the Rules make  any  distinction,
    amongst  those  non-visa  nationals  arriving  without  student   entry
    clearance, between those who are initially  admitted  as  students  and
    those who are initially admitted for some other  purposes.   There  is,
    therefore, no operative distinction between the two  appellants  before
    us.  They are both non visa-nationals who arrived in the United Kingdom
    without entry clearance as students and subsequently sought a variation
    of leave in order to allow them to remain as students.

10. Partly because of the confusion or ambiguity in the  identification  of
    aspects of the appeals that were to be resolved  by  the  decisions  in
    "lead" cases, we made  an  attempt  to  arrange  for  all  39  appeals,
    together with some others raising similar issues to  be  heard  on  the
    same day, 15 August 2006.  The previous week, Sasdev and  Co  contacted
    the Tribunal and asked for the hearings to be adjourned  owing  to  the
    sudden illness of their counsel, Mr  Bruce  Tattersall.   The  Tribunal
    replied, asking for evidence.  No evidence was forthcoming, but it  was
    asserted that Mr Tattersall was seriously ill and in the  circumstances
    it would not be appropriate for evidence to be sought.  No evidence has
    ever been provided; but in the circumstances, and bearing in  mind  the
    assertions being made by the solicitors, the  appeals  were  adjourned.
    What the Tribunal did not know at that stage was that Sasdev and Co had
    given no indication to the  Treasury  Solicitor,  who  represented  the
    respondent, that they  were  making  the  application.   Before  us  Dr
    Khublah, on instructions from Sasdev and Co said  that  the  solicitors
    were  unaware  that  the  Treasury  Solicitor  was   representing   the
    respondent, that they had advised the Home Office Presenting  Officers'
    Unit of their request for an adjournment and that they had also advised
    the  Treasury  Solicitor  as  soon  as  they  knew  that  he  was   the
    representative.  It is, however, apparent from the face of  the  letter
    purporting to be to the Treasury Solicitor that  it  was  sent  to  the
    wrong fax number, and it appears to us that it was not received by  him
    because he protested about the  granting  of  an  adjournment  when  no
    notice of the application had been given to  him.   We  are  not  in  a
    position to say  that  no  notification  was  sent  to  the  Presenting
    Officers' Unit but none appears to have been  received,  and  the  only
    evidence that it was sent was a manuscript addition at  the  bottom  of
    Sasdev and Co's letter to  the  Tribunal  requesting  the  adjournment.
    That letter is also headed in the vaguest terms: "Re: Various  hearings
    listed on 15 August 2006 Mauritian appeal hearings", and has  the  case
    reference only of one of the cases, not  being  either  of  the  "lead"
    cases.

11. The attempt to deal with all the cases together having  been  abortive,
    the "lead" cases were listed again for hearing on  19  September  2006.
    The Treasury Solicitor and Sasdev and Co were notified of that date  by
    letter from the Deputy President's office:  the  principal  purpose  of
    that letter was an apology to the Treasury Solicitor for acting on  the
    assumption that Sasdev and Co would have complied with  Rule  21(1)(a).
    Formal notices of hearing were also subsequently sent out.  In a fax to
    the Tribunal dated 18 September 2006, Sasdev and Co wrote:

        "We write to advise the court that we did not  received  no  formal
        notice of hearing for the matter listed for tomorrow even though we
        have side information  through  the  Treasury  Solicitors  in  this
        matter."

    In view of the curious grammar of that sentence it is  far  from  clear
    whether the solicitors are claiming that neither  the  letter  nor  the
    notice was received.  The letter continues as follows:


        "However we are ready to proceed and can only but apologise that we
        have to file the papers  upon  which  we  intend  to  rely  in  the
        prescribed hearing for tomorrow.  A copy of which is  being  served
        to the Treasury Solicitors accordingly.   However  as  far  as  the
        legal argument and the skeleton  arguments  are  concerned  counsel
        will endeavour to file it prior to the hearing for tomorrow  as  he
        was equally given a short notice based on the circumstances."


     The letter goes on to identify documents attached to it.


12. At the hearing, Dr Khublah applied for an  adjournment,  on  the  basis
    that Mr Tattersall was engaged on another case in Nottingham.   Mr  Tam
    QC opposed that application.  He set out the history.  He  pointed  out
    that it  was  remarkable  that  Sasdev  and  Co  seemed  to  have  such
    difficulty in sending or receiving post.  He pointed out  that  amongst
    the documents attached to the previous day's fax was a letter allegedly
    sent to the Treasury Solicitor on 22 August 2006.  That  had  also  not
    arrived.  He said that there were serious questions  about  Sasdev  and
    Co's conduct of the litigation.

13. Further enquiries of those instructing them were made by Dr Khublah and
    Mr Tam.  Dr Khublah reported that Sasdev and Co had instructed him that
    they had telephoned the Treasury  Solicitors  on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing to canvas the possibility of an adjournment and had  said  also
    that they were not sure whether it was a full hearing or not.  He  said
    that he had not  been  able  to  prepare  for  a  hearing,  because  Mr
    Tattersall had collected all the papers from London at the end  of  the
    previous week on the understanding that he  would  need  them  for  the
    hearing on 19 September.  In reply, Mr Tam reported that there  was  no
    record of anyone from Sasdev and  Co  having  telephoned  the  Treasury
    Solicitor that morning: there had, however, been a  telephone  call  on
    the previous day.  He remarked that, if Sasdev and Co were not aware of
    the hearing, it was extremely odd that Mr Tattersall should have  taken
    the papers away at the end of the previous week to prepare for it.

14. We considered the application.  Despite the assertions made at  various
    stages by Sasdev and Co, we are confident that they were aware that the
    hearing of these appeals was to be on 19 September.  They had indicated
    to the Tribunal that they  were  ready  to  proceed.   It  is  for  the
    appellants  and  their  solicitors,  not  for  the  Tribunal,  to  make
    arrangements to cover the  possibility  of  counsel  being  unavailable
    because  of  being  briefed  to  appear  elsewhere.   Neither  of   the
    appellants was present at the hearing either: it therefore follows that
    it was not envisaged by Sasdev and Co they would given  oral  evidence.
    We had a full skeleton prepared  by  Mr  Tattersall  for  the  previous
    hearing.  It did not  appear  to  us  that  the  interests  of  justice
    required an adjournment and we so announced, indicating  also  that  we
    would keep the matter under review as the case progressed.  Dr  Khublah
    then withdrew from representing the appellants, although he remained in
    court.  We may say at this stage that nothing that occurred during  the
    hearing of these appeals caused us to reconsider our  decision  on  the
    application for an adjournment.

The Issues

15.  Two principal issues are raised by the appellants.  They claim, first,
    that each is entitled to a variation of leave in order to remain  as  a
    student  studying  for  a  "degree"  awarded  by  "Dublin  Metropolitan
    University"; and they argue further that if they are not entitled under
    the Immigration Rules, the Secretary of State has conducted himself  in
    such a way that it would now be unfair to refuse them such leave.

The Immigration Rules

16. The relevant Immigration Rules are in paragraphs 57 and 60 of  HC  395.
    Paragraph 57 contains the Rules  relating  to  applications  for  entry
    clearance and leave to enter for studies.  Paragraph  60  contains  the
    Rules for student leave granted after entry,  and  makes  reference  to
    paragraph 57.  Paragraph 57 was amended with effect from 1 January 2005
    in  order  to  incorporate  a  requirement  that  studies  be   at   an
    organisation included on the DfES Register.  From that date, and at the
    date of the appellants' applications and at the date of  the  decisions
    against which they appeal, it read as follows:

        "57.     The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
             enter the United Kingdom as a student are that he:


           (i)   has been accepted for a course of study  which  is  to  be
               provided  by  an  organisation  which  is  included  on  the
               Department for Education and Skills' Register  of  Education
               and Training Providers, and is at either;
               (a)     a publicly funded institution of further  or  higher
                  education; or
               (b)  a  bona  fide  private  education   institution   which
                  maintains   satisfactory   records   of   enrolment   and
                  attendance; or
               (c) an independent fee paying school outside the  maintained
                  sector; and
            (ii) is able and intends to follow either:
               (a) a recognised full  time  degree  course  at  a  publicly
                  funded institution of further or higher education; or
               (b) a weekday full time course  involving  attendance  at  a
                  single institution for a minimum of  15  hours  organised
                  daytime study per week of a single subject,  or  directly
                  related subjects; or
               (c) a full time course of study at an independent fee paying
                  school; and
             (iii)  if  under  the  age  of  16  years  is  enrolled  at  an
               independent fee paying school  on  a  full  time  course  of
               studies which meets the requirements of  the  Education  Act
               1944; and
             (iv) intends to leave the United Kingdom  at  the  end  of  his
               studies; and
             (v)  does  not  intend  to  engage  in  business  or  to   take
               employment, except part time  or  vacation  work  undertaken
               with the consent of the Secretary of State  for  Employment;
               and
             (vi) is able to meet the costs of his course and  accommodation
               and the maintenance of himself and  any  dependants  without
               taking employment or engaging in business or having recourse
               to public funds."

17. Paragraph 60 was amended with effect from 1 October  2004.   From  that
    date  until  3  April  2006  (a  period  which  includes  the   present
    appellants' applications and the decisions against which  they  appeal)
    it read as follows:

         60. The requirements for an extension of stay as a student are that
             the applicant:
             (i)  either
                  (a)  he is {sic] a person specified in Appendix 1 to these
                    Rules and he was last admitted to the United Kingdom  in
                    possession of a valid student entry clearance, or  valid
                    prospective student entry clearance in  accordance  with
                    paragraphs 82 to 87 of these Rules; or
                  (b)  he is not a person specified in Appendix 1  to  these
                    Rules and he has been accepted for a course of study  at
                    degree level or above; or
                  (c)  he is not a person specified in Appendix 1  to  these
                     Rules and he was last admitted to the  United  Kingdom
                     in possession of a valid student entry  clearance,  or
                     valid   prospective   student   entry   clearance   in
                     accordance with paragraphs 82 to 87 of these Rules, if
                     he has been accepted  for  a  course  of  study  below
                     degree level; and
             (ii) meets the requirements for admission as a student set  out
                 in paragraph 57(i)-(vi); and
             (iii)      had  produced  satisfactory  evidence   of   regular
                 attendance during any course which he has already begun; or
                 any other course for which he  has  been  enrolled  in  the
                 past; and
             (iv) can produce satisfactory evidence  of  regular  attendance
                 during any course which he has already begun; or any  other
                 course for which he has been enrolled in the past; and
             (v)  can show evidence of satisfactory progress in  his  course
                 of study including the taking and passing of  any  relevant
                 examinations; and
             (vi) would not, as a result of an extension of stay, spend more
                 than 2 years  on  short  courses  below  degree  level  (ie
                 courses of less than 1 years duration,  or  longer  courses
                 broken off before completion); and
             (vii)     has not come to the end of a period of government  or
                 international  scholarship  agency  sponsorship,   or   has
                 written consent of  his  official  sponsor  for  a  further
                 period of study in  the  United  Kingdom  and  satisfactory
                 evidence that sufficient sponsorship funding is available."

18. Also on 1 October 2004 the Rules were amended  by  the  insertion  into
    paragraph  6,  which  contains   other   definitions,   the   following
    definition:

        "'Degree level study' means a course which leads  to  a  recognised
        United  Kingdom  degree  at  bachelor's  level  or  above,  or   an
        equivalent qualification  at  level  6  or  above  of  the  revised
        National Qualifications Framework, or  level  9  or  above  of  the
        Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework;"

19. For completeness we should add that paragraph 60(i) was replaced  again
    with effect from 3 April 2006.  There are further restrictions  on  the
    type of leave which may be  extended  for  studies:  in  particular,  a
    person who arrived in the United Kingdom without entry clearance and is
    granted leave to enter as a visitor will not  be  able  to  remain  for
    studies if the visitor's leave was granted after 1 July 2006.

20. The reference in paragraph 60 to appendix 1 to the Rules is a reference
    to  the  list  of  countries  whose  nationals  always  require   entry
    clearance, in the form of a visa issued  abroad,  before  they  can  be
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom.  Nationals of countries  not
    specified in that appendix are non-visa nationals.  They may travel  to
    the United Kingdom and seek entry for some (but not  all)  purposes  on
    arrival.  They will be granted leave to enter if and only if they  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Some purposes require entry
    clearance even for non-visa nationals, and, for all purposes,  non-visa
    nationals are entitled to apply for entry clearance before  travelling.
    That is how paragraph 60 as it was in force at the relevant time  comes
    to distinguish in sub-paragraphs  60(i)(b)  and  (c)  between  non-visa
    nationals who have not, and who have, arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with valid entry clearance as students or  prospective  students.   The
    present appellants are non-visa nationals who have no  entry  clearance
    as students: they can therefore meet the requirements of  paragraph  60
    only they have been "accepted for a course of study at degree level  or
    above".

21. In his skeleton argument, Mr Tattersall refers a number of times to the
    fact that the institutions with which the appellants are registered are
    institutions on the DfES Register.  We accept Mr Tam's submission  that
    the requirement that the institution be on the DfES  Register  and  the
    requirement that the course  be  at  degree  level  or  above  are  two
    separate requirements: indeed the contrary is unarguable.   So  far  as
    variation of leave is concerned, the requirement that  the  institution
    be on the DfES Register is contained in  sub-paragraph  60(ii)  by  its
    reference to paragraph 57(i).  That is a requirement which  applies  to
    all those seeking leave under paragraph 60.  The requirement  that  the
    course be at degree level and above  applies  only  to  some  of  those
    seeking leave under paragraph 60 and is  without  doubt  an  additional
    requirement.  It follows that the nature of the institutions with which
    the appellants are registered cannot assist them in their  claim  under
    the Rules.  In particular, we reject Mr  Tattersall's  submission  that
    the Secretary of State  may  be  acting  under  a  misapprehension  and
    confusing the requirements of s216 of the  Education  Reform  Act  1988
    (which relates to institutions recognised as able to award degrees, and
    to which we shall make further reference below) with  the  Register  of
    Providers maintained by the DfES.  With respect, the  confusion  is  Mr
    Tattersall's.  His statement that the two lists "were not, are not  and
    never were intended to  congruent"  although  perhaps  infelicitous  is
    correct.  The two lists perform two different functions.  The mere fact
    that an institution is on one list does not mean  that  it  is  on  the
    other; but that is no reason to conflate two separate  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.

22. Mr Tattersall's submissions contain no reference to the  definition  of
    degree level study in paragraph 6 of HC 395, which  we  fear  may  have
    escaped his attention.  Its wording and its application to the  present
    appeals are, however, clear.  In order to know what  is  a  "recognised
    United Kingdom degree" we do have to look at ss214 - 216  of  the  1988
    Act.  Section 214(2) defines, for  the  purposes  of  that  section,  a
    "recognised award" as:

        "(a)     any award granted  or  to  be  granted  by  a  university,
             college or other body which is authorised by Royal  Charter  of
             Act of Parliament to grant degrees;
        (b)      any award granted or to be granted by anybody for the time
             being permitted by any body falling with paragraph (a) above to
             act on its behalf in the granting of degrees; or
        (c)      such other award as the Secretary of State  may  by  order
             designate as a  recognised  award  for  the  purposes  of  this
             Section."

23. Section 214(1) makes it a criminal offence in the course of business to
    grant or offer to grant a degree "which may reasonably be taken  to  be
    an award granted or to be granted by  a  United  Kingdom  institution",
    except a recognised award.   Section  215  contains  provisions  as  to
    enforcement and s216, to which Mr Tattersall  makes  reference  in  his
    skeleton argument, provides in part as follows:

      "216
      ...
      (2)   The Secretary of State shall compile, maintain and  publish  by
             order a list including the name of every body which appears  to
             him to fall for the time being within sub-section (3) below.
      (3)   A body falls within this sub-section if it is not a  recognised
             body and either -
            (a)  provides any course which is in preparation for  a  degree
                 to be granted by a recognised body and is approved by or on
                 behalf of the recognised body; or
            (b)   is  a  constituent  college,  school  or  hall  or  other
                 institution of a university which is a recognised body.
      (4)   In this section 'recognised body' means a body  falling  within
             section 214(2)(a) or (b) of this Act."

24. "Dublin Metropolitan University" is not a body falling with  s214(2)(a)
    or (b) of the Act, and there has been no order designating  its  awards
    under s214(2)(c).  Its awards are therefore not recognised awards,  and
    their representation in the course of a business as awards  of  degrees
    by a United Kingdom institution would constitute the  criminal  offence
    defined by s214(1).  There can be no conceivable reason  for  supposing
    that the phrase "recognised United Kingdom degree" in paragraph 6 of HC
    395 carries any meaning other than that given to the phrase "recognised
    award" in s214.  It is absurd to suggest  that  the  Immigration  Rules
    should entitle a person to remain in order to undertake studies  for  a
    degree, the offering or granting of which would amount  to  a  criminal
    offence; and if criminal liability is to be escaped by making it  clear
    that the awarding body is not a "United Kingdom institution", then  the
    degree would not be a United Kingdom degree.  If  it  be  said  on  the
    appellants' behalf that "recognised  United  Kingdom  degree"  bears  a
    wider meaning than  that  indicated  by  s214  of  the  1988  Act,  and
    includes, for example, other degrees whose validity  is  recognised  in
    the United Kingdom, then there are two separate answers.  The first  is
    that the wording of the  Rule  simply  cannot  bear  that  meaning:  in
    particular, a degree awarded by an  institution  other  than  a  United
    Kingdom institution cannot properly be described as  a  United  Kingdom
    degree.  Secondly, it is necessary  to  remember  the  context  of  the
    Immigration Rules as a whole.  The  provision  in  question,  paragraph
    60(i)(b), relates to a specific class of people.  The class consists of
    those  non-visa  nationals  who  did  not  obtain  entry  clearance  as
    students, and who now seek to remain in the United Kingdom in order  to
    study for a degree.  In that context it is obvious that the  degree  in
    question would be one awarded by  a  United  Kingdom  institution,  and
    there is no reason to attempt to twist the wording of the Rule in order
    to give it some other meaning.

The Appellants' Present Position

25. Under cover of a letter to the Tribunal dated 18  September  2006,  the
    appellants have provided evidence that each of them is enrolled at  the
    London Institution for Further and Higher Education, 19  Elmwood  Road,
    Croydon, for a full-time course leading to an advanced diploma  of  the
    Association of Business Executives.  The first appellant's  diploma  is
    to be in business information systems and his start date is given as 26
    June 2006;  the  second  appellant's  diploma  is  to  be  in  business
    administration and her start date is given as 16 October 2006.   As  is
    demonstrated by a letter from IND to the registrar of that institution,
    an ABE advanced diploma is  regarded  as  a  qualification  at  "degree
    level" for the purposes of the definition in paragraph  6  of  HC  395.
    That is not because it is itself a degree, but because it is at level 6
    or above of the revised National Qualifications Framework.  We take  it
    that the letters were intended to demonstrate that, at the date of  the
    hearing, the appellants met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
    It is possible that s85(4) of the 2002 Act  was  to  be  invoked.   The
    position is, however, as Mr Tam pointed out, that registration  for  an
    ABE advanced diploma could not of itself show that the  appellants  met
    all the other requirements of paragraph 60.  There is no evidence  that
    they do meet the other requirements of paragraph 60, and the matter has
    never been investigated, because the refusal was solely on the basis of
    their failure to meet the requirements of paragraph 60(i)(b).  There is
    a further problem.  Each of the appellants' enrolment for  the  diploma
    is specifically conditional on meeting the "necessary entry requirement
    to pursue the course".  According to the only evidence before us on the
    matter, which is paragraph  3.7.3.4  of  the  Respondent's  Immigration
    Directorates' Instructions, in order to qualify for entry  onto  either
    of the advanced diplomas, an entrance must have attained an ABE diploma
    in the relevant discipline, a degree awarded  by  a  recognised  United
    Kingdom or overseas university, or another recognised qualification  on
    an approved overseas institute of higher education.  There  appears  to
    be no evidence before us that either of the appellants was qualified to
    embark on a course leading to an ABE advanced diploma.   We  note  also
    from the IDIs that "the normal duration for  the  advanced  diploma  is
    twelve months".  Each of  the  enrolment  letters  indicates  that  the
    course will take two whole academic years full-time.  This suggests  to
    us that the course is in fact  intended  to  embrace  the  ABE  diploma
    before going on to the advanced diploma.  The  ABE  diploma  is  itself
    below degree level, and if that is indeed the structure of  the  course
    the appellants will not be able to satisfy paragraph  60(i)(b)  at  its
    outset.

26. For the foregoing reasons we find that  the  appellants'  intention  to
    take a "degree" awarded by "Dublin  Metropolitan  University"  did  not
    enable them to meet the requirements of paragraph  60(i)(b);  and  that
    their present circumstances do  not  demonstrate  compliance  with  the
    requirements of that provision either.   The  decisions  against  which
    they appeal were therefore in each case decisions  which  complied  and
    comply with the Immigration Rules.

"Not in accordance with the law"

27. In addition or alternatively to their claim to be  entitled  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the appellants claim that the decision to refuse  to
    allow them to remain in the United Kingdom for studies was unlawful  in
    that it discriminates unlawfully between them and others,  whom  it  is
    said the Secretary of State has treated differently.  The arguments are
    put thus in Mr Tattersall's skeleton:

      "4.   In these cases, but not in other identical one, all  have  been
             refused on the grounds that DMU was not a recognised  body  for
             the purposes of the Rules.  There is appended (pp.6-7)  a  list
             of identical cases which were granted leave to study in UK.


          5. The questions raised by the decisions of the SoS in these cases
             are:-


             (i)  Was the Secretary of State acting ultra vires in  relation
                 to the Immigration Rules in  his  decision?  [This  is  the
                 question whether the decisions were in accordance with  the
                 Immigration Rules, which we have answered.]


             (ii) If he was not (which is denied) was he acting in  such  an
                 inconsistent and discriminatory manner as to create in  the
                 appellants a legitimate  expectation  that  they  would  be
                 treated in the same way as the successful applicants and/or
                 is the SoS estopped from taking  such  action  against  the
                 appellants?


             (iii)      If  he  was  not  acting  in  an  inconsistent   and
                 discriminatory manner (which is again denied) would  it  be
                 just and reasonable for him to  either  to  allow  all  the
                 appellants a reasonable time to switch courses. [sic]

          6. Question 5 i
             The requirements for an extension of stay as a student are  set
             out in s60 of the Immigration Rules Rule  60  ii  requires  the
             applicant to 'meets the requirements for admission as a student
             set out in paragraph 57' [paragraph 57 is then  set  out].   In
             the number of cases students at colleges which fall under 57  i
             (b) above and are taking courses validated  by  DMU  have  been
             accepted by the SoS (see appellant's bundle paragraph 5).   The
             usual criterion  for  acceptance  of  a  college  is  that  the
             institution is accredited by the British Accreditation Council.
             Further the case of [another individual] contains and admission
             by the SoS that such a provider falls within the Rules even  if
             the validating body is not registered ... .  On this  basis  we
             say that the appellants have proved  a  prima  facie  case  for
             extension of leave to remain as students under the  Immigration
             Rules.

          7. Question 5 ii
             There is evidence before the Tribunal of students in  identical
             circumstances being accepted on similar  courses  validated  by
             DMU from 2004- early 2006.  Even if (which is denied)  the  SOS
             was in  error  in  admitting  these  students,  he  cannot  now
             discriminate against those in the same position.  There is also
             a statement from Reena  Goosnanee  Potanah  demonstrating  that
             there appears to have been an unauthorised change in policy  by
             the SoS.
             In these circumstances we assert that these appellants  have  a
             legitimate expectation to remain as students.   Further  or  in
             the alternative the SoS is estopped since he gave an  assurance
             upon which the appellants have relied to their detriment.

          8. Question 5 iii
             Even if the SoS is  acting  professionally  and  legally  these
             appellant should at the very least be granted a stay  to  allow
             them to move to suitably recognised courses."

      It appears that there are three separate allegations being made.   One
    that is in a particular named appeal there was "and  admission  by  the
    SoS that such a provider falls within the Rules even if the  validating
    body is not registered" (our emphasis).  Secondly it is  said  that  in
    "identical" cases  individuals  have  been  granted  leave  to  remain.
    Thirdly, it is said that there has  been  an  "unauthorised  change  in
    policy" by the Secretary of State.  Those considerations  are  said  to
    lead to a legitimate expectation that the appellants be  granted  leave
    to remain either to undertake a course leading to a "degree" awarded by
    "Dublin Metropolitan University", or that  they  should  have  time  to
    remain in the United Kingdom in order to move to another course.

28. We consider first the argument based on the events  during  the  appeal
    hearing  of  a  particular  named  individual.   We   have   read   the
    determination.  It is clear that the Immigration  Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal for want  of  jurisdiction,  and  did  so  correctly.   All  his
    analysis of the  possible  application  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    therefore, as Mr Tam pointed  out,  obiter.   During  the  hearing  the
    Immigration Judge, apparently being unaware himself of the contents  of
    the Immigration Rules, required the Presenting Officer to show him  any
    part of the Immigration Rules requiring a degree for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 60(i)(b) to be awarded by a recognised body.  The  Presenting
    Officer, who had earlier referred in general terms to this requirement,
    was unable to find it in the time allowed him by the Immigration Judge.
      He  therefore  did  not  pursue  that  element  of  the  refusal,  he
    acknowledged that the college at which the student was registered was a
    recognised provider, and he apparently accepted that the decision under
    the Rules was (albeit unappealable) wrong.

29. Any concession made by the Presenting Officer was clearly based on  his
    ignorance of the provisions of paragraph 6 of  HC  395,  including  the
    definition of "degree level study".  Even if the Immigration Judge  had
    had  jurisdiction  to  determine  whether  the  individual  before  him
    complied with the requirements of the Immigration Rules, his acceptance
    of a concession of a point of law, made apparently under  pressure  and
    demonstrably in ignorance of the legal provisions involved,  could  not
    conceivably constitute any precedent; nor could it bind  the  Secretary
    of State to act in a similarly hasty and uninformed way  in  any  other
    case, even in a case where the Immigration Judge did have jurisdiction.
     For these reasons we consider that there is no merit  at  all  in  the
    appellants' submissions based on the conduct of the respondent  in  the
    case we have described.

30. It is then said that a number of other individuals  have  been  treated
    more beneficially, even though their  circumstances  are  the  same  as
    those of the appellants.  We treat  that  submission  with  very  great
    reservation.  We note that, in Mr Tattersall's skeleton argument, it is
    made by reference only to the requirements of paragraph 57 and  60(ii).
    The individuals in question are said to be identical in that  they  are
    studying for their "degrees" at the same institution as those  attended
    by other  individuals  who  have  had  adverse  immigration  decisions,
    including the appellants.  The submission is made without any reference
    at all to the additional requirements of paragraph 60(i)(b), which have
    to be met by those to whom that particular  sub-sub-paragraph  applies.
    Mr Tattersall's decision to  treat  the  matter  without  reference  to
    paragraph 60(i) casts real doubt on whether  the  cases  of  the  other
    individuals are properly to be regarded as "identical".

31. Further, as our discussion of the Immigration Rules  themselves  shows,
    the requirements in question were  introduced  only  in  October  2004.
    Some or all of those whose cases are described as "identical"  may  not
    have been caught by the change in paragraph 60 which occurred  on  that
    date.  We do not know.

32. Thirdly, however, even if it were shown that all the other  cases  were
    truly identical, that would not in our view entitle the  appellants  to
    claim to be treated in a similar fashion.  So far as the appellants are
    concerned, the position is clear: they are not entitled under the Rules
    to the leave they seek.  The Secretary of State has never made to  them
    any representation that they would be granted leave outside the  Rules,
    nor has he given them any reason to suppose that they would be  treated
    other than in accordance with the Immigration Rules, nor is  there  any
    evidence that he has had a policy of departing from the Rules in  cases
    relating to "Dublin Metropolitan University".  The evidence provided on
    the appellants' behalf, whether in the form of the list of other  cases
    of which no detail is given, or in the latest  witness  statements,  is
    wholly insufficient to show  any  deliberate,  considered  or  detailed
    undertaking, to the appellants or others, that  their  cases  would  be
    dealt with other than in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

33. The truth of the matter is that if it should appear  that  applications
    to  remain  for  studies  connected   with   "degrees"   from   "Dublin
    Metropolitan University" had been granted other than in accordance with
    the Immigration Rules, such decisions are  likely  to  have  been  made
    either for wholly exceptional reasons or by mistake.   If  the  former,
    the appellants, whose cases are not shown to be exceptional,  evidently
    have no claim to be treated similarly.  If the latter, the position  is
    the same: the Secretary of State is not bound to  maintain  consistency
    by repeating errors.  If authority for that proposition is  needed,  it
    is to be found in a judgment of Moses J, to which Mr Tam referred us: R
    v Secretary of State for Defence ex parte  Wilkins  (CO  4676/2000,  19
    June 2000) at paragraph 55.

34. The appellants' evidence and submissions fail  to  establish  either  a
    practice or a promise; they fail to establish their reliance on either;
    they fail to establish any  expectation;  as  a  result  they  fail  to
    establish why the Immigration Rules should not be applied to them.

35. The third strand of the appellants' argument on this issue was that the
    Secretary of State had made  what  was  described  as  an  unauthorised
    change in his  policy.   We  have  to  say  that  we  do  not  entirely
    understand the force of  that  submission.   Immigration  policy  is  a
    matter for the Secretary of State: he does not need authorisation  from
    anybody else.  That problem apart, it is  not  easy  to  see  what  the
    "change of policy" is supposed to have been.

36. On the Secretary of State's behalf, Mr Tam frankly admitted that  there
    had been some confusion in the issue of  documentation  supporting  the
    changes introduced to paragraph 60 in October 2004 and to paragraph  57
    in January 2005.  Older versions of the Instructions to decision-makers
    (the  Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions)  were  left  unrevised,
    apparently because of difficulty in accurately detailing the effect  of
    the changes.  Decision-makers no doubt should have been aware that  the
    old Instructions had been superseded by the new Rules, and that if  the
    old  Instructions  did  not  accord  with  the  new  Rules,   the   old
    Instructions should not be followed.  It may well have been  that  that
    was not made clear to everybody.  When the Instructions were revised to
    accord with the Rules, however, that was not "an unauthorised change in
    policy".  It was not unauthorised, it was not a change, and it did  not
    relate to a policy.  It was not unauthorised, because  the  changes  to
    the documents in question were made by or on behalf of the Secretary of
    State, and they were made in order to be in accordance with  the  Rules
    authorised by Parliamentary process.  There was no change, in the sense
    that the coming into  force  of  the  new  Rules  had  itself  rendered
    obsolete the Instructions for  applying  the  old  Rules,  and  so  the
    subsequent updating of the Instructions made no substantive alteration.
     No policy is concerned, because  these  Instructions  do  not  in  any
    relevant manner give any indication that the Rules in force will not be
    applied, or will be applied with the  generosity  not  implied  in  the
    Rules themselves: they merely indicate, with  more  or  less  accuracy,
    what the Rules themselves mean in  terms  of  decisions  in  individual
    cases.

37. We accept that it may well have been the case that, at  the  time  that
    the decisions in the appellants' cases were made, old Instructions were
    in  circulation  alongside  the  new  Rules.   But  although  the   new
    Instructions were not  finalised  until  more  recently,  the  evidence
    before us establishes that they were circulating in draft form from  an
    early stage.

38. If the appellants' case had been that there was a relevant part of  the
    Instructions which expressly indicated that, in cases such  as  theirs,
    leave should be granted although the Rules appeared not  to  allow  it,
    they might possibly have had the beginnings of an argument.  But  that,
    as we have said, was not the position here.  Anyone comparing  the  new
    Rules with the old Instructions would readily have  realised  that  the
    old Instructions, expounding as they did the  Rules  before  amendment,
    did not reflect the current position.  At  that  point  such  a  person
    would have been bound to attribute greater authority to the  new  Rules
    than to  the  old  Instructions.   Given  that  there  were  draft  new
    Instructions available as well, the  position  is  even  stronger.   No
    valid argument can be mounted for a right to require  a  decision-maker
    to act on out-of-date Instructions  relating  to  Rules  no  longer  in
    force, in preference to simply applying the current Rules themselves.

39. There is one other matter to which we perhaps ought to refer,  although
    it was not raised directly before us.  If Immigration Rules are changed
    after an individual arrives in the United Kingdom, or even after he has
    made his application, he has, in the absence of transitional provisions
    in the amendment, no right to have an application decided under the old
    Rules rather than the new: R v IAT ex parte Nathwani [1979-80]  Imm  AR
    9.  The continuing existence of explanatory  Instructions  relating  to
    the old Rules cannot affect that position,  even  if  some  caseworkers
    mistakenly relied on those old Instructions.

Conclusion

40.  The appellants do not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    and entirely fail to show that they should be  treated  other  than  in
    accordance with those Rules.  Their appeals are dismissed.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

