
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

CT & Others (Highly skilled migrant - student switching) No Country [2006]
UKAIT 00095

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 22 August 2006
                        Promulgated on: 06 December 2006


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                        Senior Immigration Judge Gill

                                   Between



                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellants:          Mrs J Rothwell, instructed by Scudamores
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

The  purpose  of  the  Highly  Skilled  Migrants  Programme  is  to   enable
migration, and it is not contrary to the purpose of the  relevant  Rules  to
interpret the switching rules  (paragraphs  135DA-135DG)  restrictively.   A
person cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 135DB  unless  his  current
leave was granted in accordance with the requirements of  paragraphs  57-62:
it is not sufficient to have merely leave "as a student".  In that  context,
it is clear that the  reference  to  a  degree  in  paragraph  135DB(ii)  is
reference to a degree obtained during the current period  of  leave  in  the
United Kingdom, thus excluding those who have leave under  paragraphs  57-62
for courses below degree level.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  This  is  the  reconsideration  of  the  appellants'  appeals  against
    decisions of the respondent on 9 February 2006 refusing to  vary  their
    leave to remain.  The  first  appellant  was  admitted  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a student and sought to remain as a highly skilled  migrant;
    the other appellants  were  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    dependents of a student and sought to remain as  the  dependents  of  a
    highly skilled migrant.  We do not need to deal separately  with  their
    appeals, which stand or fall with that of the first appellant, whom  we
    shall call "the appellant".

 2. There is no dispute as to the facts,  or  as  to  the  motives  of  the
    appellant.  He is a distinguished academic.  He obtained a postgraduate
    degree from the University of Sussex in the late 1980s, following which
    he returned to his own country and his own employment in a  well  known
    university.  He became dean of his faculty and acting vice  chancellor.
    He  was  deputy  co-ordinator  of  a   government   project   promoting
    undergraduate education, funded by an international organisation of the
    highest repute.  He became, therefore, a person of whom the public  had
    some knowledge.  He is well known in his country as a social  scientist
    and political analyst.

 3. No doubt it was for that reason that his opinion was sought on  certain
    political matters, in an interview that was subsequently  broadcast  by
    the BBC.  Apparently as a result of what he said,  he  has  been  twice
    abducted and  detained;  and  his  brother-in-law,  who  works  in  the
    broadcasting media, has been killed.   A  politician  who  secured  his
    release from detention advised him to stay away from  his  local  area.
    He took the opportunity to return to the  United  Kingdom  for  further
    studies.  There is no suggestion that he intended to use his  entry  to
    the United Kingdom as a device in order later to claim asylum:  on  the
    contrary he has steadfastly refused to make  such  a  claim,  believing
    that his proper role is doing his own work in his own country, as  soon
    as it is safe for him to be there.

 4. The appellant was granted entry clearance and leave to enter the United
    Kingdom in order to undertake postgraduate research at  the  University
    of Sussex.  We have not seen any papers relating  to  that  entry,  but
    entry clearance is said to have been granted under paragraph 58  of  HC
    395 with reference  to  paragraph  57,  which  is  the  principal  rule
    relating to entry as a student.  At Sussex he had a position equivalent
    to an unofficial fellow: he has been  undertaking  research  and  doing
    some part-time teaching.  Towards the conclusion  of  his  research  he
    took the view that it was not  yet  safe  for  him  to  return  to  his
    country.  He considered that he ought to eligible to take part  in  the
    government's programme for highly  skilled  migrants,  and  accordingly
    took steps to attempt to obtain an  extension  of  his  leave  in  that
    category.

 5. The Immigration Rules relating to highly skilled migrants are contained
    between paragraphs 135 and 135I of HC 395.   We  put  it  in  that  way
    because their  denomination  is  by  no  means  obvious.   The  primary
    requirements for  those  seeking  entry  clearance  as  highly  skilled
    migrants are in paragraph 135A, which is followed  by  paragraphs  135B
    and 135C dealing with the grant or refusal of entry clearance  in  such
    cases.  Paragraph 135D contains the requirements for the  extension  of
    leave as a highly skilled migrant in the  case  of  a  person  who  was
    admitted as such.  That  is  followed  by  paragraphs  numbered  135DA,
    135DB, 136DC, 135DD, 135DE, 135DF and 135DG, each of which  deals  with
    the particular circumstances in which a person who  has  been  admitted
    other than as a highly skilled migrant may have an extension  of  leave
    as a highly skilled migrant.  Paragraphs 135E and 135F  deal  with  the
    grant and refusal of variation of leave as a  highly  skilled  migrant,
    and paragraphs 135G and 135H deal with indefinite leave to remain as  a
    highly skilled migrant.

 6. Paragraph 135A is as follows:

      "Requirements for leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  highly
skilled migrant

      135A. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  leave  to  enter
        as a highly skilled migrant are that the applicant:
            i) must produce a valid document  issued  by  the  Home  Office
               confirmed that he meets, at the time of the  issue  of  that
               document, the criteria specified by the Secretary  of  State
               for entry to the United Kingdom  under  the  Highly  Skilled
               Migrant Programme; and
           ii) intends to make the United Kingdom his main home; and
          iii)  is  able  to  maintain  and  accommodate  himself  and  any
               dependants adequately without recourse to public funds; and
           iv) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance  for  entry  in
               this capacity."

 7. The requirements of sub-paragraphs (i) to  (iii)  are  the  subject  of
    reference in all the other substantive paragraphs (with  the  exception
    of paragraph 135DG, which has its own specific requirements, and is  of
    no relevance in this appeal).  In order  to  qualify  for  leave  as  a
    highly skilled migrant at all, an individual needs to  obtain  specific
    approval from the Home Office, which allocates points on the  basis  of
    an  applicant's  background,  skills,  educational  qualifications  and
    employment prospects.  In order to qualify, an applicant must obtain 65
    points.  If he does so, he is sent a letter so informing him.  This  is
    the "valid document issued by the Home Office" to  which  reference  is
    made in paragraph 135A(i).  Once obtained, the letter is valid  for  an
    application made within the next six months.  There is  no  doubt  that
    the appellant is, and was at the relevant time, entitled to at least 65
    points; and he was duly issued with an approval letter.  There is  also
    no doubt that he met and meets the requirements of sub-paragraphs  (ii)
    and (iii).  It might be thought that in his case there  would  be  some
    doubt about sub-paragraph (ii), but no question has been raised on  it,
    and we think rightly: bearing in mind that entry clearance as a  highly
    skilled migrant is normally granted under paragraph 135B for  a  period
    not exceeding twelve  months,  and  that  an  extension  in  the  first
    instance under paragraph 135E will be for a period not exceeding  three
    years, it seems unlikely that any permanent intention  is  required  by
    paragraph 135A(ii).

 8. The appellant had, at the time of his application, leave to remain as a
    student.  The relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules  relating  to
    his application was therefore paragraph 135DB, which is as follows:

        "135DB.  The requirements for an extension  of  stay  as  a  highly
        skilled migrant in the case of a person who has leave to remain  as
        a student are that the applicant:
           (i)   entered the United Kingdom or was given leave to remain as
               a student in accordance with paragraphs 57 to  62  of  these
               Rules; and
           (ii)  has obtained a degree qualification on a recognised degree
               course at either a United Kingdom publicly funded further or
               higher education institution or a bona fide  United  Kingdom
               private education institution which  maintains  satisfactory
               records of enrolment and attendance; and
           (iii) has the written consent of his official sponsor to  remain
               as a  highly  skilled  migrant  if  he  is  a  member  of  a
               government or international scholarship  agency  sponsorship
               and that sponsorship is either ongoing or has recently  come
               to an end at the time of the requested extension; and
           (iv)  meets the requirements of paragraph 135A(i)-(iii)."

    It is at this point that the appellant  and  the  respondent  disagree.
    The disagreement  relates  to  the  precise  meaning  of  sub-paragraph
    135DB(ii).  The appellant says that he meets the requirements  of  that
    paragraph, because of his postgraduate  degree  from  Sussex,  obtained
    many years ago.  The respondent argues that that sub-paragraph requires
    the degree in question to have been obtained during  the  very  student
    leave which is now to be varied.   The  appellant  responds  that  that
    interpretation is demanded neither by the wording of the Rules  nor  by
    common sense, because it excludes from consideration a person  such  as
    himself who is more highly skilled than a new graduate would be.

 9. The respondent made his position clear to the appellant before  and  in
    the course of refusing his application.  The appellant's  argument  was
    put to the Immigration Judge, who rejected it, and it was put again  to
    us.

10. The Immigration Judge's determination of this issue is as follows:

      "16.  I can see no logical basis  for  the  stipulating  in  paragraph
             135DB that switching in the case of students is  only  open  to
             those who have a British degree, irrespective of  when  it  was
             obtained.  To permit switching in the case of a student who has
             acquired a British degree at some point in  the  past,  but  to
             deny that possibility  to  a  student  whose  degree  had  been
             obtained abroad would make no sense.   To  distinguish  between
             students on that basis would be irrational.  It is all the more
             irrational  given  that  eligibility  for  the  Highly  Skilled
             Migrant Programme does not depend on  the  applicant  having  a
             British degree, or indeed any degree at all.


      17.   To allow students who have obtained a degree during  the  period
             of their current period of leave to switch  to  highly  skilled
             migrant status  is  more  readily  understandable,  because  to
             except them from the need to return to their own  countries  is
             likely to ensure that their skills are not lost to  the  United
             Kingdom.


      18.   Adopting a purposive approach to the interpretation of paragraph
             135DB, I am in no doubt that the Respondent's  construction  is
             the correct one and I must therefore  dismiss  the  Appellant's
             appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules."

11. Reconsideration was ordered on the ground that  the  Immigration  Rules
    appeared to contain no express  provision  that  the  degree  to  which
    reference is made in paragraph 135DB(ii) be  one  obtained  during  the
    current student leave.

12. We heard submissions from Mrs Rothwell and Mr Gulvin on this issue, and
    we intend no disrespect to either of them if we say  simply  that  they
    expanded on the parties' positions as we have already stated them.

13. It is  undoubtedly  true  to  say  that,  taken  by  itself,  paragraph
    135DB(ii) does not express the requirement urged by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  But, as we pointed out at the hearing, that sub-paragraph needs
    to be taken in the context  of  the  paragraph  as  a  whole,  and  the
    paragraph as a whole needs to be taken in  the  context  of  the  Rules
    relating to highly skilled migrants as  a  whole.   If  one  reads  the
    paragraph as a whole, one sees from its opening words that  it  applies
    (only) to those who have leave to remain as students.  Within the group
    of those to whom the Rule applies, the first requirement  is  that  the
    applicant:-

      "(i)  entered the United Kingdom or was given leave to  remain  as  a
              student in accordance with  paragraphs  57  to  62  of  these
              Rules".

    Not all those who have leave as student are able  potentially  to  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 135DB: they can do so only if their leave
    was granted under the requirements of paragraphs 57 to 62.

14. We do not need to set out those paragraphs in  full.   The  substantive
    requirements relating to courses and level of studies are in  paragraph
    57(i)-(iii).  Leave will be granted or extended under paragraphs 57  to
    62 only to a person who proposes to attend a full-time degree course or
    a full-time course of another sort, in either case  at  an  institution
    falling  within  the  requirements  of  paragraph  57(i).    When   the
    requirements of paragraph 57(i)-(iii)  are  read  in  conjunction  with
    paragraph 135DB(ii), the meaning of the latter becomes clear.  In order
    to qualify under paragraph 135DB at all,  the  appellant's  leave  must
    have been granted in accordance with the  substantive  requirements  of
    paragraph 57; paragraph 135DB(ii) is intended in that context merely to
    exclude those whose admission or extension of leave as  a  student  was
    for a course below degree level.  It  appears  to  us  that,  when  the
    requirements of paragraph 135DB are taken as a whole, the Secretary  of
    State's reading of sub-paragraph (ii) is strongly supported.

15. What, then, of the argument that a person like  the  appellant  may  be
    much better qualified than a new graduate, and might  therefore  expect
    to be more easily able to join the Highly  Skilled  Migrant  Programme?
    Here we must look at the Rules relating to the Programme  as  a  whole.
    The paragraph with which we are concerned does not relate to entry as a
    highly skilled migrant, but to "switching".  The Secretary of State has
    an interest in preventing abuse of entry and entry clearance procedures
    and does so by restricting the ability of those who have been  admitted
    for one purpose to obtain leave to remain  for  another  purpose.   (We
    should emphasise that we do not suggest any attempt  at  abuse  by  the
    present appellant: we are concerned  with  the  interpretation  of  the
    Rules.)

16. The purpose of the Highly Skilled Migrant Programme is set out in  part
    of an official government website as follows:-

        "The Programme is  designed  to  allow  highly  skilled  people  to
        migrate to the United Kingdom to look for work  or  self-employment
        opportunities."

    Other  guidance,  in  chapter  5,  section  11   of   the   Immigration
    Directorates' Instructions indicate that:-


        "In general, those seeking to remain in the UK as a highly  skilled
        migrant should have obtained the  correct  entry  clearance  before
        travelling to the UK.  However, the  Immigration  Rules  specify  a
        limited number of categories (listed below) from which  individuals
        may apply to switch into leave as a highly skilled migrant."

17. When the overall intention of the Programme in encouraging migration to
    the United Kingdom is added to the general need to prevent abuse, it is
    not at all surprising if the switching rules are  restrictive.   It  is
    not for us to reach a view on why  switching  from  certain  categories
    (e.g. working holiday-maker) is so much easier than from  others.   The
    point is that it cannot be  said  that  strict  switching  requirements
    interfere with the principal purpose of the Programme itself.

18. For the foregoing reasons we consider that  the  reading  of  paragraph
    135DB(ii) adopted by the Secretary of State is the correct one.  It  is
    the only  reading  which  makes  sense  in  the  context  of  paragraph
    135DB(i), and it is not contrary to the  purpose  of  the  Rules.   The
    appellant does not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  135DB(ii)  as
    correctly  interpreted  and  accordingly  cannot  succeed   under   the
    Immigration Rules.

19. It is indeed difficult to see that the appellant meets the requirements
    of paragraph 135DB(i).  Although we are told that his  entry  clearance
    as a student was issued under paragraph 57, we have, as we  have  said,
    seen no details.  It is extremely difficult to see how the  appellant's
    postgraduate work, not forming any part of any course, could  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 57.  We are aware that the same could be said
    of much postgraduate  study.   We  take  it  that  although  the  entry
    clearance was for studies it was granted by an exercise  of  discretion
    outside the terms of paragraph 57.  Whether or not that is  so,  it  is
    clear to us that the appellant's leave was not "in accordance with  the
    requirements of paragraphs 57 to 62" and for that reason too he has  no
    claim under paragraph 135DB.

20. We have referred to the appellant's history.  When his solicitors  made
    the application for leave to remain on his behalf,  and  in  subsequent
    correspondence, they referred to that  history.   They  also  submitted
    that the appellant's existing UK degree  was  sufficient  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 135DB.  They further asked for  consideration
    on an exceptional basis outside the Rules if they were wrong  in  their
    interpretation of the Rules.  It looks as though the latter request was
    interpreted at the Home Office as a  request  to  grant  the  appellant
    leave to remain on humanitarian grounds because of his fears about  the
    situation in his home country.  It is in our  view  extremely  unlikely
    that the request was intended  in  that  sense.   The  solicitors  were
    evidently aware of the Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions,  which
    they have put before us.  At chapter 5 section 11 paragraph 4, we  find
    the following:

        "Where an application to switch into  leave  as  a  highly  skilled
        migrant does not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
        because the applicant does not have leave in a  relevant  category,
        the presumption is that the application should be  refused  on  the
        basis that there is no provision for the applicant to switch.


        However, as with all cases, caseworkers may grant leave outside the
        Immigration Rules but only in  compelling  personal  circumstances.
        Circumstances will be assessed by caseworkers on  a  case  by  case
        discretionary basis.


        For  the  purposes  of  such  an  assessment,  compelling  personal
        circumstances  are  defined  as  'circumstances  relating  to   the
        individual (rather than the  employment)  where  it  is  considered
        unduly harsh to expect the individual to leave the UK and apply for
        entry clearance in their own country'.


        Whilst treating each case on its merits, not all circumstances that
        relate to the individual will be deemed unduly harsh and  therefore
        compelling.  Examples of such circumstances and which would not  be
        deemed compelling include:


        ...


        Humanitarian grounds.  If there are humanitarian concerns involved,
        it is open to the applicant to seek leave to remain in  the  UK  in
        other more appropriate immigration categories for the  purposes  of
        HSMP."

21.  Reading  that,  no  competent  solicitors   would   have   asked   for
    consideration on an exceptional basis because of humanitarian  grounds.
    No doubt what was intended by the  request  was  consideration  on  the
    basis that, by any standards, the appellant was highly skilled and that
    if the precise terms of paragraph 135DB did not apply to  him,  he  was
    nevertheless a person who might well be allowed to remain in the United
    Kingdom on an analogous basis.  As we have said, it  does  appear  that
    his admission to the United Kingdom must have been only by analogy with
    the requirements of the student rules, and an argument could  certainly
    be made that the analogy should be continued.  Whether or not  that  is
    so, it is clear, and Mr Gulvin accepted, that the request  to  consider
    the case outside the Rules, on some such basis, was never  dealt  with,
    because it was misinterpreted as a request based purely on humanitarian
    grounds.  In those circumstances it seems to us that the  Secretary  of
    State has failed to comply with  the  terms  of  his  published  policy
    indicating that he will  consider  cases  where  there  are  compelling
    personal circumstances not amounting  to  humanitarian  grounds.   This
    point was technically before the Immigration Judge (it is ground  2  of
    the appellant's grounds of appeal) but he did not deal with it  because
    it was not he subject of any detailed submissions before him.  We  make
    no criticism of him for that but, as it turns out,  although  we  agree
    (albeit  for  slightly  different  reasons)  with  his  conclusion   on
    paragraph 135DB(ii), we consider that he materially  erred  in  law  in
    failing  to  deal  with  issues  arising  out  of   the   request   for
    consideration in accordance with the respondent's policy.

22.  The  appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.    We
    substitute a determination allowing his appeal  solely  on  the  ground
    that the Secretary of State erred in law in  failing  to  consider  the
    application for exceptional leave outside the Rules in accordance  with
    his policy.  This application therefore awaits a lawful decision.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

