

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                    Azia (proof of misconduct by judge) [2012] UKUT
00096(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 January 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                     Mr C.M.G. Ockelton, Vice President
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

                                   Between

                                 SANGAR AZIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse, instructed by Braitch R B Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Heath, Home Office Presenting Officer


A party alleging misconduct by a judge  needs  to  prove  it.   Parties  and
their representatives need to ensure that the evidence  is  collected  while
memories are fresh.  Permission to call evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal
may be refused where, in circumstances where a party has not acted  promptly
to prepare and disclose evidence, it would be unfair to the other party,  or
not in the interests of justice.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iraq, now aged nearly 20.  He arrived in
    the United Kingdom in 2008 and subsequently claimed asylum.  His  claim
    was refused.  He was granted  discretionary  leave  by  reason  of  his
    youth.  During the currency of that leave he applied for further leave,
    which was refused on 11 January 2011.

 2. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on grounds raising issues  under
    the Refugee Convention and the European Convention on Human  Rights  as
    well as his entitlement to a grant  of  humanitarian  protection.   His
    appeal came before an Immigration Judge on 25 February  2011.   At  the
    beginning of the hearing the Judge was asked to consider adjourning the
    hearing in order for the appellant to have  professional  help  from  a
    counsellor or others, but, noting that  previously  the  appellant  had
    refused such help, the Judge refused the adjournment.

 3. A question was then raised about a report from Dr  Alan  George,  which
    had been tendered in support of the appellant's case.   The  Presenting
    Officer observed that the report was evidently written for an  entirely
    different appellant.  Ms Meredith, counsel for the appellant, said that
    although that might be so, the passages referring to that appellant had
    been removed and the rest of the report should be admitted.  The  Judge
    declined to accede to that suggestion.  He pointed out some passages in
    the report that referred to  the  other  appellant  and  had  not  been
    removed, and noted that it did not appear that Dr George had given  any
    opinion on this appellant.

 4. The Judge then heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  submissions
    from both parties.  His determination was written on  the  day  of  the
    hearing.  The substantive issues are dealt with in paragraphs 6  -  14.
    He concluded that the appellant was entirely lacking in credibility.

 5. The final paragraph of the determination, paragraph 15, notes  that  Ms
    Meredith  (counsel  for  the  appellant)  had,  during   the   hearing,
    demonstrated that she was unhappy about  the  judge's  conduct  of  the
    hearing.  One particular matter that evidently arose was the length  of
    examination-in-chief of the appellant.  The  appellant  (who  has  been
    represented throughout by the  same  firm  of  solicitors,  Braitch  RB
    Solicitors of Wolverhampton) had been directed  to  file  and  serve  a
    witness statement to stand as evidence in chief at  the  hearing.   The
    determination notes that the Judge had  insisted  that  examination  in
    chief be terminated after it had lasted 25 minutes.

 6. The Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 7. There was then an application for permission to appeal.   The  grounds,
    signed by Ms Meredith, raise a substantial number of issues.  What  may
    be the most significant relate to the Immigration Judge's conduct.   In
    particular it is said (a) that he reached a view on credibility  before
    considering the evidence, as is apparent from the fact that his view on
    credibility is stated in the determination before  his  description  of
    the evidence; (b) that his  conduct  was  "inappropriate"  in  that  he
    intervened during the  evidence and curtailed  it,  and  prevented  the
    appellant from having a fair hearing, that the appellant was  in  tears
    for part of it, that the appellant was sometimes not allowed to  finish
    his  answers,  and  that  he  has  miscalculated  the  length  of   the
    examination in chief, which was  15  minutes;  (c)  that  he  gave  his
    decision on the adjournment  request  without  reasons,  supplying  the
    reasons only in the written determination.   The  grounds  also  assert
    that the Judge failed to take all the evidence into account  in  making
    his determination.

 8. The grounds of appeal are said to be  accompanied  by  counsel's  note.
    They were not so accompanied, and the note has never been  provided  to
    the Tribunal or (so far as we are aware) the Secretary of State.

 9. Permission was granted by a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who
    observed that counsel:

        "makes a number of allegations about the conduct of the  IJ  which,
        if true, are capable of amounting  to  a  material  error  of  law.
        These are grounds  which  may  or  may  not  be  true  but  warrant
        investigation."


    He granted permission on all grounds.  His decision is dated  25  March
    2011.  The Secretary of State served a response saying that she did not
    consider the grounds were made out.[1]

10.   No further information has been provided to the Tribunal  in  the  ten
    months since then.   Ms  Heath  told  us  at  the  hearing  that  those
    representing the appellant had written to the Presenting Officers' Unit
    stating that the only evidence to be relied upon was that in the bundle
    prepared for the hearing before the Immigration Judge.  The only  other
    relevant communication is  a  letter  from  the  solicitors     to  the
    Tribunal seeking a photocopy of the Judge's notes, which was  evidently
    sent to them, on whose authority we do not know.[2]

11.   Ms Hulse appeared on the appellant's behalf before us.   She  told  us
    that although she was not aware of the Secretary of State's response to
    the grant of permission, she proposed to establish the facts as to  the
    Judge's conduct by calling oral evidence.  She did not propose to  call
    Ms Meredith, who had kept a contemporaneous note.  She told us  that  a
    note had been made shortly after the hearing by an interpreter  engaged
    by the solicitors.  She had not  seen  the  note  and  no  attempt  had
    previously been made to serve it on  the  Secretary  of  State  or  the
    Tribunal.  She proposed to call the interpreter and a social worker who
    had been present during the hearing and had not made any note.  She was
    going to compile witness statements for these two witnesses and  tender
    them for cross-examination.

12. The Tribunal treats allegations made about the conduct of  judges  with
    the greatest seriousness.  It goes without saying that  if  grounds  of
    appeal, such as those raised in the present case, are  made  out,  they
    are very likely to cause a determination to be set aside.   But  it  is
    not sufficient to make the allegations: they must be  substantiated  in
    fact, and in a way that is in itself fair to all  interests,  including
    those of the respondent and of justice generally.

13. Ms Hulse had been instructed late and no doubt did what she could.  But
    it is quite clear that what was proposed was essentially unfair.  Those
    representing the appellant had for  a  long  time  had  access  to  the
    interpreter's note and (apparently) counsel's.   Instead of serving and
    filing them promptly they had kept them back, so as to enable  them  to
    be produced at a hearing at which (if what Ms Heath told us  is  right)
    they had indicated no such evidence was to be called.  They  apparently
    thought that Ms Hulse could present the case properly even  though  she
    too had not seen the interpreter's note and had had  no  indication  of
    what the evidence of either of the two witnesses might  be  or  whether
    the social worker could remember what had happened at the hearing.

14. This is not an appropriate way to conduct civil litigation and it is  a
    particularly inappropriate way  to  attempt  to  establish  grounds  of
    appeal relating to the alleged misconduct or inappropriate conduct of a
    judge, which, as Ms Hulse reminds us, is a matter of  importance  going
    beyond the outcome of an individual case.   Allegations  of  that  sort
    always need to be supported by evidence.   The  evidence  needs  to  be
    served on the respondent and filed with the Tribunal in good  time,  so
    that it can be properly considered.  It may  be  appropriate  for  this
    Tribunal to seek comments from the Judge.  The Secretary of State  will
    need to consider whether to call the Presenting Officer as a witness if
    she considers that the allegations are groundless.  None of this can be
    done if the evidence is not made  available  well  in  advance  of  the
    hearing.

15. Directions may  be  given,  but  they  should  not  be  necessary.  [3]
    Solicitors who allege that a judge has behaved improperly  should  know
    that they need to support the allegation with evidence, and  should  be
    prompt in bringing the evidence to the attention of  the  Tribunal  and
    the respondent.  They are likely to want to seek an  early  hearing  of
    the matter, before memories fade.  They are likely to ensure  that  any
    prospective witnesses make a note at the earliest possible opportunity.
     A contested trial of fact about what happened at  a  previous  hearing
    may be necessary, but it can in some cases be avoided  if  all  parties
    and the Tribunal are made aware of the strength of the case if it is  a
    strong one.  Conversely, failure to  prosecute  the  case,  failure  to
    serve evidence, and reliance upon a witness who did not make a note  in
    preference to a witness who did, may well indicate that a case  is  not
    strong.

16. In the present case it seems to us that the grounds we have  summarised
    at (a) and (c) in paragraph 7 above can have no merit.  The  statement,
    in a decision, of the decision itself before the reasons  is  obviously
    entirely unobjectionable.  A Judge does not make his decision  in  real
    time as he writes or speaks his judgement: he makes  the  decision  and
    then gives it, with reasons.  And although reasons need  to  be  given,
    there is no general rule that reasons for a procedural or interlocutory
    decision have to be given to the parties at the time  the  decision  is
    made.

17. So  far  as  concerns  the  other  grounds,  despite  Ms  Hulse's  best
    endeavours, we are entirely unpersuaded that she should be  allowed  to
    call her evidence in the circumstances we have recorded.   We  formally
    refuse permission for it to be adduced, for the reasons above.

18. It follows that the Immigration  Judge  is  not  shown  to  have  acted
    improperly.  But it is clear that  there  were,  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing, concerns about the appellant and his  ability  to  do  himself
    justice.  The Judge decided to ignore those concerns on  the  basis  of
    the material before him.  We make no comment on that, evidently  it  is
    clear that the judgements he did made on the substance  of  the  appeal
    and on the appellant's credibility would have to be seen in that light.



19. Ms Hulse, after receiving the undertaking from Ms  Heath  to  which  we
    refer below, and after  taking  instructions,  told  us  that  she  was
    content for us to determine this appeal on the lines  set  out  in  the
    preceding paragraph and dismiss it.

20. The  appellant  is  now  undergoing  counselling  and  has  the  active
    assistance of social workers.  It may well be that he will wish to  put
    further material before the Secretary of State.  On  the  Secretary  of
    State's behalf Ms Heath undertakes that if a fresh claim  supported  by
    new evidence from social workers, psychiatrists or counsellors  is  put
    before the Secretary of State within three months of 25 January 2012 it
    will be considered and, if the refusal is maintained, will  be  treated
    as a fresh claim giving rise to a new appealable decision.

21. For the foregoing reasons, however, this appeal is dismissed.





                                       Signed




                                            C M G OCKELTON
                                                    Vice President of the
                           Upper Tribunal
                                        Immigration and Asylum Chamber




-----------------------
[1] The appellant's solicitors state that they have never received this
response.
[2] There is said to have been some correspondence, including a letter of
13 April 2011 indication that reliance would be placed on various items of
evidence. None of these were served at that time or later on the Tribunal
or the respondent.
[3] In the present case, directions were given, which perhaps unwisely were
confined to the procedure after any error of law had been established.

