

|Heard at: Field House with |        |LJ (Prison conditions-no    |
|Video link with IAA        |        |risk) China [2005] UKIAT    |
|Manchester                 |        |00099                       |
|On 24 February 2005        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|10th May 2005                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Vice President)                                    |
|Mr C H Bennett                                                    |
|Ms P L Ravenscroft                                                |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    Li Hong Jie (Mr L) was born on 9 January 1980.   He is a  national  of
      China.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  29  March  2000.    He
      subsequently (the papers do not indicate  the  precise  date)  claimed
      asylum.  The substance of his claim as put to the Secretary  of  State
      (at interview on 27 June 2000) was to the following effect.

      (a)   He had lived Tan Tou in the province of Fujian.    His solicitor
           had lived at Show Wu - also in the province of  Fujian.     Show
           Wu had been c.20 km from Tan Tou.

      (b)   In c.June 1999, family planning officers had visited his  sister
           and had required her to  produce  documentary  evidence  showing
           that she had been sterilised.  She had been unable to produce  a
           document to that effect.    She had therefore been told that she
           was required to pay a fine.   He had been unwilling to  pay  the
           fine.   The officials had then stated that they would  move  her
           refrigerator in lieu of payment.

      (c)   He (Mr L) had been present at the time.    Strong words had been
           spoken.  One of the family planning officials  had  kicked  him.
           He had seized the leg of one of the  officials.   That  official
           had fallen and struck his head.   The other officials  had  gone
           to assist.   His sister had told him (Mr L) to make his escape.

      (d)   He had hidden with friends for "several months" in Show Wu.   He
           had feared that he might be found.   He had heard  that  another
           man who had  come  to  the  attention  of  the  family  planning
           official had been seriously maltreated - so badly that he  (that
           man) had suffered a serious injury to his kidneys.   He had also
           been informed that, if arrested, he might be sentenced to  three
           years imprisonment.   He had therefore decided to leave China.

      (e)   His father had raised the necessary money.    A  false  passport
           (in the name of Chen Chang Hwei) had been obtained by  making  a
           corrupt payment.  He had travelled via  Russia  and  Azerbaijan.
           From Azerbaijan,  he  had  travelled  (by  air)  to  the  United
           Kingdom.

      (f)   He believed that he was still "wanted" in China.   The  brother-
           in-law of the official whose leg  he  had  seized  and  who  had
           fallen, had been a member of an organisation named "110".    The
           "110" organisation was more powerful  than  the  police.     The
           police and the "110" were looking for him.

      (g)    His  father  had  attempted  to  resolve   matters   with   the
           authorities.   But they had been "angry and unreasonable".

      (h)   He had no criminal convictions in China.   Nor  had  he  been  a
           member of a  political  party.   Apart  from  his  grandfather's
           brother, who had been exiled to the North of China in  c.1984  -
           1986, no members of his family had been  involved  in  political
           activity or had faced persecution.

      At the conclusion  of  his  interview,  Mr  L  requested  that  he  be
      permitted to remain for three years.   He then indicated:

           "Then my record would be clear, in China -  it  is  written  off
           after three years - and I would be able to return to my father."

2.     On  22  November  2000,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  Mr   L's
      application.  In consequence, on 15 October 2001,  Mr  L  was  refused
      leave to enter the  United  Kingdom.    The  notice  of  the  decision
      indicated that it was proposed to give directions for his  removal  to
      China.

3.    On 18 October 2001, Immigration Advisory Service (IAS) gave notice  of
      appeal and served a Statement of Additional Grounds under s.74 of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on Mr  L's  behalf.    In  them,  they
      asserted (in summary) that the removal of Mr L, in consequence of  his
      having been refused leave to enter, would involve the  United  Kingdom
      in breaches of its obligations under:

      (a)   the 1951 Refugee Convention, and

      (b)   Arts.3, 4, 6, 9, 10 and 11 of the European Convention  on  Human
           Rights.

4.    On 17 November 2003, IAS informed the Secretary of State that  it  was
      no longer representing Mr L.

5.    Mr L's appeal was heard by an Adjudicator, J S  Fountain  esq,  on  20
      February 2004.   Neither Mr L nor any representative of the  Secretary
      of State was present at  the  hearing.    The  hearing  was  a  "first
      hearing".    The reply form (ADJ62) to the  standard  form  directions
      had not been returned.    There was no explanation before Mr  Fountain
      or Mr L's absence.  He concluded that he was bound by  Rule  44(1)  of
      the Immigration and Asylum (Procedure) Rules  2003  to  determine  the
      appeal in Mr L's absence.

6.    By his determination  (promulgated  on  16  March  2004)  Mr  Fountain
      dismissed Mr L's appeal on "asylum" grounds but allowed it  on  "human
      rights" grounds.   He concluded:

      (a)   ".... the scenario set by [Mr L] in his  evidence  is  plausible
           (see para.16.3),

      (b)   Mr L was at risk to a sentence of  imprisonment  for  assaulting
           the  family  planning  official  and  for  having   left   China
           unlawfully, and that


      (c)   (in reliance on paragraph  5.44  of  the  then  current  Country
           Assessment (October 2003), there was a real risk that  he  would
           be subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  on
           return to China by reason of the conditions obtaining in Chinese
           prisons.


      He quoted paragraph 5.44 in the following terms:

           "The US State  Department  Report  for  Year  2001  states  that
           conditions in both the  prison  system  and  the  administrative
           detention  facilities  are  'harsh  and  frequently  degrading'.
           Facilities are often overcrowded, with poor sanitation and of  a
           poor constructional quality.   Prisoners often  rely  upon  food
           and  medicine  supplements  from  relatives,  with  a  very  low
           standard of medical care available.   Prison  discipline  relies
           upon  guards  appointing  'cell  bosses'  with  many   attendant
           abuses."

7.    The Secretary of State gave notice of  appeal  against  Mr  Fountain's
      determination.   Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Miss  K  Eshun
      (Vice President) by a determination dated 23 June 2004.   In  granting
      permission to appeal, Miss Eshun wrote as follows:

           "[Mr Fountain] dismissed [Mr L's] asylum appeal.    However,  he
           allowed the appeal under Art.3 of the ECHR (paragraph  17.2)  on
           the basis that [Mr L] will face a prison sentence in  China  and
           that the prison conditions are such that  he  is  likely  to  be
           subjected to degrading treatment sufficiently serious to  engage
           Art.3... I am granting leave so that the Tribunal  can  consider
           whether prison  conditions  in  China  reach  the  threshold  of
           Art.3."

8.    Because Mr Fountain's appeal was promulgated on 16  March  2004  (i.e.
      after 8 June 2003), the provisions of  s.101(1)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 apply to  this  appeal.    That  means
      that, if the Secretary of  State's  appeal  is  to  succeed,  he  must
      establish  that  there  is  an  error  of   law   in   Mr   Fountain's
      determination.

9.    Notice of the time and place of the hearing of the appeal was sent  to
      Mr L by first class post, at 7 Tonge Moor  Road,  Bolton,  Lancashire,
      BL2 2DH, the address which had been given for him  in  the  notice  of
      appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision,  his  last  known
      address.   Regrettably, the date on which  the  notice  was  sent  has
      (quite plainly) been wrongly stated as being "19/2/4".    That  cannot
      be correct - because (as indicated above) Miss Eshun's grant of  leave
      was not made until 23 June 2004 and the  hearing  before  Mr  Fountain
      took place on 20 February 2004.   Nor can it, as a matter of  reality,
      have been 19 February 2005 - because that day was a  Saturday  and  we
      are aware the Tribunal staff do not  work  on  Saturdays.    The  file
      cover shows that, after the grant of leave by Miss Eshun,  (the  file)
      was sent to the Tribunal Listing Section on 7  July  2004  and  to  HH
      (which we understand to be "Hearing  Hold"  on  19  July  2004).   Our
      conclusion is that the date of issue given on  the  file  copy  is  an
      error for 19 July 2004.  In these circumstances, we are satisfied that
      the notice of the time and place of  the  hearing  had  been  properly
      served on Mr L.

10.   When the appeal was called on  for  hearing,  neither  Mr  L  nor  any
      person on his behalf appeared.   There  was  no  explanation  for  his
      absence.   Because we were satisfied that:

      (a)   the date, time and place of the hearing had been sent to Mr L at
           his last known address, and

      (b)    there  was  no  explanation,  and  therefore  no   satisfactory
           explanation, for his absence,

      we were required by the  mandatory,  provisions  of  Rule  44  of  the
      Immigration Asylum and Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003  to  determine
      this appeal in Mr L's absence.

11.   With very greatest of  respect  to  him,  we  are  satisfied  that  Mr
      Fountain's determination is vitiated by the following errors in law.

      (a)   He did not make clear factual findings - at least, by  reference
           to the correct standard  of  proof  (reasonable  likelihood)  in
           relation to Mr L's evidence as to the events which  occurred  in
           China.   What he wrote (paragraph 16.3) was as follows:

                 "Accordingly based on the background  evidence  it  can  be
                 seen that the scenario set by [Mr L]  in  his  evidence  is
                 plausible." [emphasis added].

           He did not go on (expressly) to conclude that the account passed
           the test  of  reasonable  likelihood.   Whether  an  account  is
           "plausible" is not the same as whether it is  reasonably  likely
           to be true.

      (b)   Let it now be assumed that Mr Fountain's conclusion that Mr  L's
           evidence was "plausible" is to be treated as being a  conclusion
           that it was reasonably likely to be true.  That  conclusion  was
           not open to him on  the  evidence  before  him.   There  was  no
           positive evidence before Mr Fountain that Mr L's sister had  any
           children - let alone that she had more  than  one  child.    The
           only evidence before him was that  contained  in  the  notes  of
           interview.   All that Mr L had stated at interview was that  his
           sister had been required to produce a document to vouch that she
           had been sterilised and that she did not do so.   There  was  no
           evidence before Mr Fountain to support the proposition,  and  we
           are not satisfied, that  it  was  the  practice  of  the  family
           planning authorities in Fujian in c.1999 (or at any other  time)
           either to impose fines on women who were unable to  produce,  on
           demand, documents vouching that they had been sterilised  or  to
           seize the personal effects of women who  had  been  required  to
           produce such documents and had failed to do  so.    The  account
           given by Mr L did  not  indicate  whether  the  demand  for  the
           document, the failure to produce it, the imposition of the  fine
           and the attempted seizure of  the  refrigerator  had  all  taken
           place on the same day or whether there had been any, and  if  so
           what, lapse of time  between  those  various  things  occurring.
           Paragraph 6.353 of the Country Assessment (October 2003)  -  the
           edition which was before Mr Fountain - indicated as follows.


                 "For differing reasons, most authorities agree that  Fujian
                 province is lax in implementing the birth control policies.
                  The authorities work  by  incentive  schemes  rather  than
                 coercion, with forced abortion and sterilisation no  longer
                 tolerated and efforts to increase  the  professionalism  of
                 family planning workers.    Enforcement  of  sanctions  has
                 proved effective; one third of families have three children
                 or more."


           The sources of information contained in that  paragraph  (6.353)
           are identified as being reports from  the  Canadian  Immigration
           and Refuge Board in June 1999 and March 2000.   The  information
           is, we are satisfied, contemporaneous if the event  asserted  by
           Mr L. What is stated in  that  paragraph  renders  it  the  less
           likely that  what  Mr  L  stated  had  occurred.    Although  Mr
           Fountain referred to the contents of  paragraph  6.353,  we  are
           satisfied, that in reaching his conclusion that Mr L's  evidence
           was  "plausible",  the  fail  will  give  any  weight  to   that
           paragraph.


      (c)   In reaching his conclusion that Mr L's evidence  was   plausible
           and the conclusion which we assume him to have made, namely that
           it was reasonably  likely  to  be  true,  Mr  Fountain  gave  no
           consideration to the fact that Mr L had not attended the hearing
           and  had  given  no  explanation  (let  alone   a   satisfactory
           explanation) for his absence.  He  had  therefore  not  had  the
           opportunity of observing Mr L or hearing him give his evidence -
           let alone observing how he dealt with  any  questions  aimed  at
           elucidating his evidence or testing its  validity  (we  have  in
           mind that the Secretary of State  was  not  represented  at  the
           hearing - but that would not have prevented Mr Fountain, or  any
           other Adjudicator, from asking appropriate questions of Mr L  to
           elucidate his account or to test it).  If  Mr  L  had  genuinely
           been in fear either  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  on  his
           return, it is to be expected that he  would  have  attended  the
           hearing and given oral evidence.   His failure to do so, in  the
           absence of a good reason, ought  to  have  been  considered  and
           taken into account by Mr Fountain.  He  should  have  considered
           whether it was  appropriate  to  discount  Mr  L's  evidence  on
           account of his absence.    But he did not do so.


       (d)  Mr Fountain's conclusions that Mr L was reasonably likely to  be
           subjected to degrading treatment in prison in China was based on
           his conclusion that he (Mr L) would be imprisoned on his  return
           (either on account of his having assaulted the  family  planning
           official) or because he had left China without lawful  authority
           - and the extract from the Country Assessment  (paragraph  5.44)
           which we have set out above.   The relevant part of the  extract
           from the Country Assessment was  the  first  sentence  i.e.  the
           indication that the US State  Department  Report  had  indicated
           that the conditions in the prisons and administrative  detention
           facilities were "harsh and frequently degrading".  Mr Fountain's
           logic, in reality, leads to this result, namely that no  Chinese
           national who left China unlawfully and/or who had been  involved
           in a  minor assault  on  an  official  of  the  family  planning
           authority.  Could be removed to  China  by  the  United  Kingdom
           without the United Kingdom being in breach  of  its  obligations
           under Art.3 of the  ECHR.   We  do  not  consider  that  such  a
           conclusion, or Mr Fountain's conclusion in this particular case,
           was properly open to  him  or  that  he  could  reasonably  have
           reached that conclusion on the basis of the above  extract  from
           the October 2003 Country Assessment.   Before  reaching  such  a
           conclusion, it would have been necessary to  have  significantly
           more detailed evidence as to:


           1.    the frequency with which prisoners in China are  subjected
                 to degrading treatment and/or the numbers or percentages of
                 prisoners in  any  one  year  who  are  subjected  to  such
                 treatment,


           2.    the history, circumstances and lengths of sentences -  and
                 the  nature  of  the  offences  of  which  they  have  been
                 convicted - of the prisoners who  have  been  subjected  to
                 degrading treatment whilst in custody in China, and


           3.    the length of any sentence of imprisonment (as opposed  to
                 the maximum sentence) which is likely to be imposed on  the
                 individual concerned (in this case, Mr L) for  the  offence
                 or offences in respect of which it is said that  he  is  at
                 risk to imprisonment,


           Both in China generally and in Fujian (Mr  L's  home  province).
           Mr Fountain did not consider the length of sentence (if a prison
           sentence was imposed at all) which was reasonably likely  to  be
           imposed on Mr L for his offence or offences and if so whether  a
           prisoner serving a sentence of that length of time for  offences
           of the nature of which  he  had  been  convicted  is  reasonably
           likely to be subjected to degrading treatment  in  either  China
           generally or in Fujian or any other part of China where for  any
           such sentence was reasonably likely to be imposed or served.  In
           relation to this, it was said by the Tribunal in TC  (One  Child
           Policy - Prison Conditions) China  [2004]  UKIAT  00138,  as  to
           which, see below, is of assistance as indicating the approach to
           be adopted in cases involving the risk  of  human  of  degrading
           treatment  or   punishment   in   person's   in   China.    That
           determination had not been  promulgated  at  the  time  when  Mr
           Fountain gave his determination.   We  do  therefore  cite  that
           determination, in this context, as indicated because Mr Fountain
           did not refer to  that  determination  or  follow  the  approach
           adopted in it,  he  erred  in  law.    The  importance  of  that
           determination in this context is that it indicates the  approach
           which could be adopted in this category of case.

      Mr Fountain does not appear to have placed any weight on  Mr  L's  own
      evidence that after three years his record would be "clear in  China",
      that his offence would be "written off" and that he would be  able  to
      return in safety.   Whilst that was  simply  Mr  L's  opinion,  as  Mr
      Fountain was willing to accept Mr L's evidence as  to  the  events  in
      China at face value (and without being  seen  or  hear  him  give  his
      evidence), it is, to say the least, surprising that he made no mention
      of this aspect of his evidence.   Our conclusion above is not based on
      this point.

12.   As Mr Fountain's determination is vitiated  by  the  above  errors  in
      law, we must ourselves determine this  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
      evidence put before us - and by reference to the  facts,  matters  and
      circumstances currently obtaining.

13.   We are not satisfied of the truth or accuracy of what Mr L  stated  at
      interview.   Nor are we able to place any significant  weight  on  it.
      We reach those conclusions for the following reasons.

      (a)   Mr L did not attend  the  hearing  before  us.    There  was  no
           explanation for his absence.   Nor, as we have indicated, did he
           attend  the  hearing  before  Mr  Fountain.     There   was   no
           explanation for his absence then.   If he had genuinely been  in
           fear, either of persecution or  being  subjected  to  a  serious
           breach of his human rights on return  to  China,  it  is  to  be
           expected that he would have  attended  the  hearings  before  Mr
           Fountain and before us - and would  have  kept  the  Immigration
           Appellate Authority aware of his address (if he moved from place
           to place).

      (b)   For the reasons which we have given in paragraph 11(b),  we  are
           not satisfied that the account of which Mr L gave  accords  with
           known fact the evidence relating to the family or  the  planning
           policy and the manner in which it  was  operated  in  Fujian  in
           c.1999.

14.   Because we are not satisfied of the truth or accuracy  of  what  Mr  L
      stated at interview and because we are unable to place any  weight  on
      what he stated, we are  not  satisfied  that  there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood that he is of interest  to  the  authorities  in  China  on
      account of the matters which he stated had caused him to leave or that
      he will be persecuted or subjected to inhuman or  degrading  treatment
      or punishment on his return on that account.

15.   We are not satisfied that, if  returned  to  China  now,  there  is  a
      reasonable likelihood that Mr L would be imprisoned or, if imprisoned,
      that he would be imprisoned in circumstances which would  involve  his
      being subjected to inhuman or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  on
      account of his having left China unlawfully.  We reach that conclusion
      for the following reasons.

      (a)   No positive  evidence  was  placed  before  us  to  support  the
           proposition, and we are not satisfied, that any  persons  either
           whose history and circumstances were comparable with those of Mr
           L (or those which he asserted to  be  his)  and  who  have  been
           returned to China within the past 12 months have been  subjected
           to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment for having  left
           China unlawfully either at all or in such numbers or  with  such
           frequency as to indicate that there is a  reasonable  likelihood
           of any of those things happening to him (Mr L).   If persons who
           were returned were reasonably likely to be subjected to  inhuman
           or degrading treatment or punishment on that account, it  is  to
           be expected that report of that having occurred in  other  cases
           have  come  to  the  attention  of  bodies   such   as   Amnesty
           International, Human Rights  Watch  -  and  have  been  included
           either in  the  US  State  Department  Report  by  the  Canadian
           Immigration  and  Refugee  Board   Reports   and   the   Country
           Assessment.  No such reports were placed  before  us.    We  are
           therefore not satisfied that any such thing has happened in  any
           comparable cases in such numbers or with such  frequency  as  to
           indicate that there is a reasonable likelihood of that occurring
           in Mr L's case.

      (b)   The Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board (9  August  2000)  is
           cited in paragraph  6.187  of  the  Country  Assessment  in  the
           following terms.

           "Leaving China without  exit  permission  or  a  passport  is  a
           criminal offence in China punishable of [sic] up to one year  in
           prison.  Only repeat offenders would get a sentence  approaching
           the maximum.  Most  first  time  offenders  would  get  a  short
           sentence, depending on  the  circumstances  of  their  case  but
           probably with sentences of 3 months."


           The same report also stated (see paragraph 6.188 of the  Country
           Assessment) as follows:


           "The detention centre [in Fuzhou] is a rectangular,  four  story
           building with a large enclosed courtyard.  It can accommodate  a
           maximum of 100 detainees.  The cells are all around the building
           with recreation facilities  such  as  ping  pong  table  in  the
           courtyard.  On the first floor,  there  are  several  rooms  for
           questioning deportees.  Those rooms  are  fairly  small  with  a
           plexiglass divider separating the detainee and the  interviewer.
           We recognized one of the deportees of  the  previous  day  being
           questioned as we walked by.  Each cell can accommodate up to 10-
           12 people.  The  cells  are  large  rectangular  rooms  with  an
           elevated floor on each side where mattresses are  set  at  night
           and rolled up during the day.  Each cell has it's own  bathroom,
           television, and window.  From what we  could  see  most  of  the
           inmates were sleeping, watching television or playing cards.   A
           larger room is used as a cafeteria and "re-education" room.  The
           whole  determination  centre  is  very  clean  and  the   living
           conditions did not  appear  to  be  particularly  harsh,  almost
           comparable to the equivalent in Canada."  (Based on  information
           supplied by a Programe Analyst with Citizenship and  Immigration
           Canada - CIC and related  to  the  repatriation  of  90  Chinese
           illegal emigrants from Canada to Fuzhou in May 2000)."


           Paragraph 6.189 indicates that what  was  stated  in  the  above
           extract was considered still  to  be  accurate  in  April  2003.
           Paragraph 6.190 cites the US State  Department  Report  2003  as
           indicating that  first  offenders  for  illegal  emigration,  on
           repatriation, sometimes faced fines  and  that  after  a  second
           repatriation  "could  be  sentenced   to   re-education   labour
           through".  Paragraph 6.182 gives no support to  the  proposition
           that those unable to pay fines are imprisoned.  It quotes  Art.3
           of the Chinese Criminal Code in the following terms:


                       "The fine  is  to  be  paid  in  a  lump  sum  or  in
                       instalments in the period specified in the  judgment.




                       Upon the exploration of the period, one who  has  not
                       paid is to be compelled to pay.    Where  the  person
                       sentenced is unable to pay  the  fine  in  full,  the
                       people's court may collect


                       whenever he is  found  in  possession  of  executable
                       [sic] property.


                       if a person truly has difficulties in paying  because
                       he has suffered irresistible calamity,  consideration
                       may be given according to  the  circumstances  as  to
                       granting him a reduction or exemption."


      There is no indication that imprisonment for those unable  to  pay  is
      either the normal course or reasonably likely to be imposed.


      (c)   What we say in paragraph 16 (below) applies.

16.   Let it now be supposed that, contrary to our conclusion  above,  there
      is a reasonable likelihood that Mr L will be prosecuted, convicted and
      sentenced to a term of imprisonment for assaulting the official of the
      family planning authority.   We are not  satisfied  that  either,  for
      that alone or that taken in conjunction with any  liability  which  he
      may have for punishment as a person who left China unlawfully, Mr L is
      reasonably likely to be subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment or
      punishment.  Our reasons for reaching that conclusion are as  follows.



      (a)   What we have said in paragraphs 11(b) and (d) and  15   applies.



      (b)   In TC (One Child Policy - Prison Conditions) China (above),  the
           Tribunal considered the risk of a person returned to China being
           subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  where
           that individual had assaulted a police  officer  (in  connection
           with the family planning  policy)  and  left  China  unlawfully.
           Having set out  paragraph  5.44  of  the  October  2003  Country
           Assessment the Tribunal notes (paragraph 12) as follows:


                 "Similar conditions are found in the  systems  which  exist
                 for administrative  detention.   This  same  report  refers
                 elsewhere to concerns about the torture and mistreatment of
                 detainees (6.1), although it also records  steps  taken  to
                 improve  police  practices  and  introduce  further   legal
                 reforms.  At 6.8 it is stated that an Amnesty International
                 (AI) report  of  February  2001  alleged  that  torture  is
                 widespread  and  systematic  in  PRC.   Further  paragraphs
                 record ongoing AI concerns.  However, we note that  the  AI
                 report does not indicate what proportion  of  prisoners  in
                 China are estimated as experiencing  ill-treatment.   Given
                 that China is one of the most populated  countries  in  the
                 world, this constitutes a significant lacuna.  We come back
                 to the need, in order to be satisfied there is a real risk,
                 for  the  objective  evidence  considered  as  a  whole  to
                 demonstrate a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass
                 violations of the human rights of prisoners.  If there  was
                 such a consistent pattern, we would  expect  to  find  more
                 evidence than there is of the scale and frequency of  human
                 rights abuses against prisoners in China."


           The Tribunal therefore concluded that, even though there  was  a
           risk that the appellant  would  be  imprisoned  on  return,  his
           return would not involve the United Kingdom in a breach  of  its
           obligations under Art.3.


      (c)   Paragraph 5.64 of the Country Assessment (October 2004) contains
           the following extract from the Dui Hua  Foundation's  newsletter
           (Autumn 2003).


                 "On September 15, 2003, The Dui Hua Foundation's  executive
                 director John Kamm was given a comprehensive tour of Xiamen
                 Prison in Fujian Province, accompanied  by  representatives
                 of the Ministry of Justice and the Fujian  Province  Prison
                 Administration Bureau.  This was the first full tour  of  a
                 prison by a foreigner-Kamm viewed all  sections,  including
                 the rarely visited  solitary  confinement  cells-since  the
                 government declared the official end to  the  SARS  crisis.
                 The visit also  marked  the  first  time  a  foreigner  was
                 granted access to  Xiamen  Prison.   Established  in  1998,
                 Xiamen Prison is a provincial-level "Civilized  and  Modern
                 Prison," meaning that it is considered among  the  best  in
                 the province.  It occupies a 16-acre  site  in  the  Dongan
                 District of Xiamen Municipality.   Its  2,000  inmates  are
                 housed in  three  cell  blocks  and  are  watched  over  by
                 approximately 200 prison staff.  Sixteen  prisoners  occupy
                 each cell.  There are 10 cells per section and six sections
                 per  cell  block.   Xiamen  Prison  only  houses  prisoners
                 sentenced to fixed terms... Medical care  in  the  prison's
                 clinic is provided free of charge.  There is  20,000-volume
                 library and a  prison  newspaper  to  which  prisoners  can
                 contribute articles.  Each cell has a TV that is turned  on
                 for one hour each evening."


           Paragraph  5.62  indicates  that  there  are  other,  comparable
           prisons, in China.  We do not assume that the sentence which  Mr
           L would serve (making the above assumption) would be  served  in
           the Xiamen Prison.    We do not assume that the  sentence  which
           Mr L would serve (making the above assumption) would  be  served
           in the Xiamen Prison or in any comparable prison.  The existence
           of prisons of that kind in China (and  in  Fujian)  demonstrates
           that what was stated in the US State  Department  Report  (2001)
           paragraph 5.44 of October 2003 Country Assessment  (repeated  in
           paragraph 5.57 of the October 2004 edition) is not of  universal
           application.   It gives no support to the proposition that there
           is a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of
           the human rights of prisoners.


17.   In the light of the foregoing, we do  not  agree  with  Mr  Fountain's
      conclusions.   The Secretary of State's appeal against  Mr  Fountain's
      determination is therefore allowed.



                               CHARLES BENNETT


