
FB (Lone women - PSG - internal relocation - AA (Uganda) considered) Sierra
Leone [2008] UKAIT 00090

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
On 19 June and 23 July 2008

                                   Before:

                       Senior Immigration Judge Jordan
                       Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis
                              Mr F. T. Jamieson


Between:
                                     FB
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT






For the Appellant:     Ms K. Cronin, counsel, instructed by Brighton
                       Housing Trust Immigration Legal Service
For the Respondent:          Mr P. Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


1. Given the pervasive influence of the Bondo  societies  in  Sierra  Leone,
the inferior position of most women in that country and  the  relative  lack
of support provided by the community, a woman who has undergone FGM but  who
has opposed traditional  practices  is  capable  of  being  a  member  of  a
particular social group for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.

2. Although the appellant faces a specific risk in her home  area  of  being
forced to be a sowei and of being forced into marriage, in  general  members
of the Bondo societies fall  short  of  adopting  a  positively  hostile  or
combatant attitude to non-adherents of Bondo principles and avoid  targeting
them.  The treatment faced by the minority is not persecutory.

 3. The Court of Appeal's decision in AA (Uganda) v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
579 is not authority for a wider  proposition  that  lone  women  cannot  be
returned to Uganda or, indeed,  any  other  specific  country.   Nor  is  it
support for the proposition that it is unduly harsh to expect lone women  to
relocate to the capital city of their country of origin or any  other  large
urban centre.  Rather, it is a re-affirmation, in line with AH (Sudan)  that
such relocation must be reasonable, in other words, that it  must  not  have
such consequences upon the individual as to be unduly  harsh  for  her.   If
survival comes at a cost of destitution,  beggary,  crime  or  prostitution,
then that is a price too high.

4. There is a significant  migration  to  Freetown  from  rural  areas.  For
migrants to Freetown, those with the ability to access  support  would  face
no  risk.   Such  support  mechanisms  might   include   family   or   other
connections, support  mechanisms  from  other  groups,  such  as  the  Bondo
societies and support from a local mosque or church.  There  is  however  no
compelling evidence that these support mechanisms  are  the  sole  means  of
eliminating the risk of  destitution  and  its  corollary  of  the  risk  of
beggary, recourse to crime or prostitution.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Introduction and immigration history


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who  was  born  on  3  June
      1987.   She is 21 years old.  She pursues  the  reconsideration  of  a
      determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mr  J.C.  Boyd,  as  he  then  was,
      promulgated on 13 December 2004 in which he dismissed the  appellant's
      appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State,  refusing  her
      claim on asylum grounds.


   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 February  2004.   She
      was then just 16 years old.  Limited leave to remain was granted until
      2 June 2005, the eve of her 18th  birthday.   On  12  March  2004  her
      asylum claim was refused and this gave rise to a right of appeal,  the
      so-called 'upgrade'  appeal  under  section  83  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 limiting the nature and scope  of  the
      reconsideration before us to a  consideration  of  her  asylum  claim.
      Accordingly,  there  is  no  outstanding  appeal   under   the   ECHR,
      notwithstanding the fact that the appellant's limited  leave  has  now
      expired.  In the context of this appeal the Convention reason advanced
      by the appellant is that she fears harm by reason of her membership of
      a particular social group.

The claim

   3. The primary facts of this  appeal  are  not  in  dispute  because  the
      Adjudicator  found  the  appellant's  claim  entirely  credible.   The
      appellant lived in Bankala village with her parents and brothers.  Her
      father was a farmer who was killed in 1999 during the civil war.   The
      appellant's mother was a sowei (a leader of the Sande or Bondo  women,
      these being interchangeable terms) in the village and one of the Bondo
      women who carried out the ritual circumcision of young girls.

   4. When the appellant was aged about 16, she underwent FGM  which  caused
      her great pain and distress.  She spent about five days recovering  in
      a nearby village during which time she was told that  her  mother  had
      died.  She was also told that she was to replace her mother as  sowei.
      On her return to the village, she voiced her reluctance to  the  local
      chief but he insisted that she went through  the  further  rituals  to
      become a sowei, after which he would take her to be his wife.  He  was
      a much older man who already had four wives and the appellant did  not
      wish to marry him.  She decided to run away from  the  village,  which
      was about an hour's walk away from Wonkiefor, whence she travelled  by
      truck to a larger town.  There she met a man called Mr S,  who  was  a
      friend of her father's.  She used to call  him  uncle,  although  they
      were not apparently related.  While she was staying at Mr S's house, a
      woman from the village of Bankala recognised her and, a week later,  a
      group of Bondo women came to the house, demanding that she  return  to
      Bankala.  Three days later, Mr S made arrangements for  the  appellant
      to leave the area and for her to travel to  the  United  Kingdom.   On
      arrival, she was briefly examined by a doctor and then placed  in  the
      care of social workers.


   5. The Secretary of State refused the claim for reasons to  be  found  in
      his letter of 5 March 2004.  He did not accept that her claim that she
      would be forced into becoming a sowei and  would  have  to  marry  the
      chief engaged the Refugee Convention.  Having already  undergone  FGM,
      the appellant could not be said to form part of  a  particular  social
      group.  He accepted FGM was  widely  practised  among  all  levels  of
      society and that  members  of  the  Bondo  society  were  particularly
      influential as advocates for FGM.  Having identified  the  appellant's
      twofold fear of being forced to become a sowei and then into a  forced
      marriage, the Secretary of State considered there were parts of Sierra
      Leone in which the appellant did  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution and to which it would be reasonable to expect her  to  go.
      The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's  account  as  to
      the true circumstances in which she left the country,  in  particular,
      the part played by Mr S  in  financing  her  departure.   Although  it
      clearly has many of the hallmarks of trafficking, this  case  was  not
      advanced before us and we therefore make no finding on it.   Absent  a
      risk of harm, the Secretary of State also  dismissed  her  claims  for
      humanitarian protection and the under the Human Rights Convention.


The old-style appeal and the order for reconsideration


   6. The Adjudicator, having accepted  that  the  appellant's  account  was
      credible, considered the unequal position of women  in  Sierra  Leone.
      He had before him a report of Dr Fanthorpe who spoke  about  FGM,  the
      wider society and the role of the local chief, particularly  in  rural
      areas.  He treated the case as one where the appellant had  repudiated
      tradition by refusing to  undertake  secret  initiation  rituals  that
      would result in her being a sowei.  As the Tribunal later  found,  the
      Adjudicator did not properly engage with the nature of the  claim  and
      stated that, because she had already undergone  FGM,  she  was  not  a
      member of a particular social group.  In particular, he  rejected  the
      risk of further genital mutilation, and therefore the risk of  further
      persecution.  Whilst he accepted that  life  could  be  difficult  for
      women in Sierra Leone, he said that he was not satisfied that it would
      be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate within the country.

   7. The grounds of application to the IAT asserted  that  the  Adjudicator
      had  made  a  series  of  legal  errors.   When  the  application  was
      considered by a  Senior  Immigration  Judge  on  15  April  2005,  the
      application was dismissed on the basis that the appellant  was  not  a
      member of a particular social group  but  on  renewal  before  Bean  J
      reconsideration was ordered.  The single judge, having considered  the
      decision of the House of Lords in Shah and Islam [1999] UKHL 20 and of
      the Tribunal in RM (Sierra Leone) [2004], UKAIT 00108 considered  that
      the point raised in the application for reconsideration  was  arguable
      and warranted further attention by  the  AIT.   In  finding  that  the
      Immigration Judge made a material error  of  law,  Senior  Immigration
      Judge Nichols gave these reasons:


           1.    This is  a  reconsideration  pursuant  to  s.103A  of  the
                 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It  has  been
                 remitted to the Tribunal following  an  order  made  by  Mr
                 Justice Bean  in  the  High  Court  on  21  July  2005.  He
                 considered  that  the  grounds  for  reconsideration   were
                 arguable.


           2.    This is case where the Adjudicator as  he  was  found  the
                 appellant to be entirely credible.   Her mother had been  a
                 Sowei in Sierra Leone. After she died, when  the  appellant
                 was aged sixteen, the appellant had been expected  to  take
                 over her mother's duties which involved performing  FGM  on
                 uninitiated girls in  her  tribe.   FGM  had  already  been
                 performed on the appellant as a result  of  which  she  had
                 suffered shock and fear. Before she fled from  her  village
                 she was also told that she would be  forced  to  marry  the
                 village chief.


           3.    The appellant feared persecution  if  returned  to  Sierra
                 Leone because she claimed  that  she  was  a  member  of  a
                 particular social group, namely a young woman  from  Sierra
                 Leone who faced a real risk of persecution for that reason.
                 The Adjudicator had been wrong to rely on RM (Sierra Leone)
                 [2004] UKIAT 00108 which was a case that dealt  with  women
                 who were expected to undergo FGM.  The  Adjudicator  failed
                 to have proper regard to what the House of  Lords  said  in
                 Shah and Islam as to  the  determination  of  a  particular
                 social group. It was submitted that in this case the  group
                 i.e.  young  women  in  Sierra  Leone,  has  been  socially
                 constructed by the country's laws and social  mores  (there
                 was expert evidence about this issue  from  Dr  Fanthorpe).
                 The Immigration Judge had failed to consider that  evidence
                 in any detail (paragraph 13 of the grounds).


           4.    The appellant  feared  persecution  for  this  reason  and
                 argued that this would arise if there was a real risk  that
                 on return she would be forced against her will to carry out
                 FGM on other young women and secondly, that  she  would  be
                 forced into a marriage that she did not want.  These  risks
                 stem from her membership of a social  group,  namely  as  a
                 young woman in Sierra Leone.  It was  further  argued  that
                 the Immigration Judge had not given proper consideration to
                 the issue of internal flight before him.  He had failed  to
                 take proper and full account of the expert evidence in this
                 regard.


           5.    Both parties agreed with the Tribunal that the grounds  of
                 the application are made out. In the light  of  the  issues
                 raised by this  case,  and  having  regard  to  the  recent
                 decision of the House of Lords in K and Fornah [2006] UKHL,
                 the Tribunal is of the  view  that  this  case  may  be  an
                 appropriate one on which to give  Country  Guidance  as  to
                 whether the objective evidence does  establish  that  young
                 women in Sierra Leone are a particular social group for the
                 purposes of the Refugee Convention and are at real risk  of
                 harm for that reason. Further,  the  particular  issues  in
                 this case are whether this appellant,  on  account  of  her
                 membership of that  social  group  is  at  real  risk  from
                 members of the Bondo society if she returns to Sierra Leone
                 because  she  will  be  forced  to  carry  out   initiation
                 ceremonies on other  women;    forced  into  marriage;  and
                 faces general discrimination  on  account  of  her  gender.
                 Further, whether any internal flight option is available to
                 the  appellant  and  whether  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
                 protection against the ill treatment  she  fears  on  these
                 grounds.   Counsel's (Miss Naik) skeleton  argument  of  27
                 March 2007 clearly sets out the issues.


           6.     This  case  is  therefore  adjourned  initially  for  the
                 Tribunal to determine whether this is a suitable  case  for
                 country guidance. The findings of Immigration Judge Boyd in
                 relation to the appellant's account will stand and the only
                 issues in the case are those set  out  above.  The  hearing
                 date will be notified in due course.

   8. It was on this basis that, eventually, the matter came before us.


   9. Since the appeal was heard by the Adjudicator in  December  2004,  the
      appellant has given birth to two children.  KY was  born  on  9  March
      2005 and is now aged 3.  AY was born on 20 November  2007,  after  the
      first-stage of the reconsideration, and is almost a  year  old.   Both
      are  boys.   Throughout  these  proceedings  the  appellant  has  been
      described as a single mother.

The material before us

  10. The material before us consists of the appellant's bundles  A  and  B,
      running from A(i) to C401.  We have also been provided with  a  bundle
      of authorities, a chronology and a skeleton argument of 13 June 2008.

The expert's report

  11. The evidence is to be found in two reports, the  first  dated  12  May
      2004, [B57-61].  The expertise of Dr Fanthorpe in this field is not in
      issue.  Indeed, Mr Deller spoke warmly of Dr Fanthorpe as an expert of
      the highest calibre.  It is not, therefore, necessary to set  out  his
      academic career or refer to his publications,  details  of  which  are
      found in the bundle.  It suffices to say  that  he  holds  a  Research
      Fellowship in social anthropology at the University of Sussex based on
      his study of Sierra Leonean history and  culture  and  that  he  is  a
      consultant  to  the  United  Kingdom  Department   for   International
      Development and the Overseas Development Institute.


  12. There is a shared general belief amongst the various ethnic groups  in
      Sierra Leone that human beings are subject to a  multitude  of  unseen
      forces, both malign  and  benign.   These  forces  are  controlled  by
      observing social protocol in the performance of  religious  ceremonies
      and the making of charms and  medicines.   The  Bondo  societies  deal
      specifically with women's  affairs,  especially  reproductive  health.
      Bondo groups are active throughout the country.  It is  not,  however,
      an organisation as such, although all initiated women belong to Bondo.
       He describes it as: "best understood as a ritual repertoire that  may
      be performed, for various purposes, by any group  of  initiated  women
      living together in one place."

  13. According to these customary beliefs,  children  cannot  develop  into
      fully socialised adults  without  ritual  initiation  into  the  adult
      world.  This initiation is a process of sexual separation performed in
      two phases.  The first, circumcision itself after which the girls  are
      kept in seclusion in the Bondo bush; the  second,  a  public  ceremony
      marks the "coming out" of the  girls  into  society  as  fully-fledged
      adults, fit for marriage and motherhood.   Entering  the  adult  world
      wholly female or wholly male is fundamental to the proper ordering  of
      society.  The purpose of FGM is to remove any potential  for  maleness
      by excising the clitoris.  According to recent estimates published  by
      the World Health Organisation, 90% of the adult female  population  of
      Sierra Leone has undergone FGM and it is  in  general  only  the  Krio
      people in Freetown who do not participate in the practice.

  14. In paragraph 6 of his report, Dr Fanthorpe stated that he was  unaware
      of any strict rule stipulating that Bondo leadership must pass from  a
      mother to her eldest daughter although he was aware of one example  in
      which the current Bondo leader succeeded her mother at a time when she
      was already a widow, in late middle age and noted  for  her  midwifery
      skills.  As he understood it, the female elders of the local community
      select their leader amongst themselves  and  descendants  of  previous
      leaders may be preferred but age, experience and standing  within  the
      local community are also  taken  into  consideration.   From  his  own
      observation, Dr Fanthorpe noted that the local Bondo  leadership  were
      almost always well past childbearing age, although the younger married
      women supervise the newly initiated girls.

  15. The term 'sowei' is derived from a word meaning 'adept'  in the  sense
      both of a characteristic and an individual.

  16. Sierra Leonean society remains deeply patriarchal.   The  local  chief
      continues to supply almost all of the  day-to-day  governance  in  the
      provinces.  The system flourishes in a  bureaucratically  weak  state,
      where very little  information  on  people  or  property  is  recorded
      thereby imposing an inevitable reliance on customary  rights  to  land
      and property.  Society is essentially  conservative  and  FGM  is  not
      questioned.   Local  chiefs  often  serve  actively  as   patrons   of
      initiation ceremonies.  The autonomy of a local court system tends  to
      insulate rural communities from modern systems  of  justice.   Perhaps
      not  altogether  surprisingly,  matters  are  somewhat  different   in
      Freetown but even there the State authorities are influenced by  these
      cultural norms, supported by a compliant Sierra Leonean government  so
      that, although technically  criminal,  the  practice  of  FGM  is  not
      treated as a crime.

  17. Dr Fanthorpe speaks of a slow change  in  social  attitudes  but  that
      there is nevertheless an increasing momentum, particularly  among  the
      urban middle classes, to change  these  traditional  and  conservative
      values.  That said, traditional religion often goes hand-in-hand  with
      Christian or Muslim religious practices.  The momentum for change  has
      received a set back as one of the consequences  of  the  recent  civil
      war.   The  conflict  led  to  widespread  attacks  -  one  might  say
      desecration  -  upon  traditional  values  which  have  led   to   the
      conservative elements within the country  attempting  to  re-establish
      the old social order  after  hostilities  ceased.   Consequently,  the
      conservative or traditional practices  have  tended  to  experience  a
      resurgence, rather  than  a  marginalisation,  brought  about  by  the
      pressures for social change.

  18. Dr Fanthorpe considered the appellant's case in the  context  of  this
      social milieu.  He conceded that at first sight, it seemed  improbable
      that a person as young as the appellant would be expected to  take  on
      such a socially sensitive and important duty as performing  initiation
      ceremonies.  It appears that in normal circumstances a girl  like  the
      appellant (and only recently initiated) would  not  have  the  skills,
      knowledge and experience of the rituals  to  have  been  chosen  as  a
      sowei.  He cited  it  as  being  possible,  however,  that  the  local
      perceptions might place greater importance on the hereditary nature of
      a sowei's functions.  It might even be possible that, as  part  of  an
      effort to re-impose traditional values, younger people  were  selected
      as  a  means  of  engaging  both  young  and  old  in   the   process.
      Accordingly, he considered that the appellant's  claim  that  she  was
      under particular pressure to join Bondo in  order  to  take  over  her
      mother's duties might therefore be accurate.  This view  is  supported
      by background material at paragraph 41 which refers  to  the  ages  of
      women who perform the operation as getting younger, see paragraph 6.42
      of the COIS report, below.  The Adjudicator accepted that and  we,  in
      turn, accept that the Adjudicator's findings  were  properly  open  to
      him.   Dr  Fanthorpe  concluded  that  the  Bondo  is  not  a  unitary
      organisation and that, if the appellant relocated  within  the  Sierra
      Leone, it would not necessarily follow that her reluctance to serve as
      a sowei would become widely known or held against  her.   However,  he
      commented upon how Sierra Leonean society operates  through  networks,
      especially among those ethnic groups scattered throughout the country.
       Thus a person's whereabouts could soon filter back.  If the appellant
      sought to avoid contact with her extended family or those  she  knows,
      he considered that this would result in the loss of a major source  of
      economic security and  personal  protection.   Thus  unprotected,  she
      would fall into an underclass:

           "The fortunate among this group find a householder,  shopkeeper,
           lorry driver or suchlike willing to offer them food and  shelter
           in  return  for  menial  work.   The  unfortunate  descend  into
           begging, theft and prostitution.  A girl  of  [the  appellant's]
           age does not survive long in this environment,  without  a  male
           'protector', and even then, her vulnerability  to  physical  and
           sexual abuse would be very high."

  19. In his supplementary report of 2 August 2007,  Dr  Fanthorpe  reviewed
      and confirmed the contents of his earlier report.  Six years have  now
      passed since the end of the civil war.  Despite prodigious amounts  of
      foreign aid, the extended family and village community serves  as  the
      primary source of social welfare and economic security for most Sierra
      Leoneans.  Individuals who become  alienated  from  these  groups  are
      especially vulnerable.  It is Dr Fanthorpe's view that the appellant's
      fundamental problem is that she has been caught up  in  a  process  of
      social change that  has  become  intensely  politicised.   Many  young
      Sierra Leoneans have come to the conclusion that the old social system
      has little to offer  them  compared  to  the  perceived  freedoms  and
      economic rewards of  modern  life.   An  increasing  number  of  young
      adults, and girls in particular, are  no  longer  prepared  to  submit
      themselves to FGM and the uncompromising authority of the  chiefs  and
      family elders.

  20. These developments have prompted a conservative reaction that  extends
      right up to the  Sierra  Leonean  government  which  is  fundamentally
      traditional in complexion.  Such  conservatism  is  popular  at  grass
      roots level.  Clashes between Bondo society members and those  against
      them have become commonplace in Freetown, where cosmopolitan city life
      is at odds with the traditional values of the  Bondo  societies.   Yet
      even among the urban elite, there are those keen to uphold traditional
      values.  The tension has resulted  in  flashpoints  on  at  least  two
      occasions in 2007 in which two women speaking out against  Bondo  were
      forcibly  initiated.   The  same  tension  has  seen  the  authorities
      vacillating between wishing to ratify  international  standards  which
      uphold 'western' values in relation to children and women, (perhaps if
      only because such moves  reduce  international  pressure  particularly
      from the nations that contribute to Sierra Leone's aid programme), but
      run  into  the  sand  when  put  to  a  Parliamentary  vote.    Hence,
      legislative efforts in September 2006  to  ban  FGM  resulted  in  the
      material clause being omitted from  the  Bill.   Although  it  is  not
      entirely clear, we suspect that there may be similarities between  the
      position under United Kingdom law  prior  to  FGM  being  specifically
      criminalised: the procedure  is  potentially  an  assault,  A.B.H.  or
      G.B.H. but is rarely prosecuted in Sierra Leone.


  21. Dr Fanthorpe concluded that a person like the appellant,  who  refuses
      to perform the duties of a sowei and  who  refuses  to  enter  into  a
      polygamous marriage with the local chief  is  left  in  an  'invidious
      situation',  unlikely  to  receive  any  support  from  the   domestic
      political establishment and law  enforcement  agencies  or  any  state
      welfare.  In his evidence, he  also  spoke  of  the  intense  pressure
      placed upon a person in the appellant's position to marry in order  to
      gain a male protector.   Those  returning  from  the  United  Kingdom,
      having clearly  failed  to  make  a  new  life  abroad,  are  received
      unsympathetically by many Sierra Leoneans.  He concluded:

           " ...while she might be at risk if  she  returned  to  her  home
           village, it is very unlikely that there would be  a  coordinated
           effort, further afield, to target her for refusing to serve as a
           sowei.   However,  the  Bondo  Society  is  present   in   every
           neighbourhood in Sierra Leone,  and  in  the  current  political
           climate she would be at risk of taunting and harassment from any
           Bondo Society  members  who  learned  of  her  history.   Unlike
           experienced anti-FGM campaigners, who enjoy a  national  profile
           and international support, a young woman  [like  the  appellant]
           would be ill-equipped to deal with such hostility."

  22. The  expression  'taunting  and  harassment'  in  what  is  clearly  a
      carefully drafted report suggests a  level  of  treatment  that  falls
      short of serious harm.  In his evidence to the Tribunal, Dr  Fanthorpe
      stated that he had never heard of a forcible coercion in the sense  of
      a woman being physically abducted and returned to  the  home  village.
      Instead, Dr Fanthorpe focuses on whether the appellant could cope with
      such hostility without the support mechanisms of local  community  and
      family.  This was repeated in his evidence to the  Tribunal  where  he
      spoke of the appellant being taunted by those of the Bondo who  learnt
      of her history or who perceived her to be a failed returnee.


The expert's evidence at the hearing


  23. In his evidence to the Tribunal, Dr Fanthorpe spoke of  his  inability
      to find the  village  of  Bankala  on  the  map  and  the  appellant's
      description of the nearest larger village, Wonkiefor, being one hour's
      walk away on  what  is  likely  to  be  a  non-motorable  road.   This
      graphically illustrates its remote location and  the  likelihood  that
      its occupants hold deeply traditional views.  The police  presence  in
      Wonkiefor is probably in the order of one or  two  policemen  visiting
      once or twice a week.  It is the local chiefs who provide the  day-to-
      day governance.  There will be one chief in the village of Bankala and
      a more important one in Wonkiefor, with justice provided by the chiefs
      or customary courts.  State authorities would operate in only  a  very
      limited way, if at all, and would have no effective presence.

  24. He then turned to consider the position in Freetown where  he  accepts
      that her refusal to  be  a  sowei  would  not  necessarily  be  known.
      Because the state is so weak in Sierra Leone, without family  networks
      to provide a roof under which to sleep and food, he suggested it would
      be difficult or impossible to survive.   He  considered  that  it  was
      vital to have a family network.  There is a huge influx of  people  to
      Freetown, the usual destination for migrants.   Those  settling  there
      live 20 to 30 in a house which  offers  very  basic  accommodation:  a
      space to sleep and the prospect of some food.  (Ms  Cronin's  note  of
      the evidence refers to 10 in a house but the overall  picture  remains
      the same.)  He recalled that the appellant's  mother  was  T  and  her
      father F.  The  F  are  a  close  community  with  a  mosque  and  its
      associated organisations providing charity.  He considered the  likely
      response at the F mosque to a request for aid would be  to  assist  in
      reuniting the appellant with her family.

  25. The exodus of young people from  the  traditional  rural  villages  is
      resented  by  those  who  remain,  polarising  local  communities  and
      increasing  pressure  amongst  some  for  a  retrenchment.   Were  the
      appellant to be returned to her home village, she would be faced  with
      a stark choice and with the obvious pressure of becoming  involved  in
      the ritual practices and the risk of forcible marriage in which  wives
      of lower status are taken for domestic labour and their children as an
      additional source of manpower.  A  returnee,  perceived  as  a  failed
      migrant is likely to be subjected to taunts.  Local  assistance,  such
      as access to provision of  micro-credit,  (small  business  'start-up'
      loans, perhaps for as little as the equivalent of �50) is reserved for
      a chosen few.

  26. Asked by Mr Deller about the  process  by  which  a  person's  history
      emerges, Dr Fanthorpe spoke of  the  questions  asked  when  a  person
      attempts to make connections  or  build  a  place  in  the  community,
      notwithstanding the fact that the appellant speaks  Krio,  the  lingua
      franca of Sierra Leone.  He contrasted the  position  of  high-profile
      opponents of FGM, (he referred to the highly-educated  women  who  run
      such organisations who have the luxury of opposing FGM), and a  person
      in  the  position  of  the  appellant.   He  mentioned  that  the  new
      government has spoken about its aim to eradicate FGM, the  first  time
      such a statement has been made, as well as other initiatives to assist
      women but that this is a far cry from seeing it put into  practice  in
      the rural areas under the sway of the  local  chiefs  and  traditional
      mores.

  27. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Fanthorpe  accepted  that
      whilst 90% of the female population adhere  to  Bondo  practices,  the
      remaining 10% are likely to be concentrated in the  towns.   (Some  of
      the background material speaks of 80%  -  see  paragraph  41  below  -
      thereby increasing the minority to 20% and we acknowledge such figures
      are not capable of accurate quantification.)  On any view,  10%  is  a
      significant minority.  Those who see the social advantages in FGM  are
      genuine in their beliefs but do not  adopt  a  positively  hostile  or
      combative attitude  towards  non-adherents  of  Bondo.   There  is  no
      general targeting of non-participants.  The migration from  the  rural
      areas to  the  urban  centres  is  not  confined  to  the  young  male
      population, although historically this was  the  case.   Females  were
      "catching up".  It was put to Dr Fanthorpe that such  migration  would
      appear to run counter to his assertion that  the  appellant  would  be
      pressurised into leaving Freetown and returning to her local  village.
      He drew a distinction between those leaving the villages but retaining
      their dependency upon family members and someone like the appellant.

  28. There are those in Freetown who manage to engage in  business  selling
      newspapers, cassettes or other vending jobs.  He  also  spoke  of  the
      fact that Sierra Leone  is  crying  out  for  nurses  and  doctors  in
      hospitals and clinics, some of  which  have  accommodation  to  offer.
      (The appellant is unable to train as a nurse  in  the  United  Kingdom
      although she would like to do so because of restrictions on  the  work
      that she is permitted to do.)  He stated, however, that the  available
      jobs are offered to families with some  influence  and  that,  in  any
      event, there is no pay.  He also spoke of  the  limited  opportunities
      for a non-qualified person to be involved in teaching.  There is great
      unemployment and even qualified teachers are working  as  taxi-drivers
      in Freetown, once again as a result of  private  networking.   In  one
      part of his evidence, it was suggested  to  him  that  the  fact  that
      finding a job was difficult does not equate with a risk of persecution
      and  the  migratory  effect  into  the  towns  is  likely  to   create
      difficulties but the fact that it is taking place suggests there is  a
      prospect of survival.  Dr Fanthorpe did not disagree.  He continued:

           "It is a matter of emphasis.  The cassette-sellers  vendors  and
           the newspaper organisers  are  springing  up  and  migrants  are
           finding ways to survive... It is not a question of  leaving  the
           rural areas behind and going  into  a  city.   The  pressure  to
           conform is not  there  the  less.   It  remains  a  question  of
           conforming or starving. This is the cutting-edge of research  at
           this time in Sierra Leone.  What is the effect of migration post-
           war?  I cannot give a more definite answer."

Case law


  29. In Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46, the House of  Lords  spoke  with  one
      voice in saying that Ms Fornah, a young Sierra Leonean,  (aged  17  at
      the date of the hearing before the  Tribunal  and  aged  19  when  the
      appeal came before the House of Lords), was entitled to refugee status
      because she was at risk of persecution.  The form that the persecutory
      treatment was likely to take was FGM,  genital  cutting  or  excision.
      The Judicial Committee accepted that the appellant was a member  of  a
      particular social group and, therefore, had  to  be  recognised  as  a
      Convention refugee.  It was divided, however, as to the form the group
      took in the particular circumstances of the  case;  Lord  Bingham  and
      Baroness Hale classifying the appellant  as  part  of  a  wider  class
      involving all women in Sierra  Leone  who  suffer  discrimination  and
      subjugation, Lord Hope and Lord Rodger choosing a narrower  definition
      admitting to the group all females who were intact or uninitiated  but
      possibly excluding the Krio people from the Freetown area. Lord  Brown
      preferred the narrower definition but did not disagree with the  wider
      classification of Lord Bingham and Baroness Hale.


  30. The underlying basis for the claim was that FGM  was  performed  as  a
      means  of  subjugating  women  and  as  a  means  of  perpetuating  or
      reinforcing their status as socially inferior to  men.   Whilst  those
      who had been initiated no longer faced a  risk  of  further  excision,
      women collectively face discrimination.

  31. If a person is at risk in his home area, internal relocation should be
      considered as a potential means  of  affording  him  protection.   The
      decision of the House of Lords in AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 related to
      three appellants all of whom were in their thirties and were  Sudanese
      nationals. The Judicial Committee considered the position  of  members
      of black African tribes who formerly  lived  in  Darfur.  Two  of  the
      appellants were subsistence farmers.

  32. It is clear from the opinion of Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill  that  the
      enquiry has to  be  directed  to  the  situation  of  each  particular
      applicant whose age, gender, experience,  health,  skills  and  family
      ties may all be relevant in the enquiry. It is said that there  is  no
      warrant for excluding or  giving  priority  to  consideration  of  the
      applicant's way of life in the place of persecution or  for  excluding
      or giving priority to consideration of conditions generally prevailing
      in the home country. Instead there has to be a  consideration  of  all
      circumstances of the case.  That conclusion is  to  be  found  between
      paragraphs 12 and 14 of his opinion.

  33.  The scope of the consideration was also dealt with by  Baroness  Hale
      in paragraph 20 of her  opinion.  In  referring  to  Lord  Bingham  of
      Cornhill's opinion in Januzi [2006] UKHL  5,  Baroness  Hale  recorded
      this passage from Lord Bingham's thinking in the earlier appeal:

           "The decision maker taking account of all relevant circumstances
           pertaining to the claimant and his country of origin must decide
           whether it is reasonable to expect the claimant to  relocate  or
           whether it will be unduly harsh to expect him to do so."

  34. In approaching that task Baroness Hale also drew upon a UNHCR document
      which also considered that the task was an holistic exercise where the
      decision  maker  looks  at  the  individual   personal   circumstances
      including past persecution or the fear of it, psychological and health
      condition, family and social situation and  survival  capacities.   In
      setting out these categories there was not in our judgment meant to be
      any limitation on the scope of the reconsideration.

  35. The legal test is the reasonableness of internal  relocation  avoiding
      the error of equating that  with  persecutory  harm  or  ill-treatment
      sufficiently serious to engage Article 3.  The reasonableness test and
      undue hardship are one and the same; in other words taking account  of
      all the circumstances pertaining to the appellant and his  country  of
      origin, we  must  decide  whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant to relocate or whether it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
      her to do so.  See Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5  per  Lord  Bingham  of
      Cornhill at paragraph 21 and approved in SSHD v AH (Sudan) [2008] UKHL
      49 at paragraph 20.

  36. In AA (Uganda) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 579  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
      required to consider the case of  a  young  Ugandan  orphan  whom  the
      Secretary of State accepted would  be  at  risk  of  serious  harm  if
      returned to northern Uganda but was not believed  to  be  at  risk  in
      Kampala.  The issue was whether it would be unduly harsh to remove her
      there, the  classic  internal  relocation  issue.   Dealing  with  the
      position of unaccompanied women in Uganda, the Tribunal had before  it
      a report of Dr Nelson who described conditions in these terms:
           "[AA] has almost no chance  of  getting  a  formal  sector  job.
           First, she has no qualifications  or  formal  training  and  her
           chances of improving  her  educational  status  in  Kampala  are
           nil....Secondly, in East Africa  contacts  and  information  are
           critical  in  finding  jobs....contacts  and   assistance   from
           relatives and friends can be critical in  even  getting  to  the
           interview stage of a job application. Her only hope will be some
           sort of self employment in the informal economy. Here  she  will
           also be at a disadvantage  because  she  has  no  informal  home
           training in any sort of activity which might generate an  income
           in  the  informal  sector  (trading,   cooking   food,   sewing,
           embroidery). The only jobs she could hope  to  obtain  would  be
           that of house servant or bargirl or sex worker (and bargirls are
           just sex workers by another name). Her chances of finding a  job
           as a house servant will be limited. Almost inevitably these  are
           found through contacts via friends and  relatives  since  people
           are reluctant to bring a  total  stranger  into  their  domestic
           circumstances...Sadly  there  is  an  unending  demand  for  bar
           girls/sex workers (the two occupations are usually linked). That
           would be her best, perhaps her only chance  of  employment....In
           this context of high HIV/AIDS  infection  rates,  [AA]  will  be
           condemned to dangerous jobs which will put her at risk of abuse,
           injury and most significantly of all in  danger  of  contracting
           HIV/AIDS....Suffering from anxiety and depression, [AA] will  be
           plunged  into  a   very   difficult,   dangerous   and   unknown
           environment. In such an African slum many young people who  have
           grown up there are vulnerable  to  unwanted  pregnancies,  early
           marriages, prostitution, drug abuse, crime, and AIDS....How much
           more daunting and difficult will it prove  to  this  traumatised
           young woman?"
      Dr Nelson said by way of a conclusion:
           "As a young woman with no family or husband to call back on [AA]
           will be especially vulnerable, a fact confirmed time  and  again
           by anthropologists and sociologists working in  African  cities.
           With little education, no training and  no  job  experience  she
           will be reduced to working in the informal sector in the  slums.
           The most likely employment option she will be reduced to will be
           that of sex worker. This will put her at great  health  risk  of
           contracting HIV/AIDs. She will be  unable  to  find  secure  and
           decent housing. She will find it difficult to obtain counselling
           or medication for her psychological conditions."
  37. The Court of Appeal then set about  construing  what  the  Immigration
      Judge had meant in the paragraph of her determination in which she had
      accepted Dr Nelson's assessment.  The Court rejected the  respondent's
      submission that the Immigration Judge was qualifying her  findings  by
      accepting what was said by Dr Nelson about the general difficulties in
      Kampala but rejecting his assessment that what awaited  the  appellant
      in Kampala was a life of prostitution.   Buxton LJ said  in  paragraph
      10:
           "I  cannot  agree.  If  the  judge   wished   to   insert   that
           qualification  into  her  general  acceptance  of  Dr   Nelson's
           evidence she undoubtedly would have said so."
      Accordingly, there was a finding that the appellant  would  return  to
      Uganda and there find a life of prostitution.  The point is re-made in
      paragraph 17 of Buxton LJ's judgment: the appellant  would  be  driven
      into prostitution.  Lloyd LJ in paragraph 55 of his judgment construed
      the Immigration Judge's determination in exactly the same way:

           "The evidence before the Immigration Judge included that  of  Dr
           Nelson, set out in part at paragraph  9  above,  and  which  the
           Immigration Judge accepted. That evidence included the statement
           that the life awaiting AA in Kampala would most likely be one of
           prostitution. I agree with  Lord  Justice  Buxton,  despite  the
           different view expressed by  Lord  Justice  Carnwath,  that  the
           Immigration Judge's acceptance of Dr Nelson's evidence  must  be
           taken to include acceptance of that proposition as  an  integral
           part of the evidence. If the Immigration Judge had  intended  to
           accept some of the evidence but not that proposition,  she  must
           have said so in terms. If that proposition is accepted, it has a
           most significant effect on the assessment of whether  conditions
           in Kampala are such that it would be unduly harsh to  require  a
           young woman in AA's position to go to live there."

  38. In our respectful view, the return of a woman to a country  where  she
      faced prostitution would not simply have  a  significant  effect  upon
      whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  an  appellant  to  be
      subjected to such a fate; it would be determinative of that issue.  No
      construction of the obligations owed by the United Kingdom authorities
      (under whatever Convention) could possibly envisage permitting a woman
      prostituting herself as a survival technique and yet maintain it would
      not be unduly harsh for her to do so.   For  our  part,  we  would  be
      surprised, if Immigration Judge Coker (whose determination  was  under
      challenge) had been asked in terms whether that is what she had meant,
      if she would have contemplated assenting to such a proposition.


  39. Nevertheless faced with that material, it is not surprising  that  the
      Court of Appeal allowed the appeal but the Court of Appeal's  decision
      is not authority for a wider proposition that  lone  women  cannot  be
      returned to Uganda or, indeed, any other specific country.  Nor is  it
      support for the proposition that it is unduly  harsh  to  expect  lone
      women to relocate to the capital city of their country  of  origin  or
      any other large urban centre.  Rather, it is a re-affirmation, in line
      with AH (Sudan) that such relocation  must  be  reasonable,  in  other
      words, that it must not have such consequences upon the individual  as
      to be unduly harsh for her.  Inevitably, it will be unduly harsh if an
      appellant is  unable  for  all  practical  purposes  to  survive  with
      sufficient dignity to reflect her humanity.   That  is  no  more  than
      saying that if survival comes at a cost of destitution, beggary, crime
      or prostitution, then that is a price too high.

The background material

  40. The Country of Origin Information  Service  report  prepared  in  2006
      contains these passages in relation to the position of women in Sierra
      Leone and the practice of FGM:


      Women


      Constitutional Rights Of Women


       22. "The Constitution provides for equal rights for women;  however,
           in practice, women faced both legal and societal discrimination.
           In particular, their rights and  status  under  traditional  law
           varied significantly depending upon the ethnic  group  to  which
           they belonged. All women born in  the  Western  Area,  which  is
           governed by General Law, had a statutory right to  own  property
           in their name. Some women  born  in  the  provinces,  which  are
           governed by customary laws that vary from chiefdom to  chiefdom,
           did not. In the Temne tribe, women could  not  become  paramount
           chiefs; however, in the Mende tribe, there were  several  female
           paramount chiefs. Women did not have equal access to  education,
           economic opportunities, health facilities, or  social  freedoms.
           In rural areas, women performed much of the subsistence  farming
           and had little opportunity for formal education."


      6.23  The HRW report on sexual violence in the Sierra Leone civil  war
            states:


            "In theory, Sierra Leonean women are granted  equal  rights  to
            men under the 1991 constitution, which provides as one  of  the
            'fundamental  principles  of  state  policy'  that  the   state
            '...[s]hall discourage discrimination on the grounds  of  place
            of origin, circumstances of birth, sex, religion,....' [.]  The
            equal rights of women are again underscored in the human rights
            chapter  of  the  constitution.  Under  Section   27   of   the
            constitution, however, discrimination is permitted, inter alia,
            under laws dealing with 'adoption, marriage,  divorce,  burial,
            devolution of property on death or other interests of  personal
            law,' which have direct bearing on the rights of women, as well
            as under customary law. This  important  contradiction  in  the
            constitution - similar to that in many African constitutions  -
            has contributed to the low status of women in Sierra Leone,  as
            it legitimizes the application of discriminatory customary law.
            No protection from discriminatory customary law can  be  sought
            under the constitution on  the  basis  of  sex.  Customary  and
            Islamic   laws   also   continue   to   be   widely    applied,
            notwithstanding the fact that legislation provides that general
            law should prevail over customary law  when  customary  law  is
            'repugnant to statute or  natural  justice,  equity,  and  good
            conscience.' "


      6.26  As employment opportunities are limited for  women,  some  women
            have become prostitutes as a means to  support  themselves,  as
            noted by the USSD 2004 Report:


            "Prostitution  was  widespread  and  not  prohibited  by   law;
            however, prostitutes sometimes were arrested and  charged  with
            loitering or vagrancy. Many women and girls, particularly those
            displaced from their homes and with few resources, resorted  to
            prostitution  as  a  means  to  support  themselves  and  their
            children."


      Societal attitudes to domestic violence


      6.27  The USSD 2004 Report states that:


            "Domestic violence against women, especially wife beating,  was
            common. The police  were  unlikely  to  intervene  in  domestic
            disputes except in cases involving severe injury or  death.  In
            rural areas, polygyny [otherwise, polygamy] was  common.  Women
            suspected  of  marital  infidelity  often  were  subjected   to
            physical  abuse;  frequently,  women  were  beaten  until  they
            divulged the names of their partners.  Because  husbands  could
            claim monetary indemnities from their wives' partners, beatings
            often continued until the woman named several men even if there
            were no such relationships. There also were reports that  women
            suspected of infidelity were required  to  undergo  animalistic
            rituals to prove their innocence."


      6.28  The HRW report on sexual violence in the Sierra Leone civil  war
            states:


            "Societal attitudes to domestic violence are another  indicator
            of the status of women and girls in society; physical  violence
            against women and children is common in Sierra  Leone.  Indeed,
            under customary law, a husband has  the  right  to  'reasonably
            chastise his  wife  by  physical  force.'  If  the  husband  is
            persistently cruel and frequently beats his wife to  the  point
            of wounding her or causing her great pain, the wife can divorce
            her husband, but under customary law a single act  of  physical
            and brutal force is permitted. A population-based assessment of
            war-related sexual violence in  Sierra  Leone  carried  out  by
            Physicians for Human Rights among 991 female-headed  households
            in camps for displaced people found that, although  80  percent
            of  women  surveyed  expressed  that  there  should  be   legal
            protections for the rights of women, more than  60  percent  of
            the women believed that a husband has the  right  to  beat  his
            wife."

   41. The HRW report is also referred to in  paragraph  6.32  of  the  COIS
       report and re-enforces what is suggested above.   The  rape  laws  in
       Sierra Leone are an indicator of  the  confusion  and  discrimination
       surrounding the status of women and girls in the community:



      6.32  The HRW report on sexual violence in the Sierra Leone civil  war
            states:


            "...In addition to the legal confusion that exists  in  general
            law  concerning  rape,  attempts  by  women   to   obtain   the
            prosecution of rapists are frustrated by the collapsed state of
            the judiciary and the lack of effective law enforcement,  which
            has  contributed  to  the  ongoing  climate  of  impunity   for
            offenders."


            "The manner in which rape is dealt with under customary law  is
            indicative of the societal values towards sexual  violence  and
            the low status of women and girls in Sierra Leone. Although all
            serious criminal cases  should  automatically  be  tried  under
            general  law,  rape  cases  continue  to  be  prosecuted  under
            customary law in the local courts."

   42. The COIS report continues:


      The practice of female genital mutilation (FGM)


      6.40  A USSD 2001 Report on FGM in Sierra Leone states:


            "Type II (commonly referred to as  excision)  is  the  form  of
            female genital mutilation (FGM) or female genital cutting (FGC)
            widely practiced on women and girls  in  Sierra  Leone.  It  is
            generally practiced by  all  classes,  including  the  educated
            elite. Sierra Leoneans who live abroad  sometimes  bring  their
            daughters back to Sierra Leone  to  participate  in  initiation
            rites that include this procedure. Type II is  usually  carried
            out within a ritual context. It is part  of  the  passage  from
            childhood to womanhood."


            "Some estimates place the percentage  of  women  and  girls  in
            Sierra Leone who undergo this procedure at 80  percent.  Others
            put the percentage higher at  90  percent.  All  ethnic  groups
            practice it except Krios  who  are  located  primarily  in  the
            western region and in the capital, Freetown."


            "The customary power bases of women in Sierra Leone lie in  the
            secret  societies.  Women  who  administer  puberty  rites  are
            revered, feared  and  believed  to  hold  supernatural  powers.
            Membership in  these  secret  societies,  including  Sande  and
            Bundo, lasts a lifetime."


            "Groups of girls of approximately the same  age  are  initiated
            into these societies. Part of the ritual is the cutting.  Girls
            initiated together  form  a  bond  and  this  sisterhood  lasts
            throughout their lives. The girls take an oath that  they  will
            not reveal anything that happened during the puberty rite."


            "It is believed that once initiated into the society, the  girl
            has passed into womanhood. She now has  adult  status  and  can
            participate in society as a woman.  The  secret  societies  are
            supported by some members of the influential elite who are also
            members of the societies or who have relatives who are."


            "Non-members of the  secret  societies  are  considered  to  be
            children, and not accepted  as  adults  by  society.  They  are
            generally barred from taking up leadership positions in  Sierra
            Leone society. Children who come  of  age  and  have  not  gone
            through the puberty rite are liable to be  forcibly  seized  to
            undergo the procedure."


      6.41  The USSD 2004 Report states that:


            "FGM was practiced widely at all levels  of  society,  although
            with varying frequency. The less severe form  of  excision  was
            practiced. UNICEF and other groups  estimated  that  80  to  90
            percent of women and girls had undergone the practice; however,
            some local groups believed that this figure was overstated. FGM
            was practiced on  girls  as  young  as  5  years  old.  No  law
            prohibits FGM. Although a number of NGOs  worked  to  eradicate
            FGM and to inform the public about its harmful health  effects,
            active resistance by women's secret  societies,  in  which  FGM
            commonly  occurred  as  part  of  initiation  rites,  countered
            efforts to stop the practice."


      6.42  A United Nations IRIN report, dated 23  March  2005,  about  the
            practice of FGM in Sierra Leone, states:


            "Young  girls  in  Sierra   Leone,   who   were   traditionally
            circumcised at puberty, are having their clitoris  cut  out  by
            secret societies at a younger and younger  age,  especially  in
            the remote north of the country."


            "The women who perform the crude operation with  a  long-bladed
            knife are also getting younger."


            "...In many African societies,  the  circumciser  is  an  older
            woman who has passed childbearing  age  -  but  not  in  Sierra
            Leone."


            "...Young girls in Sierra Leone were traditionally  circumcised
            at puberty, as part of the rites of passage to  adulthood.  The
            ceremony  was  usually  performed  after  they  had   undergone
            training for up to two  years  in  household  skills,  such  as
            cooking, sewing and curing illnesses with local herbs."


            "But today, in most cases, this period  of  apprenticeship  has
            been pared down to just one or two weeks of preparation for the
            ritual of circumcision itself."


            "Age offers no protection from being circumcised. Olayinka Koso-
            Thomas, a gynaecologist who has been  fighting  against  female
            circumcision for 30 years in Sierra  Leone,  said,  'They  even
            initiate babies and small children.  Depending  on  the  ethnic
            group, people do it  at  different  ages:  three,  five,  after
            secondary school, etc. The Sousous do it when the girls are  40
            days old. The practice is more widespread in the  north,  where
            there are also more  Muslims,  who  are  more  intransigent  in
            sticking to the practice,' she told IRIN."


            "In the face of widespread support for the practice  among  the
            country's five million people, and government  indifference  to
            international pressure to ban genital cutting,  AIM  [Amazonian
            Initiative  Movement],  is  one  of  a  handful   organisations
            actively fighting FGM."


            "...The organisation  [AIM]  has  been  talking  to  people  in
            villages throughout the West African  country,  and  claims  to
            have  persuaded  about  400  women,  many  of  whom  double  as
            midwives, to give up inflicting FGM on others by offering  them
            alternative ways of earning money."


            "...Female circumcision is lucrative business for the women who
            perform the operation."


            "...It also brings cash into the hands of village  chiefs,  who
            charge a fee for every circumcision ceremony that  takes  place
            within their jurisdiction."


      6.43  NGO workers who have campaigned against the practice of FGM have
            encountered opposition to their work from people who are strong
            advocates of the practice. An Inter Press Service  News  Agency
            report about FGM, dated 19 April 2005, states:


            "'It is not an easy job. Sometimes I get booed and taunted.  At
            crucial moments I get chased out of places where  the  practice
            is  much  more  prevalent,'  complains  34-year-old  Ann  Marie
            Caulker, who is championing the campaign  to  end  the  age-old
            tradition of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)."


            "'Here  in  the  capital  (Freetown),  the  practice   is   not
            widespread because of the cosmopolitan nature of the city.  But
            in the predominantly conservative countryside, it  is  more  or
            less a taboo to venture discussing FGM in public; a real  tough
            challenge,' she says."


            "Caulker's strategy is  simple.  Through  her  Katanya  Women's
            Development Association (KADWA), she has recruited hundreds  of
            young girls, aged between 12 and 18, the prime target for  FGM,
            and placed them in skills training  centres.  The  girls  learn
            tailoring, dyeing, weaving, soap making and embroidery."


            "This is a cover to promote her cause, because of the hostility
            faced by anyone who dares speak  out  openly  against  FGM.  In
            between  training  sessions,   she   organises   lectures   and
            discussions about the harmful effects  of  FGM  and  admonishes
            youngsters to resist attempts at getting  them  initiated  into
            the 'Bondo Society', the local name for FGM."


            "There is as yet no law on FGM in Sierra Leone. In fact,  there
            is no statute on children's  rights.  However,  the  fact  that
            children played a major role in the decade-long civil war  that
            ended three years ago, mainly as  conscripted  combatants,  has
            jolted the authorities into action."
            "The children are traumatised, many forced  into  marriages  by
            rebel fighters or gang-raped  and  enslaved.  The  Ministry  of
            Gender, Social Welfare and Children's  Affairs  has  drafted  a
            Bill aimed at protecting children's welfare."


            "Francis Murray  Lahai,  a  child  protection  officer  at  the
            ministry, says the bill was drafted with the  help  of  experts
            hired by the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) and has much to  offer
            children in post-conflict Sierra Leone."


            "'In  the  bill  there  is  an  aspect  dealing  with   harmful
            traditional  practices  like  FGM,  tattoos  and   any   bodily
            inscription not in the interest  of  the  child,'  Lahai  says.
            'These will be proscribed and measures [will be] taken  against
            people who may want to break the law.'"


            "...But there is fierce opposition to the bill. 'Female Genital
            Mutilation is an integral part of our culture. It shouldn't  be
            banned because it helps prepare our young  girls  for  marriage
            and it curbs promiscuity,' rants 24-year-old Marie Bangura  who
            had gone through the initiation ceremony."


            "...One  major  problem  facing  anti-FGM  campaigners  is  the
            massive illiteracy standing at about 75 percent  especially  in
            the interior of the country where UNICEF estimates  90  percent
            of the women have been circumcised. There, it is a  display  of
            affluence and  power.  Family  heads  save  for  a  whole  year
            proceeds from the  farming  activities  to  spend  lavishly  on
            'Bondo' ceremonies."


            "'Bondo Society is what holds us together as  a  community  and
            keeps our traditional heritage. We cannot sit idly by and allow
            outsiders to destroy it. We will fight it out,' 56-year-old  Ya
            Ndigba Thulla, an initiator in Makeni,  the  northern  regional
            capital, told IPS in an interview."


            "...The 'Bondo Society' and its practice of FGM is  often  used
            as a weapon of political campaign. Politicians from  all  sides
            win votes from women by extolling the  virtues  of  the  'Bondo
            Society'."


       38. "...In terms of  customary  law,  girls  as  young  as  ten  are
           permitted to marry and are capable of  consenting  to  marriage,
           given their levels of maturity.  Families  usually  coerce  them
           into these marriages. There is often a significant difference in
           age between these young girls and the spouses chosen for them."


            "The Commission has found that the practice of  early  marriage
            has contributed to the high levels of sexual abuse of girls and
            has  led  to  society's  condoning  of  a  practice   that   is
            detrimental to the development of young girls. It  is  also  in
            clear  contravention  of  international  law   to   which   the
            government of Sierra Leone is [a] signatory to [sic]."


  43. These passages are significant.  Although the appellant has  undergone
      FGM, they inform our thinking in relation to the position of women  in
      general in Sierra Leone and social attitudes towards  them.   We  were
      referred by Ms Cronin to substantial amounts of additional  background
      material in relation to the position of women  in  Sierra  Leone.   In
      view of the findings made by the Adjudicator  and  the  report  of  Dr
      Fanthorpe much of the  ground  is  largely  uncontroversial.   Out  of
      deference to the significant efforts to produce this  material  before
      us, we draw attention to the following passages.   The  references  in
      square brackets refer to the pages in our bundles.


  44. In a report by International Alert - Addressing Gender-Based  Violence
      in Sierra  Leone:  Mapping  Challenges,  Responses  and  Future  Entry
      Points, we  were  directed  towards  the  material  which  related  to
      violence perpetrated on women,  not  directly  as  evidence  that  the
      appellant was at specific risk but as evidence of the  inferior  place
      of women in Sierra Leonean society and the consequences that flow from
      that.  Gender-based violence in its physical and structural  forms  is
      endemic in Sierra Leone. It  is  a  security  concern  that  also  has
      broader  economic  and  political  consequences,  C126].   The  report
      identified as a key factor that Sierra Leone is a  highly  patriarchal
      society, and institutionalised gender inequalities are exacerbated  by
      discriminatory customs, particularly in relation to marriage, property
      rights and sexual offences, [C126].  The report continued:

           "The discriminatory dimensions of Sierra Leonean  political  and
           social  life  have  always  been  there,  but  they  have   been
           exacerbated  by  the  impact  and  aftermath  of  the  war.  The
           destruction of social networks and structures, the  breaking  up
           of families and communities, and the mass displacement  of  half
           of  the  population  all  resulted  in   a   rootlessness   that
           destabilised traditional value and cultural systems. Whilst this
           offers  the  opportunity  to  renegotiate   traditionally   held
           beliefs, it also potentially facilitates a culture  of  violence
           where there is little accountability and few inbuilt  structures
           to regulate behaviour, since ties to family and  community  were
           so often broken."  [C135]

  45. The report also speaks of the role of the chiefs and customary law and
      the  tendency  for  communities  to  resort  to  informal  law,  where
      decisions are made by the chiefs or other traditional  leaders  rather
      than going  through  local  court  authorities  who  are  mandated  to
      adjudicate on matters  of  customary  law.  Discrimination  and  human
      rights abuses against women are even more pervasive  in  the  informal
      legal sector. According to Amnesty International, "not only do  Chiefs
      act outside their jurisdiction, at times they collude with men in  the
      community to forcibly evict women and children  from  their  homes  or
      subject them to arbitrary detention and other forms  of  gender  based
      violence."  [C138]


  46. The implications of women's low economic status within  the  household
      and the community limit their ability to take  action  against  gender
      based violence, and sexual violence in  particular.  Women  are  often
      reluctant to report sexual or domestic violence involving male  family
      members, given that they  often  provide  them  with  some  degree  of
      financial security. It was commonly voiced that if charges  are  made,
      the woman may risk losing her home and may compromise the survival  of
      her  dependents.  Another  offshoot  of  economic  insecurity  is  the
      prevalence of sexual exploitation and abuse  that  is  exacerbated  in
      environments of extreme poverty. Oxfam Sierra Leone conducted a survey
      in 2006 of approximately 500 randomly selected women in two districts,
      the Western Area and Kailahun, which showed that  sexual  exploitation
      and abuse are closely tied into livelihood issues.  The  survey  finds
      that sex is most often being exchanged for basic goods, which  reveals
      the economic dimensions of the discrimination  that  results  in  many
      women living in abject  poverty.  In  2002,  reports  emerged  of  the
      involvement  of  humanitarian  agency  staff  in  the  systematic  and
      widespread sexual exploitation and abuse of women and children in  the
      refugee camps of Liberia and Sierra Leone. As  in  many  other  cases,
      sexual exploitation and abuse was driven  by  the  inability  of  many
      women and children to secure access to basic goods. This leads them to
      exchange sex for food, school supplies, medication and even  free  and
      safe access to the camp facilities. So-called 'survival sex' or forced
      prostitution is particularly widespread during and in the aftermath of
      conflict, where economic insecurity has  increased.  Furthermore,  the
      destruction of traditional coping mechanisms leads women and  children
      to find alternate means of accessing  food,  shelter  and  protection.
      Although sexual exploitation and abuse is often considered an issue of
      exploitation rather than violence, engaging  in  sexual  relations  to
      secure basic goods or protection amount  to  violence  or  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment when the effects on the girls and women are  taken
      into account. Similar to other forms of gender based violence,  it  is
      based on an unequal distribution of power.  [C141]


  47. We have also read and  considered  the  Amnesty  International  Sierra
      Leone report of May 2006:  Women  face  human  rights  abuses  in  the
      informal legal sector:

           "Women are forced by a lack of formal protection from the Sierra
           Leonean Government into situations where  their  rights---civil,
           political, social and economic---are violated on a daily  basis.
           Treated as minors  under  the  guardianship  of  a  male  family
           member, women lack formal equality in marriage and the ownership
           or administration of common property, either during the marriage
           or when it has ended. Inequality and discrimination affect their
           right to an adequate standard  of  living  and  their  right  to
           housing for themselves and their  children.  Women's  access  to
           justice and redress is severely impeded."  [C173]

  48. The report also records the importance of the chiefs in the social and
      political structures.  Chiefs are elected for life, and are  the  most
      recognized authority and visible face of  government  in  communities.
      They are considered the custodian of the customs and traditions of the
      people. Local government in rural areas is based  on  149  traditional
      chiefdoms, each headed by a Paramount Chief.  [C175]  It is said  that
      the chiefs have a tremendous impact on women's access  to  justice  in
      rural Sierra Leone. In some cases they can be a positive influence  in
      a community, by assisting members of the community to resolve disputes
      without a  formal  legal  hearing.  However  in  some  cases,  Amnesty
      International has found that they have exceeded their authority  under
      the law by imposing punishments on women  which  violate  their  human
      rights - including the right to  liberty.  Amnesty  International  has
      also discovered that in other cases, the chief's role and  actions  in
      dealing with cases of domestic violence and sexual abuse have resulted
      in the continued perpetuation of  violence  at  the  community  level.
      [C176]


  49. In a section entitled 'Violence  against  Women'  the  Amnesty  report
      talks of one of the effects of a society  emerging  from  conflict  is
      that  Sierra  Leone  has  high  levels  of  violence   against   women
      consistently across the country. Although overall  prevalence  studies
      have not been carried out, United  Nations  Mission  in  Sierra  Leone
      (UNAMSIL) has reported that rape and sexual  violence  are  higher  in
      post-conflict Sierra Leone than prior to the conflict,  [C178].  As  a
      result,  women  are  left  with  little  protection  against  violence
      committed by their male relatives,  [C178].  The  conflict  in  Sierra
      Leone has also led to a large number of female headed households, many
      of whom are widows. Widows face specific forms of discrimination which
      may not be recognised as  human  rights  abuses  by  mainstream  human
      rights  organizations  or  governments,  [C179].   Women   were,   and
      frequently still are, perceived as the property of their husbands,  to
      be inherited on the death of their husband along with the rest of  his
      property by the husband's family, [C179].

  50. Ms Cronin also referred to the Sixth report of  the  Secretary-General
      on the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone, [C230]:

           "40. Considerable progress has been made  in  promoting  respect
           for human rights, particularly in building the capacity  of  the
           national Human Rights Commission to monitor, protect and promote
           human rights and to review the status of implementation  of  the
           recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. With
           support from UNIOSIL and UNDP, the Human Rights  Commission  has
           established  fully  functioning  offices,  recruited  some  core
           staff, completed a brainstorming retreat for the development  of
           a five-year strategic plan, developed rules of procedure for the
           handling  of  complaints  and  created  a  framework   for   the
           production of its first human rights report. It is also  in  the
           process of finalizing  its  administrative  and  human  resource
           manual, as well as its financial policies. During the  reporting
           period, the Commission received and investigated  70  complaints
           with the support of the United Nations.
           41. Some progress was also made  in  building  the  capacity  of
           State institutions to address the root causes of  the  conflict.
           Several training programmes on human rights, the  rule  of  law,
           women  and  children,  and  the  findings  of  the   Truth   and
           Reconciliation  Commission  were  conducted   by   UNIOSIL   for
           representatives of civil society and officials of key Government
           ministries, including local government.


           42. Notwithstanding these positive  developments,  a  number  of
           challenges remain to the full realization of human  rights.  The
           justice system and the response of the Government to sexual  and
           gender-based violence, including domestic  violence,  rape,  and
           female genital mutilation, are still  weak.  The  impunity  with
           which these abuses are committed continues to pose a  threat  to
           the basic human security of women...Many courts continue  to  be
           understaffed and under-equipped. There are  now  19  magistrates
           and 13 State counsels."

  51. The position of women in Sierra  Leone  was  also  considered  by  the
      United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination  against
      Women (CEDAW) whose concluding passages in relation to Sierra Leone of
      June 2007 [C244] spoke of the need to  enact  legislation  prohibiting
      female genital mutilation and to ensure that offenders are  prosecuted
      and adequately punished. It also urged the  government  to  strengthen
      its awareness-raising and educational efforts, targeted  at  both  men
      and women, with  the  support  of  civil  society,  to  eliminate  the
      practice of female genital  mutilation  and  its  underlying  cultural
      justifications. It continued:

           "24. While welcoming the domestic violence  bill  of  2006,  the
           Committee is deeply concerned about the high levels of  violence
           against women, including rape and sexual assault. The  Committee
           is particularly concerned about the persistence of customary law
           and cultural practices that consider the  physical  chastisement
           of family members, in particular women, acceptable."

  52. Finally, we were referred to the Annual Report for 2008 of the  United
      Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and reports of  the  Office
      of the High Commissioner  and  the  Secretary-General:  Assistance  to
      Sierra Leone in the field of Human Rights  and,  in  particular  to  a
      passage concerning women's rights, [C359]:

           "16.  Through  consistent  advocacy,   technical   support   and
           intervention by the United Nations, international  partners  and
           civil society organizations,  in  2007,  Parliament  passed  the
           Domestic Violence Act, the Devolution of  Estates  Act  and  the
           Registration of Customary Marriages and Divorce  Act,  (referred
           to as the "gender bills") in furtherance of  the  implementation
           of  the  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of   all   Forms   of
           Discrimination against Women. The enactment of the gender  bills
           will hopefully lay a firm foundation to  address  discriminatory
           practices and violence against women, enabling them  to  play  a
           meaningful role in the process of democratization  and  economic
           development.  However,  for  the  gender  bills  to   have   any
           meaningful impact, there is need for  Parliament  to  enact  the
           Sexual Offences  Act  and  the  Matrimonial  Act,  and  to  make
           adequate budgetary allocations to the Ministry of Social Welfare
           for their effective implementation.


           17. Despite the progress on the legislative front, challenges to
           the full realization of  women's  rights  still  abound.  Gender
           equity and women's empowerment remain a challenge  to  the  full
           realization  of  women's  rights  in   Sierra   Leone.   UNIOSIL
           collaborated with the 50/50 Group Sierra Leone and a  number  of
           other  women's  organizations   to   carry   out   sensitization
           activities for aspirant women candidates  at  the  2007  general
           elections as well as on women's rights  to  participate  in  the
           political process. However, women's representation in Parliament
           has dropped from 18 to 16 and only 2 women have  been  appointed
           as Ministers to the new Government, thus indicating  the  deeply
           entrenched discriminatory attitude towards  women  as  political
           leaders.


           18. The increasing incidence of  sexual  and  domestic  violence
           also remains a barrier to the realization of women's  rights  in
           the country. Up to 67 per cent of women  regularly  suffer  from
           domestic violence, including beatings, assault,  destruction  of
           properties and deprivation. Although the rate of  reporting  has
           increased because of the greater awareness among women of  their
           rights, prosecution of cases is  continuously  hampered  by  the
           inadequate capacity of the family support units  of  the  Sierra
           Leone Police, pressure by family members of the victims to  drop
           charges, obstruction  of  justice  by  people  in  high  places,
           including traditional leaders  [and]  politicians,  and  by  the
           unusually long delays in court trials. The  Ministry  of  Social
           Welfare, Gender and  Children's  Affairs,  the  national  entity
           responsible for taking the lead on such matters, lacks  capacity
           and  is  hamstrung  by  the  Government's  inadequate  budgetary
           allocation  for  women's  empowerment  programmes.   The   Peace
           Building Fund is  providing  support  for  capacity-building  of
           family support units and the Ministry."


  53. On the basis of this material and what we have said above, we approach
      the assessment of risk.

The assessment of risk - the subjective and objective fear


  54. If the appellant can do nothing to resist the  pressure  to  become  a
      sowei and is thereby forced to perform  ritual  activities,  including
      FGM, which she finds abhorrent,  these  consequences  are  capable  of
      amounting to persecutory treatment.  Such a conclusion flows from  the
      appellant being required to submit to practices which amount to  grave
      human rights abuses upon others, see BE (Iran) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ
      540.  It is unnecessary to determine whether a forced marriage is,  in
      all cases, itself persecutory treatment  because  Mr  Deller  accepted
      that, if a real risk is made out, it would  be  persecutory.   In  the
      context of this appeal, the combination of  being  forced  into  being
      both a sowei and being forced into marriage  is  enough  to  establish
      treatment sufficiently severe to engage the Geneva Convention.


  55. As a credible  witness,  the  appellant  has  been  found  to  have  a
      subjective fear of these events  occurring.   Having  found  that  the
      appellant has a subjective fear of such treatment,  the  Tribunal  now
      has to determine whether that fear is a well-founded fear in her  home
      village.

An opponent of traditional practices

  56. There is a significant element of  improbability  in  the  appellant's
      claim  that  she  has  been  approached  to  be  a  sowei  given   our
      understanding of the role of Bondo, and in particular, the place of  a
      sowei as one who is adept at performing  the  ritual  functions.   The
      appellant's immaturity,  lack  of  experience  and  understanding  run
      counter to the thrust of the background  material  that  Bondo  elders
      entrust the proper functions of a sowei to  those  who  have  acquired
      experience in the activities of the society.  Whilst heredity may have
      a role to play, it would not appear be a predominant  factor.   As  Dr
      Fanthorpe accepted, his precedent for a daughter taking  over  from  a
      mother in the case of  a  middle-aged  woman  already  known  for  her
      midwifery skills, does not lend  support  to  a  wider  claim  that  a
      daughter without such skills is likely to have the necessary qualities
      to take over the role.   Nor  does  the  fact  that  the  rituals  and
      activities of a secret society  will  be  largely  unknown  alter  the
      evidential burden upon an appellant to establish her case.  There  is,
      therefore, a significant degree  of  speculation  as  to  whether  the
      village elders are breaking away from traditional patterns as part  of
      a conservative backlash against the destructive forces  of  the  civil
      war by drafting in younger persons into positions of responsibility in
      Bondo in order  to  re-engage  a  younger  generation  with  customary
      practices that may seem alien to them.  So, too, is it speculative  to
      attribute the decision to magic or  unseen  forces  operating  on  the
      minds of the local community.  Doubtless, superstitions exist  but  it
      has not been  established  they  operated  in  the  appellant's  case.
      Nevertheless, we are not prepared to differ with the findings of  fact
      made by the Adjudicator to the effect that the appellant's  claim  was
      wholly credible.  We shall take it  that,  for  whatever  reason,  the
      Bondo elders in Bankala selected this appellant, then a  16-year  old,
      to be a sowei.


  57. Given the all pervading importance of Bondo rituals in daily life,  it
      is inconceivable that these functions  will  have  been  suspended  in
      Bankala since the appellant left the country in February 2004, some 4�
      years  ago.   Thus,  it  is  likely  that  village  elders  have  been
      practising the Bondo rituals since 2004 and will  continue  to  do  so
      whether or not the appellant returns to her village.  It is of  course
      impossible to assess whether, in their eyes, these past few years have
      been as successful as they would have been had the appellant  accepted
      the role of sowei.  The  fact  that  the  ancient  rituals  will  have
      survived the appellant's departure must inform  our  thinking  on  the
      risk faced by the appellant on return.  Logic might  appear  to  argue
      that the elders have either chosen another sowei and have no  need  to
      force that appellant to be one; or they have not  done  so  indicating
      that the practice would seem to have stopped.

  58. We also accept the appellant's evidence recited in paragraph 4 of this
      determination that she was recognised after  her  departure  from  the
      village and this led to a group of Bondo women demanding she return to
      Bankala which the  Appellant  resisted  and  she  fled.   That  event,
      sometime in 2003 or early 2004, some 4� years ago, must be seen in its
      historical context.  We cannot properly infer that in the  intervening
      period arrangements have not been made to replace the appellant  as  a
      sowei or that  the  interest  then  displayed  towards  her  would  be
      repeated now.


  59. We think that it is possible that the risk will be no greater than the
      risk faced by others who oppose these practices.  We  are  mindful  of
      the background material (set out in paragraph 6.43 of the COIS report)
      in which an NGO in 2005 spoke of  its  not  being  an  easy  task  for
      campaigners against the practice of FGM: "Sometimes I  get  booed  and
      taunted.  At crucial moments I get chased  out  of  places  where  the
      practice is much  more  prevalent."   We  do  not  consider  that  the
      appellant falls into that extreme category of  outspoken  critics  who
      have been forcibly initiated or might face serious harm.  On the other
      hand, the appellant does not have the backing of an organisation  such
      as an NGO like the woman  whose  words  we  have  quoted.   For  these
      reasons, we are satisfied that it would not be safe for the  appellant
      to return to her home area. We  are  not  satisfied  that  she  has  a
      support base provided by her family; nor  that  the  local  system  of
      justice operates to provide her with effective protection.

  60. Dr Fanthorpe has identified the social pressures exerted on those  who
      fail to conform and whilst there is not general evidence of  hostility
      harboured by Bondo women and their male patrons against non-initiates,
      the particular circumstances of  the  appellant's  case  in  her  home
      village suggest that she could not easily survive in  the  village  by
      remaining an outsider.  The stark choice described by Dr Fanthorpe  of
      conform or starve is probably an apt way to describe the bleak options
      available to her in her home village.  On the other hand, we  are  not
      satisfied that Dr Fanthorpe's evidence in relation to recurrent  cases
      of persons going missing or of abductions or ritual murders which  are
      fairly regularly reported in the press give rise to a real  risk.   Dr
      Fanthorpe accepted this was an area of speculation.

  61. We doubt that we are really able to gain much insight into the  social
      mores or customs of remote villages in Sierra Leone but we  have  been
      provided with a sufficiently detailed account  of  a  traditional  and
      conservative rural environment which is  unreceptive  to  values  that
      promote western concepts concerning the dignity and equality of  women
      in society.   Whilst  the  revolting  operation  of  FGM  will  almost
      inevitably cause a lifetime of physical and psychological problems, as
      great an offence is its underlying rationale, the subjection of  women
      to male dominance and the limitation upon a woman's ability to develop
      a wider potential.  That artless agenda is  all  the  more  remarkable
      because a majority of women in Sierra Leone are  apparently  complicit
      in  the  process;  indeed  justifying  it  under  quack  theories   of
      developing a woman's true persona by removing the maleness in her.  We
      can understand  that  for  supporters  of  these  ingrained  customary
      practices, especially in times of recent social upheaval, there is the
      likelihood of their wishing to  revert  to  these  traditional  shared
      beliefs.  Whilst with the passage of time, we are satisfied  that  the
      villagers of Bankala will have managed to find a means  of  countering
      the effect of the loss of their sowei, we are unable to  speculate  on
      their  attitude   towards   the   return   of   the   appellant   now,
      notwithstanding the passage of time since  these  events  took  place.
      Nevertheless, it is axiomatic where an appellant has been believed  as
      to her account of past risk, that the Tribunal will be  slow  to  find
      that the risk has ceased to exist in the  absence  of  fresh  material
      indicating a change in circumstances that is normally  more  than  the
      passage of time alone.  In the event, it is this factor that  we  have
      found most persuasive.  There is no other evidence  (save  as  to  the
      passage  of  time)  that  demonstrates  a  change  in   circumstances.
      Adopting  this  approach,  (supported  by  paragraph   339K   of   the
      Immigration Rules), the Tribunal is drawn to the conclusion  that  the
      appellant has established to the lower standard that  she  remains  at
      risk of harm in the area of Bankala arising from her being selected to
      act as a sowei and having rejected that role because she is opposed to
      such traditional practices.

The risk of a forced marriage


  62.  Dr Fanthorpe said that he could not say that the appellant  would  be
      forced to marry the chief.   That,  too,  is  our  conclusion  on  the
      evidence.  We can well understand that, had the  appellant  wished  to
      conform to the societal pressure of village life  in  Bankala  by  her
      acceptance of the role of sowei, the  recognition  of  her  status  by
      becoming one of the chief's wives would have been  reasonably  likely.
      We do not see that as a real likelihood now given  our  findings  that
      the  appellant  has  placed  herself  on  the  margin   by   rejecting
      traditional values.  The passage of time is, in our view, a much  more
      significant factor in considering  whether  the  chief  is  reasonably
      likely now to force her into marriage, if only because the chief, then
      a much older man, may no longer be alive.  Whilst  a  forced  marriage
      would amount to persecutory treatment, we are not satisfied  that  the
      appellant faces such a risk on return to Bankala.  Our  assessment  of
      risk proceeds on the basis that she will return as  a  woman  who  has
      eschewed traditional values.

Particular social group

  63. Lord Bingham summarised the effect of Shah and Islam [1999] 2  AC  629
      in paragraph 13 of hi opinion in Fornah:  the  Refugee  Convention  is
      concerned  with  persecution  based  upon  making  distinctions  which
      principles of fundamental human rights regard as inconsistent with the
      right of every human being judged in the context  of  the  society  in
      which the group forms part.  The social group need not be cohesive but
      it must exist independently of the persecution.


  64. Article 10 of the Qualification Directive  (2004/83/EC)  refers  to  a
      group being considered as forming a particular social group  where  in
      particular:
           members of that group  share  an  innate  characteristic,  or  a
           common  background  that  cannot  be   changed,   or   share   a
           characteristic or belief that is so fundamental to  identity  or
           conscience that a person should not be forced  to  renounce  it,
           and
           that group has a distinct  identity  in  the  relevant  country,
           because it is perceived as being different  by  the  surrounding
           society;

      This  definition  is  accurately  reproduced  in   the   Qualification
      Regulations (SI 2006 No 2525), Reg 6 (d).

  65. In Fornah, Lord Bingham  chose  the  broadest  classification,  namely
      women in Sierra Leone on the clear evidence that women share a  common
      characteristic being forced into  a  position  of  social  inferiority
      compared with men.  If FGM  affords  a  means  by  which  a  woman  is
      accepted into Sierra Leonean culture, it  does  so  on  the  basis  of
      institutionalised inferiority.  See paragraph 31:

           "FGM is an extreme expression of the discrimination to which all
           women in Sierra Leone  are  subject,  as  much  those  who  have
           already undergone the process as those who have not."

      Disagreeing with the position adopted by  Auld  LJ  in  the  Court  of
      Appeal, both Lord Bingham and Lord Hope took  the  view  that  because
      those who have undergone the process were no longer at  risk  did  not
      prevent the identification of women as members of a particular  social
      group.   The identification of a section of the group not at risk  was
      not inimical to the existence of the particular  social  group.   See,
      for example, Lord Hope at paragraph 55.

  66. Lord Hope was content to  avoid  the  difficulty  by  re-defining  the
      particular social group  in  narrower  terms:  uninitiated  indigenous
      females in Sierra Leone.  This avoided the risk of  introducing  those
      initiated into the description.  He considered such  a  classification
      avoided defining the class by reference to the persons  likely  to  be
      persecuted.


  67. Lord Rodgers classified the group  in  similar  terms  as  uninitiated
      (intact) women and girls, rejecting the principle that initiated women
      are disparaged (paragraph 74) and thereby the concept that the process
      of FGM is itself an act of disparagement.  He did not accept that both
      initiated and uninitiated form part of a particular social group.   In
      his opinion, it was necessary that all members of the group should  be
      susceptible to the persecution.  He did not reject the principle  that
      in a given context all women might forma particular social group;  nor
      did he reject the concept that if there is  widespread  discrimination
      against women in various aspects of life in Sierra Leone, this was not
      a sufficient reason to overlook the more specific reason - that  these
      were intact women.  If wrong he accepted the  wider  social  group  of
      women and girls who face mutilation, notwithstanding the fact that the
      persecution was conducted by women,  that  is,  members  of  the  very
      particular social group who are classified as victims.

  68. Baroness Hale recognised the world had woken up to  the  reality  that
      women might be persecuted in ways that were different from  men  which
      may include their treatment as the social inferiors of  men  in  their
      home country. In a patriarchal society the  recruitment  of  women  to
      perform the persecutory acts against women was simply a  manifestation
      of the subjugation of women by men  that  was  at  the  heart  of  the
      persecution.   Relying  on  the  UNHCR  guidelines  on  Gender-Related
      Persecution, she concluded that if a woman is persecuted  because  she
      is a woman in a country where women are assigned an  inferior  status,
      this is sufficient to engage the Refugee  Convention  without  further
      sub-classification.

  69. The fact that judicial decision-makers at the  highest  level  in  the
      United Kingdom have not reached a unanimous decision about the precise
      definition, nature or scope of a particular social group  suggests  to
      us that such distinctions are elusive  and,  in  the  final  analysis,
      perhaps less important  than  judges  and  commentators  have  earlier
      thought.  In particular, the process by which successive  courts  have
      defined and re-defined and defined again the constituent elements of a
      particular social group has more to do with semantics than recognising
      the face of a refugee.  In the context of this case, the  facts  which
      we see as breathing life into the description of this appellant  as  a
      member of a particular social group arise from her  relative  weakness
      to combat the risks she faces and this  derives  ultimately  from  the
      fact that she is a woman.  Secondly, it arises from the relative  lack
      of support provided by the community itself in the form  of  effective
      protection offered by the lawmakers, the law enforcers and  the  other
      state agencies who themselves reflect and reinforce underlying  social
      attitudes.  These are the brush strokes in the  broadest  sense.   The
      various elements can be  identified  in  greater  detail  by  specific
      reference to the facts of the appellant's case:  the  appellant  as  a
      young female, without a male  protector  or  the  support  of  family,
      extended family, clan, religious or other support group.  It can  also
      be identified by reference to the state's attitude  towards  her:  the
      lack of effective legislative protection; the lack of universal  state
      control; the pervasive influence of customary practices;  the  absence
      of any willingness to grant protection.  Once again, these  categories
      are not designed to be a comprehensive list of factors.


  70. We do not consider that the fact that the appellant has undergone  FGM
      must necessarily exclude her from membership of  a  particular  social
      group.  Those who have already been initiated face  a  different,  but
      still serious,  risk  of  harm  but  the  risk  stems  from  the  same
      underlying social and cultural milieu.

  71. Given the risk and applying the principles underlying the decision  in
      Fornah, the lengthy arguments directed at whether the appellant is  to
      be treated as a member of a particular social  group  can  be  swiftly
      disposed of.  If uninitiated women who are at risk of FGM fall  to  be
      treated as members of a particular  social  group  by  reason  of  the
      absence of protection afforded to them by the  state  authorities  and
      the complicity  of  those  in  power,  we  see  little  difficulty  in
      accepting  that  the  appellant  is  capable  of  forming  part  of  a
      particular social group by her resistance to accepting the  prevailing
      cultural norms in her own rural society.


Imputed Political opinion

  72. The appellant, of course, holds no political opinions.  She  does  not
      approve of FGM or wish to participate in the  Bondo  or  to  marry  an
      elderly man occupying a position of local chief.  Her motives are  not
      political in any discernible way.  That, however, is  not  the  point.
      She has been identified as one who has rejected  the  traditional  and
      customary ways of her village.  Those traditions and  customs  include
      the recognition of the local chief in the social hierarchy.  There  is
      thus a political element that might be extracted both from the  social
      place of Bondo and the position of the chief as the  principal  source
      of local governance.  These so-called 'political' elements are  relied
      upon to support a claim that the rejection of customary mores will  be
      imputed as opposition to the existing status quo and therefore  as  an
      imputed political opinion giving rise to a further Convention reason.


  73. We have, however, concluded that  it  does  not,  in  spite  of  these
      political 'overtones'. See, generally, the reasoning of the  Court  of
      Appeal in Quijano v SSHD [1996] EWCA Civ 1244.  Our view is that there
      is but a peripheral connection between these political strands and her
      resistance to being a sowei and becoming involved with  rituals  which
      she considers  harmful  and  demeaning  (both  to  herself  and  those
      subjected to them) and her obvious reluctance to marry a man for  whom
      she does not care.  The fact that the chief is, in a  sense,  a  local
      politician  and  that  the  Bondo  has  a  political  element  in  its
      operations is not conclusive are not conclusive in characterising this
      claim as one of imputed political opinion.  This  classification  may,
      in large measure, be a simple matter of fact.


  74. These considerations are largely academic because  the  appellant  has
      established a risk of harm in  her  home  area  and  we  have  already
      identified that the harm is related to her membership of a  particular
      social group.  The 'political' dimension of her appeal has no  bearing
      when consideration is given to internal relocation since  we  are  not
      concerned there with a Convention reason when  applying  the  relevant
      tests.   The  passages  in  Gomez  (Non-state   actors:   Acero-Garces
      disapproved) (Colombia) * [2000] UKIAT 00007 to which we were referred
      in the appellant's skeleton argument contain a large measure of  broad
      interpretative guidance but can properly be reduced to the  Tribunal's
      overarching conclusion that in any particular case it will depend very
      much on the individual circumstances.

Internal relocation: Reasonableness-unduly harsh

  75. In considering internal relocation, we have  considered  the  guidance
      offered in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5, AH (Sudan) [2008] UKHL  49  and  more
      recently in AB (Jamaica)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  784.   A  person  is  not
      entitled to the protection of the Convention if there is a part of her
      country of origin where she would not have  a  well  founded  fear  of
      being persecuted, and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in
      that part of the country.  In reaching a decision, regard must be  had
      to the general circumstances prevailing in that part  of  the  country
      and to the personal circumstances of the person, see paragraph 339O of
      the Immigration Rules.


  76. Central to the consideration is an assessment of what  conditions  the
      appellant will face in Freetown.   The  first  stage  is  to  consider
      whether the appellant will be safe there.  If the  appellant  has  not
      established a risk of harm  there,  the  next  stage  is  to  consider
      whether it is reasonable for her to stay there or, to  use  the  other
      side of the same coin, whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh.   In  the
      course of the evidence, we considered relocation in  Freetown,  partly
      because it will be the destination  for  the  appellant's  return  and
      partly because it is a cosmopolitan urban environment where the  rural
      chiefs do not have so great an influence and where state authority  is
      more evident.


  77. First, we think that Dr Fanthorpe's  evidence  was  clear.   Were  the
      appellant to relocate, she is not at risk of being forcibly removed to
      Bankala and the consequences that would flow from it.  He did not  say
      that the background material suggested there was a real likelihood  of
      forcible action, although he spoke of the risk that, in a country that
      relies upon networks for the distribution of information  and  gossip,
      there was a risk that the presence of the  appellant  in  Freetown  or
      elsewhere would filter back to her home village.

  78. Second Dr Fanthorpe also spoke of the protection that is  afforded  by
      marriage and was here referring not just to a specific  chief  in  her
      home area who had approved her for marriage to him.  In  this  context
      he spoke of the pressure upon any unmarried  woman,  with  or  without
      children to obtain a male protector in order  to  function  better  in
      Sierra Leonean society.  We can well see that there are real and solid
      advantages in  marriage  in  comparison  with  a  state  of  existence
      experienced  by  those  who  are  unmarried,  separated,  divorced  or
      widowed.  These advantages apply equally  to  those  with  or  without
      children, unless the children are sufficiently mature to act  in  part
      as protectors.   With such advantages in favour of marriage,  a  woman
      will inevitably be under pressure to marry but that does not,  in  our
      judgment, amount to putting her at risk of  a  forced  marriage.   The
      coercion that the Adjudicator found  that  the  appellant  was  placed
      under to marry the  local  chief  was  different  in  quality  and  in
      substance from  a  more  general  social  pressure  placed  upon  this
      appellant to marry for the sake of benefiting from a  male  protector.
      It is too speculative to assert that  such  pressure  is  persecutory.
      (In any event, whilst self-interest may have a part to play,  it  does
      not by any means exclude the real possibility of such a marriage being
      the voluntary exercise of free-will.)


  79. In the same way that it is too speculative to find that the  appellant
      will be forced into a loveless marriage as a viable means of gaining a
      protector, it is also too speculative to assume that  she  will  marry
      out of choice and thereby gain a protector. Hence, we have  to  assess
      the risk to the appellant as  a  single  person  with  2  children  in
      Freetown.  She is not at risk  of  FGM  or  further  mutilation.   The
      evidence that the appellant is not likely to suffer  direct  targeting
      from those who participate in Bondo removes a key risk.  The incidents
      of violence were  described  by  Dr  Fanthorpe  as  arising  when  the
      activities of the Bondo wrestled for space with those opposed to their
      practices.  Specific violence occurred when opponents spoke  out  and,
      in two cases at  least,  were  forcibly  subjected  to  mutilation  in
      response.  These specific risks are not faced by this appellant.

  80. There  are  other  discrete  areas  of  risk.   First,  the  appellant
      according to Dr Fanthorpe will face the  risk  of  exposing  her  past
      history to those with whom she is forced into contact in  Freetown  or
      elsewhere.  On the assumption that she will have to  reveal  the  fact
      that she is no longer an active participant in Bondo activities,  that
      will result in her becoming part of the  minority  of  Sierra  Leonean
      women  who  do  not  actively  participate  in  Bondo  or  the  secret
      societies.  Whilst this will not in itself lead to her being  targeted
      it will result in her being marginalised.  Further, as  a  person  who
      has  returned  to  Sierra  Leone  having  failed  to  settle   herself
      successfully  in  Europe  or  elsewhere  she  will   not   be   viewed
      sympathetically by other Sierra Leoneans, presumably those envious  of
      the chance of success that  she  was  offered  and  indignant  at  her
      failure.  The consequences of her past  history  being  revealed  will
      therefore result in  her  being  taunted  and  harassed  but,  in  our
      judgment, this falls well short of being at risk of  serious  harm  or
      persecutory treatment.   She  may  well  face  greater  difficulty  in
      enlisting the help of others and will not have the ready access to the
      extended family or the connections to whom she might  otherwise  turn.
      She will not, however, be entirely isolated as the background material
      establishes she will form part of a significant minority within Sierra
      Leone namely those who have disassociated themselves  from  the  Bondo
      and traditional practices.


  81. We therefore turn to the substantive conditions in Freetown  and  this
      means consideration of the prospects of leading a life  such  that  it
      would be reasonable to  expect  her  to  settle  there.   This  itself
      requires an assessment of the economic  and  social  circumstances  in
      Freetown for this appellant and in particular the risk that she  faces
      of being reduced to begging, crime or prostitution.  On the  facts  of
      this case, the risk faced by the appellant has always been  identified
      in argument as the risk of prostitution representing, as it would  do,
      the most degrading form of destitution and one that is most  alien  to
      universal principles of human dignity.  Nevertheless, prostitution  or
      sexual exploitation are just two of the various forms that destitution
      can take.  We would not wish to draw  distinctions  between  them  and
      beggary or being forced through want into crime.  Nor would we  regard
      it, of course, as a risk that is faced exclusively by a women or young
      girls.   Prostitution,  (other  than  through   unequivocal   choice),
      destitution and their associated risks of damage to health and dignity
      are the result of an individual's failure to find survival  techniques
      in the community in which he or she is living.  For our  purposes,  we
      exclude the possibility that these conditions are  the  result  of  an
      exercise of free choice.


  82. We approach the assessment of risk to this appellant from the starting
      point that prostitution is always available to those who have no other
      means of survival and is an unacceptable solution to  the  eradication
      of want.

  83. The  issue  in  this  appeal,  therefore,  centres  upon  whether  the
      appellant has established the real likelihood that Freetown offers her
      no means of survival, other than destitution or prostitution.  In this
      regard, we must take the appellant as she is.  There are a  number  of
      factors that are particularly significant.  She is now aged  21.   She
      has two children.  She has no male protector.  She has  no  family  or
      extended family to whom she can turn.  She has no access to  effective
      charity from the F mosque in Freetown.  She  is  without  connections.
      This is not to be taken as a comprehensive list as there are a  number
      of other factors, identified in other  parts  of  this  determination,
      which have described the appellant's position.  On the positive  side,
      the appellant is clearly an intelligent woman; she has  completed  the
      initial stages of her nursing training  and  is  only  permitted  from
      going further by restrictions on what she is now permitted  to  do  in
      the United Kingdom.  Whilst we would never wish to  underestimate  the
      vulnerability of young women in the position  of  the  appellant,  the
      appellant herself has shown both courage and resilience in facing  her
      difficulties.

  84. Thus, the Tribunal's task is to assess the risk faced by the appellant
      without the social and family  networks  that  provide  mechanisms  of
      support, particularly for lone women.  The fact that the appellant has
      been absent will oblige her to form social contacts again.

  85. We make the following findings from the evidence;

        i) Freetown is the principal destination for  those  leaving  rural
           areas.
       ii) As a young woman, who has eschewed traditional  values,  she  is
           one of many young Sierra Leoneans who have decided that the  old
           social system has little to offer and, in particular,  that  FGM
           is an anachronism.  This group is indeed placed in  a  difficult
           position as a minority group, perhaps, representing as little as
           10% of the  population.   Nevertheless,  members  of  the  Bondo
           societies  fall  short  of  adopting  a  positively  hostile  or
           combatant attitude to  non-adherents  of  Bondo  principles  and
           avoid targeting them.   The  treatment  faced  by  the  minority
           amounts to taunting and harassment but is not persecutory.
      iii) The migration to Freetown is both  of  males  and  females;  the
           females are in the minority but are  catching  up  in  numerical
           terms.
       iv) Freetown is a cosmopolitan society, where work is  available  to
           both men and women.
        v) For migrants to Freetown,  those  with  the  ability  to  access
           support would face  no  risk.   Such  support  mechanisms  might
           include:
           a. family connections;
           b. support mechanisms from  other  groups,  such  as  the  Bondo
              societies;
           c. support from a local mosque or church.
       vi) There is however  no  compelling  evidence  that  these  support
           mechanisms are  the  sole  means  of  eliminating  the  risk  of
           destitution and its corollary of the risk of  beggary,  recourse
           to crime or prostitution.  This is a crucial finding in relation
           to this present appeal.

  86. The background material has  spoken  of  the  type  of  work  that  is
      available to women.  Dr Fanthorpe spoke of the fortunate who are  able
      to find a householder, shopkeeper, or lorry driver able to offer  food
      and shelter in return for menial work.  Dr  Fanthorpe  also  spoke  of
      those selling newspapers, cassettes and other vending work.   Although
      he also referred  to  the  difficulties  inherent  for  those  without
      connections, there is evidence of work in nursing and teaching.   Yet,
      at the same time, he spoke of the forces that drive migration into the
      cities.  That force  is  not  the  prospect  of  destitution  but  the
      prospect of seeking relative  advantages.   No  statistics  have  been
      given concerning the number of jobs available to females in  Freetown.
      It would require cogent  evidence  to  establish  that  jobs  are  not
      available for  shop  workers,  waitresses,  typists,  office  workers,
      domestic workers or  street  vendors  rising  through  to  those  more
      skilled in teaching or nursing.  The numbers of  such  placements  are
      likely to be significant.  We have no statistics available as  to  the
      numbers of those who are destitute or forced  into  prostitution.   Dr
      Fanthorpe properly spoke of  the  better  opportunities  available  to
      those with "connections".  Nevertheless, the evidence falls  short  of
      establishing that only those with connections can  find  work  or  are
      able to avoid prostitution.  We do not say that the appellant does not
      face the possibility of destitution but nor do we find  that  she  has
      established the reasonable likelihood that she will  not  be  able  to
      find work.  We think this finding is consistent  with  Dr  Fanthorpe's
      evidence.  We can do no better than repeat what Dr Fanthorpe said:


           "It is a matter of emphasis.  The cassette-sellers  vendors  and
           the newspaper organisers  are  springing  up  and  migrants  are
           finding ways to survive... It is not a question of  leaving  the
           rural areas behind and going  into  a  city.   The  pressure  to
           conform is not  there  the  less.   It  remains  a  question  of
           conforming or starving. This is the cutting-edge of research  at
           this time in Sierra Leone.  What is the effect of migration post-
           war?  I cannot give a more definite answer."


  87. Furthermore, we do not consider that the evidence establishes that job
      opportunities are restricted to single women  without  children.   The
      evidence falls short of establishing  that  having  children  prevents
      women engaging in work.  Any economy that has a female workforce as an
      integral element must operate on the basis  that  working  women  will
      often need childcare arrangements.  Such arrangements  are  likely  to
      range from  paid  care  to  drawing  upon  help  from  neighbours  and
      acquaintances.  It would require cogent evidence to make out  a  case,
      even to the lower standard of proof, that the presence of children  as
      part of the family unit prevents the mother from working in  societies
      which has no system of welfare benefits.  Whilst  the  presence  of  a
      mother or close relative would clearly be advantageous as the provider
      of childcare, the evidence  falls  short  of  establishing  that  such
      assistance is a necessity.    In reaching  this  conclusion,  we  take
      into account the fact is that this appellant has no family  member  to
      whom she can turn but we also take into account the particular  skills
      that she has developed in the  United  Kingdom  and  the  courage  and
      resourcefulness she has displayed in coming here.

  88. Absent a risk of harm and a failure to demonstrate that  she  has  not
      acquired the techniques  necessary  to  survive  in  Freetown  without
      destitution, the appellant's relocation to Freetown  is  a  reasonable
      step for her to take.  We consider that the appellant has been  unable
      to show that she cannot lead an independent life.

Conclusion

  89. The appellant has established that the treatment she fears in her home
      area is sufficient to amount to a level of severity capable  of  being
      persecutory.


  90. She is at risk of serious harm in her home area.

  91. The risk of harm arises from her being a woman and as a  member  of  a
      particular social group for the purposes of the Convention.  If a more
      limited group needs be identified, it is as  a  woman  who  has  shown
      herself opposed to traditional values in her rural environment.

  92. She has not established she is now at risk of a forced marriage to the
      local chief.

  93.  She has not established she is at risk of abduction from Freetown  to
      her home area by those known to her in Bankala; nor at  risk  of  harm
      from members of the Bondo societies in Freetown.

  94. She has not established she is at general risk of harm for  any  other
      reason in Freetown.  The appellant has failed to establish that she is
      at risk of being forced through destitution  into  beggary,  crime  or
      prostitution.  Had the appellant established a risk  of  prostitution,
      this would  render  the  internal  flight  alternative  impermissible.
      Accordingly, there is an internal flight option open to the  appellant
      that it would be reasonable for her to take; it would  not  be  unduly
      harsh for her to do so.

      DECISION

        1) The original Tribunal made a material error of law.
                     i) Having found  that  the  Immigration  Judge  made  a
                        material error of law, we substitute a determination
                        dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds;
                    ii)  This  being  an  upgrade  appeal,  no   claim   for
                        humanitarian protection or under the ECHR calls  for
                        decision.








                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE




                                                            17 November 2008

                                                             LIST OF SOURCES





   The Country of Origin Information Service report, 2006.


   Human Rights Watch report on sexual violence in the Sierra Leone civil
      war.


   US State Department Report 2004


   US State Department Report on FGM in Sierra Leone, 2001


   United Nations IRIN report, about the practice of FGM in Sierra, 23 March
      2005.


   Inter Press Service News Agency report about FGM, dated 19 April 2005.


   International Alert - Addressing Gender-Based Violence in Sierra Leone:
      Mapping Challenges, Responses and Future Entry Points.


   Amnesty International Sierra Leone report: Women face human rights abuses
      in the informal legal sector, May 2006


   Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
      Office in Sierra Leone.


   United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
      Women (CEDAW) in relation to Sierra Leone, June 2007.


   United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and reports of the
      Office of the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General: Assistance
      to Sierra Leone in the field of Human Rights, 2008



