
FO and Others (Service of notice of decision) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00093


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

No hearing


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Renton
                     Designated Immigration Judge Aitken

                                   Between


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent

1.  Use of a courier does not appear to be service in  accordance  with  the
Notices Regulations and therefore does  not  cause  time  to  begin  to  run
against a potential appellant.  2.  Where the Respondent gives  no  reliable
information as to the date of service, the Tribunal is  likely  to  rely  on
information given by the appellant.



                        DECISION ON PRELIMINARY ISSUE


 1. In BO & Others (Extension of time for appealing) Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT
    00035 and OI Nigeria (Notice  of  decision:  time  calculation)  [2006]
    UKAIT 00042   the Tribunal has given guidance on the law  and  practice
    to be adopted by those of its members who  have  to  decide  whether  a
    notice of appeal was given, or is to be treated as given, in time.   In
    individual cases the guidance is sometimes difficult to apply,  because
    of the practices of Entry  Clearance  Officers.   We  attempt  here  to
    analyse some issues relating to service of the notice of  the  decision
    against which an appeal is brought.  We have attempted  to  deal  fully
    and fairly with the matters that have come to our attention.  Under the
    provisions of Rule 6 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)
    Rules 2005 (SI: 2005/230), however, we  are  required  to  decide  such
    issues without a hearing and by reference only to the matters mentioned
    in that rule.  We are conscious that we have not  had  the  benefit  of
    legal argument on either side.   Nevertheless,  decisions  have  to  be
    made.

 2. Appeals to this Tribunal have to be begun by notice of appeal.  If  the
    appeal is against the refusal of entry clearance, Rule 7(2)(b)  of  the
    Procedure Rules provides that the notice must be given by the appellant
    "not later than  28  days  after  he  is  served  with  notice  of  the
    decision".  Under the provisions of Rule 10, time may be  extended,  on
    application, but only if the Tribunal "is satisfied that by  reason  of
    special circumstances it would be unjust not to" extend  time.   It  is
    therefore clear that in  any  case  in  which  there  are  no  "special
    circumstances" the notice of appeal must be in  time  in  order  to  be
    valid.  And the time limit of 28 days has to  be  calculated  from  the
    date of service of the decision.

 3. The rules applying to service of the decision are not in the Tribunal's
    Procedure  Rules,  because  the  decision  itself  is  not  a  Tribunal
    document.  They are in the Immigration (Notices) Regulations  2003  (SI
    2003/658).  Those Regulations require a written notice to be  given  of
    any immigration decision which is "appealable", that  is,  can  be  the
    subject of an appeal to the Tribunal.  Regulations 4, 5 and 6  set  out
    the duty to give the notice, and specify its contents.  Regulation 7 is
    headed "Service of Notice" and is as follows:

        "7.      - (1) A notice required to be given under regulation 4 may
        be -
             (a)   given by hand;
             (b)   sent by fax;
             (c)  sent by postal service in which  delivery  or  receipt  is
                 recorded to:-
                 (i)    an address provided for correspondence by the person
                     or his representative; or
                 (ii)  where no address for correspondence has been provided
                     by the person, the last-known or usual place of  abode
                     or  place  of  business   of   the   person   or   his
                     representative.
        (2)      Where -
             (a)  a person's whereabouts are not known; and
             (b)
                 (i)   no address has been provided for  correspondence  and
                     the decision-maker does not  know  the  last-known  or
                     usual place of abode  or  place  of  business  of  the
                     person; or
                 (ii)    the  address  provided  to  the  decision-maker  is
                     defective, false or no longer in use  by  the  person;
                     and
             (c)  no representative appears to be acting for the person, the
                 notice shall be deemed to have been given when the decision-
                 maker enters a record of the above circumstances and places
                 the signed notice on the relevant file.
        (3)      Where a notice has been given in accordance with paragraph
             (2) and then subsequently the person is located,  he  shall  be
             given a copy of the notice and details of when and how  it  was
             given as soon as is practicable.
        (4)      Where  a  notice  is  sent  by  post  in  accordance  with
             paragraph (1)(c) it shall be deemed to have been served, unless
             the contrary is proved, -
             (a)  on the second day after it was posted if it is sent  to  a
                 place within the United Kingdom;
             (b)  on the twenty-eighth day after it was posted if it is sent
                 to a place outside the United Kingdom.
        (5)      For the purposes of paragraph (4)  the  period  is  to  be
             calculated -
             (a)  excluding the day on which the notice is posted; and
             (b)  in the case of paragraph (4)(a), excluding any  day  which
                 is not a business day.
        (6)       In this regulation, "business day" means  any  day  other
             than Saturday or Sunday, a day which is a  bank  holiday  under
             the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 in the part of  the
             United Kingdom to which the notice is sent,  Christmas  Day  or
             Good Friday.
        (7)      A notice given under regulation 4 may, in the  case  of  a
             minor who does not have  a  representative,  be  given  to  the
             parent, guardian or another adult who for the time being  takes
             responsibility for the child."


 4. If the  requirements  of  the  Notices  Regulations  are  followed,  in
    conjunction with ordinary office procedures - for example, a proper and
    accurate notice of the date of service of a document delivered by hand,
    there ought to be no difficulty in knowing the date of service  of  the
    decision and hence the beginning of the  28  days  limited  for  giving
    notice of appeal.  Unfortunately, both the  procedures  used  by  Entry
    Clearance Officers and the records they keep leave the matter in  doubt
    in a substantial number of cases.

 5. The standard form used for giving notice of refusal of entry  clearance
    in a number of posts has a space for giving the reason for the decision
    and the decision itself, and then states the right of  appeal  and  the
    address at which an appeal can be lodged (under Procedure Rule  6  this
    may be the Tribunal's office in England or the overseas  post  itself).
    Below that is the following:

        "The completed appeal form should not arrive  later  than  28  days
        after the date of this notice.


        The completed appeal form must be signed and dated.


        Entry Clearance Officer __________________________ Date of  Refusal
        ___________


         The following is only applicable if  this  notice  was  personally
        handed to you by an Entry Clearance Officer:


        A notice (of which this is a copy) was handed to me by


        The    contents    have    been     translated     to     me     in
        _____________________________________


        Applicants'          [sic]          signature______________________
        Date________________________"

    It will be clear from what we have said already that the form  contains
    a clear misstatement of law.  The law  does  not  require  a  completed
    appeal form to arrive within 28 days after the date of the notice.   It
    requires the appeal form to arrive within 28 days after the  notice  is
    served.  The information on the notice of decision is misleading,  and,
    given that we drew attention to this point in OI (Notice  of  decision:
    time calculations) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00042, over a year ago, we must
    assume from the continued use of the form that its  users  have  little
    interest in giving correct information.  (The  Notices  Regulations  do
    not require the time for appealing to be  included  in  the  notice  of
    decision.  It has to be on the appeal form, and is.  That is,  however,
    no excuse  for  providing  wrong,  different  and  therefore  confusing
    information on the notice itself.)


 6. The wrongness of the information at the foot of the Notice of  Decision
    is particularly striking if the decision is sent by post.  Then,  under
    the provisions of regs 7(4)(b) and (5),  the  decision  is  not  served
    until the twenty-eighth day after posting, ignoring the date of posting
    itself.  In such circumstances the period  stated  in  the  notice  has
    wholly expired by the time the period fixed by  law  begins.   The  two
    periods have not a single day in common.

 7. The next problem about the standard form is that although it contains a
    space for entering the date of the decision  itself  (which  is  by  no
    means always completed: OI was a case where it had not been), there  is
    no provision for entering the date or  method  of  service.   The  only
    exception is where the notice is "personally handed to"  the  applicant
    by an Entry Clearance Officer, in which case the receipt at the end may
    be (but, judging from our experience, by no means always is) completed.
     In fact there are some posts where the receipt  is  never  -  or  very
    rarely - applicable, because the Entry Clearance Officers have decided,
    for various reasons,  to  have  little  or  no  personal  contact  with
    applicants.

 8. Where the receipt is not completed, there is apparently  no  record  of
    the date of service: surprisingly enough,  there  is  often  no  record
    either of whether service in accordance with  the  Notices  Regulations
    has ever taken place at all.  Sometimes, no doubt, there is service  by
    hand,  even  in  cases  where  the  receipt  has  not  been  completed.
    Sometimes, no doubt, there is service by post: but service by  post  is
    only lawful service of the notice if "delivery or receipt is recorded".
     We do not recall ever having seen an assertion by an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer that such was the case.

 9. We understand that Entry Clearance Officers often communicate decisions
    by the use of  "collection  notices":  after  the  preparation  of  the
    decision the applicant is told that it is ready for collection  and  he
    returns to the office to collect it.  This is service "by hand", though
    not by an Entry Clearance Officer personally (so  the  receipt  is  not
    apposite) and the  date  of  service  seems  not  to  be  regularly  or
    officially recorded; or, if it is recorded,  the  record  is  not  made
    available to the Tribunal and so cannot influence any decision.

10. We also understand, from the inspection of a large number of cases  and
    the documents that appellants send with their notices of  appeal,  that
    some Entry Clearance posts employ the services of commercial  couriers.
    Sometimes, no doubt, the courier is engaged to deliver  the  notice  by
    taking it to the applicant's address; sometimes the courier is  engaged
    to operate as  indicated  in  the  previous  paragraph,  notifying  the
    applicants that their decisions are available for collection  from  the
    courier's office and making them available for collection  there.   The
    use of couriers poses some problems, because it does not appear  to  be
    envisaged by the Notices Regulations at all.

11. We regard it as clear beyond argument  that  service  of  a  notice  by
    courier is not  sending  it  by  post.   Postal  services  and  courier
    services are antonyms, not synonyms.  Section 7 of  the  Interpretation
    Act 1978, (which by s23(i) applies to the  Notices  Regulations  as  it
    applies to Acts of Parliament) is as follows:

        "References to service by post


        7. Where an Act authorises or requires any document to be served by
             post (whether the expression "serve" or the  expression  "give"
             or "send" or any other expression is  used)  then,  unless  the
             contrary intention appears, the service is effected by properly
             addressing, prepaying  and  posting  a  letter  containing  the
             document and, unless the  contrary  is  proved,  to  have  been
             effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered  in
             the ordinary course of post."

    The provisions as to the time of service is  the  subject  of  contrary
    provision in the Notices Regulations at  reg  7(4),  but  there  is  no
    suggestion that anything other than  post  in  the  ordinary  sense  is
    meant.  The postal service in any country is the official public  means
    of conveying letters and parcels to addresses; it  is  the  service  by
    reason of which the country is, like 190 other countries, a  member  of
    the Universal Postal Union.  It is the service to which a  letter  sent
    by post from another country is committed on arrival in the country  in
    question.  It is not a commercial courier service.

12. Can the use of a courier service be seen as giving the notice by  hand?
    With little hesitation, but mindful of the  caution  expressed  at  the
    beginning of this decision, we think that the answer again has to be in
    the negative.  First, if a courier is used, there would seem to  be  no
    difference in principle whether the courier receives  the  document  in
    the same office from which he makes it  available  for  collection,  or
    whether he carries it some short or long distance before delivering  it
    to the addressee.  It is true that in either case  the  probability  is
    the document is given, by hand, to the addressee by the  courier.   But
    that is also true of delivery by  post  if  a  registered  or  recorded
    delivery service  is  used,  and  nobody  has  ever  to  our  knowledge
    suggested that  delivery  "by  hand"  includes  use  of  registered  or
    recorded delivery post.  Giving a notice of decision by hand means,  in
    principle, that the person making the decision gives the notice to  the
    person in respect of whom it is made.  The use of  the  phrase  in  the
    context of regulations as to service and the consequent running of time
    to our mind implies an instantaneous communication in  the  sense  that
    the person affected by the notice receives it as it leaves  the  person
    making the decision.  We would be prepared (as at present  advised)  to
    treat the meaning of the phrase as extending to cases where the  notice
    is handed to the applicant by another member of  the  embassy's  staff,
    with the same employer and answerable to the same ethos of work (if  we
    may so put it) as the decision-maker.  But a notice is  not  "given  by
    hand" within the meaning of the Notices Regulations merely because  the
    addressee receives it from somebody else's hand.  It is "given by hand"
    only if he receives it by hand from the decision-maker  or  some  other
    member of the embassy staff.

13. We appreciate that this conclusion is far from being unarguably  right.
    It may be that UK  posts  abroad  are  entitled  to  subcontract  Entry
    Clearance  functions  (including  the  giving  of  notices)  to   local
    commercial organisations,  in  which  case  it  might  be  argued  that
    delivery by the courier is giving the notice by hand.  We do not  know.
    All we can say is that no such thing appears to  be  envisaged  by  the
    Notices Regulations.  Nor does it appear to be envisaged by a decision-
    maker who makes provision for the date of the decision to  be  recorded
    in such a way as to be taken as the  date  of  service  only  when  the
    notice was 'personally handed [over] by an  Entry  Clearance  Officer'.
    It is for the reasons we have given that we reach the  conclusion  that
    we do.  But, in any event, the use of couriers means that the  Tribunal
    seems to have no reliable information from  the  Respondent  about  the
    date of service (or alleged service), and in  those  circumstances  the
    consequences set out at paras 16-17 below follow inevitably.

14.  The  consequences  of  this  interpretation  of  the  rules,  to   the
    possibility of which we alluded in OI at  [14],  are  serious.   First,
    Entry Clearance Officers using courier  services,  or  postal  services
    where neither delivery nor receipt is recorded, are failing to  observe
    the law every time they do so.  Secondly, because  the  notice  is  not
    served as required by the Notices Regulations,  time  for  bringing  an
    appeal does not run against the applicant: the period of  time  limited
    for giving a notice of appeal cannot start until there  is  service  in
    accordance with the Regulations.

15. We have to say that we have considerable  difficulty  in  understanding
    why Entry Clearance Officers do not  comply  with  the  rules  made  by
    Parliament for routine aspects of their work; and we do not  understand
    why simple ordinary office practices, such as a record of the date  and
    method of service of a notice, do not appear to feature  in  our  posts
    abroad.  Alternatively, if such records are kept, we do not  understand
    why an appropriate (as distinct from misleading) note is not put on the
    notice of decision.  The present position is that  there  is  often  no
    evidence of the date when a decision was received by an applicant other
    than his own statement; and, for the reasons given above, where a  date
    is given, that date may in fact not have been the date of service.

16. Immigration Judges have to make their decisions on such evidence as  is
    available to them.  The burden of proving that a notice is in  time  is
    no doubt on  the  appellant;  but  where  no  relevant  information  is
    provided by the respondent that burden may be quite easy to  discharge.
    It does not follow that all notices should be treated  as  having  been
    given in time; but where there is a statement by the appellant  of  the
    date of service on him (whether in a notice  of  appeal  or  elsewhere)
    that is not wholly incredible, and no such statement by the respondent,
    it is difficult to see why the Tribunal should not simply  act  on  the
    former.  To do otherwise simply condones the respondent's failures  and
    runs the risk of endangering the Tribunal's independence.

17. As regards the method by which the notice of decision  was  transmitted
    to the appellant, the Tribunal will of course  not  simply  assume  the
    Respondent  to  have  used  a  method  not  allowed  by   the   Notices
    Regulations,  for  omnia  praesumuntur  rite  esse  acta.    But   that
    presumption is easy to discharge, and actual evidence in the form of an
    assertion by the appellant of a fact that is inherently likely will, in
    the absence of contrary evidence, almost certainly discharge it.  Where
    the conclusion is that the notice was not served in a manner  permitted
    by the Notices Regulations, it is difficult to see  that  time  can  be
    regarded as having started to run against the appellant.  In such cases
    the appellant is no doubt entitled to waive  the  requirements  of  the
    Regulations, and does so by entering a Notice of Appeal.  But there  is
    no time limit on his doing so, because the time limit  is  governed  by
    service, which has never taken place.  (We should  add  that  the  same
    applies to the not infrequent assertion  that  no  form  of  notice  of
    appeal was  given  to  the  appellant  with  the  notice  of  decision.
    Regulation 5(6) requires the notice of decision to be accompanied by  a
    notice of appeal with certain information on it.  Service of the notice
    of decision without the appeal form is not  proper  service;  and  that
    this is a substantive requirement rather than a merely  formal  one  is
    shown, if there were any doubt, by the fact that, as  explained  above,
    the notice of  decision  contains  an  important  misstatement  of  law
    corrected in the form of appeal.)

18. In the first case before us, the Notice of Appeal was  received  on  15
    May 2007.  The decision is dated "16/04/2007".  The Notice  of  Appeal,
    (apparently provided  by  the  respondent,  because  it  is  a  scrappy
    photocopy identical (in its printing faults) with those  in  the  other
    two cases) has the date of service  entered  as  "16/04/2007"  and  the
    deadline to appeal is  given  as  "12/05/2007".   But  the  "method  of
    service" is said  to  be  "post",  and  there  is  an  application  for
    extension of time as follows:

        "I hereby apply for extension of appeal time because I am not  sure
        if my particulars will get to the  Tribunal  before  the  deadline.
        And this is due to the fact that I received my parcel late from the
        embassy  and  their   agent   responsible   for   couriering   visa
        documentation."

    Given that the method of service is said to have been by post, and  the
    terms of the application for extension of time, it is evident that  the
    "Date of Service" cannot be right.  16 April was the date the  decision
    was made.  It looks as though the appellant, or whoever filled in  this
    part of the form, was misled by the wrong information given at the foot
    of the Notice of Decision.  If the decision was sent by  post,  service
    is deemed to have  taken  place  (under  reg  7(4)(b)  of  the  Notices
    Regulations) on the twenty-eighth day after posting, ignoring that  day
    itself, i.e. on 14 May 2007, "unless the contrary is proved".  The only
    evidence to the contrary is the  application  for  extension  of  time,
    which shows that the appellant must have had  the  decision  before  12
    May, which was what  he  thought  was  the  final  date  for  appeal  -
    otherwise, he would have been sure, rather than doubtful whether he was
    late.  But there can be no doubt, on the  evidence,  that  15  May  was
    amply within the 28 days allowed for his appeal, running from the  date
    of  any  service  by  post.   Alternatively,  if  the  application  for
    extension of time is right in  its  implication  that  service  was  by
    courier, not by post, then there has, for the reasons given above, been
    no service capable of causing time to run against  the  appellant.   In
    either case, his notice of appeal was in time.

19. In the second case the date of service is entered on the appeal form as
    20 April 2007, which, as in the first case, is in fact the date of  the
    decision, and the deadline to appeal is  given  as  "19/05/2007".   The
    method of service is said to  be  "post",  but  in  the  space  for  an
    application for extension of time is this:

        "The Dana Service Ltd used by the British High Commission delay  my
        documents I wouldn't know if the delays is  from  the  Embassy  but
        they handed this documents over to us on the 11th of May  2007  and
        that was when my lawyer could do anything about it so I am applying
        for extension of time so that my documents could be treated".

    There is no evidence that  service  took  place  on  the  date  of  the
    decision, other than the entry of that date on the form, which,  again,
    we assume to be a mistake arising  from  misinformation  given  by  the
    respondent on the notice of decision itself.   The  clear  evidence  is
    that service took place, if at  all  (because  again  delivery  was  by
    courier) on 11 May.  The Notice of Appeal was received on 25 May, again
    well in time.

20. In the third case the decision is dated "18/04/2006".   The  respondent
    has given no information about the date and method of service.  On  the
    Notice of Appeal the Date of Service is entered as "2nd May  2007"  and
    service is said to have been by post.  No other relevant information is
    given.  Here the date entered on the date of service does not  conflict
    in any way with other information on the form and it seems to  us  that
    there is no reason not to accept it as a statement that  the  appellant
    was served on that date. His Notice of Appeal, received on 25 May 2007,
    was in time.
21. For the foregoing reasons all  these  three  appeals  will  proceed  to
    determination by the Tribunal.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
