


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


R (on the application of Thakral) v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00096 (IAC)
     Heard at Field House
     On 20th January 2015


                                   Before


                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE NICOL

                                   Between

                            Gurpreet Kaur Thakral

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Rowena Moffatt instructed by Duncan Lewis,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Katherine Apps instructed by Treasury Solicitor

    The Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 [2008] 1 WLR 1420 principle is only
    engaged if, in the terms of [30] (a) of SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1054, the SSHD has refused the application in question "on the
    procedural ground that the policy requires that  the  applicant  should
    have made the application from his home state".



                                  JUDGMENT

 1. This is an application for judicial  review  of  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ('SSHD')  to  refuse  the
    Applicant's application for leave to remain in the UK as the spouse  of
    Rajvinder Thakral, a British Citizen settled  in  the  UK.  The  SSHD's
    refusal was given on 9th December 2013. The Claim Form  was  lodged  on
    6th March 2014. Permission to apply for judicial review was granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 4th June 2014.

 2. The Applicant does not dispute that the SSHD was entitled to refuse her
    application under the relevant Immigration Rule (Appendix FM) since she
    had been present without leave to remain in the UK  for  more  than  28
    days (see E-LTRP 2.2(b)) and the SSHD had concluded that there were not
    insurmountable obstacles to the Applicant enjoying family life with her
    husband in India (and so  the  Applicant  could  not  fulfil  Ex.1(b)).
    Nonetheless, she submits that the  SSHD's  refusal  was  in  breach  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and  unlawful  for
    one or both of the following reasons:

        a. The SSHD failed to consider the application of the principle  in
           Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40  [2008]  1  WLR  1420  to  her
           application to remain in the UK.

        b. The SSHD's assessment that the refusal of  the  application  for
           leave to  remain  was  a  proportionate  interference  with  the
           Applicant's family life was flawed.

   3. The Applicant was born in India on 5th December 1982. She is an Indian
      national. While still in India in September 2009 she married her first
      husband, Mr Chana, who was a British Citizen. She was granted an entry
      clearance to come to the UK as Mr Chana's wife and she was given leave
      to enter in that capacity on 13th September 2009 until  27th  November
      2011. Her marriage to Mr Chana broke down. She separated from him  and
      divorce proceedings began. She formed a relationship with Mr  Thakral.
      He had previously been married but had obtained a divorce in 2007.  On
      13th October 2011 she applied to the SSHD for leave to remain  in  the
      UK on the  basis  of  her  rights  under  Article  8.  She  relied  in
      particular on her relationship with Mr Thakral. The SSHD  refused  her
      application on 25th January 2012. She had a right  of  appeal  to  the
      First-Tier Tribunal which she exercised. The appeal was  dismissed  by
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge Eban on 24th April  2012.  She  was  granted
      permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  but  that  appeal  was
      dismissed on 23rd August 2012.

   4. On 22nd September 2012, the Applicant's divorce from Mr  Chana  became
      absolute. She married Mr Thakral on 20th October 2012. She applied for
      leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her marriage to him  on  3rd
      August 2013. She relied on both the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

   5. The SSHD refused that application, as I have  said,  on  9th  December
      2013. Since there is no challenge to the legality of the refusal under
      the Immigration Rules, there is no need to say more  about  that.  The
      decision letter also said, "It has also been  considered  whether  the
      particular  circumstances  set  out  in  your  application  constitute
      exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right to  respect
      for private and family life contained in Article 8 of the ECHR,  might
      warrant consideration by the Secretary of State of a grant of leave to
      remain in the UK outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules. It
      has been decided that they do not."

   6. In her application to the SSHD  the  Applicant  had  referred  to  the
      stigma which divorced  women  faced  in  India.  The  decision  letter
      referred to a decision of the Refugee Review Tribunal (it is not clear
      from the papers before me in which country the  RRT  was  sitting)  on
      31st July 2013 which had noted that there  was  not  a  real  risk  or
      chance that a divorcee would be subjected to  serious  or  significant
      harm. The SSHD said that  if  the  Applicant  thought  otherwise,  she
      should make an application for asylum or  humanitarian  protection  in
      the proper form.

   The Chikwamba ground

   7.  In Chikwamba the  Appellant  was  a  Zimbabwean  woman  whose  asylum
      application had been refused but who (at the relevant time)  the  SSHD
      acknowledged he could not remove to Zimbabwe. She married a Zimbabwean
      refugee and argued that her removal would be contrary  to  Article  8.
      The SSHD refused her application and  she  appealed.  The  Immigration
      Appeal Tribunal dismissed the appeal on  the  basis  that  she  should
      return to Zimbabwe and apply for entry clearance  from  there  as  her
      husband's spouse. The House  of  Lords  held  that  this  approach  to
      Article 8 was unlawful. The leading speech was given by Lord Brown.

   8. He rejected the Appellant's wider argument that  such  an  application
      could never be dismissed on the basis that the person concerned  ought
      properly to leave the country  and  apply  for  entry  clearance  from
      abroad  (see  [34]).   The  narrower  ground  was  that  it   may   be
      disproportionate to require the applicant to adopt such a course. Lord
      Brown approved this narrower basis for allowing the appeal.  It  might
      sometimes be permissible for the SSHD to rely on  such  a  reason  for
      refusing an in-country application. He said, at [44]:

         "I am far from suggesting that the Secretary of State should  [Lord
         Brown's  emphasis]  routinely  apply  this  policy   in   all   but
         exceptional cases. Rather it seems to me  that  only  comparatively
         rarely, certainly in family cases  involving  children,  should  an
         article 8 appeal be  dismissed  on  the  basis  that  it  would  be
         proportionate and more appropriate for the appellant to  apply  for
         leave from abroad. "

   9. Ms Chikwamba herself had had a baby after  the  Secretary  of  State's
      refusal. However,  it  has  subsequently  been  established  that  the
      reasoning in Chikwamba is not restricted to Article 8 cases  involving
      children. In SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan)  [2012] EWCA Civ  1054  Elias  LJ
      summarised the principles at [30]:

         "a) Where an applicant who does not  have  lawful  entry  clearance
         pursues an Article 8  claim,  a  dismissal  of  the  claim  on  the
         procedural ground that  the  policy  requires  that  the  applicant
         should have made the application from his home state may  (but  not
         necessarily will) constitute a disruption of family or private life
         sufficient to engage Article 8,  particularly  where  children  are
         adversely affected.

         b) Where Article 8  is  engaged,  it  will  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with family or private life to enforce such  a  policy
         unless, to use the language of Sullivan LJ,  there  is  a  sensible
         reason for doing so.

         c) Whether it is sensible to enforce that policy  will  necessarily
         be  fact  sensitive;  Lord  Brown  identified  certain  potentially
         relevant factors in Chikwamba. They will  include  the  prospective
         length and degree of disruption of family life  and  whether  other
         members of the family are settled in the UK.

         d) Where Article 8 is engaged and there is no sensible  reason  for
         enforcing the policy,  the  decision  maker  should  determine  the
         Article 8 claim on its substantive merits,  having  regard  to  all
         material factors, notwithstanding that the applicant has no  lawful
         entry clearance.

         e) It will be a rare case where it is appropriate for the Court  of
         Appeal,   having   concluded   that   a    lower    tribunal    has
         disproportionately interfered with Article 8  rights  in  enforcing
         the policy, to make the substantive Article 8 decision for  itself.
         Chikwamba  was such an exceptional case. Logically the court  would
         have to be satisfied that there is only one proper  answer  to  the
         Article 8 question before substituting  its  own  finding  on  this
         factual question.

         f) Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter the  way  the  courts
         should approach substantive Article 8 issues as laid down  in  such
         well known cases as Razgar and Huang.

         g) Although the cases do not say this in terms, in my judgement  if
         the Secretary of State has no sensible  reason  for  requiring  the
         application to be made from the home state, the fact  that  he  has
         failed to do so should not  thereafter  carry  any  weight  in  the
         substantive Article 8 balancing exercise."

  10.  In her skeleton argument for the Applicant, Ms Moffatt made reference
      to Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  This
      was added by the Immigration Act 2014 as from 28th July 2014.  It  was
      unnecessary for Ms Moffatt to do so. Ms Apps  for  the  SSHD  did  not
      refer to it. She was right not to  do  so.  On  this  application  for
      judicial review, my task is to consider whether  the  SSHD's  decision
      was wrong in law. The "law"  against  which  her  decision  is  to  be
      measured is that which applied when she took it i.e. on  9th  December
      2013. The Immigration Act 2014 had not by then been passed.

  11. In my judgement, though, Ms Apps did identify the fundamental  problem
      with this first ground for  seeking  judicial  review.  The  Chikwamba
      principle is only engaged if, in the terms of paragraph  [30]  (a)  of
      Hayat, the SSHD has  refused  the  application  in  question  "on  the
      procedural ground that the policy requires that the  applicant  should
      have made the application from his  home  state".  That  is  not  what
      occurred in this case. The Applicant's application for leave to remain
      was not refused on  the  basis  that  she  lacked  a  requisite  entry
      clearance or that she was barred from making the application while she
      was still in  the  UK.  On  the  contrary,  the  SSHD  considered  the
      substance of the application both under the Immigration Rules  and  in
      terms of Article 8.

  12. Ms Apps appropriately referred me to R  (Ganesabalan)  v  SSHD  [2014]
      EWHC 2712 (Admin) where, at [46] - [47] Michael Fordham QC, sitting as
      a Deputy Judge of the High Court, dismissed a  Chikwamba  argument  on
      the same basis. Ms Moffatt submitted that the Deputy Judge's  view  on
      this issue was obiter dicta. I disagree. The  Claimant  in  that  case
      succeeded on other grounds. The SSHD in that case had  not  considered
      whether the application could succeed on Article 8 grounds even though
      it could not succeed under the Rules and it was  not  inevitable  that
      the application would have been refused had it been considered on that
      alternative basis. So the  Claimant  won.  However,  the  grounds  for
      seeking judicial review and the Claimant's skeleton argument had  also
      advanced the Chikwamba argument. That aspect was  rejected  since  the
      application had not been disposed of  by  the  SSHD  on  a  procedural
      basis, but had been considered in  substance.  The  disposal  of  that
      argument  was  therefore  an  integral  part  of  the  Deputy  Judge's
      reasoning. Of course, whether it was ratio or obiter I am not bound by
      his decision. It is, though, a line of reasoning which is persuasive.

  13. In R (Sikhosana)  v SSHD [2014] EWHC 4312 (Admin) Mr Michael Kent  QC,
      also sitting as a Deputy Judge of the High Court,  recorded  that  the
      Claimant in that case had also initially pleaded  a  Chikwamba  point.
      However, that had not been pursued. The Deputy Judge agreed  that  was
      the wiser course. He said at [7],  "this is not a case where the  only
      reason why leave was refused was because a temporary interference with
      Article 8 rights while he returned to his  home  country  to  make  an
      entry clearance application would not in itself be a  disproportionate
      interference. On the contrary the conclusion here was that a permanent
      exclusion would not amount to a disproportionate interference with his
      Article 8 rights." I accept that this comment  carries  somewhat  less
      weight because  it  was  not  the  product  of  adversarial  argument,
      nonetheless it carried the Deputy Judge's endorsement.

  14. Ms Moffatt submitted that  in  substance  the  SSHD  has  refused  the
      application because the Applicant  is  here  in  the  UK  and  is  not
      applying from abroad. She  argued  that  the  cover  letter  with  the
      application had gone through in detail the requirements for  a  spouse
      under the Rules. They had been pitched in terms  of  the  requirements
      that had to be fulfilled for a spouse-applicant who was present in the
      UK, but it was clear from the information which was provided that, had
      this been an application from abroad, the application would have  been
      successful. In practical terms, therefore (even if not  in  form)  the
      application had been refused because of the presence of the  Applicant
      in the UK. She submits that it was incumbent on the SSHD  to  consider
      whether the  application  would  have  been  successful  but  for  her
      presence in the  UK.  Since,  if  that  was  the  case,  it  would  be
      disproportionate to require the Applicant to return to India and  make
      her application for entry clearance from there.

  15. Ms Apps did not accept that the SSHD had  agreed  that  the  Applicant
      would have satisfied  all  the  requirements  for  a  spouse  had  her
      application been for entry clearance from India. The SSHD had not been
      asked to consider the application in those  terms.  At  times  in  her
      submissions Ms Apps said that the SSHD was not  required  to  consider
      Chikwamba unless the matter was positively raised  by  the  applicant.
      Put in that bald way, it seems to  me  that  there  was  force  in  Ms
      Moffatt's  response  that  the  SSHD's  obligation  to  consider   the
      proportionality of an  interference  with  an  applicant's  family  or
      private life is not dependent on the applicant  specifically  invoking
      the name of a case in the House of Lords. But, in truth, it  seems  to
      me that Ms Apps was not  making  the  simplistic  submission  that  an
      applicant had to incant the name Chikwamba before the SSHD's duty  was
      engaged. Rather, she was saying that there was no  obligation  on  the
      SSHD to consider  the  Applicant's  application  on  the  hypothetical
      alternative that it was made from abroad. At  the  very  least,  there
      could be no such obligation in absence of a request  to  the  SSHD  to
      take this course. If this  is  a  proper  understanding  of  Ms  Apps'
      position, then I agree with it. Although the  cover  letter  with  the
      Applicant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  did  refer  to   the
      difficulties which she would face if she returned to India, it did not
      ask the SSHD to decide whether she would (in those circumstances) have
      been entitled to an entry clearance as a spouse. I agree that  such  a
      request would be a necessary condition before the SSHD could be  under
      a duty to decide such a question. It is not necessary for me to decide
      whether the SSHD would then be obliged to consider  this  hypothetical
      alternative even if she was asked to do so.

  16. For all of these reasons I reject  the  ground  for  seeking  judicial
      review based on Chikwamba.

   Flawed approach to Article 8 proportionality?

  17. Ms Moffatt argued that the SSHD had failed to consider the position of
      Mr Thakral's  mother.  The  cover  letter  which  was  sent  with  the
      application said: "Our client's mother-in-law  has  also  become  very
      close to the client  and  would  not  be  able  to  cope  without  her
      continuous support. Our client shares an excellent  relationship  with
      her mother-in-law and she provides support for her as  she  is  unwell
      and has suffered from 2 micro strokes in the last 12 months."

  18. She also argued that the SSHD had misunderstood the  point  which  was
      also made in the cover letter  about  the  stigma  which  attached  to
      divorced women in India. The Applicant was not seeking asylum on  this
      ground, but relying on it as a further basis for saying that it  would
      be disproportionate interference with her family and private  life  to
      reject her application for further leave to remain.

  19. As to the first point, Ms Moffatt accepted  that  I  could  take  into
      account the letter which the SSHD had written on 24th January 2014  to
      the Applicant's solicitors' letter before action. The SSHD  had  said,
      amongst other things, "You have  not  provided  any  evidence  of  the
      health problems and obligations in relation to your client's mother in
      law that would require the full time presence of  both  your  client's
      partner and your client."

  20. The SSHD was entitled to take the position which she did regarding the
      Applicant's mother-in-law. The SSHD did  not  ignore  the  Applicant's
      comments in relation to the position of divorced women in  India.  She
      did not consider  that  this,  or  the  other  matters  on  which  the
      Applicant relied, constituted good reasons why the applicant should be
      granted leave to remain in the UK despite her status as an  overstayer
      and the public interest  in  enforcing  immigration  laws.  I  do  not
      consider there was any error  of  law  in  the  SSHD's  decision  that
      refusal of the application was a proportionate interference  with  the
      family lives of the Applicant and her husband.

   Conclusion

  21. The application for judicial review is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Nicol
