

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

        YS and YY (Paragraph 352D - British national sponsor former refugee)
                                                 Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 00093

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 16 September 2008                          |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE NICHOLS
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

                                     YS
                                     YY
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Chandran of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Karunatilake, Home Office Presenting Officer

An  appellant  may  succeed  under  paragraph   352D   notwithstanding   the
acquisition of British nationality by a sponsor  to  whom  asylum  has  been
granted.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is  a  reconsideration  on  the  respondent's  application  of  a
    decision of Immigration Judge Markham David who, on 19 September  2006,
    allowed the appellants' appeals, who are citizens of Ethiopia,  against
    the respondent's decision made  on  16  August  2005  to  refuse  their
    application for entry clearance as the dependants of Etagegnehu Tsegaye
    Ayele, who is their mother, under paragraph 297 of HC 395.  This  deals
    with the requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter  the
    United Kingdom as the child of  a  person  present  and  settled  here.
    There is no dispute in this appeal that in fact neither child can  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 297.  The  appeal  concerns  an  entirely
    different point on which the Immigration Judge  was  persuaded  in  the
    appellants' favour.

2.     The appellants' mother, Etagegnehu Ayele first  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1993 and claimed asylum.  She was granted refugee status and
    on 28 January 1998, according to the copy passport in  the  appellants'
    bundle, she was granted indefinite leave to remain.  She had originally
    fled Ethiopia and has now been granted British citizenship.   When  she
    left Ethiopia she left behind her two children, the appellants.  At the
    time she could not arrange for them to travel with her  and  they  were
    left with her mother who agreed to take care  of  the  children.   They
    were very young at the time and the appellant  said  in  her  statement
    dated 13 June 2008 that she would telephone her  mother  from  time  to
    time and she also sent the children money.

3.    In 1996 the sponsor began a new relationship  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with a national  of  Ethiopia.   They  subsequently  had  two  children
    together.  They intend to marry but have not married  yet  because  the
    sponsor wants the appellants to join her first.

4.    She travelled back to Ethiopia in August 2002 to see  the  appellants,
    after she had been granted British citizenship.  She visited  again  in
    2005 and has always remained in contact with the  appellants.   By  the
    year 2004, the sponsor said that her mother had indicated that she  was
    becoming  too  weak  with  illness  to  continue  looking   after   the
    appellants.  When the sponsor went back to Ethiopia in July  2005,  her
    intention was to apply for the appellants to join her in the  UK.   She
    was by then settled in the United Kingdom and felt  that  her  children
    would have a stable life if they joined her here.  The appellants  made
    an application to join her which was refused.  This is the  subject  of
    the current appeal before the Tribunal.

5.    When the matter came before the Immigration Judge, it was put  to  him
    that the respondent ECO had  not  decided  the  application  under  the
    correct Rule.  It was submitted  that  because  the  sponsor  had  been
    granted refugee status in the United Kingdom,  the  application  should
    have been considered under paragraph 352D of HC 395.   The  Immigration
    Judge, having been referred to the Tribunal's  decision  in  CP  [2006]
    UKIAT 00040, and following the "spirit" as  he  described  it  of  that
    decision, decided that he could determine whether  the  appellants  met
    the requirements of paragraph 352D and adjourned  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal so that the parties could be prepared.

6.     At  the  adjourned  hearing,  he  apparently  received   a   document
    confirming that the sponsor had been granted refugee status,  which  we
    have not seen.  He accepted she had been  granted  refugee  status.   A
    dispute then arose as to whether or not the children were in  fact  the
    children of the sponsor, however that was resolved and it was  conceded
    by the Home Office Presenting  Officer  that  the  appellants  are  the
    children of the sponsor.   The  Immigration  Judge  then  proceeded  to
    consider the application under paragraph 352D i.e. the requirements  to
    be met by a child applying for entry clearance  in  order  to  join  or
    remain with a parent who has been granted asylum in the UK.  There  was
    a separate issue as to whether or not the sponsor had left her  country
    of habitual residence to come to the United  Kingdom  because  she  had
    temporarily been resident in Moscow en route here; however  we  do  not
    need to deal with that.   The  Immigration  Judge  made  the  following
    finding in relation to paragraph 352D:-

         "11.     In my view this paragraph of  the  Rules,  the  object  of
             which is to facilitate family union, must be given a purposive
             construction.  As the appellants were part of  a  family  unit
             when their mother  left  her  country  of  habitual  residence
             [which he accepted was Ethiopia], I do not think that the fact
             that she had a brief sojourn in Moscow before coming to the UK
             to claim asylum should mean that the appellants do not qualify
             under paragraph 352D.  In my view  they  do  qualify  and  are
             therefore entitled to be granted entry clearance to join their
             mother in the UK.


         12.      I should perhaps mention that if I  had  been  considering
             the appeal under paragraph 297 of  the  Rules,  the  appellant
             would also have qualified.  As there is  clear  evidence  that
             the father of each of the appellants is dead, the mother comes
             under paragraph 297(d) and therefore there is no  question  of
             having  to  prove  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
             considerations  which  make  the  exclusion   of   the   child
             undesirable.


         13.       The  only  additional  issue  would  be  maintenance  and
             accommodation.   Although  this  has  not  been  explored   in
             evidence before me, it seems likely that it  would  not  be  a
             problem at all, in view  of  the  earnings  of  the  sponsor's
             partner, who  is  the  father  of  both  the  sponsor's  other
             children who were born in the UK."


      As we have stated, in fact it is  now  accepted  that  the  appellants
    could not meet the requirements of paragraph 297  because,  as  can  be
    seen from the Immigration Judge's finding, they would have been reliant
    on third party support in relation to maintenance and accommodation.

7.    Reconsideration was ordered  on  the  respondent's  application  by  a
    Senior Immigration Judge.  The respondent's  grounds  submit  that  the
    Immigration Judge materially misdirected himself in law in reaching his
    decision.  It was submitted that because  the  sponsor  was  a  British
    citizen at the date of the application, she could  not  apply  for  her
    children to join her in the UK as dependants of a refugee.  Someone who
    is naturalised  as  a  British  citizen  could  not  benefit  from  the
    provisions of paragraph 352, even if at some point in the past they had
    been a refugee.  The correct paragraph was paragraph 297 as  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had applied.  The second part  of  the  first  ground
    deals with the application of paragraph 297 which we can ignore for the
    purposes of this appeal.

8.    The second ground is that the Immigration Judge  had  failed  to  take
    into account that the appellant had been dishonest in  her  application
    for asylum in the first place.  This is a reference to  the  fact  that
    when the appellant made her application for asylum she had claimed that
    her parents had been dead since she was aged 5, and that she  had  been
    cared for by the uncle who brought her into the UK as a  dependant  via
    Moscow.  She denied having any children at all at that time.   However,
    when she made her application for the children to join her  she  stated
    that they were living with her mother in Ethiopia.   It  was  submitted
    that this damaged the sponsor's credibility and that she had apparently
    obtained refugee status through what  appeared  now  to  be  deception.
    Reliance was also placed on the fact that the sponsor had  made  visits
    to Ethiopia and therefore she had voluntarily  returned  and  evidently
    had no problems in doing so.

9.    The Immigration Judge gave a direction that the  appellants  be  given
    entry clearance at the end of his determination and it  was  submitted,
    and no issue was taken  with  this,  that  he  was  wrong  to  do  that
    following EB (Ghana) [2005] UKAIT 00131.

10.   We set out the provisions of paragraph 352D of HC 395 as follows:-

         "352D    The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                enter or remain in the United Kingdom [in order to  join  or
                remain with the parent who has been granted  asylum  in  the
                United Kingdom] are that the appellant:


                (i)    is the child of a parent who has been granted  asylum
                    in the United Kingdom; and


                (ii)   is under the age of 18, and


                (iii)  is not leading an independent life, is unmarried (and
                    is  not  a  civil  partner),  and  has  not  formed   an
                    independent family unit; and


                (iv)   was part of the family unit  of  the  person  granted
                    asylum at the time that the person granted  asylum  left
                    the country of his habitual residence in order  to  seek
                    asylum; and


                (v)    would not be excluded from protection  by  virtue  of
                    Article 1F of the United Nations Convention and Protocol
                    relating to the Status of Refugees if he  were  to  seek
                    asylum in his own right; and


                (vi)   is seeking leave  to  enter,  holds  a  valid  United
                    Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity."


11.   Ms Karunatilake submitted that the purpose of  paragraph  352D  is  to
    give effect to the concept of family reunion for refugees and to enable
    family members to join those who have been granted  refugee  status  in
    the UK.  Here, however, the sponsor acquired  British  citizenship  and
    she had not retained her refugee status in law.  She submitted that  by
    definition under Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Geneva Convention, a  person
    is a  refugee  who  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason and who is outside their country of  nationality  and
    inter alia unable to avail himself of the protection of  that  country.
    A person who had been naturalised in the host  state  ceased  to  be  a
    refugee by virtue of the operation of Article  1(C)(3)  of  the  Geneva
    Convention.



12.   The relevant provision of Article 1C of the 1951  Convention  provides
    that:-

         "This Convention shall cease to apply to any person  falling  under
         the terms of Section A if:
         ...


         ...
         (3)       he  has  acquired  a  new  nationality,  and  enjoys  the
             protection of the country of his new nationality;"


      Ms Karunatilake said  that  the  UNHCR  Handbook  was  a  particularly
    helpful guide as to the international understanding of  the  Convention
    obligations.  The handbook gives  guidance  on  Article  1C(3)  and  at
    paragraph 129 it states:-

         "129.    As in the case of the reacquisition of  nationality,  this
             third cessation clause  derives  from  the  principle  that  a
             person who enjoys  national  protection  is  not  in  need  of
             international protection.


         130.     The nationality that the refugee acquires is usually  that
             of the country of his residence.   A  refugee  living  in  one
             country  may,  however,  in   certain   cases,   acquire   the
             nationality of another country.  If he does  so,  his  refugee
             status will also cease, provided that the new nationality also
             carries  the  protection  of  the  country  concerned.    This
             requirement results from the phrase 'and enjoys the protection
             of the country of his new nationality'.


         131.     If a person has ceased to be a refugee, having acquired  a
             new nationality,  and  then  claims  a  well-founded  fear  in
             relation to the country of his new nationality, this creates a
             completely new situation and his status must be determined  in
             relation to the country of his new nationality.


         132.      Where  refugee  status   has   terminated   through   the
             acquisition of a new nationality, and such new nationality has
             been lost,  depending  on  the  circumstances  of  such  loss,
             refugee status may be revived."


      Ms Karunatilake said that the August 2007 introduction to  the  Geneva
    Convention by the UNHCR was also instructive on the point as it stated:-



         "The Convention does not  apply  to  those  refugees  who  are  the
         concern of the United Nations Agencies other than  UNHCR,  such  as
         refugees from Palestine who receive protection or  assistance  from
         the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for  Palestine  Refugees
         in the Near East (UNRWA), nor to those refugees who have  a  status
         equivalent to nationals in their country of refuge."


      She submitted that Article 11 of the EU  Qualification  Directive  was
    in the same terms as Article 1C(3).  This is implemented  by  paragraph
    339A(iii) of the Immigration Rules which provides:-

         "339A    A person's grant of asylum under  paragraph  334  will  be
                revoked  or  not  renewed  if  the  Secretary  of  State  is
                satisfied that:


            ...


                (iii)  he has acquired a new  nationality,  and  enjoys  the
                    protection of the country of his new nationality;"


      She submitted that therefore a British citizen could not at  the  same
    time be a refugee as refugee status ceased as a matter of  law  when  a
    person became a British citizen.

13.   She submitted that the wording of paragraph 352D:-

         "A parent who has been granted asylum in the United Kingdom"


      does not specify that those who have  become  British  citizens  could
    rely on this paragraph of the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 352D  arose
    out of asylum related family reunion policy.  There was nothing in  the
    policy which suggested that a British citizen who had previously been a
    refugee could benefit from the  family  reunion  policy.   Particularly
    since the child of a British citizen who was formerly recognised  as  a
    refugee can apply for entry clearance pursuant to paragraph 297 of  the
    Immigration Rules as the  parent  would  then  be  settled.   Different
    rights and privileges were conferred on refugees and  British  citizens
    and a clear distinction existed between the  two.   A  British  sponsor
    should not be able to alternate between the two to their advantage.

14.   Ms Karunatilake submitted that allowing  a  British  citizen  who  had
    previously been recognised as a refugee to take advantage of  paragraph
    352D while denying that right to a British citizen in the  UK,  created
    two  different  types  of  British  citizenship  which  was  inherently
    undesirable.   If  this  was  Parliament's  intention  it  would   have
    expressly  said  so  in  the  Rules.   If   the   Immigration   Judge's
    interpretation was correct, it  would  create  a  category  of  British
    citizens who enjoyed rights greater than other British citizens as they
    would reserve the ability to be reunited with  family  members  without
    fully meeting the Immigration Rules and having to satisfy, for example,
    the maintenance and accommodation requirement.

15.   She submitted that the reason that the Rule was  strictly  limited  to
    facilitate family reunion for refugees was that  they  would  obviously
    come to the United Kingdom, quite often, with  no  financial  resources
    and hence the requirement for maintenance and accommodation was waived.
     An individual who had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  long  enough  to
    acquire British citizenship had been here long enough  to  make  a  new
    economic life for themselves and therefore should  be  subject  to  the
    normal  requirements  in  the  Immigration  Rules.   Timescales   would
    generally  mean  that  reunion  would  have  taken  place  before   the
    possibility  of  naturalisation  and,  or  the  sponsor   should   have
    integrated to the extent that he or she  would  be  able  to  meet  the
    maintenance and accommodation requirement in respect of relatives  that
    were to join him or her in this country.

16.   Ms Karunatilake submitted that  the  Rules  should  be  subject  to  a
    purposive construction and in this regard she relied on the  Tribunal's
    decision in MO Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00057.  This had been reinforced by
    the Court of Appeal in MB [2008] EWCA Civ 102.

17.   After hearing representations from both parties,  we  gave  permission
    to Ms Chandran to rely on  an  unreported  decision  of  the  Tribunal:
    Abdikarim v ECO (Nairobi) OA32396/2005, heard at Field House on  1  May
    2008 by Senior Immigration Judges Chalkley and Southern.   This  appeal
    dealt with exactly the same submission in relation to  paragraph  352D,
    and the Tribunal held in that appeal that the wording of paragraph 352D
    was to be given its ordinary meaning  and  that  the  words  "has  been
    granted asylum" were to be construed as a status that had been  granted
    that remained unchanged by the subsequent acquisition by  the  sponsor,
    in that case, of British citizenship.  In reaching this conclusion  the
    Tribunal took into account an amendment to the Rules made by Cm4851  on
    18 September 2000, which we deal with below.

18.    The  Home  Office  representative  in  Abdikarim  conceded  that  the
    Immigration Judge had been wrong to find that once a  sponsor  who  had
    been granted asylum acquired British nationality, a relative could  not
    apply under paragraph 352D to join the sponsor in the  United  Kingdom.
    Ms Karunatilake said that she did not believe the respondent was  bound
    by what she described as "a concession" made in that appeal,  and  that
    the position of the Secretary of State was as she had set out.

  19. In response, Ms Chandran  said  that  she  relied  on  the  Tribunal's
      decision in Abdikarim and, in particular on the submissions  that  had
      been made by Counsel in that appeal, which she adopted.  She  said  it
      was clear from the Immigration Rules that a plain reading of the  Rule
      meant that the appellants' application  should  have  been  considered
      under paragraph 352D because it would require a positive  act  of  the
      Secretary of State to withdraw the sponsor's refugee status.  She drew
      our attention to the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules  of
      September 2006 (Cm6918) which took effect on 9 October  2006  and,  in
      particular, to paragraph 4 which substituted a new paragraph 334 in HC
      395, setting out the circumstances in which an asylum  applicant  will
      be granted asylum in the  United  Kingdom.   At  paragraph  6  of  the
      Statement of Changes it states:-


         "6.      After paragraph 339, insert:


            'Revocation or refusal to renew a grant of asylum


             339A.          A person's grant of asylum under paragraph  334
                      will be revoked or not renewed if  the  Secretary  of
                      State is satisfied that:


                      (i)   he has voluntarily re-availed  himself  of  the
                           protection of the country of nationality;


                      (ii)  having lost his nationality, he has voluntarily
                           re-acquired it; or


                      (iii) he has acquired a new nationality,  and  enjoys
                           the  protection  of  the  country  of   his   new
                           nationality; ..."


      She also  drew  our  attention  to  the  October  2006  Guidelines  on
    Cessation, Cancellation and Revocation of Refugee Status,  referred  to
    as 'AP1 - October 2006'.  At page 2 of that guidance which is issued to
    assist the respondent's case workers, it  sets  out  the  circumstances
    where it may be appropriate to take away a person's refugee status  and
    states this should only be undertaken by the Senior  Caseworkers'  Unit
    in the Asylum Casework Directorate and that:-

         "Where a person's refugee  status  is  cancelled,  revoked  or  the
         cessation clauses applied, it is normally with a view  to  removing
         the person concerned."


      At Section 2 of the guidance it deals with cessation  clauses  and  at
    Section  3  gives  further  guidance  to  caseworkers  on  the  general
    considerations of cessation.  The Tribunal notes that nowhere is  there
    any guidance given on the cessation clauses as they might apply  to  an
    individual who has been granted refugee status in  the  United  Kingdom
    and subsequently is granted British citizenship.  All  of  the  example
    scenarios where the cessation clauses might  apply  arise  because  the
    individual has returned to his or her country  of  nationality,  or  is
    abroad for some other reason, and or is the subject of deportation from
    the United Kingdom where consideration has to be given to  whether  any
    of the cessation clauses might apply.

20.   Ms Chandran submitted that just as much as a positive act  was  needed
    to grant asylum or humanitarian protection, the same  was  required  to
    remove that status or protection as AP1/October 2006 demonstrated.

21.   She submitted that the sponsor's acquisition  of  British  nationality
    did not mean there would be automatic revocation of her refugee status.
     Although the acquisition of British nationality was a positive act, it
    was not for the purpose of paragraph 339A.  It was a  positive  act  to
    grant someone the protection of a member state, but it did  not  revoke
    refugee status, which it was clear from  the  AP1/October  2006,  could
    only be taken away by the action of a senior caseworker.

22.   Ms Chandran said that so far as the allegation that  the  sponsor  was
    not entitled to refugee  status  was  concerned  i.e.  because  of  her
    earlier alleged  deception, she drew the Tribunal's attention  to  what
    had been conceded at the hearing before  the  Immigration  Judge,  i.e.
    that the appellants were the sponsor's children.  At paragraph 8 of the
    Immigration Judge's determination, he had made it clear that he was not
    concerned with the issue of possible deception in  the  making  of  the
    asylum application by the sponsor because it had  been  agreed  at  the
    hearing that that allegation was not relied on and it was conceded that
    the children were the sponsor's  children.   In  any  event,  when  the
    sponsor submitted her application it had not been completed  or  signed
    by her.  She did not speak English and she had never said in her asylum
    application that she did  not  have  any  children.   She  was  granted
    refugee status in April 1993 without interview.  She had never had  the
    SEF Statement read back to her.  It was also important to note that the
    appellant had only been able  to  return  to  Ethiopia  after  she  had
    obtained British citizenship when she would have the protection of this
    country to enable her to return.

23.    Ms  Chandran  then  addressed  the  Tribunal  as  to   the   apparent
    differential treatment between British nationals and those who acquired
    British nationality in these circumstances.  She submitted that it  had
    to be recognised that a person who came to the United Kingdom  and  who
    is granted refugee status, will have fled their country of  origin  and
    arrived in the United Kingdom requiring protection.  This is  the  very
    reason  why  the  requirements   as   to   adequate   maintenance   and
    accommodation are not imposed in respect of  persons  who  are  granted
    refugee status and seek to have their family join them in the  UK.   If
    that is the background against which someone has  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom they are in a different position to people who  have  not  come
    with that background and have not had that level of inequality  applied
    to them.  She submitted this was  a  strong  reason  to  conclude  that
    refugee status did not stop unless the Secretary of State made a formal
    decision to revoke that status.

24.   Ms Chandran said that in Abdikarim, the Tribunal  had  been  persuaded
    that the change in the wording of paragraph 352 that had taken place in
    2000 was decisive. No assistance had been given by the respondent today
    as to why that particular finding should not be followed.

25.   On this latter point, Ms Karunatilake said that  she  had  sought  the
    advice of a senior person in the Presenting Officers' Unit, however the
    official position as to why the wording of the Rule  had  been  changed
    was not known.

The Tribunal's Decision in Abdikarim

26.   The circumstances of the sponsor in this appeal were very  similar  in
    that the  sponsor  had  become  a  British  citizen  by  the  time  the
    appellant, her son, applied to join her in the United Kingdom  pursuant
    to paragraph 352D.  This application had  also  been  considered  under
    paragraph 297 and rejected.  The appellant  also  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 and the only issue  before  the  Tribunal
    was whether or not the Immigration Judge was right to  have  considered
    the appeal under paragraph 352D.  It was  argued  before  the  Tribunal
    that the sponsor's grant of British citizenship did not disqualify this
    appellant from benefiting from less onerous requirements  of  paragraph
    352D.

27.   In this appeal it was conceded by the Home Office representative  that
    the Immigration Judge, who had dismissed the  appeal  before  him,  had
    been wrong to find that as the sponsor  had  been  granted  asylum  and
    acquired British nationality, a relative could not bring him or herself
    within paragraph 352D in seeking to join that  sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the Family Reunion Provision.

28.    The  Tribunal  considered  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  words  in
    paragraph 352D(i) and concluded that the words:-

         "is the child of a parent who has been granted asylum in the United
         Kingdom;"


      meant that once a person had been granted asylum they would always  be
    able to show that as a fact regardless of what may happen subsequently,
    e.g. the grant of British citizenship.  The grant of asylum was a  fact
    that remained unchanged by any new status.

29.   However, the Tribunal went on to  explain  that  the  changes  to  the
    wording of paragraph 352D supported this interpretation.  It stated  as
    follows:-

         "16.     Any doubt about that being  the  correct  construction  is
             dispelled by an amendment made  to  the  opening  sentence  of
             paragraph 352D.  Initially, this was set out in  Cm4851  (with
             emphasis added):


            'the requirements to be met by a person seeking leave  to  enter
                  or remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a  refugee
                  are that the appellant ...'


             But the current version of the Rules, amended as a consequence
             of Cm4851 on 18 September 2000, is:

                  'The requirements to be met by a person seeking  leave  to
                  enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order to join  or
                  remain with the parent who has been granted asylum in  the
                  United Kingdom are that the applicant ...'

         17.      The Immigration Judge found as a fact that the appellant's
             mother was a person who had been granted asylum in the  United
             Kingdom.   That finding goes unchallenged before us.  As  this
             is an appeal against refusal to grant entry clearance  we  are
             concerned, as a result of Section 85(5)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  with  the  circumstances
             appertaining at the date of the decision under appeal."


30.   The Tribunal considered the particular facts in  the  case  before  it
    and decided that the appellant in that case had  indeed  satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph 352D at the date of the decision.

Our findings in this appeal

31.   This  appeal  concerns  the  same  wording  of  paragraph  352D.   The
    ordinary meaning of the words at 352D(i) does in our view clearly  lead
    to the conclusion that it applies in to a parent who has  been  granted
    asylum and makes no qualification as to any need for that status to  be
    current at the date of the application of the child seeking to join the
    parent in the United Kingdom.  We agree with  the  interpretation  that
    the words can only mean that this is a status that has been granted  to
    the individual concerned, at whatever stage.

32.   We are not persuaded that the operation of  Article  1C  (3)  has  any
    application to the  provisions  of  paragraph  352D.   We  accept  that
    Article 1C (3) will operate so that the provisions  of  the  Convention
    will cease to apply to any individual who acquires  a  new  nationality
    and has the protection of the country of his new  nationality,  as  the
    Article states.  In other words, such an individual will no  longer  be
    in need of international protection in those circumstances.  This deals
    with the cessation of the need for protection for that individual where
    he is now protected by the country of his new nationality.  However, it
    does not in our view affect the interpretation of  paragraph  352D  and
    its  application.   Even  in  circumstances  where  an  individual  has
    acquired new nationality and the protection of that new nationality, as
    is the case here, the sponsor remains a person who, as a fact, has been
    granted asylum in the United Kingdom.

33.   Paragraph 339A of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  we  have  set  out
    earlier, implements Article 1C(3) however this clearly  envisages  that
    the Secretary of State has to take a positive action to  terminate  the
    refugee status of an individual in this situation i.e. either  revoking
    it or not renewing it, where that individual does have  the  protection
    of a country of his or her new nationality. In  addition  it  is  clear
    that such action will only be taken in certain circumstances as we have
    already set  out  at  paragraph  19  where  we  have  referred  to  the
    respondent's guidance to senior caseworkers. The outcome of this appeal
    does  not  depend  upon  the  sponsor  being  able  to  demonstrate   a
    continuation of her status as a refugee. What she needs to demonstrate,
    and which the Immigration Judge has found she has done, is that she  is
    a person who has, in the  past,  been  granted  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

34.   Whilst we note  Ms  Karunatilake's  submission  that  the  wording  of
    paragraph 352D does not specify that  those  who  have  become  British
    citizens can rely on this paragraph  in  the  Rules,  neither  does  it
    exclude that category  of  persons.   We  are  not  persuaded  that  Ms
    Karunatilake's "purposive" approach to the interpretation of  the  Rule
    is correct.  She submitted that if that approach is applied to the Rule
    it should exclude persons who now have the capacity to earn  an  income
    and support any family members and who should be in  exactly  the  same
    position as any  other  British  citizen.   The  difficulty  with  that
    submission is that individuals such as this sponsor and those like  her
    are not in the same position as any other British  citizen.   They  are
    individuals  who  have  fled  their  country  of  origin  in  need   of
    international protection and this  Rule  is  drafted  in  our  view  to
    facilitate the admission of their family members to join them in  those
    circumstances.  A British citizen (who has never been  granted  refugee
    status) will not have faced that kind of hardship.  A  person  who  has
    been granted refugee status has  been  separated  from  family  members
    through necessity not through choice, by the very fact of  the  finding
    that he or she is entitled  to  refugee  status.   An  applicant  under
    paragraph 352D will still have  to  show  that  he  or  she  meets  the
    requirements of the rule in all other respects. However we do  not  see
    why the policy underlying the rule, which is family reunion in the most
    difficult  circumstances,  should  be   subject   to   this   kind   of
    qualification which could ultimately defeat the  clear  object  of  the
    rule, especially where it is a child who is seeking to join a parent.
35.    In AM (Ethiopia) & Ors v Entry  Clearance  Officer  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    1082, Laws LJ firmly rejected a submission that  the  Rules  should  be
    constructed purposively. He referred to the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MB (Somalia) [2008] EWCA Civ 102, and to his own judgement at
    paragraph 59 of the decision where he said:

                     "..the purpose of the Rules generally is to  state  the
    Secretary of State's policy with regard to immigration.  The  Secretary
    of State is thus concerned to articulate the balance to be struck, as a
    matter of policy, between the requirements of  immigration  control  on
    the one hand and on the other the  claims  of  aliens,  or  classes  of
    aliens, to enter the United Kingdom on this or that  particular  basis.
    Subject to the public law imperatives of reason and fair procedure, and
    the statutory imperatives of the Human rights Act 1998, there can be no
    a priori bias which tilts the policy in a  liberal,  or  a  restrictive
    direction.  The policy's direction is entirely  for  the  secretary  of
    State, subject to  Parliament's  approval  by  the  negative  procedure
    provided for by the legislation. It follows that  the  purpose  of  the
    Rule (barring a verbal mistake or an  eccentric  use  of  language)  is
    necessarily satisfied by the ordinary meaning of the words.  Any  other
    conclusion must constitute a qualification  by  the  court,  on  merits
    grounds, of  the  secretary  of  state's  policy;  and  that  would  be
    unprincipled."

          We follow this approach and for the reasons  we  have  stated  the
    ordinary meaning of the words in paragraph 352D is clear.

36.   We have also considered the  amendment  to  the  opening  sentence  of
    paragraph 352D, which the Tribunal in Abdikarim  also  considered.   Ms
    Karunatilake was unable to give us  any  information  as  to  why  that
    amendment had been made.  Had it been the intention  to  only  allow  a
    family reunion during the period  when  an  individual  enjoys  refugee
    status  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  protection,  as  opposed  to  the
    acquisition of nationality and the protection that flows from that,  it
    would have been very easy for Parliament to have made that clear in the
    Rule by, for example, clear reference to the  parent  currently  having
    refugee status.  Instead the words "who has  been"  must  in  our  view
    refer to the grant of asylum at any time in the past.  We cannot  think
    there can be any other proper  interpretation of  those  words  because
    there is no qualification to that phrase, which there could  have  been
    had Parliament intended that it should only apply where the  individual
    in the United Kingdom has extant refugee status.

37.    We  find  therefore  that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not  err  in
    concluding that the appellants  appeal  fell  to  be  considered  under
    paragraph 352D.  It was conceded at the hearing before the  Immigration
    Judge that the appellants are the children of the sponsor and no  issue
    is taken that they were a part of  her  family  unit  before  she  left
    Ethiopia or that Ethiopia was the country  of  her  habitual  residence
    prior to coming to the United Kingdom to seek protection.  We  conclude
    therefore that the Immigration Judge did not materially err in  law  by
    allowing both these appeals under this paragraph of the Rules. He  gave
    a direction to the ECO at the end of his  determination.   A  direction
    should only be given for the purpose of giving  effect  to  a  decision
    under appeal - see section 87(1) of the 2002 Act.  In this case it  was
    unnecessary to give any further  direction.  To  this  extent  only  we
    reverse his decision.


Decision

38.   The Tribunal did not materially err in law and its decision  to  allow
    the appeal will therefore stand, save for the direction to issue  entry
    clearance.



Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Nichols



