

|RA ( Christians) Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT 00091                      |
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On:  13 January 2005       |        |                            |
|                                                                 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                      |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|Date Determination notified:                                     |
|                                                                 |
|22/04/2005                                                       |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                 |
|Mr D K Allen - Vice-President                                    |
|Mr J A Blair-Gould                                               |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                    |
|Between                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                       |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr D Magne of Magne & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr G Elks, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant appeals to the  Tribunal  with  permission  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  Warren  L  Grant,  in  which  he
      dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision of  29  October
      2003 to issue directions for his removal from the United Kingdom,  and
      refusing asylum.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 13 January 2005.  Mr  D  Magne  of
      Magne & Co Solicitors appeared on behalf of the appellant,  and  Mr  G
      Elks appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

3.    This appeal was listed to  be  a  follower  to  the  Tribunal  Country
      Guidance case in AK [2004] UKIAT 00298.  It has become clear  that  it
      cannot be regarded purely as a follower case, given the evidence  that
      has been  produced  of  risk  to  Christians  in  Iraq  since  AK  was
      determined, and therefore what we have to say about risk to Christians
      in Iraq,  although  it  builds  on  the  Tribunal's  findings  in  AK,
      necessarily goes beyond the findings there recorded  given  the  fresh
      evidence.  We should record our gratitude to Mr Elks who coped with  a
      long and difficult list, receiving only very short notice  of  a  good
      deal of detailed objective evidence.

4.    The Adjudicator accepted that Mr Al-Najaar is a  Catholic.   He  found
      little else of his claim to be credible however.  Mr Al-Najaar arrived
      in the United Kingdom by lorry on 22 December 1999 and claimed  asylum
      on the following day, though his interview did not  take  place  until
      nearly four years later.  He claimed that, having refused in  1998  to
      assist some security men by providing them with information about  his
      father's Christian customers, he was attacked by four men in a car who
      also ransacked his  father's  shop.   After  spending  three  days  in
      hospital he was again approached by the security men  who  returned  a
      week later and arrested him and he was  detained  for  two  weeks  and
      tortured.  His father  arranged  for  him  to  leave  Iraq  after  his
      release.  Subsequently he learnt that two weeks later the security men
      had come to his home to look for him and  had  beaten  his  father  to
      death and then tortured his brother so that  he  became  insane.   The
      appellant went first to Jordan where he remained for five months until
      he found an agent to whom he paid $5,000 to take him  to  Europe.   He
      was arrested on the Austrian border and imprisoned for two months  and
      on release told that the Austrian government would not  grant  asylum.
      He went to Germany and applied for asylum but after attacks on him  by
      neo-Nazis he left Germany through Belgium and thus came to the  United
      Kingdom.

5.    He gave evidence before the Adjudicator and  produced  a  letter  from
      his sister who he said worked for the CPA and who had married Mr Brian
      Erickson some two months prior to the hearing.

6.    The Adjudicator  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  forum-shopping,
      having gone from Jordan to Austria and then to Germany and then to the
      United Kingdom.  He considered that he had failed to report his  fears
      of neo-Nazis to the authorities in Germany or to the church  to  which
      he belonged.  He noted that although he had not known the  whereabouts
      of his family as recently as October 2003 his  sister's  wedding  must
      have taken place in late November of that year and he had with him  at
      the hearing a set of photographs to prove it.  Given that he had  been
      with his cousin since 1999 the Adjudicator considered that it made  no
      sense that he claimed to have had no idea by October  2003  about  his
      family's whereabouts.  The evidence was that they had not moved  house
      and the Adjudicator considered  that  the  appellant  could  not  have
      contacted his cousins from Germany if he had not had  their  telephone
      number and could not have had that number if they had not given it  to
      him before he left Iraq.  The appellant had  claimed  that  two  weeks
      after his release his father was arrested and tortured  to  death  and
      his brother tortured into insanity.  His evidence in his statement was
      that he left for Jordan a week after his release which  showed  either
      that he was in contact with his family after his departure  from  Iraq
      or the story about what happened to his father  and  brother  was  not
      true.  There was no evidence as to how his  sister  could  have  known
      that he was living in the United Kingdom other than  that  he  was  at
      contact in all times with his family and had embellished his story.

7.    The Adjudicator  also  considered  the  letter  from  the  appellant's
      sister to be curious, noting that it was written in English,  that  it
      contained spelling errors including an error in the  spelling  of  the
      name of Paul Bremer, failure to exhibit any of the threatening letters
      that were claimed to have been sent and that she had not reported  the
      matter to Mr Bremer or to the British representative.  The Adjudicator
      considered that it was unclear why an  Iraqi  citizen  married  to  an
      American  citizen  should  seek  to  report  threats  to  the  British
      representative.  He noted that the letter was presented  at  the  last
      minute.  There was no medical evidence to support the claim that their
      mother and brother had been rendered mentally ill.

8.    The Adjudicator having therefore in effect accepted little  more  than
      that the appellant was Iraqi and a Catholic, went on to  consider  the
      objective evidence concerning the situation for Christians in Iraq and
      concluded that targets of Islamic ire were attacked for what they  did
      such as for selling liquor or being women  who  did  not  cover  their
      hair, rather than because of what they were.  He concluded that  there
      was no real risk on return.

9.    The grounds of appeal challenge the Adjudicator's adverse  credibility
      findings and as a  consequence  challenge  the  findings  on  risk  on
      return, and also argue that the Adjudicator erred in his assessment of
      the positions of Christians in Iraq.  Permission was  granted  on  the
      former two but not the last point.

10.   This was the first issue that came for consideration  before  us.   Mr
      Magne sought permission to  vary  the  grounds  of  appeal  given  the
      significant recent deterioration in the situation  for  Christians  in
      Iraq.

11.   Mr Elks argued  that  it  was  not  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  allow
      variation just because of a deterioration in  the  situation,  but  it
      needed to be shown that in accordance with what has been said  by  the
      Tribunal  in  AK  [2004]  UKIAT  00201  that  there  must  be  special
      circumstances.  The strength of the grounds was not enough by  itself.
      Special circumstances had not been shown in this case, though  it  may
      be that the appellant would wish to make future representations to the
      Secretary of State in the light of fresh evidence  and  that  was  the
      appropriate forum for the fresh evidence.

12.   On consideration we considered that we would allow  the  variation  in
      this case.  We accept as we must, since it is set  out  in  a  starred
      determination that the strength of grounds of appeal cannot by  itself
      be a ground for extending time, bearing in mind however that that is a
      somewhat different context from the issue before us  of  permitting  a
      variation, though clearly there must be a degree of relevance of  this
      criterion to the context before us.  The strength of  this  particular
      ground is of clear relevance to our mind.   There  are  references  to
      objective evidence which arguably go  contrary  to  the  Adjudicator's
      reasoning in this regard, and, if we find that there is  an  error  of
      law in the Adjudicator's determination this would  allow  us  to  deal
      with the  up-to-date  objective  evidence.   It  is  clear  that  that
      objective evidence is of some force as regards assessment of the  risk
      to Christians in Iraq at present.  Though we have some  sympathy  with
      the points made  by  Mr  Elks  we  consider  on  balance  that  it  is
      appropriate to allow the variation of the  grounds  in  this  case  to
      allow the ground concerning the challenge to the findings on  risk  to
      Christians in Iraq to be argued.

13.   Thereafter Mr Magne sought and was granted permission to  adduce  oral
      evidence from Mr Brian Erickson.

14.   Mr Elks expressed concern that he had not been able to make  enquiries
      about Mr Erickson.

15.   Mr Magne said that he had contacted the team leader at the  Presenting
      Officer's unit seeking the bundle to be brought to  the  attention  of
      the Presenting Officer as quickly as possible.

16.   Mr Elks expressed his concern that the case had  been  listed  for  no
      more than 25 minutes, and we undertook to record as  we  here  do  his
      concern about the lack of time to  prepare  for  cross-examination  in
      this case.  We gave him time to make such preparation as he felt  able
      to do in the circumstances.

17.   Mr Brian  Erickson  of  14202  Cokevale  Street,  Rockville,  Maryland
      28041, USA gave evidence.  He was referred to his letters at page  131
      and 140 of the bundle and confirmed that they had both been written by
      him and he stood by their contents as he did by the  contents  of  his
      statement at page 301 of  the  bundle  subject  to  one  amendment  at
      paragraph 16.  He had said at page  304  that  probably  half  of  the
      people at the CPA were Christian but that  was  probably  towards  the
      beginning and did not mean that that was the case all the time he  was
      there.  Towards the end of his time there and the  transfer  of  power
      there were  probably  only  a  quarter  or  slightly  fewer  who  were
      Christians.

18.   He was referred to page 143 of the bundle and asked  to  identify  the
      three people in the photograph.  He said that the lady on the left was
      a friend of his wife, the lady in the middle  was  his  wife  and  the
      gentleman to her left in the photograph was  Ambassador  Paul  Bremer.
      Subject to the above amendment he was willing for his statement to  be
      adopted as evidence in court today.

19.   He was referred  to  paragraph  6.215  of  the  October  2004  Country
      Report.  This involved information concerning the Iraq Property Claims
      Commission (IPCC).  He was asked whether the Home  Office  or  the  UK
      government contacted him while he was there and he replied no.  He was
      asked whether they had contacted anyone in  his  organisation  and  he
      said it was possible that they had contacted the senior advisor of his
      commission, but he did not see any information there that referred  to
      speaking to them.

20.   He was referred to the Section between paragraph 6.46 and 6.55 in  the
      Country  Report  concerning  Christians  in  Iraq.   He  had  had  the
      opportunity to read this.  He had shared his office with the  Ministry
      of Displacement and Migration which is the main  ministry  working  to
      assist Iraq on matters of humanitarian relief and  human  rights.   He
      referred to the Minister Pascale Isho, with whom he had worked towards
      the last two and a half months of  his  time  in  Iraq  where  he  had
      succeeded to the senior position in the IPCC, and he had  worked  with
      the senior person who was working with the ministry, Jennifer Johnson.
       The IPCC's implementing body was the  Ministry  of  Displacement  and
      Migration.

21.   He was asked what information he  had  got  from  the  Minister  about
      Christians elsewhere in Iraq.  He said that in speaking with  Jennifer
      Johnson and several times with the Minister it was  obvious  that  the
      situation  was  extremely  grave.   The  Minister   was   specifically
      concerned about very  old  Christian  communities  in  the  north  and
      reports of ethnic cleansing and depopulation of those communities  and
      a series of attacks and violence aimed against Christians.

22.   He was asked whether the Home Office had  ever  contacted  Ms  Johnson
      about Christians in Iraq.  He said that they had not to his knowledge.
       He found it surprising that in  that  section  of  the  document  the
      Minister was not quoted, as she was the only Christian  in  the  Iraqi
      government and her Ministry was primarily  charged  with  humanitarian
      issues as they concerned the Iraqi people.  He also considered that  a
      lot of the information was dated.   His  understanding  was  that  the
      Archbishop in Basra referred to at  paragraph  6.48  had  subsequently
      been assassinated.  Also towards the end of his  time  there  when  he
      spoke to Iraqis he worked with, especially the Christians, they  spoke
      about Baghdad being flooded by Christian refugees.  He had  been  told
      that there were no more Christians in the south of Iraq.

23.   It was put to him that the appellant  was  from  Baghdad  and  he  was
      asked whether he could not go and live at his family address.  He said
      that this would be very difficult.  His (i.e. Mr Erickson's) wife  was
      targeted by terrorists and insurgents  and  people  had  come  to  the
      neighbourhood and searched for her  and  a  note  was  posted  at  her
      residence with a statement about people who worked with the coalition.
       He thought that the appellant  would  be  in  danger  as  there  were
      attacks on people who worked with the coalition  and  their  families.
      He had heard a rumour via his wife that  it  was  said  that  she  had
      married an American general, so she was subject to talk and scrutiny.

24.   On cross-examination Mr Elks asked Mr Erickson if he had any  identity
      documentation with him and he produced among other things his passport
      and his embassy card which was formerly his ID when he was at  the  US
      Mission in Baghdad.

25.   He was referred to his letter of 18 August 2004 at  page  140  of  the
      bundle.  He confirmed that it had his  signature  on  it  and  he  had
      written the letter.  He was asked whether this was the  official  line
      of the US government and said no and his position working for  the  US
      government was that he was the senior advisor to the IPCC and this was
      information that he had given concerning the appellant's  case,  in  a
      private capacity.  He was asked why if that was the case it was on  US
      Embassy headed paper and he said it was because he was working for the
      US mission.  He did not normally write personal letters on such  paper
      and had done this as it gave the identification that he worked at  the
      US mission in  Baghdad  and  he  believed  it  gave  veracity  to  the
      information he gave.

26.   It was put to him that he could have given the same information  in  a
      personal letter and  could  have  verified  his  ID  by  reference  to
      documents and it was put to him that he had done this in order to give
      kudos.  He said that the facts spoke for themselves  and  denied  that
      the aim was for his views  to  be  interpreted  as  those  of  the  US
      government.  He had wanted to ensure that it was  understood  that  he
      was a person working in Iraq and the information he had  obtained  was
      reputable and he was a reputable source of that information.

27.   He was asked whether he  was  a  contractor  or  employed  by  the  US
      government whilst in the CPA and  he  said  he  was  employed  by  the
      Department of Defense, and when he wrote the letter he was employed by
      the US State Department.  He was asked what the position  was  for  US
      government employees who used their position for personal gain and  he
      denied that there was any personal gain.  The  question  was  repeated
      and he said that he had no idea.  He was asked  whether  he  had  ever
      told his superiors he was writing letters on US headed  paper  and  he
      said he had spoken with his superior Duncan Gilchrist and told him  he
      was writing on behalf of the appellant and his case would  be  pending
      before the UK courts.  He had not said that he was writing  on  headed
      paper with his personal position at the foot of the paper.

28.   He was asked how many Christians there were in Iraq from  his  limited
      experience and he said that he had read in a CIA Factbook that it  was
      around 3 per cent and that would be around  600,000  people.   He  had
      read this book for general information on Iraq and did not know if  it
      said 3 per cent but knew it from general reading about Iraq.   He  had
      not specifically researched the problems of Christians.  He  had  kept
      himself abreast and read articles in his office and working  with  the
      Minister for Displacement and Migration and they would share  articles
      and this was a problem that they discussed.

29.   He was referred to paragraph 19 of his statement, at page 305  of  the
      bundle, where he had said that many Christians relocated  to  Baghdad.
      He was asked how many.  He said he had no idea.  There was information
      about moving from the south and the west, for  example  from  Fallujah
      and from the north.  He had heard anecdotally from Christians.  He had
      spoken to people specifically about the south having been  emptied  of
      Christians coming to Baghdad.  It was very hard always to estimate the
      number of refugees accurately and this was the view of bodies such  as
      the UNHCR.

30.   He was referred to paragraph 24 of the statement at page  306  of  the
      bundle concerning gold being a big business for  Christians  in  Iraq.
      He said that a group of Christians worked in the Iraqi Properly Claims
      Commission and they, about four people, were involved  with  the  gold
      business and they spoke about stores being burned  and  people  picked
      on.  He was asked whether he had only got his information  about  gold
      from these four people and he said he also got  the  information  from
      talking to other Christians and this was a niche they had carved  out,
      and this was true also with regard to alcohol and hospitality.   These
      were profitable businesses.  It was put to him  that  the  attacks  on
      Christians could be put down to the general lawlessness and  the  fact
      that they were people with money.  He said that this was not the  case
      as it was clear that there was a  very  specific  pattern  of  attacks
      against Christians.  There was for example the case he  had  cited  at
      paragraph 23 of the statement  concerning  the  burning  down  of  the
      optician's building.  You  could  always  tell  that  a  store  was  a
      Christian store for the reasons that he had set out in that paragraph.



31.   His wife's status in the United States was as  a  legal  resident  and
      she had been told that she would get her green  card,  the  resident's
      card, and she was legally able to work in the USA.  He was  asked  why
      he had not applied for refugee status for her there and he  questioned
      why it would be necessary to go through that when she was  married  to
      him and he could get her in legally.  Today she was in Washington DC.

32.   There was no re-examination.

33.    In  his  submissions  Mr  Magne  stated  that,  with  regard  to  the
      Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings, the  Adjudicator  had  not
      referred to the objective evidence.  The failure to claim asylum in  a
      third country was of little relevance to the proof of the  claim.   He
      had failed to consider the reason why the appellant  had  not  claimed
      asylum in Germany.  As to the last sentence of paragraph 15 it  was  a
      matter from which adverse inference was drawn and it should have  been
      put to the appellant if it was a material concern.

34.   The Tribunal was referred to page 128 of the bundle,  where  the  case
      worker for the Refugee Legal Centre made it clear what  the  appellant
      had said to her and that the issue of the appellant's contact with his
      family in Iraq had not been raised either by the  Adjudicator  or  the
      Presenting Officer at the hearing.  It was clear  that  shortly  after
      his arrival in Jordan he was in  contact  with  his  family  but  lost
      contact and the Adjudicator had failed to address this issue.  It  was
      contended that the  Adjudicator  had  adopted  a  flawed  approach  to
      credibility  having  looked  at  the  evidence  on  its   own   before
      considering the objective evidence.

35.   Mr Magne contended that the circumstances today in Iraq made a lot  of
      the earlier country information obsolete.  The appellant still  feared
      targeting from Ba'ath Party officials and was at risk as  a  Christian
      and on  account  of  imputed  political  opinion  given  his  sister's
      marriage to Mr Erickson, a leading CPA member.  The  UNHCR  report  of
      August 2004 had not been before the Tribunal in the AK.

36.   Mr Magne then took us to various points in the bundle.  First  of  all
      at page 148 he referred us to the evidence  concerning  Christians  in
      the UNHCR document of 12 August  2004  with  an  update  at  page  156
      paragraph 2 which was  of  especial  relevance  to  the  appellant  on
      account of his relationship to his sister to  Mr  Erickson.   He  also
      took us in detail to the House of Commons debate on  8  December  2004
      which is set out at pages 158-169 of the bundle.  The targeting of the
      appellant's sister as set out in the letter of 26 March 2004  had  not
      been contradicted by the Secretary of State.  The letter of  26  April
      2004 confirmed that she was the only Iraqi working for the CPA who was
      allowed to live in the Green Zone.  Examples of killings of staff were
      set out in that letter.  It was accepted by UNHCR as could be seen  at
      page 274b that operatives of the former regime  continued  to  operate
      and those who were at risk from the Ba'ath regime  remained  at  risk.
      Mr Erickson's evidence was confirmed by the US Department  of  General
      Accounting Office at page 220-221.  Property reform was a  main  point
      in reconstruction but they were not even able to engage  interpreters,
      as could be seen at paragraph 11 at page 304 and this was relevant  to
      inability to protect.  People had left from both  the  south  and  the
      north so it was not only Christians with money who were at risk.   Nor
      was it limited to people who were acting  in  a  manner  offensive  to
      Islam as had been held  in  AK.   There  were  specific  killings  and
      blanket warnings that people should  convert,  leave  or  die,  and  a
      campaign of persecution.   The  administration  was  unable  to  offer
      protection and it could hardly protect its  own  soldiers  and  police
      officers.  The state was unable to offer protection.

37.   In his  submissions  Mr  Elks  contended  that  Mr  Erickson  had  not
      provided evidence of great assistance since it was  essentially  based
      on his personal knowledge and was anecdotal.  It depended  on  whom  a
      person spoke to and their qualifications,  and  it  depended  upon  an
      analysis of the information being set against  established  tests  and
      put into context.  Mr Erickson had agreed for example that with regard
      to the number of Christians in  Iraq  he  got  this  information  from
      general reading on Iraq and had not carried out any specific  research
      and set his  knowledge  gained  in  Iraq  against  academic  research.
      Little weight could be attached to his evidence.  He had made it clear
      that he did not usually write personal letters on  US  paper  and  the
      reasons he had given for doing so were weak and it was argued that  it
      was done to give some extra weight to the information provided, and it
      did not deserve that weight.

38.    Mr  Elks  contended  that  there  was  no  error  of   law   in   the
      determination.  The Adjudicator had heard the appellant's evidence and
      came to sustainable conclusions on credibility.  It was not  necessary
      to  put  every  point  concerning  the  Adjudicator  with  regard   to
      credibility to the appellant and there could be  tactical  reasons  as
      had been held by the Tribunal in WM why an appellant did not deal with
      an issue and hoped that the Adjudicator would not notice it.   It  was
      for an appellant whose credibility was challenged as in this  case  to
      put forward all the evidence and deal with the discrepancies.

39.   The approach to the sister's letter was not perverse.   It  was  valid
      to query why she would report  to  the  British  representative.   The
      credibility assessment was sound.

40.   If the Tribunal disagreed then dealing first with the risk on  account
      of association with the CPA, it was not disputed that threats had been
      directed to the appellant's sister and her family, but he would return
      to Iraq after a  number  of  years'  absence.   The  family  would  be
      associated with the CPA in Baghdad and he could relocate elsewhere and
      it could be he would not be associated with his family in  any  event.
      As a consequence there was no risk and no need to consider protection.



41.   As regards risk as a Christian, AK was the  starting  point.   It  was
      said that things had moved on, and there were  references  to  further
      attacks.  The bombs that went off  in  August  2004,  referred  to  at
      paragraph 6.52 of the  Country  Report  had  been  considered  by  the
      Tribunal in AK.  It was for the appellant to  show  that  the  Batayav
      threshold had been crossed.  A lot of information had  been  submitted
      but it did not show a gross and systematic persecution  of  Christians
      in  Iraq.   Mr  Erickson's  evidence  included  statements  concerning
      Christians being involved in lucrative trades and  although  it  would
      not be entirely on that account that they  would  be  at  risk,  in  a
      lawless society some of the attacks detailed within the evidence  were
      related to economic betterment.  He referred to page 148 of the bundle
      which bore this out.

42.   As regards the House of Commons debate, a lot of the  references  were
      to Chaldo-Assyrian Christians and the appellant was  a  Catholic.   It
      had not been shown that they faced the same risk but it did not in any
      event cross the threshold.  It  could  be  seen  from  page  169  that
      relocation was feasible and the appellant  had  to  show  it  was  not
      viable.  The issue  of  protection  was  fact-sensitive  and  a  broad
      assertion could not be made that every Christian in Iraq would have  a
      sufficiency of protection.  This appellant would not face a real risk.



43.   By way of reply Mr Magne argued that  Mr  Erickson's  letter  made  it
      clear that his wife was allowed to stay in the CPA but the mother  and
      mentally-disturbed son were in hiding, and if the State could  protect
      then they would not have to be in the Green Zone.  Relocation was  not
      viable.  The Tribunal was referred to Mr Erickson's statement  in  the
      evidence in this regard.  There was also reference to  this  point  at
      page 274b in the  bundle  and  at  page  132  paragraph  7  concerning
      relocation to the north and elsewhere.

44.   With regard  to  what  had  been  said  by  the  Parliamentary  Under-
      Secretary of State for  Foreign  &  Commonwealth  Affairs  during  the
      debate, the fact that families lived in the north did not mean that it
      was secure or that there were enough places there for  the  appellant.
      They were a small number in quite a precarious situation.  In fact  it
      tallied with Mr Erickson's evidence.  People have come to Baghdad  for
      safety from the north and it showed a true desperation and it also had
      to be seen in the context of there being 600,000 Christians in Iraq.

45.   At this point Mr Magne took instructions from Mr  Erickson  concerning
      what the Minister of Displacement and Migration  had  said  about  the
      resettlement of Christians and that she had  been  angered  about  the
      displacement being effected with no reasons.  Mr Magne argued that the
      Secretary of State's assertions could not be taken to be reliable.

46.   Mr Elks contended that it would be  appropriate  if  Mr  Erickson  was
      going to give fresh evidence for him to be recalled, so that he  could
      be cross-examined.  Mr Erickson was recalled  and  said  that  he  had
      spoken  with  Pascale  Isho  the  Minister,  and  he  had  attended  a
      conference in Geneva with her where he had spent  some  time  and  had
      been in a meeting with her in Baghdad.  She had spoken about her anger
      concerning the Christians in the  north  being  pushed  out  of  their
      ancestral areas.  It was unclear what the report was.  She was angered
      about the fact that there was supposed to be resettlement going on but
      it was being blocked by the Kurds.  This had been in October 2004.  He
      was surprised  that  she  was  not  being  consulted.   There  was  no
      information that anyone had spoken to her directly though  this  could
      be done and she could explain in depth.

47.   When cross-examined by Mr Elks, Mr Erickson agreed that  he  had  last
      had contact with Pascale Isho in October 2004.  It  was  suggested  to
      him that it could be  that  he  was  not  aware  of  the  resettlement
      programmes that had taken place and the resettlement  referred  to  at
      page 169 by the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State.   Mr  Erickson
      said that there were plans for relocation but Pascale Isho had  spoken
      with frustration and anger that this was not ongoing.

48.   It was put to him that this might be the case that things  were  going
      on that she was not aware of or things had begun to develop  since  he
      had spoken to her and there was specific evidence  about  resettlement
      now.  Mr Erickson questioned what was said by the Parliamentary Under-
      Secretary of State at page 169 of the bundle with regard to the detail
      on resettlement.  From his lengthy  experience  of  working  with  the
      Kurds they had real problems with them and people were threatened  and
      there were problems if you were not a Kurd.

49.   We asked Mr Elks whether he  would  be  prepared  to  investigate  the
      information stated at page 169 concerning  the  specific  examples  of
      relocation mentioned there on the basis that  he  would  not  find  it
      necessary to say anything if  it  was  not  accurate  and  unless  his
      enquiries altered the correctness of the information then he stood  by
      it.  We allowed Mr Elks a week to provide that information if any  and
      for Mr Magne to provide any comments on it a week thereafter for  him.
      No such communication was in fact received from Mr Elks.

50.   Mr Magne referred to Mr Erickson's later evidence.  He said  that  the
      information in the debate was highly likely to be inaccurate  and  his
      experience with the Kurds should be borne in mind.  Even taken at  its
      highest it only involved 1,050 families and it was negligible and  was
      irrelevant to the appellant.

51.    We  consider  first  whether  there  is  an  error  of  law  in   the
      Adjudicator's determination.  Upon consideration we consider that  the
      credibility findings are flawed to the extent that  they  comprise  an
      error of law.  The issues that concerned the Adjudicator appear to  us
      to be essentially marginal.  The first of these concerns the view that
      the appellant was forum-shopping, given that he spent  several  months
      in Jordan and thereafter went to Austria and from  there  to  Germany.
      It seems that he was told in Austria that they did not  accept  asylum
      seekers and this was after a period of imprisonment  for  two  months,
      and he had fears of neo-Nazis in Germany.  It may be  that  he  should
      have pursued matters further than he  did  there  but  as  we  say  we
      consider this to  be  of  no  more  than  marginal  relevance  to  the
      credibility  of  the  claim  that  he  makes.   The  question  of  the
      whereabouts of his family  again  appears  to  us  to  be  of  limited
      relevance.  It would have been of assistance  if  these  concerns  had
      been put to the appellant by the Adjudicator,  as  clearly  they  were
      not.  It would also have been preferable had he considered credibility
      in the context of the objective evidence, and that to  our  mind  adds
      further weight to the conclusion we have come  to  that  there  is  an
      error of law in the assessment of credibility in this case.

52.   That having been said, the key issue is that  of  risk  on  return  on
      account of his Christianity.  The claim that he was a Catholic was not
      challenged.  The Tribunal considered the risk to Christians in Iraq in
      its  determination  to  which  we  have  referred  above,  AK,  in   a
      determination  where  the  appeal  was  heard  in  August   2004   and
      promulgated in November of that year.   The  Tribunal  considered  the
      objective evidence and concluded that though there might be categories
      of Christians who were  at  particular  risk,  especially  sellers  of
      alcohol, owners of cinemas where sexually-explicit  films  were  shown
      and perhaps people who spoke English who would be at risk  on  account
      of their Christianity.  It was also considered that  clerics  of  some
      eminence and prominence would be in particular at risk.  The appellant
      in that case did not come into any of those categories.

53.   It is contended that since the Tribunal  considered  the  evidence  on
      risk to return in Iraq to Christians in August 2004 the situation  has
      materially deteriorated to the extent that there can now  properly  be
      said to be a real risk of persecution and/or breach of human rights of
      a Christian in Iraq.  In this regard Mr Magne relied first of  all  on
      the oral evidence of Mr  Erickson  and  thereafter  in  particular  on
      evidence from the UNHCR, evidence in the October 2004  Country  Report
      and evidence in a debate in the House of Commons on 8  December  2004.
      Mr Erickson was in Iraq between May 2003  and  November  2004  and  it
      seems he was back in the United States in  August  2003.   During  the
      earlier period he worked as a contractor for  USAID  and  in  February
      2004 he was hired by  the  Defense  Department  as  a  Public  Affairs
      Officer under Mr  Bremer  and  then  became  involved  with  the  Iraq
      Property Claims Commission and he worked thereafter for the Department
      of State at the US mission in Baghdad, having been  appointed  to  the
      Coalition Provisional Authority.  The evidence  set  out  in  his  two
      letters and in his statement arises essentially as  a  consequence  of
      discussions he had with a number of people including interpreters  and
      also  colleagues  in  the  Ministry  of  Displacement  and   Migration
      including the Minister, Pascale Isho.  The further risk  factor  which
      is said to exist in  this  case  is  on  account  of  the  appellant's
      relationship to Mr Erickson, being his  brother-in-law.   Mr  Erickson
      married the appellant's sister Ragat in October 2003 and this  led  to
      threats being made against her to the extent  that  she  was  afforded
      protection by the CPA, being the only Iraqi national allowed  to  live
      in the CPA-protected area, as set out in Mr Erickson's  letter  of  26
      March 2004 at page 131 of the bundle.

54.   Mr Erickson's evidence, concentrating for the  moment  purely  on  the
      question of risk as a Christian, is clearly of  assistance  though  he
      accepted that it  was  essentially  derived  anecdotally,  however  he
      attached particular weight, not surprisingly, to what he said  he  had
      been  told  by  the  Minister  with  regard  to  her   concerns   that
      resettlement with Christians in the north was not taking place due  to
      this being blocked by the Kurds.

55.   We find it somewhat surprising that no evidence has been  provided  by
      Pascale Isho recording her concerns in this  regard.   It  would  have
      been of assistance also to have had information as to  the  timing  of
      the stating of these concerns and  the  basis  upon  which  they  were
      expressed.  We understand from Mr Erickson that he  had  conversations
      with Ms Isho in this regard in October 2004, and that is  relevant  to
      an issue we shall  come  to  consider  later  which  is  that  of  the
      situation in the north of Iraq for Christians.  We  conclude  in  this
      regard by noting the assistance we have  derived  from  Mr  Erickson's
      evidence but bearing  in  mind  that  it  is  essentially  anecdotally
      sourced.

56.   The next piece of evidence to which we turn is the  UNHCR  information
      document dated 12 August 2004, which as noted above was not before the
      Tribunal when it considered AK.   There  is  a  section  here  on  the
      situation for Christians at page 148 of the bundle.  It is  said  that
      it was unanimously acknowledged by all persons  interviewed  that  the
      situation of Christians in Iraq has  dramatically  deteriorated  since
      the fall of the previous regime.  This was attributable to one or more
      of the following  factors:  firstly  that  the  coalition  forces  are
      predominantly made up of people from Christian nations, secondly  that
      Christians are regarded as "infidels" by Islamic  fundamentalists  and
      extremists,  and  thirdly  that  Christians  have  traditionally  been
      involved in the alcohol trade in Iraq and the combination of  economic
      benefits and non-Islamic values  of  this  activity  are  resented  by
      fundamentalists and the unemployed.

57.    It  is  said  that  resentment  towards  Christians  appears  to   be
      particularly heartfelt in the south as well as in the  Sunni  triangle
      where there is currently a trend towards a stricter interpretation  of
      Islam.  There is reference  to  several  incident  of  Christian-owned
      alcohol shops being targeted or ransacked.  It  is  said  that  it  is
      possible that this was done for religious reasons but many people felt
      that it was also possible that there was an economic  motive.   It  is
      said that due to the perceived ineffectiveness of the police  as  well
      as the religious element of these crimes, most such crimes  are  never
      reported to the police.

58.   Thereafter there is detailed evidence to be found  in  the  course  of
      the parliamentary debate  on  8  December  2004.   This,  as  Mr  Elks
      reminded us, is essentially in  the  context  of  the  Chaldo-Assyrian
      community in  Iraq,  who  it  seems  form  more  than  95%  of  Iraq's
      Christians, according to Stephen  Pound  MP.   We  see  no  reason  to
      suppose however that the risk  is  materially  different  for  Chaldo-
      Assyrians and for other Christians such as Catholics, though Mr  Pound
      does refer at page 159 to the fact that they are at risk as being both
      an ethnic and a religious minority which may not be true of  Catholics
      as regards the former aspect.  Mr Pound refers to having many examples
      of the slaughter of innocent Chaldo-Assyrians on their way to and from
      church, work and their study.  He refers to pressure being  placed  by
      the KDP in the north on Chaldo-Assyrians to join the KDP  or  fly  the
      Kurdish flag.  He states that as recently as  July  2004  the  KDP  in
      Dohuk and Irbil prevented  Chaldo-Assyrian  groups  and  organisations
      from being  part  of  the  special  electoral  committee  to  nominate
      participants to the Iraqi National Conference, the  purpose  of  which
      was to elect representatives  to  the  Iraqi  National  Assembly.   He
      states that the situation was violent and awful up to that  day  which
      had seen gunmen bomb two Christian churches in Mosul.  He states  that
      the specific  targeting  of  Christian  churches  continues  with  the
      unimaginable consequence that a Christian is terrified to  attend  his
      or her place of Christian worship.  He refers to the mortar attack  on
      9 September 2004 against the inhabitants of the  Chaldo-Assyrian  town
      of Baghdede which included the death of a child and critical injury to
      his brother and mother.  In the same month two  26  year  old  Chaldo-
      Assyrians were kidnapped and beheaded and there was another example in
      December of 2004 of a man who had been kidnapped and killed  when  the
      family could not come up with the ransom.   Mr Pound goes on to  state
      at  page  161  that  Chaldo-Assyrians   and   Christians   are   being
      specifically targeted and no group in modern Iraq is being targeted in
      the same way.  He refers to the fact that there has been one attack on
      a mosque in the past three months and eighteen  attacks  on  Christian
      churches.

59.   He was reminded by the  Parliamentary  Under-Secretary  of  State  for
      Foreign & Commonwealth Affairs (Mr Chris Mullin) that the Shia  Muslim
      leader in Iraq, Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistanti, had called for an end to
      the attacks and talked  about  the  need  to  respect  the  rights  of
      Christians and other religious faiths and their right to live in  Iraq
      peacefully.  Mr Pound considered however that the voice of  the  Grand
      Ayatollah was essentially isolated and  there  had  been  very  little
      indication of any diminution in attacks  on  the  Christian  community
      since.

60.   There are also statements by Mr Spink MP who referred to  the  attacks
      which we have already mentioned in August 2004 against  five  churches
      in Baghdad and Mosul.  Since those  attacks  Islamic  extremists  have
      struck Christian churches again.   Five  Chaldo-Assyrian  churches  in
      Baghdad were bombed on 16 October although nobody was injured.   Bombs
      exploded at two churches in Baghdad on 8 November within the space  of
      five or ten minutes which is indicative of the level of  coordination,
      and at least three people were killed and 40 injured.  On 4  July  two
      Chaldo-Assyrians were shot dead at their home by  Islamic  extremists,
      it seems in Mosul.  There was reference to a bishop having referred to
      posters being put up in northern Iraq urging Christians to convert  to
      Islam or leave the country.  Chaldo-Assyrian Christians  had  received
      threatening letters telling  them  to  support  the  Muslim  rebellion
      against the Coalition Authority and to practise Islam or suffer severe
      consequences.  The recipients of those letters were told that if  they
      did not follow basic rules such as wearing the veil and did not follow
      Islamic teachings they would be severely  treated  or  killed.   Three
      Christian bishops in Mosul had received letters  threatening  to  kill
      one member of each Christian household as a punishment for  women  not
      wearing the Islamic veil.

61.   There was also reference to the fact that at least 58  Chaldo-Assyrian
      villages had been occupied, eight completely and 50 partially, by  the
      Kurds.  All of these are in Dohuk province and in areas controlled  by
      the KDP.  There is reference to the Chaldo-Assyrian Christians being a
      community under siege and of being specifically  at  risk  of  attacks
      from Islamic extremists from Iran and from those who want to drag them
      out of Iraq and kill them or force them to convert to Islam.

62.   It is said by Mr Barratt MP at page 164 that the  Christian  community
      is clearly suffering badly.  People were fleeing on  a  regular  basis
      and there were  claims  of  villages  being  destroyed,  churches  and
      monasteries being razed and  Christians  being  deported  to  Baghdad.
      Christians were  often  victims  of  the  growing  abduction  industry
      because they were seen as wealthy and he refers to a large  number  of
      Christians having been kidnapped in Baghdad  between  April  2003  and
      November 2004 and naturally people are terrified of even going to pray
      and of coming out as Christians.

63.   There was reference by Mr Streeter MP at page 166 to  a  recent  email
      received from Canon Andrew White who works in the Middle East and Iraq
      of a mass leafleting to all the  churches  and  individual  Christians
      having taken place recently telling  them  to  leave  the  country  or
      convert to Islam.  There was  reference  to  his  church  having  been
      attacked yesterday afternoon, though the guards shot at the  attackers
      which caused them to flee.   It  is  said  that  the  cries  from  the
      Christians of Iraq are  increasingly  desperate.   He  refers  to  the
      examples given of specific atrocities.

64.    The  Parliamentary  Under-Secretary  of   State   for   Foreign   and
      Commonwealth Affairs, Mr Mullin, referred to the  fact  that  in  some
      parts of Iraq, notably the  Sunni  area  west  of  the  Tigris  river,
      attacks had been specifically directed at Christians and churches.  He
      referred to the government having  recently  consulted  fairly  widely
      with a range of leading Christians in northern Iraq.  He  went  on  to
      state that Christian Iraqis are well integrated in the autonomous area
      of Kurdistan, the Kurdistan regional government  in  Kirkuk  and  most
      parts of Mosul, but not of course in the  western  side  of  the  city
      where the  situation  is  difficult  and  dangerous.   In  Irbil  some
      Christians occupy senior government positions.  One  is  Deputy  Prime
      Minister, another is Minister of Migration [this would be a  reference
      to Pascale Isho  to  whom  Mr  Erickson  referred].   Mr  Mullin  also
      referred to the fact that a committee  has  been  set  up  in  Angkawr
      Christian village just outside  Irbil  to  help  the  resettlement  of
      Christians from elsewhere in Iraq.  He referred to the  fact  that  so
      far about 1,000 Christian families have resettled in the areas  around
      Irbil and Dohuk provinces and another fifty Christian families, mainly
      from the south of Iraq, have resettled in  the  Suleymaniah  province.
      He referred also to the fact that  a  further  1,000  Christians  took
      temporary shelter in Suleymaniah from Mosul during fighting  there  in
      early November but it was understood that most if not all of them  had
      returned to their homes in Mosul.  Progress continued to be  made  and
      he was pleased to report that on 6 and 7 December the first 70 of  170
      Assyrian families who had fled to Baghdad in  the  1980s  returned  to
      their homes near the Syrian border.  He remained concerned by  reports
      that Christians were suffering discrimination in other parts of  Iraq,
      referring to the appalling attacks on churches which had resulted in a
      number of deaths and injuries to dozens more.

65.   Thereafter there is an item from Asian News concerning attacks on  the
      Chaldean Bishop's palace and the Catholic  Armenian  church,  both  in
      Mosul, by bomb attacks.

66.   We think it is appropriate that we refer also  to  evidence  that  was
      put before us in a further appeal heard on the same day, the appeal of
      Mr Basheer Hana.  Much of this concerns articles from various  sources
      referring to the situation of Christians in Iraq.  There was reference
      in the document at page 12 of the bundle in that case from MSNBC  News
      concerning a two-thirds drop in attendance at St Joseph's Cathedral in
      Baghdad.  A Christian community leader is quoted as saying  that  more
      than 200 Christians have been kidnapped and at least 60 of  them  have
      been murdered.  Pascale Isho  the  Migration  Minister  is  quoted  as
      saying that at least 40,000 Christians have fled the country since the
      US invasion, most having gone to Jordan and  Syria.   Christians  were
      targeted partly for operating liquor stores  and  beauty  salons,  for
      being perceived as being comparatively well-off and as  being  staunch
      supporters of the American-led invasion.  It is  said at page 17, this
      being a document from the Assyrian  Democratic  Movement,  that  those
      occupying Chaldo-Assyrian lands in the north of Iraq refused to  leave
      and have now embarked on a process of  intimidation  so  that  Chaldo-
      Assyrians in other villages are forced to  flee  due  to  threats  and
      constant mental and physical harassment.  At page 19  to  page  25  of
      this bundle there is a list of  people  who  between  April  2003  and
      October 2004, all being Chaldo-Assyrians, were killed or  attacked  in
      their homes, colleges or at work in some cases for  the  US  military.
      There is a report in The Times  of  18  October  2004  concerning  the
      damage done to five churches in Baghdad, to  which  we  have  referred
      above.  In  The  Times  of  December  24  2004  there  is  an  article
      concerning Christians facing an absence of midnight mass on  Christmas
      Eve because of curfews imposed and  the  fact  that  congregations  on
      Christmas Day were sparse, given people's fears as to their safety.

67.   There are also various documents  from  the  Barnabas  Fund  which  is
      concerned with bringing hope  to  the  persecuted  church.   There  is
      reference at page 52 of this bundle in a  document  dated  3  November
      2004 to leaflets being distributed with a message  telling  Christians
      to go and leave Iraq, and Islamic militants  knock  at  the  doors  of
      Christian homes in Mosul  demanding  money.   There  are  threats  and
      attacks many of which it is said go unreported.  In  an  item  in  the
      Independent of 17 October 2004  it  is  reported  that  the  Christian
      community in Iraq has come under repeated sectarian attack from Muslim
      extremists since the occupation, and about 45,000 of a  population  of
      around 600,000 have fled abroad.  It is clear that steady  numbers  of
      Christians are leaving Iraq.  Looting has  been  used  as  a  tool  of
      intimidation against Christians in Basra, and there are concerns  that
      an Islamic republic, i.e. a theocratic regime, would  be  particularly
      oppressive and alienating.

68.   There is a document at page 65 concerning the blinding and  amputation
      of the hands of the  Muslim  partner  of  the  Christian  owner  of  a
      restaurant who was killed because he served the Americans.  At page 75
      of the bundle "The Universe" it is said that so well orchestrated were
      the attacks on the Christians in August 2004 that they were  beginning
      to suspect that the forces ranged against them amounted  to  far  more
      than just a few fanatics.

69.   There is a also a very  recent  item  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  of  8
      January 2005 in which it is suggested that  some  300,000  Christians,
      roughly a quarter of the population, have fled their homes  since  the
      US-led invasion.  It is said that  60,000  Christians  fled  Mosul  in
      recent months.  Anti-Christian graffiti  has  been  daubed  on  church
      walls and inflammatory CDs sold in the  market  and  there  have  been
      regular gun attacks in Christian areas of  the  city.   There  was  an
      interview with a gentleman who had fled with the rest of his family to
      Angkawr which is described as one of a number of Christian communities
      in the Kurdish-protected north.  150 families sheltered there from the
      oppression and fear that forced them to flee  their  homes  in  Mosul,
      Baghdad and Basra.  Angkawr is a town of 35,000 people and is defended
      by guards and concrete barriers.

70.   There is  clearly  therefore  evidence  of  significant  problems  for
      Christians in a number  of  parts  of  Iraq.   Most  of  the  evidence
      concerns Chaldo-Assyrians, but we consider that the risk to Christians
      generally is  not  materially  different  from  the  risk  to  Chaldo-
      Assyrians and the issue is of that of assessing the level of risk that
      they face, and in particular as the Tribunal noted  in  AK,  following
      Hariri and Batayev, there requires to be a consistent pattern of gross
      and systematic violation of rights under Article 3 for that  threshold
      to be crossed.

71.   We accept that the evidence shows a  deterioration  in  the  situation
      since the Tribunal considered the evidence of risk  to  Christians  in
      Iraq in AK.  It is relevant to bear in mind also what is said  in  the
      Country Report of October  2004  that  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
      Office  is  receiving  increased  reports  of   intimidation   against
      Christians.  There have also been sectarian attacks  and  over  recent
      months Christian churches have  been  deliberately  targeted  in  bomb
      attacks which have resulted in  the  deaths  of  eleven  people.   The
      Chaldean Patriarch is quoted as saying that fanaticism is on the  rise
      though he also  stated  that  there  was  no  general  persecution  of
      Christians.  He considered that the personal survival of Christians is
      likely  to  come  under  further  threats  as  the  movement  for  the
      Islamisation of Iraq gathers momentum.

72.   The question before us is whether there is a real risk on  return  for
      this appellant and to what extent if any there can be  said  to  be  a
      real risk for Christians generally in  Iraq.   Increasing  numbers  of
      Christians  are  leaving  Iraq,  though  equally  it  is  clear   that
      significant numbers remain.  The number of Christians  in  Iraq  would
      appear on the evidence as a whole (and in this regard we consider that
      the recent report in the Daily Telegraph is somewhat in error in  this
      respect) to be in the order of some 600,000.   It is said that at  one
      point there were over a  million  prior  to  the  downfall  of  Saddam
      Hussein's regime.  We are persuaded by the number of examples to which
      we have referred above in the evidence and the general  atmosphere  of
      fear that the situation is closer than it was to one where there is  a
      real  risk  of  persecution  or  breach  of  their  human  rights  for
      Christians in Iraq.  We are not persuaded however that it has  reached
      the point of crossing the threshold so as to become a real  risk.   It
      is clear that Christians are  still  meeting  together  and  attending
      church, albeit in an atmosphere of increasing concern, and  increasing
      examples of attacks and are clearly feeling inhibited from  expressing
      their religion to an  extent  which,  we  accept,  comes  closer  than
      previously to amounting to a real risk  of  persecution.   However  we
      conclude that the evidence falls short as of today of indicating  that
      the appropriate threshold is crossed.

73.   If we are wrong in this  regard  we  consider  that  the  evidence  in
      particular as set out in the remarks of Mr Mullin in the parliamentary
      debate of 8 December 2004 indicates that relocation can take place  to
      the north.  We bear in mind in this regard Mr Erickson's evidence  and
      his quotations from Ms Isho concerning the problems with the Kurds for
      a non-Kurd assimilating in the north.  Against that  however  we  have
      the clear and specific examples  given  by  Mr  Mullin  and  also  the
      evidence as contained in the Daily Telegraph report of 8 January  2005
      concerning Christians living in the north having relocated there  from
      other parts of Iraq.  Though the numbers, as Mr Magne  contended,  are
      small in comparison to the numbers of Christians generally, we do  not
      consider that that shows that it would be unduly harsh for a Christian
      to relocate to the north.  The evidence is not such at this  stage  as
      to indicate problems for a person relocating to the north such  as  to
      render this unduly harsh or, in the case of Article  3  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention to indicate a real risk of  breach  of  their  human
      rights in effecting such relocation and living in the north.

74.   We are conscious of the fact that  Iraq  is  a  country  where  change
      occurs at a faster rate  than  most  other  countries  of  the  world.
      Country Guidance cases on Iraq at present are unlikely to have a  very
      long shelf life.  Nevertheless we can only deal with the  evidence  as
      it is before us at the time of the hearing, and we have concluded with
      regard to the evidence on risk to Christians in Iraq that  at  present
      though the position has, as we say, deteriorated since it was examined
      by the Tribunal in AK, that it does not in the  case  of  a  Christian
      such as the appellant who has no particular distinguishing features to
      his Christianity, give rise to a  real  risk.   Again  the  categories
      identified by the Tribunal in AK at paragraph 10 would appear to be at
      particular risk, especially clerics of some eminence  and  prominence.
      The comment made at paragraph  11  in  that  determination  concerning
      alcohol sellers or owners of cinemas showing films offence to  Muslims
      is a comment which we would endorse and repeat.

75.   We  turn  to  the  other  risk  factor  in  this  case,  that  of  the
      appellant's relationship to  Mr  Erickson  through  his  sister.   The
      appellant has been in the United Kingdom  since  1999.    Mr  Erickson
      came to Iraq in May 2003 and married the appellant's sister  Ragat  on
      21 October 2003.    He referred in his memo at pages 131 to 133 of the
      bundle to threats being made against his wife in the form of  a  visit
      by two young men who asked about her in the neighbourhood and a  piece
      of cardboard left on the doorstep at  her  family  home  stating  "the
      enemies of Iraq and God will die".  He had considered  that  her  life
      was in danger since she worked for the CPA, and had requested that she
      be allowed to stay in the protected  CPA  housing  area.    She  lived
      there with him until she went to the United  States  with  him.     Mr
      Erickson considered that the appellant  would  have  to  stay  in  the
      family house and believed that he would be targeted since  there  were
      people who knew that his wife worked for the CPA and were  looking  to
      kill her.   He also considered that, since the family home was in Dora
      where there had been the  most  fighting  against  the  coalition  and
      resistance by former Ba'athists in Baghdad that he would  be  at  risk
      there.   He would not be allowed to live in the Green Zone.   Nor,  as
      we have noted above, did Mr Erickson consider that the appellant could
      relocate elsewhere in Iraq.   His wife's  family  had  said  that  the
      appellant could stay with them for a short time, but they did not have
      the room.  His mother and her  mentally  disturbed  son  were  now  in
      hiding.

76.   We accept that there are risk factors in the  applicant's  case  which
      would make it unsafe for  him  to  return  to  his  home  area.    His
      problems as regards his relationship to his sister are however in  our
      view essentially localised.  We consider that he could  relocate  away
      from that area without this being unduly harsh,  essentially  for  the
      reasons given at paragraph 73 above.  Indeed as regards  the  problems
      on account of his  relationship  with  his  sister  we  consider  that
      relocation could take place to areas other than the  north  away  from
      his essentially localised problem.  We do not  consider  however  that
      either separately or cumulatively with the risk factors that  we  have
      identified for him as a  Christian  that  he  faces  a  real  risk  of
      persecution away from his immediate home area in Iraq.   The appeal is
      therefore dismissed.



                                                                   D K Allen
                                                              Vice President
