


|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|AN and NN (s.83 - asylum grounds only) Albania [2007] UKAIT 00097 |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                |                                |
|Heard at: Field House on 8      |                                |
|November  2007                  |                                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
| SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


Representation
For the appellants: Mr N O'Brien of Counsel instructed by Barnes  Harild  &
Dyer Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

JM v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1402 has no
impact on the scope of s. 83. As is clear from the relevant legislation and
Immigration Rules, in an appeal under s.83 of the 2002 Act the Tribunal has
no jurisdiction to consider  non-asylum  grounds;  and,  if  an  appeal  is
allowed on asylum grounds, it cannot be allowed on humanitarian  protection
grounds.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants, both nationals of Albania, are twins born on 9 May  1991.
On 15 January 2007 the Secretary of State had refused to grant them  asylum,
although he had gone on to grant each of them limited leave to remain  until
8 May 2009 (when they turn 18). In determinations notified on 21 March  2007
Immigration Judge Entwhistle allowed their appeals, stating that:


        "DECISION
         I allow the appeal on asylum grounds
        I allow the appeal on Human Rights grounds
        I allow the appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds"


 2. The respondent was successful in obtaining an order for  reconsideration
and so the matter comes before me.

3.  There  are  two  obvious  errors  of  law  in  the  immigration  judge's
determinations. The first is that he wrongly  considered  that  the  appeals
before him were capable of being  brought on one or more of the grounds  set
out in s.84 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the
2002 Act")  so as to cover  "[h]uman  rights  grounds"  and  "[h]umanitarian
protection grounds". For that to have been the case they would  have  needed
to be appeals against an immigration decision as  defined  by  s.82(2)  They
were not. The decision in each case - to refuse to grant asylum -  does  not
fall within the definition of "immigration decision" contained  in  s.82(2).
The decisions not falling within s.  82(2),  there  could  be  no  right  of
appeal against them under s.82(1). Their appeals could not be ones to  which
s.84(1) applied either, as the latter's list of grounds on which  an  appeal
must be brought is confined to appeals under section 82(1). Nor could  their
appeals  be  ones  in  which  any  matter  raised  in  a   s.120   statement
constituting a ground of appeal could be  considered,  as  s.85(2)  confines
any such matter to grounds of appeal "of a kind listed in s.84(1)".

4. That is not to say the appellants possessed no right of appeal  nor  that
their appeals could not be brought on any grounds. They  each  had,  as  the
decision letter stated, a s.83  appeal.  Section  83  is  in  the  following
terms:

      "(1) This section applies where a person has made an asylum claim  and
      -
         a) his claim has been rejected by the Secretary of State, but
         b) he has been granted leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
            Kingdom  for  a  period  exceeding  one  year  (or  for  periods
            exceeding one year in aggregate).
        (2) The person may appeal to the Tribunal against the  rejection  of
      his asylum claim."

5. Section 84(3) specifies that:

      "An appeal under section 83  must  be  brought  on  the  grounds  that
      removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  the
      United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention".


6. The appellants' appeals fell squarely  within  s.83:  they  had  made  an
asylum claim; it had been rejected by the Secretary of State; they had  each
been granted leave to remain for a period exceeding one year; and  they  had
appealed against the rejection of their asylum claim  on  the  grounds  that
removal would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
Convention.

7. Since both representatives were agreed that in allowing  the  appeals  on
non-asylum (as well as on asylum grounds) the immigration judge went  beyond
his jurisdiction, I would not normally need to add anything further to  what
has just  been  said.  However,  both  asked  that  I  clarify  the  correct
position, as to their knowledge the approach taken by the immigration  judge
in considering he had jurisdiction to decide these "s. 83 appeals"  on  non-
asylum as well as asylum grounds was not an isolated example. It  was  their
understanding, they said, that a number of immigration  judges  were  taking
the view that they were indeed obliged in this type of appeal to  deal  with
non-asylum grounds as a result of what had been decided in  JM  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1402.

8. JM has no impact on the scope of s.83.  JM was solely concerned with  the
proper construction of s.82 and s.84(1)(g) of the  2002  Act.  The  Tribunal
had concluded in JM (Rule 62(7); human rights unarguable) Liberia  *  [2006]
UKAIT 00009 that a human rights claim was not justiciable on a variation  of
leave appeal because  in  such  a  case  the  appellant's  removal  was  not
imminent, and the case was not within section 84(1)(g)  which conferred  the
relevant jurisdiction on the Tribunal.  Overruling  the  Tribunal,  Laws  LJ
held that the case was within s.84(1)(g) and that as a result  the  Tribunal
should have concluded that it was obliged to determine  the  matter  of  the
human rights claim which had been raised as a ground of appeal.

9. The Court of  Appeal  in  JM  was  not  concerned,  therefore,  with  the
situation where there is no immigration decision as defined by  s.82(2)  and
where the only right of appeal conferred by statute  is  confined  expressly
to an appeal "against the  rejection  of  his  asylum  claim".  Nor  was  it
concerned with an appeal outside the scope of s.84(1). Furthermore, as  Laws
LJ emphasised in JM,  the  Tribunal  is  a  creature  of  statute  and  thus
possesses only the jurisdiction which statute has conferred upon it.

10. The only possible argument for considering  that  an  immigration  judge
in a s.83 case could  or  must  determine  non-asylum  grounds  rests  on  a
particular reading of the wording of s. 86.  So  far  as  is  relevant  this
section states:

   "This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1), 83 or 83A.
     1) The Tribunal must determine -
           (a) any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or  not  by
           virtue of section 85(1)), and
           (b) any matter which s.85 requires it to consider..."

11. It might be argued that since s.86 expressly includes  an  appeal  under
s.83 as well as under s.82(1) within its scope,  the  Tribunal,  even  in  a
s.83 appeal, must determine  "any  matter  raised  as  a  ground  of  appeal
(whether or not by virtue of s.85(1))", including human rights matters.  But
the inclusion of s.83 within the scope of s.86 cannot  extend  what  can  be
determined in a s.83  appeal  beyond  the  only  grounds  that  the  statute
provides - i.e. asylum grounds.

12. The inclusion of a s.83 appeal within the scope of s.86(1) serves  other
purposes. It ensures, for example, that the Tribunal must allow  the  appeal
if it thinks  that  a  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  asylum  was  not  in
accordance with the law  (including  immigration  rules)  (s.86(3)(a)),  but
must otherwise dismiss  it  (s.86(5)).  It  also  obliges  the  Tribunal  to
determine matters that can be raised and to determine them in certain  ways.
There is an obligation on the Tribunal in such an appeal  to  determine  any
matter which s.85 requires it to consider (s.86(2)(b)). By  this  means  the
Tribunal may, in an appeal  under  s.83(2)  consider  any  matter  which  it
thinks relevant to the substance of the decision, including  evidence  which
concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision (s.85(4)). By  this
means the "Ravichandran" principle is applied to a s.83 appeal (as  well  as
to appeals raising asylum grounds brought under s.82).

13. The above reading of s.83 in no way  offends  the  "one-stop"  principle
highlighted by the Court of  Appeal in  JM,  since  a  person  with  limited
leave to remain will have the ability to apply for a variation of  leave  on
any grounds before expiry of that limited  leave.  If  that  application  is
refused, an appeal will lie under s.82.

14. I note at this point that as a result of an amendment introduced by  the
Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 there is  now  a  s.83A,  which
affects decisions made on or after 31 August 2006,  but  that  amendment  is
solely concerned with persons who have been granted limited leave to  remain
as a refugee and who then receive a decision that they are not  refugees.  I
am concerned here with s.83 only.

15. The second  obvious  error  on  the  face  of  the  immigration  judge's
determination is that despite allowing the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  he
also sought to allow it, not just on human  rights  grounds,  but  also  "on
Humanitarian Protection grounds". That was  to  try  and  square  a  circle.
Paragraph 339C of HC395 (as amended) states in its first part that:

            "Grant of humanitarian protection
      339C. A person will be granted humanitarian protection in  the  United
      Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
      (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of  entry  in
      the United Kingdom;
      (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in  regulation  2  of
      The  Refugee  or  Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
      (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
      (iii) substantial grounds have  been  shown  for  believing  that  the
      person concerned, if he returned to the country of return, would  face
      a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or, owing to such
      risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection  of  that  country;
      and
      (iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection".
      ..."


16. Manifestly, therefore,  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection  is  only
possible if a person "does not qualify as a refugee..." (339C(ii)).

17. Nevertheless the legal errors  so  far  identified  in  the  immigration
judge's determinations were not material in relation to the only appeals  he
had jurisdiction to decide: the s. 83 asylum appeals.  I  can  only  find  a
material error of law if it is  an  error  which  "affected  the  Tribunal's
decision  upon  the  appeal"  (Rule  31,  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005.

18. The respondent's grounds base the contention  that  there  was  such  an
error of law on  the  following  four  arguments.  The  first  is  that  the
immigration judge failed to take into account all the matters identified  by
the Tribunal in Koci [2003] EWCA Civ 1507 as affirmed in  TB  (blood  feuds-
relevant risk) CG Albania [2004] UKIAT 00158 as follows:


      "35.  In the light of the  Court  of  Appeal  judgment  in  Koci,  the
      blanket 'negative' assessment in Brozi  on  the  issue  of  the  state
      protection in Albanian blood feuds must be seen to be as wrong as  was
      the blanket 'positive' assessment in Koci at Tribunal level.   As  the
      Court of Appeal emphasises 'Every case has to  be  considered  on  its
      merits'. Merely because a finding of fact has been made that  a  blood
      feud exists, it cannot automatically be  assumed  that  the  appellant
      will be at real risk if returned to Albania.


      Building upon Longmore LJ's suggested list of important circumstances,
      the Tribunal finds that the following  matters  will  be  relevant  in
      determining the nature of the risk on return:


           (a) whether the dispute can be characterised as a  'blood  feud'
           at all;


           (b) even if  it  can,  the  extent  to  which  its  origins  and
           development (if any) are to be regarded by Albanian  society  as
           falling within the classic principles of the Kanun;


           (c)  the history of the feud, including  the  notoriety  of  the
           original killings and numbers killed;


           (d) the past and likely future attitude of the police and  other
           authorities towards the feud;


           (e) the degree  of  commitment  shown  by  the  opposing  family
           towards prosecuting the feud;


           (f) the time that has elapsed since the last killing;


           (g) the ability of the opposing family  to  locate  the  alleged
           potential victim  anywhere in Albania;


           (h) that person's profile as a potential target  for  the  blood
           feud; and


           (i) the prospects for eliminating the feud, whether by  recourse
           to the  payment  of  money,  a  reconciliation  organisation  or
           otherwise... "


   19. Secondly, the grounds allege, he fell into error in failing to  make
   any finding on whether the latest incident the  appellants'  family  had
   faced demonstrated that they were among the actual targets of the killer
   and in this way he wrongly based himself on mere speculation  about  the
   risk the appellants would face on return. Thirdly, it is contended  that
   when assessing the issue of sufficiency of protection,  the  immigration
   judge failed to take adequately into account that the police had  agreed
   to investigate the latest incident when the appellants' brother was shot
   and he had wrongly failed to attach weight to the lack  of  evidence  of
   the appellants' family attempting to  approach  an  agency  providing  a
   reconciliation service. Finally it is  submitted  that  the  immigration
   judge failed to make any findings on  the  ability  of  the  appellants'
   family to locate the appellants in parts of  Albania  other  than  their
   home area.

   20. I  remind  myself  that  my  task  is  not  to  decide  whether  the
   immigration judge made the correct decision but only whether his was one
   which contained a material error of law.

   21. In my view the principal start point for deciding this case must  be
   the fact that the respondent has accepted  the  appellants'  account  of
   their family having become involved in a blood feud with  the  K  family
   since 1993 as true without qualification. That is clear from the reasons
   for refusal letter. Furthermore  and  in  any  event,  the  grounds  for
   reconsideration raise no challenge to the  immigration  judge's  finding
   that the account they gave of the blood feud and  its  consequences  for
   their family was correct.

   22.  As  I  will  return  to  when  addressing  the  issue  of  internal
   relocation, this acceptance of the appellants'  story  has  considerable
   importance for my consideration of this case.

   23. So far as the first argument is concerned, it is  difficult  to  see
   that the immigration judge failed  to  take  into  account  any  of  the
   factors specified in TB.  As Mr Gulvin agreed, the only possible  factor
   which TB identified which the immigration judge could be  said  to  have
   overlooked was 37 (g). I shall deal with that when considering  internal
   relocation.

   24. As regards the second argument, which Mr Gulvin also accepted lacked
   cogency, I fail to see that the immigration judge did not  consider  the
   issue of whether the  evidence  showed  that  the  appellants  had  been
   targeted. That assessment was not based on mere speculation  but  rather
   on  inferences  based  on  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  including   the
   appellants'  own  evidence,  the  newspaper  article,  other  items   of
   documentary  evidence  and  the   background   country   evidence.   The
   immigration judge noted that  since  the  blood  feud  between  the  two
   families had begun in 1993, five people had been killed:  3  members  of
   the K family and 2 members of the appellants'  family.  The  immigration
   judge  properly  noted  that  according  to  the   background   evidence
   concerning blood feuds in Albania, significant lapses  of  time  between
   killings of family members was  not  unusual.  It  cannot  seriously  be
   suggested that the immigration judge could only  reasonably  have  found
   that the attack on 3 May 2005 was merely a random shooting by  a  crazed
   killer. On the available evidence it was open to the  immigration  judge
   to conclude that the appellants' family had become and remained a target
   for adverse treatment from members of the K family.

   25. That brings me to  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of  protection.  The
   grounds are quite correct to emphasise the need for an immigration judge
   when considering this issue to examine what steps  have  been  taken  by
   those concerned to avail themselves of protection from  the  authorities
   and other agencies. However, the  immigration  judge  plainly  did  give
   careful consideration to the evidence regarding  this  matter.  I  would
   accept that read in isolation the sentence in para 22(c) is  capable  of
   being read as suggesting that the immigration judge overlooked the  onus
   on the appellants' family to take  active  steps  to  obtain  protection
   ("The police officer said they would try and investigate the matter  but
   they did not hear from the police again"). However, this observation has
   to be read in the context of  the  determination  as  a  whole  and  the
   accepted factual matrix. Elsewhere (para 22(d))  the  immigration  judge
   noted that the police had failed effectively to  investigate  the  first
   killing of the appellants' grandfather in 1997. In that context for  the
   police to fail to contact the family after their initial response on the
   day of the killing in 2005 of another  family  member,  the  appellants'
   brother, was properly seen as of some significance. Furthermore, it  was
   the appellants' unchallenged  evidence  that  after  this  incident  the
   appellant's father and uncles remained in hiding and  only  occasionally
   came back to the house because they considered that the police would not
   be able to prevent further attacks against them. Clearly at the time  of
   the killing of the appellants' brother the  police  would  have  had  to
   consider whether to provide specific protection to the family. They  had
   not provided such protection.


   26. The immigration  judge  also  noted,  in  relation  to  the  related
   question of whether the appellants' family had taken steps to go to  any
   of  the  agencies  which  provide  reconciliation  services,  that   the
   appellants were not quite 14 when their brother was killed and  may  not
   have been aware of any approaches to  reconciliation  agencies  made  by
   their elders. By the same token their age may well have meant they  were
   not aware of efforts made  by  their  elders  to  communicate  with  the
   police. I consider that the immigration  judge  was  quite  entitled  to
   treat these surrounding circumstances as indicating that: "The  evidence
   of this family's experience is that they have  not  received  protection
   from the police since members of their  family  have  been  killed".  As
   regards the issue of approaches to reconciliation agencies, I have  just
   noted that the immigration judge addressed this and  decided  that  this
   was something of which the appellants may not have had knowledge. In any
   event, as Mr O'Brien correctly observed,  the  police  report  indicated
   that the K family was hostile to any idea of reconciliation.


   27. The immigration judge's assessment of what the police  were  willing
   and able to do and what had happened in relation to  reconciliation  was
   entirely sustainable.

   28. The respondent's final argument was that the immigration  judge  had
   failed to address the issue of internal  relocation.  In  my  view  that
   argument is somewhat weakened by the fact that the  respondent  had  not
   raised it in the reasons for refusal, notwithstanding acceptance therein
   of the appellant's account. Nor, despite the appellant's  representative
   at the hearing (Mr O'Brien, who represented there as well)  raising  the
   internal relocation issue expressly, did the respondent's representative
   raise it. Mr Gulvin contends that these  failures  did  not  excuse  the
   immigration judge from having to address the matter. If what he meant by
   this argument was that the immigration judge was not  entitled  to  find
   that the appellants faced a real risk of  persecution  unless  satisfied
   also that there was no viable internal relocation option, I must  agree.
   But the failure of the respondent to raise or  pursue  the  matter  does
   mean that the  focus  now  has  to  be,  not  so  much  on  whether  the
   immigration judge expressly dealt with (non-existent) arguments based on
   internal relocation, but rather on whether his findings were  consistent
   with the evidence and submissions which were before  him.  Mr  O'Brien's
   submission at the hearing before the immigration judge was that (para 17
   (c)) according to the country evidence internal flight  was  very  often
   not an option, that the K family was a large one, that  the  Directorate
   of the Police themselves considered the feud to be  an  "aggressive  and
   unpredictable one" and that therefore the appellants would not  be  safe
   anywhere in Albania.

   29. It is at this point that the respondent's lack of challenge  to  the
   appellants' evidence becomes very  significant.  It  was  accepted  that
   members of the appellant's family, including their father, were still in
   hiding. That was strong evidence that other members of  the  family  had
   not been able to internally relocate: as Mr Gulvin properly accepted, if
   a person has to live in hiding, that  cannot  be  said  to  satisfy  the
   safety requirement which forms one of the two necessary  conditions  for
   the existence of a viable internal relocation option: see  para  3390(a)
   of HC395 as amended. Furthermore, in the appellants' case there was also
   evidence that the family had sought to move them out of  harm's  way  by
   placing them in a boarding school. That had  proved  impossible  as  the
   school concerned had decided that it would be too risky. Mr O'Brien  had
   submitted before the immigration judge that in  these  circumstances  it
   was the appellants' "last resort" to be sent out of  the  country.  That
   was clearly another factor which the immigration judge  weighed  in  the
   balance: see para 22(b).

   30. Hence, although I would agree that the immigration judge nowhere  in
   his own  "Conclusions"   addressed  the  internal  relocation  issue  in
   specific or express terms, I am satisfied that his assessment that there
   would be an insufficiency of protection for the appellants on return  to
   Albania can be taken  to  incorporate  a  finding  on  this  issue.  His
   references to the fact that other members of the family  were  still  in
   hiding and to the unsuccessful  attempts  to  place  the  appellants  in
   boarding school indicate that he did consider in substance the  relevant
   factors. It must also be borne in mind that the  immigration  judge  had
   before him two appellants who were minors and who had already  witnessed
   a fatal attack on their older brother on their way to school  and  that,
   in the absence of having them placed in a boarding school, the  evidence
   was they would have to remain in  hiding,  either  in  the  family  home
   (where they lived in fear of reprisal until they left Albania in October
   2005) or with other relatives elsewhere.

   31. For the above reasons I conclude that the immigration judge did  not
   materially err in law in finding that the appellants faced a  real  risk
   on return of persecution. As was conceded by Mr Gulvin at the outset, if
   the immigration judge was entitled to find that there was real  risk  of
   persecution, it can be accepted, following the House of  Lords  judgment
   in K and Fornah [2007] UKHL 46, that there was, in addition,  a  Refugee
   Convention reason for this risk by  reason  of  the  appellant's  family
   being a particular social group.

   32. Having found that the immigration judge did not  materially  err  in
   law I conclude that his decision to allow the appeal on  asylum  grounds
   must stand.


Signed:

               DR H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)


