
      [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

               EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 18 to 25 October and 15 December 2010      |                             |
|and 14 January 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE
                       Immigration Judge R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                     EM
                                     COM
                                     CLM
                                     JG
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For Appellants EM and JG:    Mark Henderson and Alasdair Mackenzie,
                         instructed by the Immigration Advisory Service
For Appellant COM:     Shivani Jegarajah, instructed by Thompson & Co,
                         Solicitors
For Appellant CLM:     Mark Henderson and Alasdair Mackenzie, instructed by
                         Turpin & Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Eleanor Grey and Colin Thomann, instructed by the
                         Treasury Solicitor

1.  Evaluating the position as at the  end  of  January  2011,  the  country
guidance at  paragraph  267  of  this  determination  replaces  that  in  RN
(Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083, as follows:

 (1)        As a general matter, there is  significantly  less  politically
      motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with the situation considered
      by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does not show that,  as
      a general matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker from the United
      Kingdom, having no significant  MDC  profile,  would  result  in  that
      person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-
      PF.

  (2)       The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case  of
    a person without ZANU-PF connections, returning from the United Kingdom
    after a significant absence to a rural area  of  Zimbabwe,  other  than
    Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a person may  well  find
    it difficult to avoid adverse  attention,  amounting  to  serious  ill-
    treatment, from ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control.   The
    adverse attention may well involve a requirement to demonstrate loyalty
    to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm in the event of  failure.
    Persons who have shown themselves not to be favourably disposed to ZANU-
    PF are entitled to international protection, whether or not they  could
    and would do whatever might be necessary to  demonstrate  such  loyalty
    (RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 1285).

  (3)       The situation is not uniform across  the  relevant  rural  areas
    and there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
    sight appearing to fall within the category described in the  preceding
    paragraph, in reality does not do so. For example, the  evidence  might
    disclose that, in the home village, ZANU-PF power structures  or  other
    means of coercion are weak or absent.

  (4)       In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
    Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is  highly  unlikely  to  face
    significant difficulty from ZANU-PF elements,  including  the  security
    forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member  or  supporter.  A  person
    may, however, be able to show that his or her village or  area  is  one
    that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.

  (5)       A returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
    difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density area.  Whilst
    the socio-economic situation in high-density areas is more challenging,
    in  general  a  person  without  ZANU-PF  connections  will  not   face
    significant problems there (including a "loyalty test"), unless  he  or
    she has a significant MDC profile, which might  cause  him  or  her  to
    feature on a list of those targeted for harassment, or would  otherwise
    engage in political activities likely to attract the adverse  attention
    of ZANU-PF.

  (6)       A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not  suffer  the  adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he or  she
    has a significant MDC profile.

  (7)       The issue of what  is  a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
    internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and  is  not
    necessarily to be determined by reference to the place  a  person  from
    Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland. As a general matter,  it
    is unlikely that a person with a well-founded fear of persecution in  a
    major  urban  centre  such  as  Harare  will  have  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative to  a  rural  area  in  the  Eastern  provinces.
    Relocation to Matabeleland  (including  Bulawayo)  may  be  negated  by
    discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.

 (8)        Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or  (subject  to
    what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in general,  more  realistic;  but
    the socio-economic circumstances in which persons are reasonably likely
    to find themselves will need to be considered, in  order  to  determine
    whether it would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  to  expect  them  to
    relocate.

 (9)  The economy  of  Zimbabwe  has  markedly  improved  since  the  period
    considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the  US
    dollar and the South African rand has ended the recent  hyperinflation.
    The availability  of  food  and  other  goods  in  shops  has  likewise
    improved, as has the availability  of  utilities  in  Harare.  Although
    these improvements are not being felt by  everyone,  with  15%  of  the
    population  still  requiring  food  aid,  there  has   not   been   any
    deterioration in the humanitarian situation since late  2008.  Zimbabwe
    has a large informal economy, ranging from street traders to home-based
    enterprises, which (depending on the circumstances)  returnees  may  be
    expected to enter.

(10)  As was the position in  RN,  those  who  are  or  have  been  teachers
    require to have their cases determined on  the  basis  that  this  fact
    places  them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened   risk   category,   the
    significance of which will need to be assessed on an individual basis.

(11)   In  certain  cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously   lacking   in
    credibility may properly be found as a result to have failed to show  a
    reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in fact, be regarded, on
    return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b) that they would be returning
    to a socio-economic milieu in which problems with ZANU-PF  will  arise.
    This important point was identified in RN, and remains valid.

2.  Guidance is also given on the assessment of the private and family  life
of a Zimbabwean national present in the United Kingdom  for  over  11  years
with children born and/or  resident  most  of  their  lives  in  the  United
Kingdom.

3.  In the absence of countervailing factors,  residence  of  over  7  years
with children well-integrated into the  educational  system  in  the  United
Kingdom,  is  an  indicator  that  the  welfare   of   the   child   favours
regularisation of the status of mother and children.



This determination is arranged as follows:

A. PRELIMINARY
                         paragraphs 1 - 3



B. THE FOUR APPELLANTS
                 4 - 35
Appellant EM
                                  4 - 12
Appellant COM
                             13 - 19
Appellant CLM
                             20 - 23
Appellant JG
                                  24 - 35

C. ZIMBABWE COUNTRY GUIDANCE CASES                                  36 - 73
Country guidance before RN
                 36 - 48
RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083
49 - 66
RS and Others (Zimbabwe - AIDS) Zimbabwe CG [2010]
UKUT 363 (IAC)   67 - 73

D. FACT FINDING MISSION OF AUGUST 2010                              74 -
128
Background
                                  75 - 79
The FFM report
                             80 - 117
The seven voluntary returnees
                 118 - 121
Tribunal's summary of information given by the returnees                122
- 128

E. EVIDENCE EMANATING FROM FOREIGN
AND COMMONWEALTH OFFICE
129 - 140
Background
                                  130 - 134
Appellants' submissions
                       135 - 140

F. ASSESSMENT OF THE GENERAL EVIDENCE                               141 -
231
Has there been a material change in the risk of
persecution or other serious ill-treatment since RN?
      141 - 158
Problems arising from the COPAC process
      159 - 173
Geographic differences
                       174 - 209
-  Eastern Provinces   189 - 190
- Matabeleland
                                  191 - 197
- Harare and Bulawayo
                       198 - 209
The economy
                                  210 - 218
Internal relocation
                             219 - 225
Teachers
                                        226 - 231

G. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FUTURE ELECTIONS                             232 -
265
Analysis
                                        234 - 265
The Issues  234
- (i) When will elections be called?    235 - 237
- (ii) Protection against abuse   238 - 246
- (iii) The Legal assessment of future risk  247 - 265

H. COUNTRY GUIDANCE ON ZIMBABWE
266 - 267
At the point of return
                             266
New country guidance regarding the position
after the point of return
                             267

I. RE-MAKING THE DECISIONS IN THE FOUR APPEALS           268 - 308
                             Appellant EM
                                                              268 - 276
Appellant COM
                             277 - 283
Appellant CLM
                             284 - 298
Appellant JG
                                  299 - 308
 - Claim to international protection
                       299 - 307
 - Article 8
                                        308

                              ----------------

Appendix A - Summary of oral evidence
Appendix B - Summary  of  evidence  regarding  timing  and  consequences  of
elections
Appendix C - Documentary material


                               A. PRELIMINARY

 1. This is the determination of the Tribunal, to which each of  the  panel
    has contributed. In it we consider the situation in Zimbabwe  in  terms
    of the current political position and  related  protection  issues,  in
    order to give country guidance, some two years after the appearance  of
    the determination in RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083.  We
    do this in the context of re-making the decisions in the case  of  four
    Zimbabwean applicants for asylum, whom we shall  call  the  appellants.
    The issue on which  we  give  this  country  guidance  is  whether  the
    circumstances in Zimbabwe as at the date of this decision are such that
    there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that a  person  who  has  no
    ZANU-PF connections will be at risk on return to his or her  home  area
    by reason of a perception of disloyalty or an inability to  demonstrate
    loyalty.

 2. The Tribunal sat on 18 to 25 October and 15 December  2010  and  on  14
    January 2011. We heard oral evidence from two  of  the  appellants  and
    from four expert witnesses called by three of the appellants. The  oral
    evidence is summarised in  Appendix  A.   The  evidence  regarding  the
    timing and consequences of elections is summarised in Appendix  B.   We
    were provided with a large amount of  documentary  material,  which  is
    listed in Appendix C. The background evidence covers the position up to
    28  January  2011.  Counsel  made  a  number  of  written   submissions
    (including in skeleton arguments), as well as oral submissions, all  of
    which we have taken into account, together with  the  entirety  of  the
    oral and written evidence.

 3. We would  like  to  record  our  gratitude  to  counsel  and  to  those
    instructing them for the efforts they have made; in particular, to  put
    the Tribunal in as good a position as  possible  to  give  its  country
    guidance. We are also grateful to the experts who gave  oral  evidence.
    We have taken account of the judgments of the Court  of  Appeal  in  PO
    (Nigeria) [2011] EWCA Civ 132.  We observe what is there said about the
    length of the AIT's determination in  that  case  detracting  from  the
    clarity of its exposition.  The present determination is necessarily  a
    long one; but we have  sought  to  maintain  clarity  by  dealing  with
    certain of the evidence in Appendices A and B.  We have  also  followed
    paragraph 56 of the judgments in setting out our  country  guidance  at
    paragraph 267 of this determination.





                           B. THE FOUR APPELLANTS

Appellant EM

 4. EM was born on 27 December 1975.  He left  Zimbabwe  by  air  in  March
    1999, arriving in the United Kingdom as a visitor on 27  March.   On  6
    April 2000 he was granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  until  30
    September 2002.  Appellant EM overstayed, claiming asylum  on  5  April
    2009.  He said he had come from a teaching family in Zimbabwe  and  had
    worked as a supply teacher in that country for about two  years,  until
    1997.  In 1998 he  enrolled  for  a  teaching  diploma  with  Belvedere
    Technical Teachers College.  His home area was Mutoko, a rural area  of
    Mashonaland East.  He travelled to the United Kingdom in order to visit
    his sister.  He told the respondent at  interview  that  he  had  three
    sisters and three first cousins living  in  the  United  Kingdom.   One
    sister was a British citizen and the other two had been granted asylum.
     At the time, he was staying with friends in the United Kingdom and did
    not have a partner in this  country.   He  did  not  have  any  medical
    issues: "just an allergy or two".

 5. On 6 July 2009 appellant EM was served with the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse his asylum application.  Appellant EM's appeal was  heard  at
    Taylor House on 17  August  2009  by  an  Immigration  Judge.   In  her
    determination dismissing that appeal, the Immigration Judge noted  that
    appellant EM asserted a fear of returning to Zimbabwe because he had no
    close family network in that country and  because  of  his  association
    with the teaching profession and because he had been away for ten years
    in a country seen as hostile by  the  ZANU-PF  government.   He  feared
    being questioned at the airport.

 6. At paragraph 8 of her determination,  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    consider that appellant EM had given a  credible  explanation  for  the
    delay in claiming asylum.  After abandoning his studies  in  2000,  the
    appellant had used the services of a Nigerian  representative  in  2002
    who, it was said, had obtained an ILR stamp for  the  appellant,  which
    was later found to be invalid.  The Immigration Judge  did  not  accept
    appellant EM believed the ILR stamp to have been  genuine  and  further
    found that he must have been aware since at least 2002 if  not  earlier
    that he had no basis of stay.  The only explanation  he  gave  for  the
    failure to claim asylum until 2009 was that he had hoped the  situation
    would improve.

 7. The Immigration Judge found there was no evidence that appellant EM had
    been politically active either  in  Zimbabwe  or  the  United  Kingdom.
    There was no evidence to corroborate his claim to have  been  a  supply
    teacher.  In any event, that had  only  been  for  three  months  at  a
    primary school in East Mashonaland in 1995 and for  the  year  1997  at
    another primary school.  Conflicting evidence was given by appellant EM
    and his sister at the hearing as to the identities of  the  schools  at
    which the appellant was said to have taught.  The difficulty  appellant
    EM had in establishing that he had been a supply teacher  suggested  to
    the Immigration Judge that the authorities would not be aware  of  this
    aspect of his past.  She also noted that his  passport  bore  the  term
    "student" instead of "teacher".  As for the claim to have come  from  a
    family of teachers, the Immigration Judge noted that one sister, S, had
    been granted asylum but there was nothing to suggest that this had been
    on account of her profession.  Appellant EM's father, also said to have
    been a teacher, had retired in 1990 although he was later said to  have
    been brought out of retirement by a large mission school.  Appellant EM
    said that his brother had taught  in  Harare.   The  Immigration  Judge
    found that there was no evidence that these persons had  been  targeted
    as teachers or involved in the MDC.  On the contrary, appellant EM said
    that since they lived in a ZANU-PF stronghold, they had had to be card-
    carrying members of ZANU-PF to ensure their safety.   The  decision  of
    appellant EM's parents and brother to leave for Zambia at  the  end  of
    2008 was, she found, due to the illness of the appellant's  father  and
    his inability to access care in Zimbabwe.  Although  appellant  EM  had
    suggested to the Immigration Judge that they left  also  because  there
    was  a  resurgence  of  violence  in  Mashonaland  in  late  2008,  the
    Immigration Judge said she had been "shown  no  objective  evidence  to
    corroborate this" (paragraph 11).  The family  had  remained  in  their
    home area throughout all the previous problems during the elections and
    there was no suggestion appellant EM's parents  had  been  driven  from
    their home.

 8. At paragraph 14, the Immigration Judge considered that she was entitled
    to depart from the findings in RN  because  there  was  "now  a  power-
    sharing  agreement  in  place  with  MDC  politicians   in   government
    positions" and that RN had reached its conclusions "in the aftermath of
    the postelection violence and the apparent failure of power sharing  in
    2008".  She concluded that the situation "had sufficiently changed from
    that described in RN to  merit  deviation".   The  appellant  would  be
    returning to his family home (which he said was being looked  after  by
    distant relatives) and where his parents and brother  had  lived  until
    they went to Zambia for medical reasons.  Although the  home  area  had
    been a ZANU-PF stronghold there was no indication that  appellant  EM's
    family, who carried ZANU-PF cards, had been targeted in any  way.   She
    "could not accept his bare assertion that he  would  be  at  real  risk
    because he could not demonstrate support for the regime.   I  concluded
    that despite the appellant's length of stay in the UK and that he would
    be returning as a failed asylum seeker these factors on  their  own  in
    the current circumstances would not arouse suspicion on return."

 9. Reconsideration of the Immigration Judge's decision was ordered  on  21
    September 2009 under section 103A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 on the basis that, despite the  unchallenged  extensive
    adverse credibility findings in the determination, it was arguable that
    the Immigration Judge had erred in departing from the country  guidance
    in RN.  At the reconsideration hearing on  18  January  2010,  the  AIT
    found that there was a material error of law in the determination,  for
    the reason just given, and that none of the findings of the Immigration
    Judge concerning the appellant should stand, with the exception of  the
    finding that the appellant was aware in 2002 that the ILR stamp he  had
    secured in his passport was not genuine.

10. On 18 October 2010, at the commencement of  the  present  hearings,  Mr
    Henderson  made  an  application  for  appellant  EM's  appeal  to   be
    adjourned.  Appellant EM's case  had  been  transferred  from  previous
    representatives to the Immigration Advisory Service when his appeal had
    been amongst those  designated  as  potential  candidates  for  country
    guidance.  At the time the file was transferred, contact had been  made
    with appellant EM but since then, contact with him had been lost.   The
    last contact was at the beginning of September 2010.

11. We were satisfied that appellant  EM  had  been  properly  served  with
    notice of the hearing.  It was for appellant  EM  to  maintain  contact
    with his legal advisers.  There was nothing to suggest that his failure
    to do so had arisen from circumstances beyond his control.  In all  the
    circumstances, applying the overriding objective set out in rule  2  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, we decided that the
    interests of fairness  and  justice  were  such  that  the  adjournment
    application should be refused.

12. In  his  closing  written  submissions,  Mr  Henderson  submitted  that
    appellant EM would be unable to  demonstrate  loyalty  to  ZANU-PF,  if
    returned, taking account of his long absence in the United Kingdom, his
    asylum claim, the  grant  of  asylum  to  family  members,  his  former
    profession as a teacher and his lack of actual ZANU-PF links.

Appellant COM

13. Appellant COM was born on 5 December 1969. He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 17 October 2002, using his own  passport.   He  applied  for
    asylum on 13 February 2009.  On 12 August 2009 the  respondent  refused
    appellant COM's application and he appealed  to  an  Immigration  Judge
    who, following a hearing in Birmingham on 5 October 2009,  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal.  Appellant COM said  that  he  was  a  resident  of
    Harare who had joined the MDC in 1999 and attended meetings and rallies
    as well as distributing flyers and supporting the party with donations.
     He had been detained in May or June 1999 in a local shopping area,  on
    suspicion of looting.  The following month he had  been  stopped  at  a
    roadblock when visiting his family in their village and detained  in  a
    cell until the following morning.  A few months later,  ZANU-PF  youths
    had seized him and taken him to their base where they beat him and made
    him sit in cold water.  He was warned by them about supporting the MDC.
     The CIO then took an interest in appellant COM because he had a job as
    a credit controller for an  international  courier  company.   At  this
    point he decided it was better to leave Zimbabwe.  Following arrival in
    the United Kingdom, appellant COM joined the Northampton branch of  the
    MDC UK and Ireland in February 2007.

14. The Immigration Judge found that appellant COM had come to  the  notice
    of the authorities as a low level MDC supporter and that his account of
    incidents involving government officials  and  ZANU-PF  supporters  was
    credible.  The Immigration Judge did not, however,  consider  that  the
    treatment meted out to  appellant  COM  in  Zimbabwe  had  amounted  to
    persecution.  The Immigration Judge found that appellant COM  had  been
    an active member of the Northampton branch since January 2007 and  that
    he had also attended Zimbabwean vigils, where he had been photographed.

15. The Immigration Judge did not  find  appellant  COM's  credibility  was
    undermined by the fact that in 2004  he  had  made  an  application  to
    remain based on ancestry, which involved  the  submission  of  a  false
    birth certificate.  This was apparently all  the  fault  of  his  legal
    adviser.

16. The Immigration Judge found that RN was "still good law.  I  find  that
    although the situation has changed in Zimbabwe since RN,  human  rights
    abuses continue and that the appellant would be at risk of  persecution
    on return" (paragraph 44).  The Immigration Judge found that  appellant
    COM's inability to demonstrate loyalty would be such as to give rise to
    a real risk, increased by the fact that he would be  "a  failed  asylum
    seeker and that he has spent a  considerable  amount  of  time  in  the
    United  Kingdom".   Furthermore  there  was  "a  real  risk  that   his
    activities in the United Kingdom may have come to the attention of  the
    CIO and the authorities in Zimbabwe and  that  he  would  face  further
    interrogation on arrival".

17. Reconsideration of the Immigration  Judge's  decision  was  ordered  by
    Ouseley J on 10 December 2009.  He was  satisfied  that  a  substantial
    case had been mounted before the Immigration Judge  by  the  respondent
    that circumstances in Zimbabwe had  changed  since  RN  and  that  this
    should  have  been  dealt  with  "in  a  legally  adequately   reasoned
    decision".  Paragraph 44 of the determination "leaves it wholly unclear
    how the IJ approached it".  Ouseley J did not  "say  the  decision  was
    bound to be different but it could be, and I am sceptical of the extent
    to which what has been provided suffices for  an  IJ  to  disapply  RN,
    absent any  further  CG".   The  respondent's  case  "warranted  proper
    analysis rather than lengthy rehearsal".

18. On 22 February 2010 the Upper Tribunal directed  that  not  later  than
    five working days before the Case Management Review hearing  (which  in
    the event took place on 25 March) the  party  who  did  not  apply  for
    reconsideration (that is to say, in  this  case,  appellant  COM)  must
    serve a reply on the Tribunal and the other party, if it was  contended
    that there was no material error of law in  the  determination,  giving
    reasons; and in the absence of such a reply, the Tribunal may  at  that
    hearing decide the error of law issue.  At the hearing on 25 March, the
    representative of appellant  COM  conceded  that  there  had  not  been
    compliance with the directions of the Upper Tribunal.  On that day, the
    representative handed the Tribunal a manuscript reply,  asserting  that
    the Secretary of State had failed  to  supply  evidence  of  sufficient
    quality and quantity regarding what was said to be changes  in  country
    conditions since  RN.   Furthermore  the  Practice  Directions  of  the
    Tribunal were said to require  the  Immigration  Judge  to  give  clear
    reasons only for departing  from  current  country  guidance,  not  for
    following such guidance.  The Tribunal on 25 March concluded that there
    was no merit in these submissions and that the evidence supplied by the
    Secretary of State had  required  some  sort  of  analysis,  which  was
    lacking in the determination.  The attempt  to  rely  on  the  Practice
    Directions was misconceived.  The Tribunal accordingly  set  aside  the
    Immigration Judge's decision.

19. As will be apparent, in the present proceedings which are  the  subject
    of this determination, appellant COM was in the position of  being  the
    respondent.  We have, nevertheless, continued to refer  to  him  as  an
    appellant, for ease of reference.  At the hearing  on  22  October,  we
    indicated that we would remake the decision in appellant COM's case  by
    allowing his appeal.

Appellant CLM

20. Appellant CLM, born on 25 November 1952, left Zimbabwe  using  his  own
    passport and in possession of a  visit  visa,  in  February  2005.   He
    claimed asylum in March 2009.  His application was refused on  28  July
    2009 and he appealed to the AIT.  Following a hearing at Newport  on  7
    October 2009, a Designated Immigration Judge dismissed appellant  CLM's
    appeal.

21. The Designated Immigration  Judge  made  adverse  credibility  findings
    regarding appellant CLM.  He found that even if appellant CLM had  been
    involved in politics at all in Zimbabwe, this would have been  only  as
    "a low level member of the MDC in Hatfield", Harare (paragraph  74(i)).
    Although appellant CLM had joined his local branch of the  MDC  in  the
    United Kingdom and  attended  a  number  of  meetings,  the  Designated
    Immigration Judge found there was "no evidence  to  indicate  that  his
    identity would have been disclosed to any individuals who were employed
    by the Zimbabwean Embassy or who are supporters of the ZANU-PF  or  the
    current Zimbabwean regime"  (paragraph  74(ii)).   Nor  was  there  any
    evidence "to show that the appellant's  name  or  photograph  has  ever
    appeared on the MDC [local branch's] website or in any  other  capacity
    in  connection  with  that  organisation"  (paragraph   74(iii)).    At
    paragraph 79, the Designated  Immigration  Judge  found  that  although
    appellant CLM might face hardship upon return to Zimbabwe, this was not
    anything greater than that which would be faced by any other member  of
    his ethnic community.  The  civil  and  social  infrastructure  of  the
    country might still be basic, but that did not mean that conditions  in
    Zimbabwe generally were such that return would mean  a  returnee  would
    automatically face "inhumane or degrading treatment" (paragraph 79).

22. At paragraphs 80 to 85, the Designated Immigration Judge  analysed  the
    post-RN evidence, in particular, that in the COI Report  of  July  2009
    which spoke of "many professionals, many of them teachers ... returning
    to Zimbabwe and ... seeking readmission into public  service".   During
    February 2009 reports indicated that over 80,000  Zimbabweans  returned
    voluntarily from South Africa.  So far as the CIO were  concerned,  the
    Designated  Immigration  Judge  did  not  consider  that  it  would  be
    reasonably likely that the appellant would  be  suspected  of  being  a
    failed asylum seeker by the CIO.  As indicated  in  HS,  the  screening
    process adopted by the CIO at the airport remained an  intelligence-led
    process, which sought to identify individuals in whom the  CIO  had  an
    interest from the passenger manifest.  That guidance had not in any way
    changed since RN.  In the circumstances of appellant  CLM's  case,  the
    Designated Immigration Judge was not satisfied that the CIO were likely
    to have any interest in the appellant upon return or that there was any
    likelihood of  him  being  held  for  second  stage  questioning.   The
    appellant had family  in  Hatfield,  Harare,  with  whom  he  could  be
    reunited.  At paragraph 12,  the  Designated  Immigration  Judge  noted
    appellant CLM's evidence that, although he had high blood pressure  and
    cholesterol, he was able to obtain medication for this in Zimbabwe.  He
    had been doing odd jobs such as gardening and cleaning  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It is  also  relevant  to  note  at  this  point  that
    appellant CLM had said in his asylum interview that  five  of  his  six
    children continued to reside in Hatfield, Southerton  and  Westgate  in
    Harare. According to the answer to question 171 of that interview,  the
    ages of the children would now be 38, 36 and 31 (for those  whose  ages
    appellant CLM was able to give).   Appellant  CLM  described  Hatfield,
    Southerton and Westgate as "low  density  areas"  of  Harare  (question
    160).  He said two of his  daughters  were  married,  one  son  was  an
    accountant and one a clerk, whilst another son whose age he was  unable
    to give was going to school.  Another son was in the United Kingdom.

23. Reconsideration of the  Designated  Immigration  Judge's  decision  was
    ordered on 10 November 2009, on the basis  that  it  did  not  seem  he
    considered whether the appellant would be able to show loyalty to ZANU-
    PF on return, although "whether this is really still necessary  can  be
    dealt with on reconsideration".   On  25  March  2010,  the  respondent
    acknowledged that directions sent by the Upper Tribunal on 22  February
    had not been complied with.  These required the respondent to  serve  a
    reply if it was contended that there was no material error  of  law  in
    the determination of the Designated Immigration Judge and  stated  that
    in the absence of such a reply, the Upper Tribunal may at  the  hearing
    decide the error of law issue.  The Tribunal accordingly  proceeded  on
    25  March  to  decide  that  issue,  concluding  that  the   Designated
    Immigration Judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  departing
    from RN and at paragraph 91 of his determination  in  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that the  appellant's  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom would not  place  him  at  real  risk  on  return.   The
    Designated Immigration Judge's findings of fact regarding the appellant
    would, however, stand, as would his finding regarding a witness who had
    confirmed appellant CLM's involvement in the local branch of the MDC.

Appellant JG

24. Appellant JG was born on 18 August 1970, came to the United Kingdom  in
    1999 and was granted an extension of stay  as  a  student  until  2001,
    after which time she has remained without leave.  She claimed asylum on
    17 March 2009, with her three children as dependants.  That  claim  was
    refused by the  respondent  and  appellant  JG  appealed  to  the  AIT.
    Following a hearing at Newport on 29 October 2009, an Immigration Judge
    dismissed appellant JG's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

25. Appellant JG told the  Immigration  Judge  that  she  was  a  qualified
    secondary school teacher in Zimbabwe, who had worked at  a  government-
    funded school  that  had  a  "fervent  ZANU-PF  ethic"  (paragraph  7).
    Although not engaged in politics, she supported the  MDC.   Wishing  to
    change her career, appellant JG arrived in the United Kingdom  in  1999
    in order to embark on a nursing course.  She left her husband  and  son
    in Zimbabwe and had had no problems in that country prior to departure.
     Her husband had arrived in the United Kingdom in 2001 and appellant JG
    moved in with him and his children from a  previous  relationship.   He
    became abusive and took the  �2,000  which  appellant  JG's  sister  in
    Canada had given her to enrol upon another course.  Appellant JG's  son
    joined her in the United Kingdom in 2002 and in 2003 she moved in  with
    her twin sister who was also living in  this  country.   She  had  lost
    contact with her husband and had been in a relationship with a  British
    citizen for the past three years.  She claimed asylum when her home had
    been destroyed  and  her  family  feared  persecution  and  torture  in
    Zimbabwe.  Also, her estranged husband's family had threatened to  take
    appellant JG's children away.

26. The Immigration Judge found that the delay in appellant  JG's  claiming
    asylum was as a result of her perception that - presumably as a  result
    of RN - she thought she would stand a greater chance of  succeeding  in
    staying  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  rejected  the  assertion  that
    appellant JG had claimed because things were getting worse in Zimbabwe.
     The Immigration Judge accepted that appellant JG had been ill-used  by
    her husband in the United Kingdom  but  rejected  the  claim  that,  if
    returned, she would be at risk from his family in Zimbabwe, on  account
    of the broken relationship with her husband.  The in-laws were said  to
    be active members of ZANU-PF but the Immigration Judge did not find  it
    in the least likely that her in-laws would turn her in to the CIO or to
    ZANU-PF activists (paragraphs 44 and 45).  On  the  contrary,  applying
    RN, the Immigration Judge found that appellant JG would  experience  no
    difficulty in demonstrating loyalty to the  regime,  given  her  family
    connections "and I find it extremely likely that members of her  family
    would be able to see her through  any  processes  at  the  airport  and
    obviate any difficulties with the CIO" (paragraph  47).   At  paragraph
    49, he found that there would be "no obstacle to her expressing loyalty
    to the regime and pointing to the fact that she has never come  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities".

27. As regards Article 8, although appellant JG had referred to  a  problem
    with her lung, there was no firm evidence  of  her  medical  condition.
    She gave evidence that her son had been 4 on arrival and  was  now  11.
    He had behavioural difficulties but "had not yet  been  diagnosed  with
    Asperger's" syndrome (paragraph 22).  She "had  two  children  to  look
    after and was pregnant" (17).  As regards her current relationship, she
    said that "the man concerned was working abroad and ...  they  did  not
    live together when he was in the United Kingdom, which was only  for  a
    month three times a year" (paragraph 21).  Appellant JG relied on  help
    from her church and lived with her sister.  The rent was  paid  by  the
    sister in Canada.

28. At paragraph 46, the Immigration Judge found that the medical condition
    of appellant JG's son was not such as to breach the threshold of either
    Article 3 or Article 8 and that there was no firm evidence of  her  own
    medical condition.  The Immigration Judge did not find "that Article  8
    is engaged at all, but if it were, then her removal would be in pursuit
    of the legitimate aim of immigration control and would be proportionate
    to  that  aim"  (paragraph  46).   The  Immigration  Judge  found  that
    appellant JG "clearly has family back in Zimbabwe and I did not believe
    that there was  the  level  of  family  animosity  she  has  sought  to
    establish.  I find that  she  could  easily  support  herself  back  in
    Zimbabwe, if necessary with the help currently received from the sister
    in Canada."

29. Reconsideration of the Immigration Judge's decision was ordered  on  26
    November 2009 on the basis that the Immigration Judge  did  not  engage
    with the issue of risk to the appellant as a former  teacher.   At  the
    Case Management Hearing of the Upper Tribunal on  25  March  2010,  the
    respondent conceded that there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  The Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the appellant would not be  at  real  risk  on
    return, as a former teacher, having  regard  to  the  relevant  country
    guidance, and had also failed  to  make  proper  findings  of  fact  in
    relation to the position of the  appellant's  children,  in  connection
    with her Article 8 claim.   The  Tribunal  accordingly  set  aside  the
    decision.  The  parties  were  directed  to  prepare  for  the  present
    proceedings on the basis that the accepted findings of  fact  regarding
    the appellant would stand and that the  Tribunal  would  need  to  make
    fresh findings of fact regarding the Article 8 ground,  insofar  as  it
    related to the position of appellant JG's children.

30. In connection with the present proceedings, two reports  were  produced
    by Christine Brown, an  independent  social  worker.   She  noted  that
    appellant JG's son, T, was born in 1997 but remained with his  maternal
    aunt from the age of 9 months until brought to the United Kingdom  from
    Zimbabwe when he was 4.  He experienced  certain  behavioural  problems
    and was being assessed for the need for a Statement of Educational Need
    under the Educational Needs and Disability Act 2001.  A second son,  M,
    was born on 25 January 2002 and a daughter, R, on 12/01/2004.  Ms Brown
    observed that T's behaviour was  problematic  and  further  noted  that
    staff at his school had concerns regarding his understanding of  social
    interactions and attendant behaviours.  Appellant JG was  diagnosed  in
    2001 with bronchial tuberculosis, which responded  well  to  treatment,
    and she was subsequently diagnosed with Aspergilloma,  a  fungus  which
    develops in a cavity in her lung.  This also was  treated  with  drugs;
    but appellant JG considered she required a gluten and dairy  free  diet
    as well as a "mould free environment" (paragraph  3.6).   She  told  Ms
    Brown that surgery to deal with the fungal condition had been ruled out
    in 2009, on the ground that it posed an unreasonable risk to her  life.
    Ms Brown considered that appellant JG's ability to maintain her  health
    was vital to her children's  wellbeing  and  security.   On  return  to
    Zimbabwe, her ability to work would be compromised, although any  funds
    which she might require would be provided by her sister in Canada,  who
    worked as an accountant  (4.0).   If  appellant  JG  became  incapable,
    through ill health, of caring for her children in Zimbabwe, this  would
    leave them "vulnerable in an alien and unknown culture" (4.4).

31. Ms Brown concluded that appellant JG, along with her sister,  had  done
    much to  provide  a  loving  and  secure  family  environment  for  her
    children, who remained her primary focus, often during periods of  what
    appeared to Ms Brown to be quite extreme ill health.  The children  had
    developed significant social and emotional ties within their individual
    networks and, in Ms Brown's opinion, would "respond to any such removal
    with immense distress and trauma" (8.5).  The child  T  had  additional
    needs, which required further assessment.

32. In a further report handed to the Tribunal on 22 October 2010, Ms Brown
    noted that T was benefiting from a programme of  assistance,  supported
    by subject teachers, as a result of which strategies had  been  put  in
    place to attempt his integration into the classroom setting (1.6).  The
    new report also noted that the children had only a limited knowledge of
    Shona which "would in  turn  limit  their  ability  to  comprehensively
    access the educational curriculum in Zimbabwe until such  a  time  when
    their comprehension and application  of  the  language  had  developed"
    (1.7).  Of greater impact, however, would be the  loss  of  social  and
    emotional structures and  networks,  and  the  fact  that  in  Zimbabwe
    schools they would be regarded as  "outsiders".   Appellant  JG  feared
    that her "former husband who now has indefinite leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom would want to make an application for residency of their
    children under the Children Act 1999 for a s.8 residence order", albeit
    that the children had indicated to Ms Brown that under no circumstances
    would  they  want  to  live  with  him.  Other  documentation  in   the
    appellant's bundle related to the position  of  the  child  T  and  the
    efforts being made to address his needs as "a vulnerable young man  who
    stands out as 'different' from his peers"  (report  of  Assistant  Head
    Teacher, 4 October 2010).

33. Appellant JG's written statement of 29 September 2010 formed the  basis
    of her  oral  evidence,  which  is  set  out  at  Appendix  A  to  this
    determination.  There  is,  however,  a  supplementary  statement  from
    appellant JG, with a short confirmatory statement from her sister, each
    dated 24 November 2010.   The  supplementary  statement  deals  with  a
    passage in appellant JG's  statement  of  29  September,  regarding  an
    alleged attack on her mother in Zimbabwe.  In the September  statement,
    appellant JG said that her uncle rang her in April 2010 to say that her
    mother had been beaten up, whilst walking home from  church.   She  and
    other women had been confronted by "a bunch of thugs", who were thought
    to have come from Epworth, "the rougher area nearby" in order to  drink
    or hang around.  The thugs allegedly shouted out  at  the  mother  that
    they knew she had kids in England.  After this, appellant  JG's  mother
    had sent JG's younger sister, AT, to South Africa to stay with friends,
    prior to travelling to Canada.

34. The 24 November statement records how the earlier statement came to say
    that she understood from her uncle's  phone  call  in  April  that  her
    mother had been attacked in March 2010.  Having seen the police  report
    on the attack, appellant JG said that this was  given  the  date  of  3
    February 2010.  She attributed this discrepancy to her being ill at the
    beginning of 2010 with her lung condition, as well as feeling  stressed
    and worried, and being in a state of shock when she was told about  her
    mother.

35. In  December  2010,  the  respondent  decided  to  grant  appellant  JG
    discretionary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  for  three  years
    (together with the children), following a reassessment of the Article 8
    position.  We shall, however, later in this determination, have more to
    say about the Article 8 case of someone in the  position  of  appellant
    JG.  On 12 January 2011, appellant JG gave notice under Rule 17A of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and Practice Direction 5
    of the Practice Directions of 10 February 2010,  stating  her  wish  to
    pursue her appeal before the Upper Tribunal on the ground specified  in
    section 84(1)(g) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    which relates to the Refugee Convention.


                     C.  ZIMBABWE COUNTRY GUIDANCE CASES

Country guidance before RN

36. The earliest extant country guidance case on Zimbabwe is SM and  Others
    (MDC - internal flight - risk  categories)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
    00100, which became country guidance on 12 May 2005.  SM was  heard  in
    the wake of the Secretary of  State's  decision  in  November  2004  to
    resume enforced removals to Zimbabwe, which had  been  suspended  since
    the beginning of 2002.  The IAT summarised the background as follows:-

         "37.     The background to the current situation  in  Zimbabwe  can
             briefly be summarised as follows.   Zimbabwe  achieved  formal
             independence from the United Kingdom in 1980.  Robert Mugabe's
             ZANU-PF party won the largest number of seats in the elections
             in  that  year.    Mugabe  became  Prime  Minster  leading   a
             coalition  government  and  has  been  in  power  since  then.
             Constitutional changes in 1987 created an executive Presidency
             incorporating the ceremonial post of President  with  that  of
             Prime Minister.  ZANU-PF won a decisive  election  victory  in
             1995.   The  MDC  was  formed  in  September  1999  under  the
             leadership  of  Morgan  Tsvangirai.   In   February   2000   a
             referendum was held in a bid to  consolidate  the  President's
             powers by amending the Constitution.  Although this was  lost,
             the government party pushed through a constitutional amendment
             to allow the seizure of  white-owned  farms.   Elections  were
             held in June 2000 and  there  was  a  systematic  campaign  of
             violence   towards   supporters   of   potential    opposition
             politicians.  Many acts of violence were perpetrated by  ZANU-
             PF militants and war veterans.  Politically motivated violence
             mostly perpetrated by government supporters  against  the  MDC
             and commercial farmers continued  throughout  2001  after  the
             Parliamentary elections and in 2002  in  the  run  up  to  the
             Presidential election of March 2002."

37. The IAT went on to find  that  the  government's  human  rights  record
    remained poor and that ZANU-PF supporters had committed  numerous  acts
    of abuse against opposition supporters.  There was little  prospect  of
    redress from the police  or  authorities.   There  was  a  "pattern  of
    political intimidation and violence perpetrated by the government using
    affiliated organisations and supporters" (paragraph 38).

38. At paragraph 41, the IAT considered the position of  those  removed  to
    Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom.  Interrogation of such returnees  was
    considered to be inevitable; but  if  "it  is  being  asserted  by  the
    Zimbabwe government that returns are being used as a cloak for  British
    agents and saboteurs to be smuggled into the country, it is likely that
    those returns will be carefully monitored whether for that reason or to
    identify and intimidate opponents to the regime".  Returnees in general
    would be regarded with "contempt  and  suspicion"  (paragraph  42)  and
    "those who are suspected of being politically active with the MDC would
    be at real risk".  Apart from that category, whether there was  a  real
    risk in an individual case would depend upon the circumstances.   Given
    the unpredictability of the situation,  it  could  not  necessarily  be
    assumed that those who had merely engaged  in  "low  level  activities"
    would not be at real risk.  Relevant risk  factors  would  include  the
    categories identified in  paragraph  43,  which  comprised  "activists,
    campaigners, officials and election polling agents, MDC candidates  for
    local and national government, MDC members, MDC supporters,  those  who
    voted or [were] believed to have voted for the MDC and those  belonging
    to the MDC, families of the  foregoing,  employees  of  the  foregoing,
    those whose actions have given rise to suspicion  of  support  for  the
    opposition such as  attending  an  MDC  rally  or  wearing  a  T-shirt,
    attending a demonstration, teachers and other professionals, refusal to
    attend a ZANU-PF rally or chant a ZANU-PF slogan or not having a  ZANU-
    PF membership card".

39. At paragraph 44, the IAT accepted "there is a  heightened  risk  during
    election periods and their  immediate  aftermath.   This  reflects  the
    pattern which has been followed since 2000.  Before an  election  there
    is intimidation of opposition supporters  and  those  perceived  to  be
    encouraging support for the opposition in particular teachers and civil
    servants.   Following  an  election  the  phenomenon  of  post-election
    retribution is well documented."  It was, however, in  the  IAT's  view
    artificial to attempt to draw "too clear a distinction between election
    periods and those periods before the next parliamentary or presidential
    elections".  There was at the present  time  a  "heightened  risk"  for
    teachers "because of their profession and the perception that they have
    supported and encouraged support for the MDC" (paragraph 45).

40. At paragraph 46,  discussing  the  record  keeping  by  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities, the IAT reiterated that "The issue is whether an applicant
    is of adverse interest to the authorities.  The fact that an  applicant
    has a file indicates that he is or has been known  to  the  authorities
    but without more it does not indicate whether he would currently be  of
    interest."  So far as internal relocation was concerned, the IAT  found
    that a person "who has  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  war
    veterans or ZANU-PF and who has been noted as a political  opponent  in
    his home area in our judgment is unlikely to be  able  to  relocate  in
    safety".  The position would be otherwise, however, in the  case  of  a
    victim of arbitrary violence "where his identity is  unlikely  to  have
    been noted and recorded" (paragraph 49).

41. Following a number of judicial reviews in the case of persons  who  had
    been detained for removal to Zimbabwe, the Secretary of State agreed in
    July 2005 to  suspend  removals  to  that  country,  pending  a  "lead"
    judicial review hearing.  On 18 October 2005 the Asylum and Immigration
    Tribunal gave  country  guidance  in  the  determination  known  as  AA
    (Involuntary returns to Zimbabwe) Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKAIT 00144.  That
    case ceased however to be country guidance on  2  August  2006  on  the
    publication of AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2006]
    UKAIT 00061 ("AA No 2").  At paragraph 229 of AA  No  2,  the  Tribunal
    found that the evidence regarding enforced returns did not establish or
    demonstrate "a consistent pattern of such returnees being subjected  to
    ill-treatment upon being involuntarily returned simply  on  account  of
    being regarded as someone who has made an unsuccessful asylum claim  in
    the United Kingdom".  There was only "a very small handful of cases  in
    which it is said that there was no reason other than the mere  fact  of
    an involuntary return and the perception on the part of the authorities
    of being  a  failed  asylum  seeker  that  gave  rise  to"  significant
    difficulties  (paragraph  230).   Although  "all  deportees   will   be
    questioned, often in a hostile fashion, it is only in those cases where
    some further suspicion arises, above and beyond the asylum claim in the
    United Kingdom, that the deportee is moved on to the next stage of  the
    process which involves interrogation which carries with it a real  risk
    of serious ill-treatment" (paragraph 231).

42. There was nothing to indicate that the authorities  at  Harare  Airport
    had  any  means  of  distinguishing  between  deportees  who  had  made
    unsuccessful asylum claims and those who had not claimed asylum but who
    were being removed because they had no leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom (paragraph 240).  All such returnees were likely  to  be  asked
    whether they had claimed asylum in the United Kingdom; but  they  would
    be "allowed on their way unless that interview gives rise to suspicions
    of an adverse political profile, some additional feature to a  military
    history that demands further investigation or any outstanding  criminal
    issues" (paragraph 241).  The evidence  regarding  voluntary  returnees
    was "clear" (paragraph 243).  There were three flights a week from  the
    United Kingdom to Harare, which were usually fully booked with ordinary
    travellers, many of whom would be Zimbabwe citizens  "who  pass  freely
    and without difficulty in and out of Zimbabwe".  A person  who  made  a
    voluntary  return  "with  or  without  the   assistance   of   an   IOM
    reintegration package, will  be  indistinguishable  from  the  ordinary
    traveller".

43. At paragraph 244, the Tribunal confirmed the country guidance in SM but
    to the risk categories identified in SM were added those whose military
    history disclosed issues that would lead to  further  investigation  by
    the security services upon return and those in respect  of  whom  there
    were  outstanding  and  unresolved  criminal  issues.   Those   removed
    involuntarily  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  receive  an   initial
    interview to establish whether the deportee was of any interest to  the
    CIO or the security services. "The deportee  will  be  of  interest  if
    questioning  reveals  that  the  deportee  has  a   political   profile
    considered adverse to the Zimbabwean regime" (paragraph  249).  Such  a
    person would be taken away for a "second stage  interrogation".  Anyone
    subject to a second stage interrogation by the CIO faced a real risk of
    serious mistreatment sufficient to constitute a  breach  of  Article  3
    (paragraphs 250 and 251).

44. Although the appeal in AA No 2 was remitted  to  the  Tribunal  by  the
    Court of Appeal, its status as country guidance, together with that  of
    SM, was reaffirmed by the Tribunal in  HS  (Returning  asylum  seekers)
    Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094, which became  country  guidance  on  29
    November 2007.  At paragraph 259, the Tribunal noted that the Court  of
    Appeal had remitted the case of AA No 2 mainly because the Tribunal had
    not dealt expressly with important evidence of two witnesses  known  as
    W5 and W6.  The  Tribunal  in  HS  considered  the  evidence  of  these
    witnesses and found that  it  did  not  support  the  proposition  that
    violence was used  during  the  initial  interview  at  Harare  Airport
    (paragraph 260).

45. The evidence reinforced the finding that there was a "two stage process
    at  the  airport  and  that  anyone  identified  during   the   initial
    questioning that takes place at the airport as being of  interest  will
    be taken for interrogation. At that second stage there is a  real  risk
    of  serious  harm,  but  not  before."   The  CIO,  having  taken  over
    responsibility for the  operation  of  immigration  control  at  Harare
    Airport, replacing immigration officers, had the aim of detecting those
    of interest "because of an adverse military or criminal  profile.   The
    main focus of the operation to identify those who  may  be  of  adverse
    interest remains those who are perceived to be  politically  active  in
    support of the opposition.  But anyone perceived to be a threat to or a
    critic of the regime will attract interest also" (paragraph 264).

46. The assumption of responsibilities by the CIO was  not  something  that
    affected the level of risk.  The CIO could not question everyone and so
    there was "a screening process to identify those who might merit closer
    examination.  We see no reason to suppose that the heightened  role  of
    the CIO would change this" (paragraph 266).  As well as those suspected
    of adverse political, criminal or military activities, "those perceived
    to be associated with what have come to be identified as civil  society
    organisations may attract adverse interest as critics  of  the  regime"
    (paragraph 266).

47. There was "no evidence that  ordinary  passengers  returning  from  the
    United  Kingdom  experience  any  difficulty  in  passing  through  the
    airport.  In fact, the evidence is to the  contrary"  (paragraph  267).
    Nor was there evidence  of  any  consistent  pattern  of  treating  any
    differently those who had not claimed asylum in the United Kingdom  but
    who had been forcibly removed to Zimbabwe because they had been refused
    leave to enter or remain.  Despite the "political rhetoric of President
    Mugabe and other highly placed members of the ruling  party,  the  fact
    alone of returning to Zimbabwe having spent time in the United Kingdom,
    even if there is some  irregularity  discernable  from  stamps  in  the
    passenger's passport, does not give rise to any real risk on return  to
    Harare airport" (paragraph 269).

48. The Tribunal accepted that the risk to returnees could not be  assessed
    "on the basis that they are expected to lie to immigration officials on
    their return.  Therefore, we proceed on the basis that the fact of  the
    failed asylum claim will be disclosed to anyone  who  asks"  (paragraph
    271).  Nearly a quarter of the population  of  Zimbabwe  had  left  the
    country and it was plain that the Zimbabwe government  and  its  agents
    were fully aware that "the overwhelming majority of these are  economic
    migrants" (paragraph 273).  Professor  Ranger's  evidence  was  that  a
    person who had sought to prosper economically  in  the  United  Kingdom
    would not be regarded as being disloyal for having left Zimbabwe.   The
    rhetoric of the  Zimbabwe  government,  that  returning  failed  asylum
    seekers were being recruited to act as spies on behalf  of  the  United
    Kingdom government, was "nonsense" and described by W66 (who was  in  a
    position to know) as  being  rhetoric  designed  "to  demonstrate  that
    people were foolish to go abroad to claim asylum.  Those who do will be
    sent back" (paragraph 278). At paragraph 282, the Tribunal adopted  and
    reaffirmed the guidance in AA No.2, adding  a  further  risk  category.
    Those associated with civil society organisations  that  had  attracted
    adverse interest from the Zimbabwean authorities would  face  the  same
    level of risk as those perceived  to  be  political  opponents  of  the
    regime.

RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083

49. The hearing in RN began on 1 September 2008, in the immediate aftermath
    of the atrocities and other widespread violence that had  characterised
    the period  around  the  second  round  of  presidential  elections  in
    Zimbabwe in the middle of that year.  At the close of proceedings on  5
    September, the Tribunal indicated that it would reconvene if  an  event
    occurred that was capable of indicating a fundamental change in country
    conditions (paragraph 3).  Following reports that an agreement had been
    reached between Mr Mugabe and Mr Tsvangirai  regarding  power  sharing,
    the  hearing  was  reconvened  on  1  October,  when  submissions  were
    considered.  The hearing of the case was concluded on  30  October,  in
    order to take evidence regarding the position in the light of the power
    sharing agreement that had been signed.

50. The position of the Secretary of State in the RN appeal is described in
    paragraphs 27 to 33 of the determination.  In short, the  Secretary  of
    State submitted that it was not appropriate in the autumn of 2008 to be
    giving country guidance on Zimbabwe.   Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of
    State instructed Counsel not  to  cross-examine  the  expert  witnesses
    called by the appellant to give oral evidence before the Tribunal.   As
    a result, that evidence went unchallenged.  So  far  as  the  issue  of
    country guidance was concerned, the Tribunal was satisfied:-

         "...that in the circumstances it is right to give country  guidance
         in this case, not just because of the passage of time since HS  but
         also because the events of 2008 demand an authoritative  assessment
         from the Tribunal in the form  of  country  guidance.   We  do  not
         purport to be able to predict the future and it may  well  be  that
         events in Zimbabwe change swiftly and fundamentally.  All we can do
         is to assess the information on the basis of the evidence before us
         and give country guidance pursuant to  Practice  Direction  18  and
         section 107(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
         which  makes  that  guidance  authoritative,  to  the  extent  that
         subsequent appeals depend upon the same or similar evidence as that
         before us."  (paragraph 33).

51. At paragraph 205, the Tribunal noted that in HS, it had been found that
    the well-resourced, professional and sophisticated intelligence service
    that comprises the CIO "would  distinguish,  when  dealing  with  those
    returning as deportees from the United Kingdom, between those deportees
    in whom there was some reason to have interest and those who were of no
    adverse interest simply on that account".  According to the Tribunal in
    RN, there could be no doubt that those falling into the risk categories
    identified and reaffirmed in HS  continued  to  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecutory ill-treatment on return.

52. What was a new and important development was the fact  that  there  had
    been "a major shift in the respective roles of the formal agents of the
    state, such as the army, the police and the CIO on the one hand and  on
    the other the less formal representatives of the regime deployed in the
    form of the so-called 'war veterans', youth militias and the groups  of
    people who simply regard themselves as ZANU-PF  supporters"  (paragraph
    207).

53. There was little doubt, according to  the  Tribunal,  that  Mugabe  had
    expected to win both the parliamentary and  presidential  elections  in
    March 2008.  This accounted for the "relatively  peaceful  pre-election
    period and the fact that  the  MDC  was  able  to  campaign  relatively
    freely" (paragraph 208).  It was wrongly thought that, as a  result  of
    past brutality, the electorate had been  "tamed".   Given  that  voting
    results were displayed outside polling stations, it  was  not  possible
    for the vote to be rigged to such an extent as to give Mugabe  victory.
    In the weeks that followed the March elections, the most that could  be
    achieved was to deny Tsvangirai outright victory, which he had  claimed
    was secured.  This led to the need for a run-off vote.

54. The RN Tribunal considered it to be of  significance  that  Mugabe  had
    considered accepting the outcome of the first round "but was  persuaded
    not to by those who stood behind him such as the commanders of the  JOC
    and senior representatives of the CIO" (paragraph  210).   They  feared
    that, in the event of the MDC taking power, they  could  be  called  to
    account for their past misdeeds.  It was these officers,  according  to
    the Tribunal, who promised to deliver the  second  round  vote  in  the
    presidential elections to Mugabe and it was they who orchestrated  what
    followed.

55. The violence that was unleashed as a consequence showed that there "has
    been a major shift in the way in which the formal agents of the  state,
    such  as  the  army,  police  and  CIO   deployed   the   less   formal
    representatives of  the  regime  in  the  form  of  the  so-called  war
    veterans, youth militias or 'green bombers' and groups  of  youths  who
    simply regard themselves as ZANU-PF supporters" (paragraph 211).  Since
    support for the MDC was centred in urban areas, it was reasoned by ZANU-
    PF that within those  urban  communities  there  would  be  significant
    numbers of MDC supporters and potential supporters.  As a  result  "The
    target of the operation was not simply those identified  as  opposition
    supporters  but  whole  communities  within  which  such  people  might
    reasonably be expected to be found" (paragraph 212).

56. In reaching these findings, the Tribunal had significant regard to  the
    evidence of the  witness  from  a  NGO  known  as  W66.   This  witness
    considered that, even if a failed asylum seeker experienced no  problem
    at the airport, he or she would do so on  return  to  their  home  area
    because:-

         "...anything  which  might  draw  attention   to   an   individual,
         suggesting they are an MDC sympathiser or unsympathetic to ZANU-PF,
         could mark them for  special  treatment  in  the  present  climate"
         (paragraph 79).

57. At paragraph 80, W66 was recorded as saying that the  appellant  in  RN
    might well encounter roadblocks when seeking to travel from  Harare  to
    her home area by bus or other form of transport  and  that  if  so  she
    would be required to produce proof of identification to demonstrate she
    was from the area she was  seeking  to  access.   Those  operating  the
    roadblock would look for some proof of support for ZANU-PF.  From other
    evidence, the Tribunal noted that a person stopped at a  roadblock  who
    was unable to produce a ZANU-PF card "might be asked to sing the latest
    ZANU-PF campaign songs.  An inability  to  do  so  would  be  taken  as
    evidence of  disloyalty  to  the  party  and  so  of  support  for  the
    opposition.  Clearly, a person returning to Zimbabwe after  some  years
    living in the United Kingdom would be unlikely to be able to pass  such
    a  test"  (paragraph  81).   At  paragraph  89,  W66  was  recorded  as
    describing how the violence was being delivered by  various  groups  of
    people on behalf of the regime who, having been directed as to the task
    by the formal state authorities, had been left to carry it out as  they
    saw fit.  This had led to "an escalation in the scale and the extent of
    the brutality involved as well as  the  categories  of  victims".   The
    basis  of  identification  of  those  targeted  had  changed  from  the
    individual to the collective and from the gathering of  information  as
    to an individual's acts in support of the MDC to the targeting of those
    who were simply unable to demonstrate support  for  ZANU-PF  (paragraph
    89).

58. At paragraph 102, the Tribunal noted the evidence of  Professor  Ranger
    that, following the violence of the summer of 2008, some of the militia
    bases established then had been dismantled but others had  not.   There
    was also "an emerging worry ... that  ZANU/PF  youth  in  some  of  the
    militia camps were refusing to disband, claiming that they had not been
    paid and threatening to reward themselves by looting".  A Human  Rights
    Watch Report of September 2008 said that MDC activists who had fled the
    violence before the July  7  run-off  remained  in  hiding  "while  war
    veterans and youth militia continued  to  terrorise  villagers  in  the
    rural areas" (paragraph 102).

59. At paragraph 115, recording the written evidence  of  witness  W4,  the
    Tribunal noted that this person said that the violence  "has  continued
    'again more  or  less  unabated'  even  after  the  run-off  election".
    Accordingly, the Tribunal concluded there  was  cogent  evidence  that,
    subject to certain exceptions, those returning from the United  Kingdom
    to their homes were at risk of being regarded as  disloyal  and  so  as
    legitimate targets for retribution and ill-treatment at  the  hands  of
    the various militias who continued to seek to protect and preserve  the
    ruling party's hold on power (paragraph 116).

60. In the light of this evidence the Tribunal concluded as follows:-

         "215.    What  is  clear...is  that  it  has  been  established  by
             overwhelming evidence that in  deploying  these  militias  the
             regime unleashed against its own citizens a  vicious  campaign
             of  violence,  murder,  destruction,  rape  and   displacement
             designed to ensure that  there  remains  of  the  MDC  nothing
             capable of mounting a challenge to the continued authority  of
             the ruling party.


         216.     This campaign has been rolled out across the  country  not
             by disciplined state forces but by  the  loose  collection  of
             undisciplined   militias   who   have   delivered   a    quite
             astonishingly brutal wave of  violence  to  whole  communities
             thought to bear a responsibility for the  'wrong'  outcome  of
             the March 2008 poll.  It is precisely because of that that any
             attempt to  target  specifically  those  who  have  chosen  to
             involve themselves with the MDC has been  abandoned.   In  our
             view there can be no doubt at all from the evidence now before
             the Tribunal that those at risk are not simply those  who  are
             seen to be  supporters  of  the  MDC  but  anyone  who  cannot
             demonstrate positive support for ZANU-PF or alignment with the
             regime.


         217.     We are reinforced in our conclusion by  the  reports  that
             even some  ZANU-PF  supporters  have  suffered  beatings  when
             confronted by the militias and when they have been  unable  to
             demonstrate their loyalty.


         218.     The evidence demonstrates also, in our  view  clearly  and
             without ambiguity, that  the  aim  of  the  violence  was  not
             limited to delivering for Mr Mugabe  victory  in  the  run-off
             vote, but to ensure that the MDC support base was sufficiently
             dismantled as to  ensure  that  it  ceased  to  exist  in  any
             meaningful way as to remain a  threat  to  ZANU-PF's  hold  on
             power.  That explains why, notwithstanding  the  talks  taking
             place following the memorandum of understanding and  the  fact
             that the elections are,  for  now  at  least,  concluded,  the
             violence continues.  Although this  violence  is  not  at  the
             level seen during the summer of this year, everything  remains
             in place for it to be repeated, should the  regime  deem  this
             necessary.


         219.     We are satisfied also that the militias  have  established
             no go areas and roadblocks to ensure that abuses that continue
             in rural areas where the MDC has made inroads into the ZANU-PF
             vote go unreported wherever possible so that displaced  people
             are not allowed to return to their home areas.


         220.     For these reasons we do not see that there can be said  to
             be an end  in  sight  to  the  real  risk  of  violence  being
             perpetrated on those identified as disloyal to the regime  and
             therefore its potential supporters of the MDC.


         ...


         223.     For these reasons we are  not  satisfied  that  the  power
             sharing agreement has given rise in itself to any  significant
             change on the ground in  Zimbabwe,  so  far  as  international
             protection issues  are  concerned.   There  is,  moreover,  no
             evidence to show that in the absence of more effective foreign
             political or other political pressure, the position is  likely
             to change spontaneously.


         ...


         225.     ...a person who is unable to  demonstrate  that  he  is  a
             member or supporter  of  ZANU-PF  or  otherwise  loyal  to  or
             associated with the regime when asked to do so by any  of  the
             various groups deployed across the country by  the  Zimbabwean
             regime to maintain its authority and hold on power will be  at
             real risk of being subjected  to  ill-treatment  amounting  to
             persecution and serious harm such as to infringe Article 3  of
             the ECHR.


         226.     That risk arises throughout the country, in both urban and
             rural areas.  A person may be faced with a need to demonstrate
             such loyalty to the ruling  party  in  varying  circumstances.
             The youth  militias,  "war  veterans"  and  other  groups  put
             together under the direction of  the  state  authorities  have
             established camps or bases throughout the country  from  which
             they operate.  Although the evidence  suggests  that  some  of
             those camps or bases have closed down after the  run-off  vote
             in July of this year it is plain that  many  remain  and  that
             they are to be found throughout the country in both rural  and
             urban areas.  Ordinary Zimbabwean citizens may encounter these
             groups at roadblocks set up to establish no go areas or simply
             when at home as militias move into areas  thought  to  harbour
             MDC support."

61. The Tribunal in RN distinguished between rural areas, low density urban
    areas and high density urban areas as follows:-

         "228.    People living in high density urban areas  will  face  the
             same risk from marauding gangs of militias or War Veterans  as
             do those living in the rural areas, save that the  latter  are
             possibly at greater risk if their area has been designated  as
             a no go area by the militias.


         229.     The evidence  suggests  that  those  living  in  the  more
             affluent low density urban areas  or  suburbs  are  likely  to
             avoid such difficulties, the relative security of their  homes
             and their personal security arrangements being  sufficient  to
             keep out speculative visits.  Many of those with the means  to
             occupy such residences are in general likely to be  associated
             with the regime and so not a target on the  basis  of  doubted
             loyalty.  Others may enjoy such a lifestyle as a result  of  a
             more circumspect relationship with the regime falling short of
             actual association, but which is,  nevertheless,  such  as  to
             give the appearance of loyalty."

62. The  Tribunal  at  several  points  emphasised  the  need  to  make  an
    individualised assessment of risk on return and that, as Elias  LJ  has
    subsequently held in TM (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 916, "The fact  that
    an asylum seeker falls into one or more of the enhanced risk categories
    is not of itself sufficient to justify the grant of asylum".  This  was
    made clear by paragraph 230:-

         "230.    It remains the position, in our judgment,  that  a  person
             returning to his home area from the United Kingdom as a failed
             asylum seeker will not generally be at risk  on  that  account
             alone, although in some cases that may in fact  be  sufficient
             to give rise to a real risk.  Each case will turn on  its  own
             facts and the particular circumstances of the  individual  are
             to be assessed as a whole.   If  such  a  person  (and  as  we
             explain below there may be a not insignificant number)  is  in
             fact associated with the regime or is otherwise a  person  who
             would be returning to a milieu where loyalty to the regime  is
             assumed, he will not be at any real risk simply because he has
             spent time in the United Kingdom and sought to extend his stay
             by making a false asylum claim."

63. In the context of late 2008, however, a person returning  to  his  home
    area in Zimbabwe would "be unable to demonstrate that he voted for ZANU-
    PF and so he may be assumed to be a supporter of the  opposition,  that
    being sufficient to give rise to a real risk" (paragraph 231).  So  far
    as internal relocation was concerned, the  Tribunal  at  paragraph  233
    found that a newcomer to an area would be likely to encounter enquiries
    from representatives of the regime in control of that area and that, in
    such an area, the same risk arose as being faced  with  the  demand  to
    demonstrate loyalty to the ruling party, and  might  even  be  enhanced
    owing to his "newcomer" status.

64. At paragraphs 242 to 247, the Tribunal identified  situations  where  a
    person  would,  notwithstanding  the  serious  country  conditions   in
    Zimbabwe, be unable to make good a claim to  international  protection.
    It might, for instance, be difficult to reconcile the nature  and  cost
    of the person's  journey  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  economic
    deprivations suffered by many Zimbabweans.  That might  in  turn  raise
    questions as to  whether  the  person  was  in  fact  aligned  with  or
    otherwise viewed as loyal to the regime "so as to be able to avoid  the
    consequences  of  the  chaotic  disarray  in  the  economy  that  other
    Zimbabweans have had to deal with, so  as  to  preserve  the  means  to
    finance such a journey...  Most  ordinary  Zimbabweans  not  prospering
    under the patronage of the regime have very little left in the  way  of
    resources or possessions" (paragraph 243).  Also, a person not found to
    be a witness of truth may fail to discharge the burden of showing  that
    they were at real risk on return.  As pointed out in GM & YT  (Eritrea)
    [2008] EWCA Civ 833, however, it would still be necessary  to  consider
    whether, despite not being credible as to past experiences,  there  was
    nevertheless a reasonable likelihood of persecution on return.

65. At paragraph 261, the Tribunal found that there was clear evidence that
    teachers in Zimbabwe had, once again during 2008,  become  targets  for
    persecution.  That was confirmed by the evidence  of  Professor  Ranger
    and reinforced by news reports.  The fact of being a teacher or  having
    been a teacher was "capable of raising an enhanced risk".

66. Finally, as regards country conditions and Article 3 of the  ECHR,  the
    Tribunal found at paragraphs 248 to 257  that  country  conditions  and
    living conditions for many Zimbabweans  had  continued  to  deteriorate
    since the summer of 2007 and that some might be subjected to a complete
    deprivation of the basic necessities of life.  That would not always be
    the case and each claim had to be considered on its own facts.

RS and Others (Zimbabwe - AIDS) Zimbabwe CG [2010] UKUT 363 (IAC)

67. This country guidance on Zimbabwe was added on 14  October  2010.   Its
    summary (which we regard as an accurate pr�cis  of  the  determination)
    reads as follows:-

         "(1)     A significant number of people are receiving treatment for
             HIV/AIDS in Zimbabwe, and hence a Zimbabwean returnee will not
             succeed in a claim for international protection on  the  basis
             of a diagnosis of  HIV/AIDS  unless  their  case  crosses  the
             threshold identified in N v United Kingdom.


         (2)      Though there is some evidence of discrimination in  access
             to AIDS medication and food in Zimbabwe, it is not such as  to
             show a real risk of such discrimination.


         (3)      The return to Zimbabwe  of  a  Zimbabwean  diagnosed  with
             HIV/AIDS does not place the United Kingdom in  breach  of  its
             obligations under the Disability Discrimination Act."

68. The Tribunal in RS had this to say about the country guidance in RN:-

         "197.    It was agreed prior to the hearing of these  appeals  that
             they would be concerned with risk to the appellants on  return
             to Zimbabwe on account of their HIV/AIDS diagnoses, and it was
             not understood that the country guidance decision in RN  would
             be revisited.  Nevertheless it was argued  on  behalf  of  the
             Secretary of State that it was appropriate to revisit RN,  and
             reference  is  made  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  skeleton
             argument and elsewhere to background evidence postdating RN in
             this regard.


         198.     The suggestion that RN should be revisited was  vigorously
             resisted on behalf of the appellants, in  light  of  the  pre-
             hearing agreement, but nevertheless some evidence was  put  in
             and submissions made regarding the status  of  RN  as  country
             guidance and emphasising the point that RN remains  in  effect
             binding country guidance unless very clear and cogent  reasons
             are given for departing from it.  The point is  made  that  if
             the appeals had been listed as general country guidance then a
             good deal of evidence would have been provided  on  behalf  of
             the appellants.


         199.     We do not propose to dwell on this issue.  The  status  of
             RN as the relevant country guidance is not a substantive issue
             before us, and we understand that it is likely that later this
             year RN will be revisited.  In any event such evidence  as  we
             have before us to  the  extent  that  we  have  considered  it
             appropriate   to   give   consideration   to   it,   indicates
             sufficiently clearly to our view, that bearing in mind that it
             is limited evidence only, that there is no  reason  to  depart
             from RN as the country guidance that  should  lie  behind  our
             decision insofar as it is relevant to do so.  Matters such  as
             the State Department Report of 11 March 2010, and  the  report
             of Professor Ranger, indicate to us sufficiently clearly, that
             bearing in mind the terms of Practice Statement  12,  we  have
             not been provided with the kind of clear  and  cogent  reasons
             which seem to us to be  required  in  cases  involving  issues
             relating to aspects of  country  conditions  as  a  whole  for
             departing from RN as country guidance.  It  remains  therefore
             very much of significance in this case as background  (and  in
             some  cases  as  foreground)  to  the  issues  that  we   must
             consider."

69. For the appellants in the present  case,  Mr  Henderson,  relying  upon
    paragraph 199 of RS, submitted that, not  only  should  extant  country
    guidance provide the starting point, but also that it could be departed
    from only if there were "clear and cogent reasons" for  doing  so.   In
    support of that submission, Mr Henderson relied upon what the  Tribunal
    (Carnwath LJ, Deputy President Ockelton and  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    Storey) had said in paragraph 13(ii) of TK (Tamils -  LP  updated)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049:-

         "(ii)    ...all parties should understand that when a case  is  set
             down to review existing country guidance, the latter is to  be
             taken as a starting-point.  The Tribunal  has  not  ruled  out
             that in some cases there could be a challenge to the  historic
             validity of Tribunal country  guidance  (although  such  would
             require the production of evidence pointing both  towards  and
             against the accuracy of that guidance at  the  relevant  time:
             see AM & AM  (Armed  conflict;  risk  categories)  CG  Somalia
             [2008] UKAIT 00091); but that will be  rare.   Ordinarily  (as
             here), the process is incremental: the parties do not seek  to
             dispute that the Tribunal's country guidance was valid at  the
             time, but only to argue that it now needs  alteration  in  the
             light of fresh evidence (see  AIT  Practice  Direction  18.2).
             That being the case, there  is  no  place  for  the  wholesale
             reiteration of background country evidence that was before the
             previous Tribunal.  Expert reports should not trawl  over  old
             ground..."

70. The relevant Practice Direction is now Practice  Direction  12  of  the
    Practice Directions (Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal), dated 10 February 2010, the  relevant
    provisions of which read as follows:-

         "12.2    A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the
             IAT  bearing  the  letters  'CG'  shall  be  treated   as   an
             authoritative finding on the country guidance issue identified
             in the determination,  based  upon  the  evidence  before  the
             members of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that determine the
             appeal.  As a result, unless it has been expressly  superseded
             or  replaced  by  any  later   'CG'   determination,   or   is
             inconsistent with other  authority  that  is  binding  on  the
             Tribunal, such a country guidance case is authoritative in any
             subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:-


             (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and


             (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.


         ...


         12.4     Because of the principle that like cases should be treated
             in like manner, any failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently
             applicable country guidance case or to show why  it  does  not
             apply to the case in question is  likely  to  be  regarded  as
             grounds for appeal on a point of law."

71. The proposition  that  a  country  guidance  case  should  provide  the
    "starting point" for a subsequent case  that  relates  to  the  country
    guidance issue is inherent in  the  Practice  Direction  (and  its  AIT
    predecessor).  Whether the subsequent case is being "set down to review
    existing country guidance" or not, the effect of Practice Direction  12
    and section 107(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    is to require the existing country guidance case to  be  authoritative,
    to the extent that the requirements in Practice Direction  12.2(a)  and
    (b) are met. This is fully in accord with what the House of Lords  (per
    Lord Brown) held in R (Hoxha) v Special Adjudicator [2005] UKHL 19.  If
    the existing country guidance is such as to  favour  appellants  (to  a
    greater or lesser extent), it will in practice be for the respondent to
    adduce before a subsequent Tribunal  "sufficient  material  to  satisfy
    them" that the position has changed" (Paragraph 66).

72. We do not find that the Upper Tribunal's conclusion in RS at  paragraph
    199 is of assistance to our task in the present case. There  the  Upper
    Tribunal was expressing a view about the need for  cogent  evidence  to
    depart from an extant country guidance case in  a  case  that  was  not
    itself intended to be a country guidance case on the issue  before  us.
    The present cases have long been designated  country  guidance  on  the
    issue of a change in circumstances since RN, and  we  are  re-examining
    all material data to  inform  ourselves  what  the  present  evidential
    position is.   We  recognise  that  the  country  guidance  system  has
    limitations if extant decisions become out of date  and  not  based  on
    relevant assessments as close as reasonably practicable to the date  of
    the decision. The solution is two fold. First,  in  individual  appeals
    where there is fresh material not available at the time of the  country
    guidance the Immigration Judge will be  entitled  to  depart  from  the
    country guidance in the particular case on the basis that the  guidance
    was either not directed to  the  particular  issue  in  the  subsequent
    appeals, or the factual assessment in the guidance case has now  to  be
    updated in the light of relevant cogent fresh information.  Second,  it
    is for the Tribunal to identify appeals as suitable for  fresh  country
    guidance where a fundamental review of all relevant material should  be
    undertaken to see whether the situation has changed.  The  observations
    in TK were directed to the first class, rather than setting a test  for
    departure from country guidance in all circumstances.  We  nevertheless
    recognise  that  where  a  previous  assessment  has  resulted  in  the
    conclusion that the population generally or certain sections of it  may
    be at risk, any assessment that the material circumstances have changed
    would need to  demonstrate  that  such  changes  are  well  established
    evidentially and durable. That is the test that we will  apply  in  our
    consideration of the material but not as a preliminary reason to decide
    whether we should revisit RN at all.

73. Mr Henderson's related submission  regarding  RS  was  that,  with  the
    exception of the FFM report, the evidence submitted by  the  respondent
    to the panel in RS was in substance no different from that submitted to
    us; and that, on any reasonable view, developments  in  Zimbabwe  since
    March 2010 had been a deterioration rather  than  an  improvement.   In
    considering this submission, it is important to bear in mind  that,  as
    the RS Tribunal said in paragraph 199, the status of RN as the relevant
    country guidance was not "a substantive issue before us".  The focus in
    RS was the availability in Zimbabwe of medication for the treatment for
    HIV/AIDS and whether such  availability  was  influenced  by  political
    factors.  A country guidance case provides guidance on the  issue  that
    the case is considering rather  than  generally.  Some  of  the  expert
    material relied on before us was included in the  material  before  the
    Tribunal in RS where comments of a more general nature were made by the
    witnesses but that is no reason for us not to evaluate all the material
    now available to decide the issue at stake  in  the  present  case.  In
    short we reject the contention that we should not embark on the enquiry
    that follows.


                   D.  FACT FINDING MISSION OF AUGUST 2010

74. A major source of evidence relied upon by the respondent in the present
    appeals involved the report of Fact-Finding Mission to Zimbabwe, Harare
    9 - 17 August 2010  produced  by  the  Country  of  Origin  Information
    Service of UKBA and published on 21 September 2010.  On behalf  of  the
    appellants, Mr Henderson mounted a vigorous attack upon the FFM.  It is
    therefore necessary to deal with the document in some detail.

Background

75. Section 142  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    established the Advisory Panel on Country Information, to advise on the
    balance and reliability of the respondent's country  information.   The
    functions of the APCI have  now  been  absorbed  into  the  Independent
    Advisory Group on Country Information of the Chief Inspector of UKBA.

76. In April 2008 Dr Alan Ingram of the Department of Geography, University
    College London produced a Review of COI  Fact-Finding  Mission  Reports
    and Guidelines.  He noted that  the  COIS  web  page  stated  that  FFM
    reports were "produced by COI Service following fact  finding  missions
    to countries of origin to obtain information  not  available  from  the
    existing sources".  At that time, FFM  reports  had  been  produced  in
    relation to Iraq, Cameroon, India and Somalia.  Dr Ingram made a number
    of recommendations, including that a  section  should  be  included  in
    FFMs, setting out the thinking behind the choice of interviewees.

77. In a response paper of 2008 written by Nick Swift of the  COI  Service,
    it was  explained  that  FFMs  "do  not  attempt  to  undertake  social
    research.  Rather, COIS FFMs are an extension of the routine desk-based
    research used to produce COI Reports and other COI products.  Our  FFMs
    are not seeking to find 'the truth'; they are simply looking to  obtain
    a range of views from  informed  parties  on  the  issue  in  question"
    (paragraph 4.1).  Interviewees were briefed in advance on the questions
    to be asked and had an opportunity of changing their  responses  before
    giving consent for their views to be  included  in  the  report.   This
    meant the report was essentially "a collection of prepared  statements,
    similar in nature to published written material".  The  difference  was
    that, unlike such published material, the  information  obtained  "goes
    directly to the detailed issues under investigation".  Noting criticism
    of the expression "fact finding mission", paragraph 5.2 of the response
    said that it was in the nature of all COI that "most of it is comprised
    of the views and opinions of informed  organisations  and  individuals.
    This applies equally to FFMs, which do not seek to find hard facts  but
    a range of informed views."  "Fact finding mission" was,  nevertheless,
    the accepted term  used  by  all  countries  which  carried  them  out.
    Consideration would, however, be given to referring to the exercise  as
    an "information gathering mission".

78. At paragraph 5.5 of the response, it was stated that to some extent the
    sources  used  in  FFMs  were   self-selecting   owing   to   practical
    considerations of availability,  geography  and  timing.   Although  an
    effort was made to make the samples as representative as possible,  the
    reports of FFMs "make no claims about the validity of the sample;  they
    simply state who was interviewed and what they said.  It is left to the
    user to assess the value of the information provided by each source, as
    well as the overall balance of the sample."

79. Dr Adamson of SOAS and Dr �ali of UCL undertook an  evaluation  of  the
    February 2008 Fact Finding Mission to Turkey. The  authors  noted  that
    statements  by  interviewees  should  not  necessarily  be  treated  as
    authoritative but rather as opinions  or  impressions  in  many  cases.
    Given the relatively small sample, it was  unclear  how  representative
    the opinions presented were.  The respondent agreed with  this,  noting
    that  the  statements  by  the  interviewees  contained  opinions   and
    impressions and would be used in the  context  of  other  authoritative
    material.  Lack of time available for the FFM  also  meant  that  there
    were practical constraints.  The minutes  of  the  APCI  meeting  of  7
    October 2008, when the evaluation of the FFM to Turkey  was  discussed,
    included the observation by  Nick  Swift  that  FFM  reports  were  not
    designed to be stand-alone documents but to supplement the  COI  Report
    and that the information contained  in  them  did  not  purport  to  be
    objective fact but the views of the individuals concerned.

The FFM report

80. With these background observations, we turn to the FFM  report  in  the
    present case.  The Fact-Finding Mission was undertaken by  the  Country
    of Origin Information Service with assistance from the Country Specific
    Policy Team, both of which are parts of UKBA, together with the Foreign
    and Commonwealth Office.  The FFM was led  by  Debbie  Goodier,  Senior
    Researcher in COIS.  Andrew Jones, First  Secretary  Migration  at  the
    British Embassy, Harare, and Mark Walker, Head of  Unit,  CSPT  (as  he
    then was) also took part in the visit.  According to  the  introduction
    to the published report, the stated purpose of the FFM was  "to  gather
    information on the situation in Zimbabwe since  the  formation  of  the
    Government of National Unity (GNU)  in  February  2009,  which  may  be
    relevant to the consideration of  asylum  applications  in  the  United
    Kingdom".  All meetings with  sources  were  arranged  by  the  British
    Embassy in Harare.  The team also met seven Zimbabweans who had claimed
    asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  who  had  subsequently  returned
    voluntarily to Zimbabwe from the  United  Kingdom  in  2009  and  2010.
    These individuals were  identified  and  selected  by  the  IOM.   Most
    meetings took place between 10 and 17 August 2010.  Where the team were
    unable to schedule appointments during  their  visit,  interviews  were
    conducted solely by Andrew Jones of the FCO.   All  interlocutors  were
    sent the list of questions to be asked at the interview in advance  and
    advised that the information obtained may  be  published  in  a  report
    placed in a public domain  and/or  used  by  immigration  officials  to
    assist the Immigration and Asylum Chamber (sic) when it considered  the
    Zimbabwe country guidance case in October 2010.  The document  sent  to
    NGOs in advance of  meetings  was  at  Annex  A  to  the  report.   The
    introduction  stated  that  given  time  constraints,  the  report  was
    presented "as a collation of the agreed notes of  answers  provided  by
    each interlocutor in response to the questions asked".  A short summary
    of the information gathered from the sources had also been provided  at
    the start  of  each  section  on  main  thematic  questions.   All  the
    information gathered was said to have been attributed to sources and no
    attempt had been made to provide any analysis of the material.  Several
    of the sources interviewed had asked to  remain  anonymous  and  to  be
    identified in general terms.  The list of the sources  interviewed  was
    at Annex B, a glossary of acronyms and abbreviations at  Annex  C,  the
    NGO interview "transcripts" at Annex D and the selection  criteria  for
    returnees and questions sent to them in advance at Annex E.

81. We have had regard to the interview notes with the NGO interviewees or,
    as we shall call them, the  civil  society  interviewees.   Apart  from
    these notes, the only other substantive part of the FFM report to which
    we have had regard are the 'transcripts' of  the  interviews  with  the
    seven returnees.  For reasons which will be explained, we have not  had
    regard to the executive summary or summaries of responses.

82. We shall deal first with the issues regarding the  interviewees,  other
    than the seven returnees to  Zimbabwe  from  the  United  Kingdom.   As
    already indicated, the process envisaged by the  respondent  was  that,
    although manuscript notes were  taken  of  the  various  meetings  (the
    respondent has supplied  those  of  Debbie  Goodier)  a  set  of  notes
    comprising the questions asked and the answers given by the interviewee
    was produced in respect of each interviewee and sent  to  that  person,
    for comment and approval.  It was a  major  point  for  the  respondent
    that, having regard to the  approval  process,  these  interview  notes
    represented the actual views of the interviewees.

83. Following the late production by  the  respondent  of  email  exchanges
    between David Gibbon, Senior Country Researcher -  Zimbabwe  and  South
    Africa in the COIS and various interviewees, the appellants  discovered
    that there were, in fact, a number of difficulties in this regard.   In
    the notes  relating  to  Gays  and  Lesbians  of  Zimbabwe  (GALZ)  the
    interviewee, to whom we refer as W82, wished  to  amend  the  paragraph
    relating to "the situation for gay  men".   Having  said  that  it  was
    possible for a man to be openly gay in Zimbabwe, the  second  sentence,
    as originally drafted, read "In high density areas openly gay  men  may
    face taunting and harassment and may also face  discrimination  in  the
    provision of services on account of their sexuality".  W82 amended  his
    statement so that the sentence read "In high density areas  openly  gay
    men may face violence,  taunting  and  harassment  and  may  also  face
    discrimination in  the  provision  of  services  on  account  of  their
    sexuality".  His "track-change" comment,  explaining  this  alteration,
    read "Although isolated, it's important to  highlight  its  occurrence"
    [i.e. the occurrence of  violence].   According  to  a  letter  to  the
    Tribunal of 25  October  2010  from  Richard  Lederle,  Directorate  of
    Central  Operations,  Country  of  Origin  Information  Service,   this
    omission from the published report was a mistake.

84. The second problem in fact does not relate to the full interview  notes
    but, rather, to the summary of responses, which the respondent  at  the
    hearing did not rely upon and to  which  we  have  had  no  substantive
    regard.  For the record, however, we observe that the notes relating to
    the Research and Advocacy Unit included, at Mr  Reeler's  request,  the
    following addendum to the list of profiles  mentioned  in  response  to
    question 5: "Can you set out  your  understanding  of  the  nature  and
    incidence of political violence in Zimbabwe at the present  time  (i.e.
    post-GNU)?":

         "To this list should also be added persons that do not  demonstrate
         'positive affiliation' to ZANU-PF: this is especially important  in
         the rural areas and during elections."

85. The omission of this passage from the summary is, again, attributed  to
    error.

86. The third mistake arises in the notes relating to the Zimbabwe  Lawyers
    for Human Rights.  Under the response to the question "Can you set  out
    your understanding of the nature and incidence of political violence in
    Zimbabwe at the  present  time  (i.e.  post-GNU)?",  there  is  in  the
    published FFM report which was before the Tribunal the sentence:-

         "The violence is mostly  in  the  form  of  threats  claiming  that
         violence in 2008 will be surpassed."

87. ZLHR responded, not with a textual amendment  but  with  the  following
    comment:-

         "This  is  too  much  of  a  generalisation  and   underplays   the
         complexities of political violence in the country.  I would suggest
         it either be taken out or developed further to  indicate  the  many
         different types of political violence which are experienced.  It is
         definitely not just threats."

88. Later in the same notes,  against  the  question  "Are  there  are  any
    restrictions  on  someone  moving  and  settling  in  another  part  of
    Zimbabwe?", the document stated:-

         "Movement to urban areas  is  possible  but  uncommon  as  economic
         reasons  prevent  people  paying  for  accommodation.    Employment
         prospects will affect where people migrate to."

89. Here, the comment received was:-

         "It is not uncommon as there has been an influx into  urban  areas,
         but living conditions are terrible because people cannot afford the
         costs of accommodation and end up sharing  small  rooms  with  many
         other people."

90. Mr Gibbon sought clarification from Mr Jones of the FCO in Harare.   So
    far as the first problematic part of the text was concerned,  Mr  Jones
    proposed its omission, as suggested by  the  ZLHR  representative.   Mr
    Gibbon did so.  As regards the second comment, Mr  Gibbon  deleted  the
    word "uncommon"  but  did  not  incorporate  the  comment  that  living
    conditions were terrible.  This was said to be an error.

91. Not unexpectedly, Mr Henderson, on behalf of the appellants, had a good
    deal to say about these matters, as  well  as  other  issues  where  he
    asserted that there were problems with the interview  notes.   We  will
    come to these shortly.  First, however, it is necessary  to  deal  with
    some general criticisms.

92. Mr Henderson's first general criticism was that the FFM report contains
    opinions, not facts but those opinions have not been  filtered,  either
    individually or collectively, by any expert  analyst  for  reliability,
    balance or weight.  Mr Henderson referred to Practice Direction  10  of
    the Practice Directions of 10 February 2010, of the First-tier Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal.  This concerns the requirements imposed  on  an
    expert witness.  Without the safeguards to which Practice Direction  10
    refers, he contended that it was difficult  to  see  how  the  Tribunal
    could legitimately place weight on opinions expressed by people who may
    be partly or entirely  anonymous,  who  have  not  had  regard  to  the
    Practice Direction, whose views were being  reported  second-hand,  and
    whose own expertise and qualifications were in some cases in doubt.

93. As we have already seen, it has been acknowledged by the COIS that Fact-
    Finding Mission reports are essentially about the gathering of opinions
    from informed sources in the country in  question,  albeit  based  upon
    what those sources consider to be the factual position (for example, as
    regards incidents of violence).  Indeed, in the Tribunal's  experience,
    it is clear to anyone reading an FFM report produced in proceedings  in
    the United Kingdom that such a report is an assemblage of opinions.

94. So far as Practice Direction 10  is  concerned,  the  Tribunal  is  not
    persuaded by Mr  Henderson's  submission.   It  is  manifest  that  the
    Practice Direction is directed to the  responsibilities  of  an  expert
    witness, giving evidence before the Tribunal, by reference to an expert
    report.  Looking at the list of identified sources in Annex  B  of  the
    FFM report, it would be inappropriate to expect many, if  not  all,  of
    the organisations to have provided their views in the form of  experts'
    reports.  They were in no sense "instructed" to provide  such  reports;
    nor can they be expected to give views which are unslanted or unbiased,
    in the sense of being uninfluenced by the concerns, aims and objectives
    of  the  bodies  concerned.   On  the  contrary,  such  civil   society
    organisations have, as is clear from  the  other  evidence,  frequently
    fallen foul of the ZANU-PF regime and, since the GNU, of that  part  of
    the government that comprises ZANU-PF.  Their views are put forward  by
    the respondent as ones deserving of serious consideration  because,  in
    essence, they come from informed sources on the ground.

95. Likewise, we do not find force in Mr  Henderson's  apparent  submission
    that the responses in  the  FFM  report  should  have  been  "filtered"
    through  "a  well-qualified  expert"  (paragraph  144  of  his  closing
    submissions).  In fact,  at  the  hearing  this  was  effectively  what
    happened, in that both Professor Ranger and W66 were  asked  in  detail
    about the responses in the FFM report.  At the end of the day, however,
    it is for the Tribunal, as an expert body in its own right, to  analyse
    and give weight to all the various evidential elements  in  this  case.
    That is what we have done.

96. Four of the interviewees in the FFM report asked to  remain  anonymous.
    Mr Henderson questioned the weight that could  be  placed  upon  these,
    particularly  in  the  light  of  his  submissions  regarding  Practice
    Direction 10.

97. Although four organisations were anonymous in the version  of  the  FFM
    report of 21 September 2010, which  was  before  the  Tribunal  at  the
    hearings in October, the current version of the document on the website
    contains six anonymous interviewees.  The  first  of  these,  of  whose
    identity the Tribunal and the  parties  are  aware,  has  since  become
    anonymous at the interviewee's request.  He was regarded by W66 in oral
    evidence as "of course" deserving of respect.  The second  interviewee,
    an international organisation, which,  again,  was  identified  to  the
    Tribunal and the parties, was also regarded by W66 as a natural  source
    to include; a view the Tribunal shares.

98. The third anonymous interviewee, who was described as "an  organisation
    in Zimbabwe", was interviewed by Debbie  Goodier  on  11  August  2010.
    That this organisation is one of some substance is  apparent  from  the
    statement  in  the  interview  notes  that  it  "could  operate  freely
    throughout Zimbabwe" and that some elements of the GNU speculated  that
    the organisation was biased towards MDC: "however, the organisation  is
    keen to maintain a reputation for neutrality".

99. The fourth anonymous interviewee  was  "a  major  NGO"  interviewed  by
    Debbie Goodier on 11 August.  This organisation indicated that  it  was
    able to operate freely in Zimbabwe "in respects of some aspects of  its
    operations but in relation to work with IDPs there are some constraints
    on physical  aspects  to  some  areas".   These  were,  however,  often
    overcome through local explanation and negotiation,  although  concerns
    remained and the situation was  expected  to  get  worse  as  the  next
    elections  approached.   The  organisation  was  "already  working   on
    contingency plans in an attempt to be able to maintain its  operations"
    but had significant doubts about how conducive  the  environment  would
    remain.  Without at this stage venturing into the significance of  what
    is there said, it is apparent to the Tribunal that  this  organisation,
    albeit anonymous, was one that it was appropriate for COIS to  approach
    in connection with the FFM report.

100. The  fifth  anonymous  organisation  was  "a  faith-based  organisation
    working in Zimbabwe", interviewed by Debbie Goodier on 16 August.   Its
    response stated that it was an organisation "working in  ten  provinces
    of Zimbabwe through faith based community groups  in  urban  and  rural
    areas.  The organisation carries out advocacy and governance  work  and
    networks within civil society.   It  is  also  part  of  an  ecumenical
    coalition group of cross denominational church  leaders."   We  see  no
    reason not to take that at face value, in deciding  the  weight  to  be
    given to the organisation's views.

101. The sixth and  final  anonymous  interviewee  was  described  as  being
    attributable "to [a] major  international  humanitarian  organisation".
    He was interviewed by Debbie Goodier on 17 August.   He  described  the
    organisation as being generally able to  operate  freely  in  Zimbabwe,
    although over the past year it had been prevented  from  accessing  the
    diamond  fields.   Elsewhere  "access  is   surprisingly   good.    The
    organisation  operates  a  substantial  programme  spread  across   the
    country."   We  consider  it  plain  from  that  statement   that   the
    organisation is one of some reach and significance.

102. Mr Henderson criticised the assertion in the introduction  to  the  FFM
    report, that no attempt had been made to provide any  analysis  of  the
    material.  He submitted that such an analysis  had,  in  fact,  started
    before  the  interviews  had  even  occurred,  with  the  selection  of
    interviewees, the choice of questions, the choice of the conditions  in
    which  the  interviews  took  place  and  the  mode  of  recording  the
    interviews.  The Tribunal does not accept these criticisms.  So far  as
    the selection of interviewees was concerned, we accept what  Mr  Walker
    said in evidence, to the effect that the COIS had done its best in  the
    time available to identify those whose views fell to be regarded as  of
    significance.  Indeed, given the degree of scrutiny to  which  it  must
    have been apparent the FFM report would be subjected, it would  plainly
    have been counterproductive to have done  otherwise.   Furthermore,  we
    observe that W66, having had an opportunity  to  consider  and  comment
    upon the reliability of the respondents to the FFM (both anonymous  and
    otherwise), in effect accepted that they represented a  serious  effort
    to gain the  views  of  the  voices  of  key  NGOs.   Whether  all  the
    interviewees are to be given equal  weight  is,  however,  a  different
    matter, to which we shall turn in due course.  Mr Walker accepted that,
    on reflection, more might have been done to involve trade unions.

103. So far as the choice of questions is  concerned,  the  Tribunal  agrees
    with Mr Henderson, to the extent that an element of judgment  is  bound
    to be involved in framing any questions of the kind with which  we  are
    concerned.  But the precise nature of those questions is plain for  all
    to see, as is the way in which the interviewees chose to  answer  them.
    The fact that not all interviewees appear to have been asked  the  same
    questions is, again, clear on the face of the report.   No  purpose  is
    served by speculating about the reason for this.  The effect is  simply
    that there is no evidence in the form of answers to questions that were
    not put.  So far  as  the  narrowness  of  some  of  the  questions  is
    concerned, Mr Henderson criticised the question "Can you set  out  your
    understanding of the nature and  incidence  of  political  violence  in
    Zimbabwe at the present time (i.e. post-GNU)?"  Mr Henderson  submitted
    that the question of how things might develop  in  future,  or  how  an
    election might affect levels of violence, did not  seem  to  have  been
    asked.  Nevertheless, he observed that some interviewees had  commented
    on the future anyway.  That is so, and we shall consider what they  had
    to say.  However, the Tribunal does not find  that  there  is  anything
    sinister or otherwise problematic in the nature of the question,  given
    that it is  inherently  easier  for  an  interviewee  to  describe  the
    position as it exists, rather than as it might be at some future  time.
    The purpose of the question  seems  to  us  to  be  clear:  namely,  to
    ascertain whether there had been any change  since  the  Government  of
    National Unity was established in early 2009, shortly after publication
    of the determination in RN.

104. As for the fact that  only  one  organisation  was  asked  specifically
    about the profiles of victims of violence, the point we have  mentioned
    in the preceding paragraph applies.  It is, however,  significant  that
    the organisation asked about this, the Research and Advocacy  Unit  (Mr
    Reeler) is one of the two organisations regarded by W77 and W66 as  the
    most reliable of the sources quoted in the report (appellants'  closing
    submissions, paragraph 160).

105. Whether certain interviewees were speaking on their own  behalf  or  on
    behalf of the organisation for which they worked was, in a small number
    of instances, problematic.  Mr Reeler claimed that he was not asked  at
    his interview whether he was giving a personal view or the view of  the
    RAU.  In the  event,  however,  he  was  happy  for  his  views  to  be
    attributed to that organisation.  The same applied in the case of  W78.
    Anastasia Moyo, in an email of 22 October 2010, said that she would  be
    more comfortable if the interview was attributed to her as an activist,
    rather than to her organisation, Bulawayo Agenda.  That  has  now  been
    done in the latest version of the FFM  report,  although  Mr  Henderson
    questioned whether it was right to designate her  as  a  "human  rights
    activist", as opposed to merely an "activist".  The Tribunal  does  not
    find that anything of significance turns on this.

106. A more significant dispute, however, arose in relation to the  position
    of W80, regarding the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum.  In his  undated
    statement in appellants' bundle A/2, W80 stated that he  was  asked  at
    interview whether the Forum had reports of systematic ill-treatment  of
    returnees since the GNU and it was about this systematic  ill-treatment
    of returnees that he said he would expect to hear if such a  thing  was
    occurring.  Mr Walker, although his notes were not made available,  was
    categoric in oral evidence that he remembered this particular exchange.
     He said that W80 was not asked about systematic ill-treatment.

107. There is  in  respondent's  bundle  D  a  copy  email  from  W80  of  3
    September,  in  which  he  said  that  the   transcript   was   "fairly
    representative of  the  discussion.   Please  note  the  few  suggested
    changes I have made."  These changes were not included with the  email;
    but it does not appear to be the case  that  they  involved  the  notes
    being changed to refer to systematic ill-treatment.  On  the  contrary,
    paragraph 2 of W80's undated statement - "I now note that this part  of
    the summary is liable to be  misunderstood"  -  makes  it  sufficiently
    plain that W80  did  not  so  amend  the  transcript  as  part  of  the
    verification process of the FFM report.

108. On 9 November, the respondent produced Ms  Goodier's  manuscript  notes
    of the meetings with W80  and  the  seven  returnees  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  So far as the disputed  matter  is  concerned,  Ms  Goodier's
    notes record "No accounts of UK returnees being mistreated -  HR  Forum
    would have known - huge network, most locations  reported".   Over  the
    page, she wrote "Systematic ill-treatment would have been  reported  to
    NGO forum - any mistreatment isolated".

109.  In  their  respective  written  submissions,  both  sides  claimed  Ms
    Goodier's manuscript notes supported their respective  stances  on  the
    issue  of  "systematic"  ill-treatment  of  returnees.   The   Tribunal
    considers that the essential thrust of what W80 said to Ms Goodier  and
    Mr Walker is satisfactorily captured in the notes published in the  FFM
    report: that the Forum "has not come across any cases of returnees from
    the UK being mistreated and would expect to  know  of  any  such  cases
    because its member organisations are represented across the country".

110. Mr Henderson sought to use the manuscript  notes  to  mount  a  further
    general challenge to the FFM report.  Observing that there were various
    passages in those notes that had no counterpart in the printed  report,
    he asserted that the printed "notes" must constitute  an  accurate  and
    "as far  as  possible"  unedited  record  of  what  was  said  by  each
    interviewee, if the notes were to  have  "any  value  at  all".   (This
    submission chimed with Mr Henderson's earlier criticism of the report's
    referring to the notes  as  "transcripts"  of  what  was  said  at  the
    meetings).  The Tribunal finds the submission goes too far.   There  is
    nothing in the manuscript notes we have seen that can  be  said  to  be
    materially at variance with the printed notes.  Again, we come back  to
    the fact that interviewees were sent and asked to approve  the  printed
    notes, which stand as  their  response  to  the  questions  posed.   Mr
    Henderson's suggestion that  interviewees  "will  have  pressing  tasks
    other than rewriting someone's interview note" is not  compatible  with
    the fact that the interviewees consented to and engaged with a  process
    which involved them giving their views through the printed notes of the
    questions and answers.  We note what Ms Harland  had  to  say  in  this
    regard; but reject  the  implication  that  civil  society  figures  in
    Zimbabwe were guilty of naivety or carelessness in their dealings  with
    FFM teams.

111. Where Mr Henderson is on stronger ground, we find, is  in  relation  to
    the executive  summary  at  the  beginning  of  the  FFM  report.   The
    existence of this summary is hard to reconcile with the  claim  in  the
    introduction that "No attempt has been made to provide any analysis  of
    the material".  Mr Walker, in his evidence, essentially agreed with  Mr
    Henderson on this matter, informing  us  that  he  had  argued  against
    including an executive summary.  For the respondent, Ms  Grey  informed
    the Tribunal that no reliance was placed on the executive  summary  or,
    indeed, the summaries of responses from the  interviewees  (other  than
    the returnees).  We  have  taken  no  account  of  those  summaries  in
    reaching our findings.  Although it is not a matter for us, it  may  be
    that those responsible for the preparation of future FFM reports  would
    in future do well to eschew such summaries, leaving decision makers and
    judicial fact-finders to draw  their  own  conclusions  from  the  full
    versions of the questions and answers of the interviewees.

112. Mr Henderson further criticised the current FFM report for  failing  to
    comply with what he described as "undertakings" given by Nick Swift  to
    the APCI, that  such  reports  would  "disclaim  any  intention  to  be
    comprehensive"; for failing to state  that  the  report  contained  the
    views of those interviewed rather than "objective fact";  and  for  not
    indicating that the report should not be considered in  isolation  from
    other country information.

113. We have dealt earlier with the criticism that the FFM report  is  about
    views or opinions, rather than facts.  As for disclaiming any intention
    to be comprehensive, the lack of any such statement does not affect the
    weight to be placed upon the views, as expressed in the  questions  and
    answers, read in their entirety.  Again, the matter  is  not  for  this
    Tribunal; but we question whether a  standard  form  of  words  in  FFM
    reports, disclaiming an intention to be "comprehensive", will always be
    meaningful.  Indeed, it seems to us that any such  statement  runs  the
    risk of being precisely the sort of "gloss" to which Mr Henderson  took
    exception.  In the present case, the records  of  interviews  stand  as
    evidence of what was said by the various individuals and  organisations
    in answer to questions.  As such, it is evidence,  no  more,  no  less.
    Whether that evidence is "comprehensive" will depend upon the issue  or
    issues at stake in an individual case, in connection with which the FFM
    report is tendered in evidence.  What weight to place on that  evidence
    will be a matter for the judicial fact-finder who,  as  is  trite  law,
    must reach his or her conclusions on the totality of the  evidence,  as
    presented by both parties.  For the same reason, we also  do  not  find
    force in Mr Henderson's criticism that the FFM report  does  not  state
    that it is not  to  be  considered  in  isolation  from  other  country
    information.

114. That brings us to the issue  of  the  Operational  Guidance  Note.   Mr
    Henderson criticised this for citing the FFM report as "practically the
    only information post-dating March 2010" (paragraph 146 of the  closing
    submissions).  It is not for us to tell the respondent how  she  should
    write OGNs.  What is important is that the country information  in  the
    OGN is not, as that document makes plain, to be  regarded  by  decision
    makers as having the status of evidence.   In  the  present  case,  the
    respondent did not rely upon the relevant Zimbabwe OGNs as evidence and
    we have not treated them as such.

115. We have already  dealt  with  the  issue  of  those  organisations  and
    individuals who chose to be anonymised in the FFM report.   So  far  as
    the named  individuals  and  organisations  were  concerned,  the  RAU,
    ZimRights, Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human  Rights,  Zimbabwe
    Lawyers for Human Rights, Zimbabwe Human  Rights  NGO  Forum,  and  the
    Catholic  Commission  for  Justice  and  Peace  Zimbabwe  were  broadly
    accepted by W66 as authoritative sources of information.  The  Tribunal
    has formed its own assessment that the views of those organisations are
    to be given weight.  GALZ has a more limited remit, as is manifest from
    its nature.  Nevertheless, its functions bring  it  into  contact  with
    other NGOs and state elements, as well as public attitudes.

116. The appellants' witnesses took issue with the role of  the  Counselling
    Services Unit.  We accept what  those  witnesses  said,  regarding  the
    CSU's lack of research capabilities for examining the  range  of  human
    rights abuses in Zimbabwe.  We have, accordingly,  limited  the  weight
    given to the views of the CSU in the FFM report.  We have not, however,
    disregarded their views, since it is apparent from the notes  that  the
    CSU representative possessed a detailed knowledge of  the  position  on
    the ground.

117. The ambit of the Commercial Farmers Union  is  self-evident.   Bulawayo
    Agenda and the Bulawayo Progressive Residents Association,  whilst  not
    possessing  the  research  capabilities  of  some   other   NGOs,   are
    nevertheless civil society organisations that have useful things to say
    about  the  position  in  Zimbabwe's  second  largest  city   and   its
    surrounding area (W77 considered that they "had a  broader  reach  than
    Bulawayo itself").  We have approached them in that light.

The seven voluntary returnees

118. Apart from the printed notes of the questions and  answers  with  civil
    society interviewees, the only other part of the FFM  report  to  which
    the Tribunal has had regard in the present appeals is that in  part  5,
    comprising the notes of interviews with the seven  voluntary  returnees
    to Zimbabwe, interviewed by the FFM team in August 2010.  As  with  the
    civil society participants, efforts were made by  the  team  to  obtain
    written confirmation from the returnees  as  to  the  accuracy  of  the
    notes.  However, the response has been far poorer than in the  case  of
    the civil society interviewees.  We have taken that into account in our
    consideration of the evidence but do not consider that the  failure  of
    returnees to respond means that this part of the evidence falls  to  be
    disregarded.  This is particularly so since sources were informed  that
    if they did not respond within seven days, it  would  be  assumed  they
    were content.

119. The criticism levelled by the  appellants  against  this  part  of  the
    evidence essentially rests on the suggestion that the selection of  the
    returnees  was  in  practice  dictated  by  the  IOM  and   that   that
    organisation had an interest in  painting  as  positive  a  picture  as
    possible about its activities in  assisting  the  voluntary  return  of
    failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe.  It  was  also  suggested  that  the
    positive nature of the comments of the returnees could at least in part
    be attributed to their desire to keep on good terms with the IOM, until
    that organisation had provided the returnees with all the financial and
    other assistance for which they might be eligible.

120. We do not consider  that  the  IOM's  involvement  in  the  process  of
    identifying the returnees is a matter of any  particular  significance.
    Because of that organisation's work on  behalf  of  UKBA,  they  are  a
    natural source of information and an  obvious  point  of  contact  with
    returnees to Zimbabwe.  Whether or  not  some  of  the  returnees  also
    featured in a presentation that Sarah Harland described in her evidence
    is, again, immaterial.  We do  not  accept  her  insinuation  that  any
    evidence which can be said to involve the IOM is tainted, as  a  result
    of the organisation's desire to maintain its contract with UKBA.

121.  Furthermore,   the   suggestion   that   the   seven   returnees   are
    unrepresentative finds no support in  the  remainder  of  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal.  On the contrary, there is, in fact, an absence of
    evidence to show that returning failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe  from
    the United  Kingdom,  albeit  arriving  voluntarily  (with  or  without
    emergency travel documents), have suffered harm, either at the point of
    return or subsequently.  The account given by Ms Harland of a  returnee
    being murdered involved a person described  as  an  activist  returning
    from South Africa, having never been in the United  Kingdom  (We  shall
    have more to say about this aspect of her  evidence  later).   Finally,
    although the accounts  given  by  the  returnees  have  certain  common
    elements, not least the absence of problems  involving  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities, each contains a considerable amount of individual  detail.
    We also have the benefit of the respondent's refusal letters in respect
    of returnees 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 and of the determinations in the case  of
    returnees 1, 3, 4, 5 and 7 (returnees 2 and 6 did not appeal).

Tribunal's summary of the information given by the returnees

122. Returnee 1 arrived in the United Kingdom in 2000 and claimed asylum  in
    2008.  She returned to Zimbabwe in January 2009.   Although  not  found
    credible by the Immigration Judge as to her claim  to  be  in  need  of
    international protection, returnee 1 was considered by  him  to  be  an
    educated person from a middle class family, who remained  in  Zimbabwe.
    Having passed through Harare Airport without problems, she returned  to
    the parental home in Mashonaland but later moved to Harare where  there
    was "more freedom...and less intimidation".  She moved to  Harare  "for
    economic reasons as the income from the family business was not  enough
    to support the family".  She had not been successful in finding  a  job
    and had not told people that she had claimed asylum.  Returnee  1  told
    the FFM team that there was not the same pressure in Harare  to  attend
    ZANU-PF meetings as there was in rural areas and that it  was  possible
    to have a discussion in public in Harare about  politics,  albeit  with
    circumspection.

123. Returnee 2 claimed asylum in the United Kingdom in September  2002  but
    did not pursue an appeal and remained here illegally  until  May  2010,
    when he decided to return to look after his mother.  He was  not  asked
    questions at the  Zimbabwean  Embassy  regarding  his  application  for
    emergency  travel  documentation  and  passed  through  Harare  Airport
    without difficulty.  Having gone to Nyanga to care for his  mother,  he
    returned to Harare in order to find a job.  He regarded the  assistance
    received from IOM as insufficient as "without  cash  he  has  found  it
    impossible to negotiate the best  possible  price  for  goods  for  his
    business".

124. Returnee 3 was concerned that the FFM team did not provide  details  of
    the basis of his asylum claim, made in 2009.  Returning to Zimbabwe  in
    May 2010, he encountered no difficulties at  Harare  Airport.   He  was
    "surprised that there was very little  interest  in  his  situation  in
    Zimbabwe and he has encountered no problems  since  he  returned".   He
    was, however, anxious not to reveal  that  he  claimed  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom.  When interviewed, he was living in Harare,  which  was
    not his home area but was "the place where he has the  best  chance  of
    getting a job and in fact the place he is most familiar with".  It  was
    not fear that had prevented him returning to his  home  area,  but  the
    absence of job prospects.  Although presently unafraid, returnee 2 said
    that there was great uncertainty about what the  next  elections  would
    bring.

125. Returnee 4 arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2001  and  claimed
    asylum in November 2008.  The Immigration Judge found that  returnee  4
    had produced forged documentation in connection with a claim to  remain
    in the United Kingdom, based on UK ancestry.  He returned  to  Zimbabwe
    in May  2010,  using  emergency  travel  documentation  issued  by  the
    Zimbabwean Embassy.  He was briefly questioned at Harare Airport  about
    his documentation but was able to pass  through  entry  clearance.   He
    paid officers a bribe of  $20,  in  order  to  stop  what  looked  like
    becoming a protracted search of his bags.  Returnee 4 went to  live  in
    the  Hatfield  district  of  Harare  with  a  cousin.   Owing   to   an
    administrative problem, there was a delay in the  IOM  paying  him  his
    accommodation allowance.  He therefore used the �500 given  to  him  on
    departure from London, as well as help  from  family  and  friends,  in
    order to rent accommodation in the Avenues area.  He subsequently moved
    back to live with his cousin.  Although he had  been  fearful  for  his
    safety, returnee 4 had not  received  any  threats  and  there  was  no
    indication that anyone in Zimbabwe was aware of his asylum  claim.   He
    had made "a conscious decision not to tell people this".   He  regarded
    the atmosphere in Zimbabwe as "uncertain".

126. Returnee 5, a middle-aged man, arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2000,
    returned to Zimbabwe in 2003, came back to the United Kingdom  in  2005
    and claimed asylum in April 2009.  The Immigration Judge found returnee
    5 to have lived in an affluent suburb and to have been in the  business
    of  importing  cars  through  South  Africa.   The  Immigration   Judge
    considered that the evidence suggested returnee 5 was aligned with  the
    government of Zimbabwe.  Returning in May 2010 using  emergency  travel
    documentation, returnee 5 told the FFM team that he "had to lie and say
    that he had lost his passport to  avoid  having  to  say  that  he  had
    claimed asylum in the UK, although  he  felt  that  they  knew  he  had
    claimed asylum".  He had a house in Harare but this had been sublet  so
    he travelled to Bulawayo where he owned a flat and was then living.  He
    was "very happy" to be back in Bulawayo; but he  did  not  tell  anyone
    that he had claimed asylum in the UK "because he does not know how they
    would react".

127. Returnee 6, an elderly married lady, travelled to  the  United  Kingdom
    in March 2004 and claimed asylum in March 2009.  When that was refused,
    she did not appeal.  She had no difficulty on return to Harare Airport.
     The IOM took her to stay in a guest house in Harare and then drove her
    to Bulawayo, where she later rented a cottage, before moving back  into
    her own home in that city, which had been damaged.  She was "very happy
    to be back in Bulawayo" but only  her  husband  knew  she  had  claimed
    asylum in the UK.

128. Returnee 7, described as a young man, arrived in the United Kingdom  in
    2001 in order to study but was advised to claim asylum, which he did in
    2004.  The Immigration Judge described  the  claim  of  returnee  7  as
    "exaggerated and very general".  Returnee 7 went back  to  Zimbabwe  in
    January 2010, using his own passport.  He had  no  problems  at  Harare
    Airport.  His brother met him and drove him to  Bulawayo.   Returnee  7
    then set up a cattle breeding business on land  owned  by  his  father,
    which was "doing extremely well".   He  had  only  told  his  immediate
    family that he had claimed asylum in the UK "because people are  afraid
    to talk about having claimed asylum because if for example they  talked
    to neighbours they might in turn tell  ZANU-PF  and  that  would  be  a
    problem".  Returnee 7 described himself as "no longer afraid  after  he
    had passed through immigration at Harare Airport".


         E.  EVIDENCE EMANATING FROM FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH OFFICE

129. Apart from the Fact  Finding  Mission,  a  second  source  of  evidence
    produced by the respondent requires separate mention.   This  comprises
    certain "egrams" sent to the FCO in London from the British Embassy  in
    Harare between 2 July and 26 November 2010.

Background

130. Prior to the hearing  in  October  2010,  appellants  JG,  EM  and  CLM
    requested disclosure  of  all  documents  within  the  control  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  or  other  government
    departments relating to  assessments  of  the  political  situation  in
    Zimbabwe for the purpose of determining whether  to  commence  enforced
    returns, pursuant to the ministerial  statement  of  29  October  2009.
    That ministerial statement had indicated that the UKBA would begin work
    on a process aimed at  normalising  the  returns  policy  to  Zimbabwe,
    moving towards resuming enforced returns  as  and  when  the  political
    situation developed.  The  appellants'  purpose  was,  in  essence,  to
    ascertain what lay behind the ministerial statement  in  October  2010,
    that the situation was now such that (subject to what might be said  by
    this Tribunal in the present proceedings by way  of  country  guidance)
    enforced returns to Zimbabwe could recommence.

131. In a letter of 18 October  2010  from  the  FCO  Zimbabwe  Unit  to  Mr
    Walker, it was said that the FCO had always been  clear  that  enforced
    returns were related to foreign policy  considerations,  in  particular
    the stability of the inclusive government in  Zimbabwe,  and  were  not
    related to security or safety of returnees.  On 20 October the Tribunal
    directed the  disclosure  of  "any  material  emanating  from  the  FCO
    regarding its assessment of the political situation in Zimbabwe from  1
    August 2010".  On 22 December 2010 certain egrams were supplied to  the
    appellants and the Tribunal, subject to certain redactions  and  gists.
    This followed an analysis of FCO material, in which Junior Counsel  for
    the respondent was involved, to identify material  potentially  falling
    within the scope of the Tribunal's  direction,  including  (of  course)
    material that might be said to undermine the respondent's  case  and/or
    support the cases of the appellants.  Ten egrams were identified.

132. The redacted and gisted material was the subject of a  public  interest
    immunity certificate, signed by the Secretary of State for Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Affairs on 21  December  2010.   In  accordance  with  the
    policy  announced  by  the  Attorney  General  on  11  July  1997,  the
    certificate stated that the Foreign Secretary had focused  specifically
    on the damage which would be caused if the  material  in  question  was
    revealed and that he had "applied the test rigorously.   Where  I  have
    taken the view that the high test was not met, I have not made a  claim
    for PII."  In the certificate, he had explained to the  fullest  extent
    possible "the reasons  why  disclosure  of  the  redacted  or  withheld
    material would damage international relations".  Where it had not  been
    possible to be more specific, full details were given  in  a  schedule,
    made available to the Tribunal.

133. Acting pursuant to section 25 of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enquiries
    Act 2007 and following the principles laid down in R v Chief  Constable
    of the West Midlands Police, ex-parte Wiley [1995] 1 AC 274, as well as
    the overriding objective in rule 2 of  the  2008  Rules,  the  Tribunal
    considered the certificate, schedule and redacted and gisted  material.
    As a result, the respondent, at a hearing on 14 January 2011, confirmed
    that certain redacted passages  would  be  unredacted  and  other  such
    passages gisted.  That this  would  be  done  was  communicated  to  Mr
    Henderson on 14 January and the amended materials were supplied to  the
    appellants and the Tribunal.  We  were  satisfied  that  the  remaining
    redactions and all of the gists were justified in the public  interest,
    in that disclosure would cause real harm to that interest  by  damaging
    this country's international relations, and this was so notwithstanding
    the important protection issues raised in the present appeals.

134. At the "closed" part of the hearing on 14  January,  the  Tribunal  was
    shown egrams emanating from the Embassy, covering the period between 22
    November 2010 and 4 January 2011.  In order to bring  finality  to  the
    present proceedings, compatibly  with  the  overriding  objective,  the
    Tribunal indicated in the "open" part  of  those  proceedings  that  it
    would examine these egrams, compatibly with its PII functions,  with  a
    view to seeing whether any of them added anything of real substance  to
    the material already before the Tribunal.  Applying that criterion, the
    Tribunal required an egram dated 26 November 2010 to be produced to the
    appellants in gisted form.  This has been done.  On the same basis, the
    Tribunal stated that the respondent  should  keep  the  position  under
    review until publication of this determination  and  disclose  material
    subsequently  arising  only  if  that  could  be  said  to  indicate  a
    fundamental  change  in  the  position.   No  such  material  has  been
    supplied.

Appellants' submissions

135. Our assessment of  the  FCO  egrams  is  to  be  found  later  in  this
    determination, where we examine that evidence, together with the  other
    evidence before us.  We do, however, at this stage need to address  the
    general issues raised in the "Appellants' Submissions on Disclosure  of
    FCO Documents", prepared on 20 January 2011.

136. Mr Henderson made the point that the respondent was unable to meet  the
    timetable set by the Tribunal for disclosure of the FCO evidence.  That
    is so; but we do not consider, nor does Mr Henderson suggest, that this
    has caused his side any particular difficulties, or that  Ms  Grey  was
    wrong to say that the task of examining potentially  relevant  material
    was more onerous than originally envisaged.

137. The submissions of 20 January point out that, besides the  FCO  letters
    to which we have referred, Mr Walker gave oral evidence to  the  effect
    that his understanding of the FCO's objections to enforced returns  was
    that the stability of the Zimbabwean government  would  be  harmed,  in
    that such returns would be used by ZANU-PF against  Morgan  Tsvangirai,
    who would be accused of shipping back MDC voters.  The submissions make
    the point that there is nothing in the egrams that touches on the FCO's
    concerns in this regard.

138. Whilst true, we do not consider that this impacts materially  upon  the
    issues the Tribunal has to decide.  Insofar as the FCO's stated  policy
    was not  to  damage  the  stability  of  the  inclusive  government  in
    Zimbabwe, the FCO has to be taken as  not  viewing  the  resumption  of
    forced returns at  this  time  as  something  which  would  damage  the
    inclusive government by undermining the position of Morgan  Tsvangirai.
    The motivation behind  and  timing  of  the  ministerial  statement  of
    October 2010 are, however, not our concern.  What we have to decide  is
    whether and, if so, in what  circumstances,  the  return  of  a  failed
    Zimbabwean asylum seeker from the United Kingdom  to  Zimbabwe  at  the
    present time would give rise to a real risk  of  persecution  or  other
    serious harm to that person, taking (as we  shall  explain  further)  a
    holistic view, both as regards the position on the ground  now  and  by
    reference to possible future scenarios.

139. In this regard, the FCO emails have something  useful  to  say,  as  we
    shall later explain.  The submissions of 20 January urged  us  to  give
    the egrams relatively little weight, in particular, compared  with  the
    expert evidence and the evidence of "the most senior Zimbabwean figures
    involved in human  rights  monitoring  and  reporting  who  have  given
    statements to the Tribunal".  It appears from the submissions  that  we
    were being asked to place no weight, in particular, on  those  passages
    in  the  egrams  which  the  appellants  acknowledged  "strike  a  more
    optimistic note" than the assessments of the experts and other  persons
    just described.

140. These  submissions  are  misconceived.   It  is  clearly  part  of  the
    function of Mr Canning, the British Ambassador  to  Zimbabwe,  and  his
    diplomatic staff, to keep the FCO in London apprised of  the  situation
    in that country, both as  it  is  at  present  and  as  regards  future
    scenarios, such as what might happen in the run-up  to  any  elections.
    Assessments of this kind are plainly  a  significant  function  of  any
    foreign-serving diplomat.  It is manifest that those  assessments  must
    involve a combination of first-hand observation  and  discussions  with
    third parties who are in a position to  provide  relevant  information.
    In short, the egrams are a proper part of the fabric  of  the  evidence
    placed before the Tribunal, which includes  the  views  of  the  expert
    witnesses.


                   F.  ASSESSMENT OF THE GENERAL EVIDENCE

Has there been a material change in the risk of persecution or other
serious ill-treatment since RN?

141. On the totality of the evidence before us, it is plain that (except  in
    the case of certain rural areas) there has been a  material  change  in
    the risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment in Zimbabwe,  compared
    with the position as analysed by the Tribunal in RN.  In that case, the
    Tribunal quite rightly had great regard to the levels of serious  human
    rights abuses, including death, serious injury and torture,  which  had
    been inflicted by agents of ZANU-PF during the summer of 2008, both  in
    the run-up to the second  round  of  elections  and  in  the  immediate
    aftermath thereof.  Compared with that position,  the  evidence  before
    us, including that of the appellants' experts, points  consistently  to
    what we regard as a marked decrease in such violence.   W66  stated  in
    oral evidence that it would be wrong to suggest that things were as bad
    now as they were in 2008.  There had been "an orgy of violence" between
    the two elections of that year, involving an attack on  the  population
    of Zimbabwe, but the country "was not in the same position, yet".   W66
    described the position as different from that described  in  RN,  where
    anyone might be caught up at roadblocks  and  required  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to ZANU-PF.  W77 specifically did not take issue with  anything
    he had heard W66 say in oral evidence.  W77  considered  that  violence
    had  been  particularly  bad  in  2008  and  was  different  in  nature
    thereafter.  Any fresh violence in  2009  and  thereafter  was  not  an
    increase in the rates of violence witnessed  in  2008.   He  considered
    there to be a "sliding scale" of risk, with MDC activists  at  the  top
    and those at the bottom being  ordinary  individuals  in  high  density
    areas, where the risk "would involve a random element".  2008 had  been
    "an exceptional  year"  for  roadblocks  which  were  "more  random  or
    sporadic now".  Although W77 described there  still  being  a  risk  of
    being stopped and questioned, as to whether one was a supporter of  the
    MDC, in the light of the evidence as a whole, we do not find that  this
    can be said to represent a generalised real risk  to  returning  failed
    asylum seekers from the United Kingdom, regardless of  their  political
    profile.

142. It was also plain to us  from  Professor  Ranger's  evidence  that  the
    position,  according  to  him,  was,  in  terms  of  current  violence,
    different from that described in RN.  It is true  that  both  Professor
    Ranger and the other appellants'  witnesses  expressed  grave  concerns
    about the future position, in particular, when elections were called in
    Zimbabwe. For example, Professor Ranger spoke  of  the  most  pervading
    emotion being a "fear of renewed violence".   We  shall  turn  to  that
    issue in due course.  For the present, however, we find that, short  of
    such  concern  as  to  the  future,  the  evidence  shows   a   general
    improvement, compared with the position in RN.

143. The same point emerged from the evidence of Mr Reeler (of the  Research
    and Advocacy Unit), who stated that violence "is not currently as  high
    as during the 2008 election period".  We note what Mr  Reeler  said  at
    paragraph 19 of his first report, that there is  a  spectrum  of  risk,
    with MDC members, office bearers and suchlike being  at  the  top;  but
    that "There is also a real risk for ordinary Zimbabweans  who  are  not
    perceived as loyal".  We do not, however, consider the  evidence  shows
    that, as a general matter, the return of a failed  asylum  seeker  from
    the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC profile, would result  in
    that person facing at present a real  risk  of  having  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to the regime.

144. This is reiterated in the evidence in the parts of the  FFM  report  to
    which we have had regard.  For example,  the  Zimbabwe  Association  of
    Doctors for Human Rights considered that  current  levels  of  violence
    were (as at August 2010) "much lower  than  in  2008",  notwithstanding
    that there was a  high  level  of  "verbal  violence  and  intimidation
    directed towards known political  activists".   Having  regard  to  the
    evidence before us, we also consider that there is force  in  what  was
    said in the FFM report by the international organisation referred to in
    paragraph 97 above,  that  the  same  information  regarding  political
    violence "tends to circulate continually and is  often  uncorroborated.
    Thus, what was in fact  one  incident  comes  to  be  reported  as  two
    separate ones and motives and outcomes can become confused."   To  this
    must be added the fact that, as is apparent, many of the internet  news
    sources placed before  us  display  a  marked  (albeit  understandable)
    antipathy towards Mugabe and ZANU-PF, with the resulting temptation  to
    over-generalise from what may in reality be sporadic problems.  In  the
    organisation's view, the overstatement of  actual  levels  of  violence
    leads people to talk about the current situation as if it were  similar
    to 2008, "when in fact there is no comparison".

145. The anonymous organisation interviewed by the FFM  team  on  11  August
    2010 spoke of people in Zimbabwe being  "tentative  about  the  current
    peace and ... aware that it is fragile".   Again,  however,  there  was
    concern about the "potential for violence in many  rural  communities".
    There was a "general opinion that [the police]  are  less  tolerant  of
    political violence" than in the past;  although  the  evidence  overall
    means that that last remark must be treated with considerable  caution.
    There is, however, support  for  it  in  the  view  of  the  major  NGO
    interviewed on 11 August, which considered that  in  urban  areas  "the
    police are more likely to intervene to stop political violence, whoever
    the perpetrator".  The Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum considered  that
    there were  problems  regarding  the  constitutional  outreach  process
    (about which we shall have more to say); but that otherwise "levels  of
    political violence are currently low, with  more  emphasis  on  threats
    along the lines of stay in line or expect to face worse  violence  than
    in 2008".  The Catholic  Commission  for  Justice  and  Peace  Zimbabwe
    considered that there was "little  actual  political  violence  at  the
    moment", although this was said to be because the population  had  been
    "so cowed by previous violence that they are afraid to do the  sort  of
    things that would provoke further actual  violence".   Whilst  we  have
    tempered the weight to be placed on the views of  Bulawayo  Agenda,  so
    far as more general issues are concerned, it is nevertheless noteworthy
    that  they  considered  that  threats  and  physical  violence   within
    Matabeleland  North  and  South,  Bulawayo,  Midlands,   Masvingo   and
    Manicaland had declined since the formation of the GNU.   By  the  same
    token, the Bulawayo Progressive Residents  Association  considered  the
    current situation to be "peaceful - for the moment, at least.  Violence
    is much less widespread and the violence is less open."

146. For the appellants, Mr Henderson  submitted  that,  if  one  looked  at
    various statistics of human rights violations, there  was  no  material
    difference between those recorded in the  late  summer  and  autumn  of
    2008, as considered in RN, and the figures recorded for the  summer  of
    2010.  As  the  Tribunal  in  RN,  notwithstanding  this  reduction  in
    violence, had seen fit to say what it  did  about  the  risk  to  those
    unable to demonstrate loyalty to the regime (or, as it  should  now  be
    described, ZANU-PF), Mr Henderson submitted that there  was  no  proper
    basis for us to depart from the country guidance in RN.

147. We do not consider there to be merit in  these  submissions.   Although
    RN looked at the position in the few months immediately  following  the
    election violence in the summer of 2008, it  was  quite  understandable
    for that Tribunal to adopt a very cautious approach  to  whether  there
    had been a material change on the ground, as regards the real  risk  of
    serious harm.  In particular, the Tribunal, at  paragraph  102  of  its
    determination, noted the evidence of Professor Ranger that the militias
    unleashed by ZANU-PF in the run-up to the presidential elections  were,
    in some cases, refusing to disband  and  that,  according  to  a  Human
    Rights Watch  Report,  these  groups  and  others  were  continuing  to
    terrorise villagers in rural areas.  At  paragraph  115,  the  Tribunal
    also had regard to the written evidence of the witness described as  W4
    who considered that the violence had continued "more or  less  unabated
    even after the run-off election".

148. In addition,  at  paragraph  218,  the  Tribunal  considered  that  the
    continuing violence, just described, was being perpetrated with a  view
    to ensuring that the MDC support base "was sufficiently  dismantled  as
    to ensure that it ceased to exist in any meaningful way as to remain  a
    threat to ZANU-PF's hold on power".

149. It is plain from the evidence before this  Tribunal  that,  insofar  as
    that might have been a reason for the continuing violence in  2008,  it
    has manifestly failed to have the desired result.  Support for the  MDC
    in general and the MDC-T in particular  appears,  if  anything,  to  be
    higher now than it was at the time of the 2008 elections.  But, be that
    as it may, we are in no doubt that, viewing matters  from  the  vantage
    point of late January 2011, when the  latest  country  information  was
    placed  before  us,  militias,  war  veterans  and  the  like  are  not
    terrorising the population of Zimbabwe, as they were  during  2008.  We
    make this finding, taking into account the most recent evidence adduced
    by the appellants, including that  concerning  clashes  in  mid-January
    2011 between MDC members and ZANU-PF youths  in  the  Mbare  suburb  of
    Harare and a report of a disturbance at the MDC  headquarters  in  that
    city. We also note the comments in the House of  Lords  on  27  January
    2011 by the Minister of State, Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office,  who
    referred to "clear evidence of intimidation and violence rising again".
    We do not regard the Minister's remarks as an acknowledgment  that  the
    present position is as serious as in late 2008, at the time of RN; but,
    in any event, the evidence before us does not show this to be the case.

150. It is also relevant  to  observe  that,  according  to  the  July  2010
    Zimbabwe Peace Project summary of politically  motivated  human  rights
    and food related violations (appellants' bundle  B),  a  graph  showing
    what was described as "politically motivated violence"  indicated  that
    this rose from around 600 cases a month to 4,380 in April  2008,  6,288
    in May 2008, declining to 3,758 in June 2008 and 1,383 in July of  that
    year.  Violence in fact rose from 964 to 1,336  between  September  and
    October 2008, with well over 1,000 cases a month being  recorded  until
    August 2009, when it dropped to 527.  The figure for July 2010 was 884.
     A later report showed the figure for September 2010 as 861.

151. In the materials supplied by the appellants in January 2011,  there  is
    a report from "sokwanele.com" entitled "Zimbabwe  Inclusive  Government
    Watch: Issue 22". It asserts that in November 2010 106  "articles  from
    the internet media were  recorded  and  catalogued",  representing  "an
    increase of 10% from  October  in  breaches  of  the  Global  Political
    Agreement". Although the  article  appears  to  infer  from  this  that
    violence is on the increase, the basis of the study, coupled  with  the
    rhetorical nature of much of the report, does not indicate that  it  is
    evidence deserving of particular weight.

152. We have already  touched  on  the  issue  of  roadblocks.   These  were
    prevalent both in the run-up to the elections in the summer of 2008 and
    in their immediate aftermath.  It is plain from the determination in RN
    that the Tribunal in that case regarded the prevalence of roadblocks as
    particularly significant, as regards its finding that a  returnee  from
    the United Kingdom at that time faced a real risk of encountering  such
    a roadblock, whether in a  rural  or  urban  area,  and  of  having  to
    demonstrate loyalty to the regime; for example, by singing  the  latest
    ZANU-PF song.

153. It  is  apparent  from  the  evidence  before  us  that  incidences  of
    roadblocks have, since that time, significantly  diminished.   None  of
    the civil society organisations and individuals interviewed by the  FFM
    team identified roadblocks as a significant current  problem.   Neither
    did any of the appellants' witnesses.  In this regard, W66 specifically
    said in oral evidence that things were not as  bad  at  present  as  in
    2008.  W77 regarded  roadblocks  as  "more  random  or  sporadic  now".
    Professor Ranger spoke of there being some roadblocks  in  Mashonaland.
    In general, we find that the  thrust  of  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellants' experts is to the effect that, whilst there may be  a  risk
    to a  person  who  is  not  a  MDC  activist  of  being  challenged  to
    demonstrate allegiance to ZANU-PF, whether at a  roadblock  or  in  the
    course of a search of a high-density urban area for MDC  activists  and
    supporters who might be on a list, that risk is currently sporadic  and
    random.  As  such,  it  cannot  properly  be  compared  with  the  risk
    identified  in  the  country  guidance  in  RN.   The  report  in   the
    Zimbabwean.co.uk of 28 December 2010 that "the dreaded military police"
    had been "roped into manning roadblocks" is somewhat vague and does not
    indicate that the sort of problems experienced at  roadblocks  in  2008
    are being experienced at the present time.

154. Although we have had regard to the reservations voiced by Mr  Henderson
    regarding the usefulness of the evidence of  the  seven  returnees  who
    featured in the FFM report,  we  consider,  for  the  reasons  we  have
    already given, that some weight can be placed on this  evidence.   None
    of the returnees suggested in any way that he or she had been  required
    to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, in circumstances where there  was  a
    real risk of serious ill-treatment,  in  the  event  of  a  failure  to
    perform satisfactorily.  We take account of the fact that some  of  the
    returnees had chosen not to disclose the fact  that  they  had  claimed
    asylum in the United Kingdom; but that is in no  sense  to  be  equated
    with  the  "loyalty  test"  which  featured  in  the  guidance  in  RN.
    Furthermore, looking at the  evidence  overall,  we  find  that,  as  a
    general matter, the fact of having claimed asylum in the United Kingdom
    will not of itself be a factor of any particular  significance  in  the
    assessment of risk.  However, in some cases, such as that of a returnee
    to certain rural areas, it will be part of a package of attributes that
    may well give rise to a real risk (see below).

155. Ms Harland referred to a returnee from  South  Africa  (who  had  never
    been to the United Kingdom) who was said to be an MDC activist and  who
    had been murdered.  True MDC activists, in respect of whom there  is  a
    real risk that ZANU-PF would regard them as a threat, may indeed be  at
    real risk of persecution on return to Zimbabwe, whether from the United
    Kingdom or elsewhere.  Ms Harland also spoke of an individual  who  had
    apparently left the United Kingdom for Zimbabwe in 2007,  but  gone  to
    South Africa in 2008, before returning to Zimbabwe.  He said  that  his
    attempts to re-register for teaching had been futile as  he  was  being
    punished for having been away in the United Kingdom.  He was said to be
    lying low for fear of victimisation.  Even if one accepts all  this  at
    face value, it comes nowhere near being an example of a person who,  on
    return, suffered serious harm amounting to persecution or Article 3 ill-
    treatment. Ms Harland spoke of a third returnee; but had  no  knowledge
    of how he had fared.

156. Accordingly, as we have already indicated in the  section  relating  to
    the FFM report, the evidence of the seven returnees falls to be read in
    the context of there being no evidence before us of any  returnee  from
    the United Kingdom suffering ill-treatment on return, or  subsequently.
    In so saying, we have had regard to the fact that  the  seven  returned
    voluntarily.  However, some returned on emergency travel documentation,
    such as would be provided in the case of certain of those involuntarily
    returned (that is to say, those who lacked passports).  There  is  also
    the evidence of Mr Walker regarding forced removals of what  appear  to
    have been deportees.  Again, there is  no  evidence  of  the  deportees
    being ill-treated.  Their escorts, however, were apparently detained by
    the Zimbabwe authorities.

157. Whilst noting the reservations expressed by the  appellants  concerning
    the British Embassy egrams (written submissions of 20  and  28  January
    2011), we consider that the egrams contain assessments of the  position
    during the period in  question,  which  are  in  line  with  the  other
    evidence before us. On 6 September 2010, the  Ambassador,  Mr  Canning,
    wrote: "Had we in the chaos and violence of 2008 been offered a glimpse
    of the Zimbabwe of today, there is little doubt we  would  have  seized
    it. Tsvangirai, harshly criticised for going into  the  coalition,  has
    been proved right". An egram of 28 September spoke of Zimbabwe enjoying
    relative peace compared with 2008, although there remained  pockets  of
    violence. On 29 October the Ambassador wrote that the "majority of  the
    population, and particularly the business community, would settle for a
    continuation of the present arrangement  which,  despite  its  manifest
    faults, has delivered a significant degree of stability, a reduction in
    human rights abuses, improved economic performance and  the  first  GDP
    growth for 13 years". On 15 November, the Embassy again referred to the
    formation of the inclusive government securing "a significant reduction
    in the level of human rights abuses".

158. It is important to make two things clear. First, the fact that  general
    levels of risk of persecution  and  other  serious  ill-treatment  have
    materially declined since RN does not mean that  the  potential  for  a
    return to such levels does not exist, in the event of parliamentary and
    presidential elections being called.  It  was  a  major  plank  in  the
    appellants' case that the likelihood of such  elections  taking  place,
    and of the violence that might ensue, had to be taken into  account  in
    the Tribunal's conclusions on present risk. This is a matter  to  which
    we shall turn in due course. Secondly, we are  here  dealing  with  the
    general position, across Zimbabwe. As we  shall  see,  the  risk  to  a
    particular individual will very much depend on the place to which he or
    she would return.

Problems arising from the COPAC process

159.  In  making  our  findings,  we  have  had  particular  regard  to  the
    activities of the Constitutional Parliamentary Committee (COPAC), which
    in the summer of 2010 undertook a large number of  "outreach"  meetings
    across Zimbabwe, with the aim of gathering the public's  views  on  the
    proposed new constitution for that  country.   It  is  noteworthy  that
    these meetings were well underway at the time that  the  civil  society
    interviewees gave their views to the FFM team in August 2010.  W66 said
    in oral evidence that  he  was  sure  that  those  who  attended  COPAC
    outreach meetings and had a political profile were at higher risk  than
    those whose profile was low.  W77 placed  on  the  debit  side  of  his
    "balance sheet" the continuing use of youth militia to attack suspected
    opposition figures and supporters, as well as  those  speaking  out  at
    constitutional outreach meetings (or even attending them).  The present
    violence tended to be focused on the COPAC process.   Professor  Ranger
    referred to the violence when COPAC reached Harare, in September  2010,
    leading to the postponement of the  outreach  meetings  in  that  city.
    This had overshadowed the COPAC process in Bulawayo, where the meetings
    were "violently noisy, if not subject to violence by  means  of  sticks
    and stones".

160. Professor Ranger agreed that the COPAC process served as the focus  for
    such intimidation and violence as there was at the present time.   This
    chimed with the Peace Project report in appellants' bundle  B,  dealing
    with the position in August 2010.  The MDC had  provided  a  number  of
    chairmen in the COPAC  process,  who  had  initially  spoken  about  it
    highly.  Professor Ranger considered that an  ordinary  villager  would
    conclude from the activities of ZANU-PF  at  COPAC  outreach  meetings,
    that it was "too dangerous to support the MDC".

161. Anthony Reeler, in his  statement,  considered  that  people  attending
    outreach meetings had to say the right things "otherwise they might  be
    assaulted by militia".  When COPAC reached Harare, ZANU-PF  people  had
    been bussed into the city in order to commit violence.   Dewa  Mavhinga
    of Crisis Zimbabwe Coalition, whilst noting that  levels  of  organised
    violence were lower than during the election period, observed that  the
    COPAC process had brought a wave of violence.  The problems in  Harare,
    which had left a person dead, had, he considered, "put to rest the idea
    that urban areas were safe".  For the same reason, W78 had changed  his
    earlier view that urban areas were still relatively safe from organised
    violence.  W79 of the Zimbabwe Human Rights Association  thought  that,
    since being interviewed by the FFM team in August,  the  situation  had
    deteriorated, owing to the COPAC process, with  violence  inflicted  by
    people bussed in by "certain anti-democratic political  parties".   W80
    of the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum likewise  thought  that  ZANU-PF
    had imposed its authority on Harare through organised violence  related
    to the COPAC process.

162. In its July 2010 summary on  politically  motivated  human  rights  and
    food-related violations, the Zimbabwe  Peace  Project  considered  that
    villagers suspected of belonging to the MDC-T were being told to  "shut
    up during COPAC processes and also  selected  ZANU-PF  supporters  were
    allowed  to  speak  during  the  outreach  meetings   in   most   rural
    constituencies across the country".  In its August  2010  summary,  ZPP
    noted an upsurge "in the number of intimidation  and  harassment  cases
    related to the  COPAC  outreach  programme.   The  highest  numbers  of
    violations were recorded in the Manicaland province", which remained "a
    hotspot of violations".  On the  other  hand,  Matabeleland  North  and
    South recorded only "minimal cases of violations despite the enthusiasm
    that has been associated with the  constitution  making  process".   In
    Bulawayo,  most  cases  reported   were   those   of   harassment   and
    intimidation.  A press report in September 2010  recorded  that  up  to
    sixteen outreach meetings had been  cancelled  in  Manicaland  province
    because of violence from ZANU-PF supporters.

163. The Radio Africa correspondent in Harare thought that Mugabe and  ZANU-
    PF were using the outreach exercise "not only to test the waters but to
    remind people just how violent his thugs could be and how far they were
    willing to go to get their way".  On 7 November,  there  was  a  report
    that  at  least  fifteen  resettled  farmers  near  Masvingo  had  been
    "severely tortured by ZANU-PF youths ... for failure to attend a  rally
    held in Manwenge  area".   The  farmers  were  "too  afraid  to  go  to
    hospital".  On the other hand, a  report  of  10  November,  also  from
    Masvingo, noted that villagers were refusing to pay a levy of two goats
    per family or a  $70  fine  for  refusing  to  support  ZANU-PF-imposed
    village heads and that attempts by ZANU-PF to reorganise their  party's
    leadership at grassroots level was facing resistance from villagers who
    "vowed to challenge the goat levy in  the  courts".   A  report  of  11
    November  describes  something  called  "Operation  Headless  Chicken",
    described by an anonymous ZANU-PF official as  identifying  youths  and
    party leaders "who will be trained in beheading people".

164. In the FFM report, ZimRights, whilst noting that the COPAC process  had
    been used by ZANU-PF to trigger violence, was encouraged  by  the  fact
    that, contrary to expectations, people were happy to speak direct to  a
    video camera, as part of a  ZimRights  project,  and  that  "they  were
    clearly not afraid".  In the rural areas people had not been turning up
    to COPAC meetings "simply because they don't want to hear from or about
    ZANU-PF anymore".  It would be difficult for ZANU-PF to regain  control
    in areas such as Manicaland. The fact that, in rural  areas,  villagers
    were not, as a general matter, coerced into attending COPAC meetings is
    also borne out by the article of 12 July in the Zimbabwean,  concerning
    the touring play "Waiting for the constitution". The article  described
    people saying that COPAC asked them to gather at certain venues  "where
    they could not go because they were being  watched".  The  people  knew
    they "have power for a "NO" vote if they are  prevented  from  speaking
    out during the constitutional process".  The Research and Advocacy Unit
    (Anthony Reeler) told the FFM  team  that  now  that  the  constitution
    making process had begun, political space was closing down dramatically
    and  there  were  increasing  reports   of   political   violence   and
    intimidation.  Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights  told  the  team  that
    with the advent of COPAC, violence had surfaced again in  a  number  of
    provinces and COPAC outreach meetings had had to be cancelled  in  some
    areas due to intimidation, disruptions and monitoring.

165. The Counselling Services Unit considered  that,  although  there  would
    still be intimidation as seen in the COPAC process, ZANU-PF  would  try
    to suppress large- scale pre and post-election political violence,  out
    of a fear of being indicted by the International Criminal  Court.   The
    international organisation interviewed on 12 August, whilst noting that
    violence was occurring in the outreach process, considered that ZANU-PF
    "has taken an  active  decision  not  to  unleash  the  full  force  of
    political violence in relation to the  constitutional  referendum,  not
    least because to have done so would have infuriated the South  Africans
    during the soccer World Cup".  The Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum told
    the team that the violence linked to  the  outreach  process  was  "not
    systematic but such as there is tends to be perpetrated by  war  vets".
    Although ordinary people "who say the wrong things at  meetings"  might
    be threatened, or worse, higher  profile  figures  were  liable  to  be
    arrested and, if so, tortured.  Otherwise, levels of political violence
    were low with more emphasis on threats.

166. Although physical violence  undoubtedly  occurred  from  time  to  time
    during outreach meetings (as to which we have noted the MDC's  list  of
    some incidents it said had then occurred,  mainly  in  Mashonaland  and
    Masvingo), it is evident from the evidence as a  whole,  including  the
    Zimbabwe Peace Project reports, that most of  the  violations  did  not
    involve physical violence.  For example the  Harare/Bulawayo  report  -
    shadowing the outreach process - recorded  only  3%  of  violations  as
    involving violence, with the majority relating to  coaching,  political
    interference and harassment.  There were,  however,  disturbances  that
    were said to have rocked outreach meetings in Mbare, Harare.   It  was,
    in our view, significant that the decision was very  quickly  taken  to
    suspend  the  outreach  meetings  in  Harare,  rather  than   let   the
    difficulties continue.  A further report of the Peace Project described
    the resumed  consultations  in  Harare  on  30  and  31  October  2010,
    following the September suspensions.  The report identified the  reason
    for the suspension as "inter-party violence between supporters  of  the
    two main rival parties, ZANU-PF and the MDC-T".  The MDC list, to which
    we have referred,  describes  a  small  number  of  physical  assaults,
    involving MDC members and supporters, at outreach meetings.

167. At the resumed October meetings,  COPAC  was  applauded  for  deploying
    police to all outreach venues, albeit that  this  created  "a  somewhat
    intimidating, subdued, sombre and agitated atmosphere".  The  political
    mood in October was described as "brittle,  temperamental  and  visibly
    polarised along party  lines".   It  appears  that  ZANU-PF,  no  doubt
    through the bussing in of supporters, were able to turn  many  outreach
    meetings into  political  rallies.   In  Harare  North  there  were  no
    reported incidents of political skirmishes or violence, although  "hate
    language" was said to have haunted the proceedings.

168.  Despite  the  problems  experienced  in  Harare   during   the   COPAC
    activities, it is plain that they were on nowhere near the scale of the
    2008 election violence.  Unlike reports in  respect  of  certain  rural
    areas,  where  there  is  suggestion  that  villagers  may  have   been
    threatened or otherwise cajoled to attend  meetings,  the  evidence  in
    respect of  Harare  does  not  indicate  that  (leaving  aside  ZANU-PF
    supporters who were bussed there), attendees  at  meetings  were  there
    otherwise than of their own free will.

169. It would also be wrong to categorise the  COPAC  outreach  meetings  as
    entirely negative.  In a press report of 5 November, it was  said  that
    the  deliberations  exhibited  "a  general  consensus  that   the   new
    constitution shall have a bill of rights  and  that  people  should  be
    guaranteed their freedom of expression and association".  This supports
    positive statements made in respect of the process by Morgan Tsvangirai
    and an MDC spokesman, who indicated that it would  be  wrong  to  think
    that the MDC would campaign for a "No" vote in any future referendum on
    the constitution. It also fits with the evidence regarding the separate
    "transitional justice" process, commented on by Professor  Ranger,  who
    acknowledged there had been relatively open discussions  in  connection
    with that process. Likewise, the British Embassy in Harare reported  to
    the FCO on 29 October that, despite ZANU-PF's  mobilising  to  dominate
    many  outreach  meetings,  "the  outreach  process  has  educated   and
    empowered many Zimbabweans" and that despite the serious flaws "it  has
    been remarkable to see an exercise of this scale unfold in the  way  it
    has".

170. The Zimbabwe Peace Project reports in respect of  COPAC  activities  in
    Bulawayo indicate that these "generally went well  though  with  a  few
    isolated chaotic incidents".  This reflects  the  general  position  in
    that city, which we shall describe in more detail in due course.

171. Instances of significant problems,  including  intimidation  backed  by
    threats designed to  instil  serious  fear,  are,  however,  much  more
    evident in reports relating to rural areas (other  than  Matabeleland),
    although these were not  always  overt.   The  Zimbabwe  Peace  Project
    report entitled "Shadowing the  Outreach  Process"  spoke  of  outreach
    violations in rural communities as being "craftily committed through an
    array of hard to detect  strategies  that  include  ferrying  of  party
    supporters from one venue to another, posting  party  youths/supporters
    at outreach venues, grouping  communities  under  their  head  men  and
    conducting of roll calls after meetings" etc.  According  to  the  same
    report, cases of harassment remained "disturbingly visible".

172. The suggestion that all outreach meetings  were  dominated  by  ZANU-PF
    is, however, to some extent contradicted by a passage in  the  Zimbabwe
    Peace Project weekly report of 19 to 25 July, which describes responses
    at meetings as being along  political  lines  with  ZANU-PF  and  MDC-T
    "actively involved in selling their constitutional positions by way  of
    distributing flyers before the arrival of COPAC teams".   Contributions
    either reflected MDC-T or ZANU-PF positions "depending which  political
    party was dominating at the outreach meeting".  Compatibly with what we
    have earlier  noted,  the  reports  said  that  areas  that  were  less
    politically sensitive appeared to result in  "consensus  after  serious
    debates", at least in the case of meetings in Midlands province.

173. Overall, we do not consider that the problems emanating from the  COPAC
    exercise in the period June-October 2010 justify the  view  that  there
    has been a significant deterioration in general country conditions,  as
    seems to have been asserted by some of the appellants' witnesses.   The
    COPAC exercise has, however, served to  underscore  the  difference  in
    circumstances  between  those  living  in   urban   and   rural   areas
    respectively.   In  particular,  in  some  instances  at   least,   the
    combination of coercion to  attend  meetings  and  the  nature  of  the
    threats made, appear to us to be capable of being  persecutory,  within
    the ambit of the Refugee Convention.  We do not, however, consider as a
    general matter  that  everyone  living  in  rural  areas  is  currently
    suffering persecution. But  the  evidence  regarding  COPAC  points  to
    differences between urban and rural  areas,  and  between  rural  areas
    themselves, which have relevance to the position of a person  returning
    from the United Kingdom, and which require a detailed appraisal. It  is
    to this that we now turn.

Geographic differences

174. In RN, the Tribunal identified significant differences in the  risk  of
    serious harm, depending upon whether a person was returning to an urban
    or rural area.  As regards urban areas, the Tribunal  also  found  that
    differences existed between, on the one hand, high-density  areas  and,
    on the other, low-density ones.   As  can  already  be  seen  from  the
    present determination, this Tribunal has had  evidence  adduced  to  it
    which plainly discloses material differences between  urban  and  rural
    areas, as well as between different kinds of urban areas.  The evidence
    before us on these matters is more detailed and precise than that in RN
    and calls for close scrutiny.

175. The civil society interviewees in the FFM report spoke consistently  of
    rural areas being more problematic than urban ones.  However, a  common
    thread running through these responses and, indeed,  the  rest  of  the
    evidence, was that not all rural areas of Zimbabwe were  the  same,  so
    far as problems from ZANU-PF were concerned.

176. ZimRights stated that urban  areas  were  politically  more  open  than
    rural ones and that violence was more common in "Mashonaland, Midlands,
    Manicaland and Masvingo.  These are  all  ex-ZANU-PF  strongholds  that
    ZANU-PF wants to win back  from  the  MDC.   They  are  doing  this  by
    cracking down on the people that they think made them lose."  A  little
    later, the same organisation stated that the  "remotest  parts  of  the
    rural areas are the most affected by violence".  So far  as  Manicaland
    was concerned, however, the interviewee thought that it would  be  very
    difficult for ZANU-PF to regain control, as the Zimbabwean people "have
    lost their patience".  The first now anonymous  interviewee  (paragraph
    97 above) told the FFM team that Harare was "more politically open than
    the rural areas.  Areas that were strongly contested  during  the  last
    election and where majorities  are  slim  are  still  battlegrounds  in
    political terms."  In this regard the interviewee referred  to  Bindura
    (in Mashonaland Central) and Buhera (in Manicaland).

177. The Research and Advocacy Unit said that there was  a  "large  pool  of
    youth in the rural areas  that  ZANU-PF  can  draw  upon  in  terms  of
    recruitment  for  the  militia".   As  for   political   violence   and
    repression, the rural areas were "more affected.  ZANU-PF are massively
    outnumbered in the urban areas but there is violence in  the  per-urban
    (sic) areas such as Epworth in Harare."  In terms of rural  areas  with
    high levels of violence, RAU referred to  Mashonaland  East,  West  and
    Central and also areas of Masvingo, Manicaland and Midlands, which were
    said to "experience violence".

178. During elections, RAU said that movement in  rural  areas  was  tightly
    controlled, particularly in Mashonaland.  The Zimbabwe  Association  of
    Doctors  for  Human  Rights  told  the  FFM  team  that  Masvingo   and
    Mashonaland East and Central had been "particularly difficult to access
    in order to conduct surveys".  This organisation identified Mashonaland
    East and Central, North Manicaland and border areas  between  Midlands,
    Masvingo and Manicaland as having "higher levels of violence than other
    areas".  Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights identified Mashonaland East,
    Central, and West, Manicaland and Masvingo as having a "higher level of
    violence than other areas", with Midlands  province  having  had  "some
    sporadic violence".

179. The Counselling Services Unit noted discrimination  and  irregularities
    in the provision of aid in Mashonaland Central and East,  described  as
    "dreadful", whilst Manicaland and Mashonaland West were "difficult", in
    the latter case because of a leadership struggle within  ZANU-PF.   The
    major international organisation interviewed on 12 August said that the
    violence in 2008 had been concentrated in Mashonaland Central and East,
    Manicaland and Masvingo, in an attempt by ZANU-PF to regain ground lost
    to the MDC.  Current and future political violence was thought by  that
    organisation to follow the same pattern.   An  anonymous  organisation,
    interviewed on 11 August, considered that  in  rural  areas  there  was
    "some fear of reprisal for speaking against ZANU-PF",  although  people
    could talk about politics "more freely than previously  but  are  still
    inhibited by memories of past persecution".  A major  NGO,  interviewed
    on 11 August, noted political interference in the distribution  of  aid
    in  Mashonaland  Central  and  East  and  Manicaland.    The   Catholic
    Commission for Justice and Peace  Zimbabwe  said  that  its  programmes
    undertaken throughout Zimbabwe indicated  that  some  people  had  been
    deterred from participating, especially in rural  areas,  because  they
    feared awkward questioning about why they had attended the Commission's
    events.  The Commission  considered  that  although  levels  of  actual
    physical violence  were  low  across  Zimbabwe,  the  potential  for  a
    resurgence in  such  violence  was  greatest  in  Mashonaland  Central,
    Mashonaland East, Masvingo, Manicaland and Midlands provinces.   Again,
    the reason for this was given  as  ZANU-PF's  desire  to  reclaim  lost
    political ground.  Bulawayo Agenda  spoke  of  decline  in  threats  of
    physical violence in Matabeleland North and South, Bulawayo,  Midlands,
    Masvingo and Manicaland, since the formation of the GNU.

180. An anonymous faith-based organisation interviewed on 16 August said  it
    had no problems working in  Matabeleland  and  the  Midlands  but  that
    working in Mashonaland East and Central was made problematic  by  ZANU-
    PF.  The same organisation described as  more  problematic  Mashonaland
    East, Central and West and  Midlands,  whilst  in  Mutare  (Manicaland)
    there were said to be "pockets  of  violence  during  COPAC  meetings".
    Another organisation spoke of traditional leadership  structures,  such
    as chiefs and headmen, being "extensively used  in  rural  communities.
    Informants in rural areas are also used." The major NGO interviewed  on
    11 August drew a distinction between urban  and  rural  areas.  In  the
    latter "violence can more easily be hidden" and those areas were "where
    the ZANU strongholds tend to be located".

181. The oral evidence on behalf of the appellants painted  a  very  similar
    picture.  W77 accepted that there were differences  between  areas  and
    that a distinction fell to be drawn  between  rural  and  urban  areas,
    given that chiefs and headmen, loyal to ZANU-PF, had a particular  role
    in the former.   In  the  urban  areas,  there  were  local  government
    structures and the police force.  The MDC controlled  local  structures
    in Harare, although local councils had been abolished by ZANU-PF, after
    these had been taken over by the MDC.  W77 agreed  that  a  person  who
    moved to an urban area in a non-election period may face  a  risk  that
    was  not  particularly  acute  (albeit  that  he  stressed   the   word
    "particularly").

182. Professor Ranger, asked about the  report  "A  Place  in  the  Sun"  in
    appellants' bundle B, agreed  that  a  distinction  fell  to  be  drawn
    between threats made in rural areas and small towns and the position in
    Harare and Bulawayo.  As that report indicated, there was a picture  of
    the  magistracy  retaining  a  degree  of  independence  and  resisting
    intimidation in the major urban centres.  Professor  Ranger  said  that
    that was so "even in 2008".   To  this  extent  he  accepted  that  his
    written report fell to be qualified.  Professor Ranger also agreed that
    the Peace Project reports  on  the  COPAC  process  disclosed  regional
    differences in problems arising from that process.

183. For reasons which we develop below we do not consider that rural  areas
    and high density areas raise the same  problems  of  risk,  or  can  be
    considered basically the same as W66 appeared to suggest at some points
    in his evidence.  Neither did we find W77's contention that  few  areas
    are "completely safe" as helpful to the task we face.

184. The report, "A Place in the Sun", produced by the Commonwealth  Lawyers
    Association in June 2010, about which Professor Ranger was asked, noted
    that what was  described  as  a  government  strategy  of  threats  and
    intimidation had been effective in smaller towns and  rural  areas  but
    had not been as successful in  the  two  major  cities  of  Harare  and
    Bulawayo "where magistrates still retain some  independence.   This  is
    reflected in the reports of other organisations on this subject".

185. The Zimbabwe  Peace  Project's  monthly  summaries  have  already  been
    described in this determination.  Whilst bearing in mind what  we  have
    noted regarding the wide scope of what  are  described  as  politically
    motivated human rights and food-related violations, it  is  significant
    that the Project's  reports  point  to  Manicaland,  Mashonaland  East,
    Mashonaland  Central,  Midlands  and  Masvingo  as  being  particularly
    volatile.  That is also borne out in various press  reports.   Memories
    of what happened in many  rural  areas  during  the  2008  presidential
    election process have made  residents  of  those  areas  understandably
    concerned about the reports (of which there are a  significant  number)
    of so-called torture bases  being  re-established,  although  there  is
    little, if any, evidence to suggest that such bases, if they have  been
    re-established, are being used to commit human rights violations.

186. Some reflection of the different experiences and concerns of rural  and
    urban areas can be seen in two  press  reports  on  the  same  day,  10
    November.  In the district of Muzarabandi  in  Mashonaland  Central,  a
    villager at a "Heal Zimbabwe" meeting offered to sell his  chickens  in
    order to pay for international election  observers,  stating  that  his
    community could not face a repetition of 2008 when "SADC observers were
    relaxing in hotels while we got beaten here".  In a different report on
    the same  day,  it  was  reported  that  ZANU-PF  had  failed  to  sell
    membership cards to the electorate in urban areas, according to a ZANU-
    PF "insider".

187. A report of 22 November  described  marauding  ZANU-PF  youths  burning
    houses near Mhangura in Mashonaland West whilst on 1  December  it  was
    asserted that soldiers in Mashonaland East had  been  holding  training
    drills in villages as part of a drive  to  intimidate  the  inhabitants
    into backing Mugabe.  The next day, residents of  a  volatile  area  in
    Mashonaland were said to have equated talk of  elections  with  "a  war
    situation",  urging  the  development  of  protection  strategies   for
    citizens. Appellants' bundle 'F', containing  press  reports  regarding
    the position up to 12  January  2011,  includes  several  instances  of
    problems in Masvingo Province, one of which involved the beating up  by
    "thugs" of a MDC activist. The  appellants'  further  evidence,  taking
    matters up to 28 January, contained reports  of  further  incidents  in
    Masvingo Province, as well as intimidation in a small town in Midlands.

188. The respondent sought to rely on the response in the  FFM  report  from
    the Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human  Rights,  who  considered
    that, even in rural areas, there was  usually  no  sinister  basis  for
    questions that returnees might be asked and  that  "those  who  do  not
    participate  in  political  activity  on  return  will  not  have   any
    additional problems, when compared with other residents".

Eastern Provinces

189. Although, as a general  matter,  the  risk  of  persecution  and  other
    serious ill-treatment in  Zimbabwe,  including  the  rural  areas,  has
    significantly declined, as  at  28  January  2011,  compared  with  the
    position under review in RN, the  evidence  before  us  raises  serious
    concerns as to the position  of  a  Zimbabwe  citizen  without  ZANU-PF
    connections, returning from the  United  Kingdom  after  a  significant
    absence to live in Mashonaland West, Mashonaland  Central,  Mashonaland
    East, Manicaland,  Masvingo  or  Midlands  province.   Such  a  person,
    returning to a rural part of  such  a  province,  where  the  chief  or
    headman is likely to be  an  acolyte  of  ZANU-PF,  may  well  find  it
    difficult  to  avoid  adverse  attention,  amounting  to  serious  ill-
    treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those  they  control,
    unless, of course, the Immigration Judge is entitled to  conclude  that
    the returnee is  likely  to  be  associated  with  such  elements.   An
    Immigration Judge would be so entitled to find  where  the  appellant's
    evidence of past history, place of  residence  and  family  and  social
    connections is to this effect, or where a case has  been  rejected  and
    the  proper  inference  is  that  the  denials  on  these  issues  were
    untruthful: see MA (Somalia)  [2010]  UKSC  49.   In  these  cases  the
    Immigration Judge is entitled to conclude that  loyalty  would  not  be
    challenged or that it would otherwise not create  a  difficulty.  Apart
    from this category, however, we conclude that returnees to these  areas
    would face a real risk of persecution because of a continuing  risk  of
    being required to demonstrate loyalty.  In the light of the judgment of
    the Court of Appeal in RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 1285 we  recognise
    it is no answer to a loyalty challenge  that  the  returnees  could  be
    expected to mislead the inquirer as to where loyalties lay.

190. Having said this, two matters need to be  emphasised.  First,  although
    what we have just said appears from the  evidence  to  be  the  general
    position in the Eastern provinces, some of these are  more  problematic
    than others. For example, Mashonaland East featured consistently in the
    evidence to which we have just referred; Midlands  less  so.  Secondly,
    bearing in mind that the occurrence  of  problems  within  the  Eastern
    provinces is not  uniform,  there  may  be  reasons  why  a  particular
    individual, although at  first  sight  appearing  to  fall  within  the
    category we have described, in reality does not do  so.   For  example,
    the  evidence  might  disclose  that,  in  the  particular  village  in
    question, the chief or headman is not ZANU-PF, or  that  ZANU-PF  power
    structures are weak or absent.  That such a state  of  affairs  is  not
    fanciful is demonstrated by the entry in the Zimbabwe Vigil diary of 20
    November, in which a "visionary chief" named Chaka in Mashonaland  held
    a meeting in which he told the crowd that "people  should  be  free  to
    live in harmony and that if he heard that a youth had burned a house or
    beaten someone because of politics 'then you have  to  depart  from  my
    area'.  He said that as of today he would  not  tolerate  any  form  of
    intimidation or any form of violence against the people of Manhova  and
    Chaka."

Matabeleland

191. Apart from the metropolitan  provinces  of  Harare  and  Bulawayo,  the
    remaining provinces are  Matabeleland  North  and  Matabeleland  South.
    These comprise, roughly, the  western  part  of  Zimbabwe.   It  was  a
    striking feature of the evidence before us that  the  position  in  the
    Matabeleland provinces at present is markedly different  from  that  in
    the other provinces to which we have  referred.   In  the  FFM  report,
    ZimRights described how the  police  had  recently  refused  the  MDC-T
    permission to hold a rally in Hwange, which is  in  Matabeleland  North
    "but the party, led by ... Morgan Tsvangirai, held the rally anyway and
    there was no interference".  The Research and Advocacy Unit  identified
    Matabeleland North and South as areas which  had  not  experienced  the
    same  levels  of  violence  as  the  Mashonaland  provinces,  Masvingo,
    Manicaland and Midlands.  The same  point  was  made  by  the  Zimbabwe
    Association  of  Doctors  for  Human  Rights  and   the   international
    organisation mentioned in  paragraph  97  above.   The  Zimbabwe  Human
    Rights NGO Forum went further, describing Matabeleland as  "very  safe,
    with very little political violence there even in 2008".  The  Catholic
    Commission  for  Justice  and  Peace  Zimbabwe   considered   that   in
    Matabeleland "ZANU does not exert  sufficient  control  to  orchestrate
    large scale violence, although there is the potential for incidents  of
    targeted violence". The "major NGO" is recorded in the  FFM  report  as
    saying that the potential  for  political  violence  was  significantly
    higher in most rural areas "with the exception  of  Matabeleland  North
    and Matabeleland South".

192. Although we have approached with some caution  the  views  of  Bulawayo
    Agenda regarding the position outside that  city  and  its  surrounding
    area, what it had to say about Matabeleland is, we consider, within its
    remit.  Bulawayo Agenda described there being a decline in threats  and
    physical violence since the formation of the  GNU.   In  addition,  war
    veterans and ZANU-PF youth were no longer as vicious as they once  were
    in Matabeleland "as they are no longer taking instruction following the
    formation of the GNU and are instead  living  peacefully  within  their
    communities".

193. Zimbabwe  Peace  Project's  monthly  reports,  likewise,  distinguished
    between Matabeleland and  other  provinces,  in  terms  of  politically
    motivated human rights and food-related violations.  In September 2010,
    Matabeleland  South  was  described  as   "relatively   peaceful"   and
    Matabeleland  North  as  "relatively  calm  with  very  few  cases   of
    politically motivated violations".

194. In his statement on behalf of the appellants,  Mr  Reeler  of  the  RAU
    said it could not be assumed that Matabeleland "would be safe during an
    election period".   The  election  was  "still  difficult  in  2008  in
    Matabeleland".  He acknowledged, however, that "there  is  currently  a
    low level of violence there".   Likewise,  in  his  statement  for  the
    appellants,  W80  (Zimbabwe  Human  Rights   NGO   Forum)   said   that
    Matabeleland had indeed experienced comparatively  less  violence  than
    other areas as it was not such a priority electorally to  ZANU-PF.   He
    said, however, that "no area can be regarded as safe in the  run-up  to
    the election".  Both here and elsewhere we have,  of  course,  reminded
    ourselves that our task is not to assess whether a place is "safe" but,
    rather, to determine  whether  there  is  a  real  risk  or  reasonable
    likelihood of persecution or other serious ill-treatment to a  returnee
    from the United Kingdom.

195. The Zimbabwe Peace Project's August 2010 report was even more  positive
    about Matabeleland.  Its  provinces  had  recorded  "minimal  cases  of
    violations despite the enthusiasm that has  been  associated  with  the
    constitution making process".

196. In press reports, it was said on 29 November that a split  between  the
    two MDC factions in Matabeleland might enable ZANU-PF to be an indirect
    beneficiary, in any future elections. However, on the following day, it
    was reported that the MDC's Matabeleland North provincial executive had
    held a press conference to announce that seventeen members of the MDC-M
    party had rejoined the MDC-T "in a bid to comprehensively win the  next
    elections as a united front". A report from Radio Netherlands Worldwide
    on 12 January 2011 claimed a "secret" document purporting  to  be  from
    the MDC had been uncovered, in which the MDC were said to regard  their
    enemies as the Ndebele people, whether in ZANU-PF or  the  MDC  itself,
    rather than Shonas in ZANU-PF. An MDC spokesman denied  his  party  was
    responsible for the alleged document and, judging by its terms, as  set
    out in the article, it would appear to be a crude attempt to smear  the
    MDC in Matabeleland. As such, it falls to be regarded as a further sign
    of ZANU-PF's relative weakness in that part of Zimbabwe.

197. Even in Matabeleland North and Matabeleland South, however,  there  may
    be occasional instances of a particular village  or  other  area  being
    under the sway of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.  Indeed, this  was  the
    position in the home village of the appellant in RN. That  this  is  so
    may account for the report in a more recent segment of the  appellants'
    evidence, that chiefs in  two  districts  in  Matabeleland  North  were
    reported to have told their people "that soldiers will soon be deployed
    in the area as peacekeepers ahead of elections". As a  general  matter,
    however, we are satisfied on the entirety of  the  evidence  before  us
    that, at the present time, a person returning from the  United  Kingdom
    to Matabeleland is highly unlikely to face any  significant  difficulty
    from ZANU-PF elements,  including  for  this  purpose  members  of  the
    security forces. This would be so even if the person is a MDC member or
    supporter. Although the police in Matabeleland are said  to  be  Shona,
    the evidence does  not  disclose  that  they  are  causing  significant
    problems.

Harare and Bulawayo

198. Harare and Bulawayo are, by some margin,  the  main  urban  centres  in
    Zimbabwe, each having the status of a Province.  Our general assessment
    of the evidence before us is that, in both of these  cities,  ZANU-PF's
    inclination and  ability  to  control  and  coerce  the  population  is
    significantly less than in the rural areas of, for example, Mashonaland
    and Manicaland, where the party has not lost hope of securing electoral
    success.  We have already described  the  events  regarding  the  COPAC
    outreach  meetings  in  Harare.   Although  there  was  some   violence
    involving the September meetings,  the  outreach  process  was  quickly
    postponed when violence flared.  This lends  support  to  the  view  of
    those, such as the anonymous organisation in Zimbabwe quoted in the FFM
    report, that the police  are  generally  better  disciplined  and  less
    tolerant of political violence, in the main urban areas.  We have  also
    noted the evidence in the "A Place in the Sun" report,  concerning  the
    greater independence of magistrates in those areas, which found support
    in the evidence of Professor Ranger.  The October  meetings  in  Harare
    went off without any significant violence, albeit that  they  fell  far
    short of COPAC's wish to engender full and  frank  discussions  between
    the rival political parties.

199. The Tribunal  in  RN  noted  a  difference  between  the  position  in,
    respectively, high and low-density areas of Harare.  A person living in
    a low-density area would, in summary, not be reasonably likely to  face
    a "loyalty" challenge from militia or war veterans.  In relation to the
    period under consideration in  RN,  however,  it  was  found  that  the
    situation would be otherwise in high-density areas.

200. The evidence before us demonstrates that there are difficulties   faced
    by those living in high density areas not  faced  by  those  living  in
    other urban areas: there is a greater prevalence of  criminal  disorder
    and  reduced  personal  security;  where  it  is   available   at   all
    accommodation will be very crowded and a lower standard; street traders
    working in the informal economy may be the subject of  harassment  from
    state officials; persons perceived to be active  in  MDC  politics  may
    face the risk of targeted reprisals.  The Zimbabwe  Lawyers  for  Human
    Rights described high-density areas as experiencing "occasional arrests
    and beatings".  The evidence taken  as  a  whole  does  not  present  a
    picture of such intensity or regularity as to suggest that any resident
    of a high density area having no active  involvement  in  MDC  politics
    would be at risk of harm. The picture  of  ZANU-PF  activity  in  these
    areas is significantly  different  from  rural  areas:  the  system  of
    control through ZANU-PF chiefs and village headmen and the  ability  to
    monitor the identity of new  arrivals  in  rural  communities  have  no
    proper counterparts in Harare. We are accordingly unable to accept  the
    evidence of those witnesses who suggested that the risk level  was  the
    same in the rural and high density urban areas.

201. It is common ground that the MDC tend to dominate  high-density  areas.
    In his response to the FFM team, W80 of the Zimbabwe Human  Rights  NGO
    Forum said  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  ZANU-PF  to  harm  MDC
    supporters in MDC dominated areas "because the MDC  tend  to  be  quite
    well-organised in those areas and can protect those who might otherwise
    be at risk of political violence by the threat of retribution".  In his
    statement on behalf of the appellants,  W80  sought  to  qualify  those
    remarks.  He said that what he was referring to were  isolated  pockets
    of resistance that had appeared on occasions and he did not  mean  that
    there were areas of the country that the MDC controlled or that the MDC
    could generally protect its supporters.  The infrastructure of violence
    was still intact and ZANU-PF remained in total control of the  coercive
    arms of the state.

202. We accept W80's point that, since ZANU-PF  does  indeed  remain  in  de
    facto control of the army, police and similar services, it is wrong  to
    speak of any particular area of Zimbabwe as being "controlled"  by  the
    MDC.  Nevertheless, it is apparent that in  his  response  to  the  FFM
    team, W80 was describing the present position, where in practice it  is
    indeed "difficult for ZANU-PF supporters to harm MDC supporters in MDC-
    dominated areas".  The position might,  of  course,  be  different  if,
    immediately prior to an election, Mugabe and ZANU-PF were to  launch  a
    significant campaign of violence in Harare, such as in 2008.   That  is
    not, however, the position at present.

203. We say this, having particular regard  to  the  latest  evidence,  from
    January 2011, concerning various disturbances in Harare, which are said
    to have been instigated by ZANU-PF elements. The alleged  establishment
    in high-density areas of campaign bases in the homes of ZANU-PF leaders
    falls significantly short of the kind of militia  bases  described   in
    the evidence in relation to certain rural areas. There continues to  be
    an  absence  of  reliable  evidence  that  militia  bases   have   been
    established in Harare. The setting up of  campaign  bases  in  peoples'
    homes is, if anything, an indication of the relative weakness of  ZANU-
    PF in the capital. The report of 26 January 2011 that carried the story
    of these bases referred to ZANU-PF and  MDC  youths  being  engaged  in
    clashes, which, again, differs from the descriptions of what  is  going
    on in rural areas, where the picture is often one  of  villagers  being
    coerced into silent submission by a ZANU-PF gang. Overall, we find that
    this and the other most recent evidence underscores the  position  that
    emerges from the earlier evidence, which is  that  the  focus  of  such
    current ZANU-PF activity as there  is  in  the  high-density  areas  of
    Harare is on MDC activists, as opposed to the general population.

204. We accordingly conclude that, at the present time,  although  a  person
    having no significant MDC profile, returning to a high-density area  of
    Harare, is likely to face more difficulties than someone returning to a
    low-density area, he or she would not at present face a  real  risk  of
    having to prove loyalty to ZANU-PF  in  order  to  avoid  serious  ill-
    treatment. So far  as  living  conditions  in  high-density  areas  are
    concerned, the only witness to assert that the housing  in  such  areas
    was unfit for human habitation was the person we have described as  W79
    of the Zimbabwe Human Rights Association.  We do not conclude from this
    that anyone having to live in such a high density area would be exposed
    to inhuman or degrading treatment contrary to Article 3.  Mr  Henderson
    did not attempt to submit to us that this was  the  case.  Whether  any
    individual having to  live  rough  in  shanty  accommodation  or  other
    grossly overcrowded and  insecure  arrangements  would  be  exposed  to
    treatment of this level of  severity  would  depend  on  an  individual
    assessment of circumstances  including  age,  gender,  health,  earning
    capacity,  social  assistance  arrangements,  the  presence  of   young
    children and the like.

205. We have spoken  so  far  of  high  and  low-density  areas  in  Harare.
    Professor Ranger, however, told us that there were three kinds of  zone
    in Harare.  The low-density areas comprised the  white  community,  the
    coloured community and Africans "who were not so poor.  The low-density
    areas had more Africans than in the past."  Then there  were  areas  of
    intermediate-density.   Here,  although  there   were   problems   with
    dereliction, there were not problems with gangs.  These he  categorised
    as "medium-density areas".  Finally, there were the high-density areas,
    which, although they had problems, nevertheless  "had  some  services".
    The Tribunal also notes that appellant JG described her  home  area  of
    Queensdale as "kind of medium-density".  She said that it was  not  far
    from Epworth "where many rowdy gangs"  existed;  and  Queensdale  might
    therefore be "a  vulnerable  location".   Many  cities  in  the  world,
    including, ones in the United Kingdom, have areas of affluence adjacent
    or close to areas of relative deprivation.  This fact  would  generally
    not give rise to  a  claim  for  international  protection  or  furnish
    evidential support for a contention that it would be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect a person to relocate to accommodation there.  Particularly given
    what we have had to say about the present position of the  high-density
    areas in Harare, we do not consider  that  the  distribution  of  high,
    medium and low-density areas has significance, as regards  the  matters
    with which we are concerned.

206. We turn  now  to  the  position  in  Bulawayo.   Just  as  the  general
    situation in rural Matabeleland is better than that in the rural  areas
    of the other provinces of Zimbabwe, it is apparent  from  the  evidence
    that the position of Bulawayo is better than that of Harare.   W66  was
    not aware directly of political violence in Bulawayo.  W77 agreed  that
    the COPAC outreach meetings had gone better in Bulawayo than in Harare.
     Similarly, Professor Ranger, describing the COPAC meetings  in  Harare
    and Bulawayo in September, agreed that there had been less violence  in
    Bulawayo.  Indeed, he then went on to indicate  that  the  violence  in
    Bulawayo was not physical but concerned the meetings  being  "violently
    noisy".  Although Professor Ranger described an incident involving  the
    closure of the art gallery in  Bulawayo,  the  overall  thrust  of  his
    evidence was that Bulawayo  remained  a  more  tolerant  city  in  many
    respects.  As in Harare, Professor Ranger agreed that in  Bulawayo  the
    magistracy retained independence and was able to  resist  intimidation.
    The representative of GALZ was referred to in the FFM report as  saying
    that people in Bulawayo "are more politically  active  and  willing  to
    push for their rights.  There is a  gay  nightclub  in  the  middle  of
    town."  The GALZ representative considered that this different attitude
    might be related to Bulawayo's proximity to South Africa.

207. Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights considered  the  police  in  Bulawayo
    were "better than in Harare,  although  they  are  also  known  to  act
    arbitrarily".  The Bulawayo Progressive Residents Association described
    the current situation as "peaceful - for the moment, at  least".   Most
    of the political violence seen at meetings was "between two individuals
    who have contrasting  ideas,  rather  than  as  part  of  a  systematic
    campaign".  There was,  however,  the  potential  for  future  violence
    should a "big event happen".  The Zimbabwe Peace Project "recorded  the
    least number of violations during the month of  September  [2010]  with
    only three incidents directly linked  to  politically  motivated  human
    rights violations" in Bulawayo.  Although there were reports of  police
    moving around the city centre and the western suburbs just  before  the
    COPAC outreach team visited  the  city,  any  difficulties  "eventually
    fizzled  out  and  there  were  no  incidents  that  were   linked   to
    constitutional outreach meetings".  Radio Dialogue told  the  FFM  team
    that Bulawayo was "more open than Harare and many civil society  groups
    operate from there".  The Zimbabwe Peace Project  considered  that  the
    outreach consultations in Bulawayo generally went well with only a  few
    isolated chaotic incidences.   Nothing  in  the  most  recent  evidence
    suggests that there has been any material change in Bulawayo.

208. In November 2010 the MDC Mayor of Bulawayo was described  as  having  a
    conducive working  relationship  with  all  councillors  regardless  of
    political affiliation.  The Mayor said councillors did not allow anyone
    to interfere in the running of the city  and  he  had  currently  given
    priority to the provision of clean and sufficient water for  residents,
    sewers and road repairs, refuse collection, maintenance of clinics  and
    clearing of city's housing backlog, which currently stood  at  100,000.
    That last point chimed with the evidence of Professor Ranger, who  said
    that there were housing shortages in Bulawayo, given its generally low-
    density nature.

209. We conclude that a person returning to Bulawayo  at  the  current  time
    from the United Kingdom is not reasonably likely  to  face  a  "loyalty
    test" or otherwise suffer the adverse attention of  ZANU-PF  (including
    the security forces). That is so even if he or she  has  a  significant
    MDC profile.

The economy

210. It is plain from the evidence before  us  that  the  abolition  by  the
    Government of National  Unity  of  the  Zimbabwean  currency,  and  its
    replacement by US dollars or (in Bulawayo) the South African rand,  has
    had a transformative effect upon  the  economy  of  the  country.   The
    unprecedented  hyperinflation  seen  at  the  time  of  RN  has   gone.
    According to W77, the majority of the population appeared to credit the
    MDC with turning around the economy.  The Amnesty International  Report
    of 2010 said there was now an improved  availability  of  food  in  the
    shops,  although  many  poor  households  had  no  access  to   foreign
    currencies and could not afford fees for education and healthcare.   In
    a similar vein, the COI Report of 30 September 2010 said that  although
    the stabilisation of the economy had normalised life in tangible  ways,
    the benefits of this remained outside the reach of many.  The  Consumer
    Council of Zimbabwe had noted that an average family of six  needed  at
    least $496 a month  for  a  basic  basket  of  goods,  including  food,
    transportation  costs,  electricity  and  water  etc.   Civil   society
    interviewees recorded in the FFM report painted a similar picture.  The
    importance of continuing  the  improvement  in  the  economic  position
    appears to have been recognised within ZANU-PF. On 10 January 2011, the
    standard.co.zw reported that the  proposed  indigenisation  law,  under
    which certain foreign-owned enterprises would be taken over,  had  been
    "frozen" after the government admitted it was discouraging badly-needed
    foreign investment. This was  despite  moves  before  ZANU-PF's  annual
    conference to push for implementation of the law.

211. Although there was some suggestion in  the  appellants'  evidence  that
    the  currency  reforms  might  have  reduced  the  opportunities   that
    previously existed to work in the large informal economy  of  Zimbabwe,
    we do not find that the evidence overall indicates that there has  been
    any significant overall reduction, as a result of  the  reforms,  in  a
    person's ability to find gainful work in Zimbabwe, whether formally  or
    informally.

212. A report of 2 October 2010 described Zimbabwe's large  informal  sector
    as constituting up to 60% of the country's economic activity and the US-
    based Centre for International Private Enterprise and the US Chamber of
    Commerce were of the view  that  Zimbabwe  topped  the  world  list  of
    economies with  an informal sector economy.  An earlier  report  of  29
    April had suggested  that  the  informal  sector  might  be  shrinking.
    However, a study  produced  in  February  2010  by  a  student  at  the
    University of Kwa Zulu-Natal,  Durban  noted  that,  according  to  the
    international definition of employment, growth in the  informal  sector
    in Zimbabwe had had the effect of keeping the reported unemployment  in
    that country at below 10%.   The  report  interviewed  78  respondents,
    spread across street vending, home industry, flea market and home-based
    enterprises.   Those  working  in  the  flea  market   and   home-based
    enterprise classes appeared to be  more  educated  than  those  in  the
    street vendor and home industry classes.   Enterprise  owners  in  low-
    density suburbs were comparatively better educated than those in  other
    locations.  The median figure for start-off funds  for  businesses  was
    $300.  $1,000 was needed for a flea market but only $100 for  a  street
    vendor.   The  street  vendor   class   was   described   as   "clearly
    survivalist", in comparison  with  the  "entrepreneurial"  flea  market
    class.  96% of all respondents said that their activities allowed  them
    to  support  their  families.   The  study  concluded  that  this   was
    surprising, particularly for the street  vendor  class,  but  it  could
    probably indicate a very basic level of sustenance for  respondents  in
    that activity class.

213. The study found that the police were using increasingly brutal  methods
    to try and control unlicensed  street  trading  in  the  townships  and
    central business district of  Harare.   Informal  sector  workers  were
    being negatively affected by  political  wrangles  resulting  from  the
    opposition led council in Harare that found it difficult to  work  with
    ZANU-PF.  This resulted in mixed messages being sent out by politicians
    as a way of currying favour  with  the  important  segment  of  society
    comprising the informal sector and also had an adverse  effect  on  the
    local authority's ability to allocate stalls.  There  had  nevertheless
    been a lot of new entrants into the informal sector and these seemed to
    be "younger and more educated.  These new entrants seemed to have  made
    strategic decisions on location, types of products they  sell  and  the
    way they run their enterprises."

214. Asked about the study report, W66 agreed  in  oral  evidence  that  the
    informal economic sector was expanding and it  might  be  possible  for
    someone to establish themselves there.  However,  he  still  considered
    that it would be difficult for a returnee to survive economically in an
    urban area.  If a person were young and dynamic this would be possible:
    "It depended on the circumstances of the individual".  A person with no
    skills and no family back-up or housing  might  find  it  difficult  to
    break into economic self-activity  to  survive,  without  support  from
    someone outside Zimbabwe.

215. As in RN, it will remain important in Zimbabwe cases to  make  findings
    regarding the social and economic situation that is  reasonably  likely
    to face a returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom.   At  one  end  of  the
    spectrum, a person may be found (despite assertions to the contrary) to
    come from a middle class family in a  low-density  area  of  Harare  or
    Bulawayo, and to be able to be  supported  by  that  family  on  return
    and/or commence economic activity, whether in the  informal  or  formal
    sectors, which  would  not  give  rise  to  problems  with  ZANU-PF  or
    authority elements answering to it.

216. At the other end of the spectrum, a person who has demonstrated  he  or
    she is not reasonably likely to have any family or other  support,  who
    would be returning to a high-density area of Harare, may have no option
    but to call upon the financial package in the  Voluntary  Assisted  and
    Reintegration Programme in order to get started in the informal sector.
     Many of those seen by Ms Harland of the Zimbabwe  Association  in  the
    course of her  work  she  described  as  vendors,  who  she  said  were
    "extremely ingenious but lacking in qualifications".  Depending on  age
    and personal circumstances, we would generally expect it to be possible
    for such a  person  to  use  the  relocation  grant  and  reintegration
    assistance in order to establish themselves  in  the  informal  sector.
    This would include paying  for  any  necessary  permit  that  might  be
    required  by  the  authorities,  as  well  as  unofficial  payments  to
    facilitate one's activities.  Even  so,  street  vending  is  the  most
    challenging form of employment in the informal economy; but it  is  far
    from being the only form.

217. We accept the evidence of Mr Walker, that a survey undertaken  by  UKBA
    of Zimbabwe asylum claims shows that nearly two  thirds  of  applicants
    originate in the large urban  areas  of  Zimbabwe.   We  also  note  Ms
    Harland's evidence, that Zimbabwe asylum seekers come from all  classes
    of society  in  that  country.   Also  relevant  was  the  evidence  of
    Professor Ranger, that some Zimbabweans in the United Kingdom  did  not
    wish to return home because they could not do so  "in  splendour";  and
    that there was accordingly a fear of losing face in their reluctance to
    return.

218. Before leaving this topic, it is necessary to  state  that  we  do  not
    consider the evidence before  us  to  show  any  deterioration  in  the
    humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe, compared  with  RN.   None  of  the
    interviewees asked about the provision of aid by the FFM team suggested
    that "dollarisation" had significantly increased the numbers  of  those
    requiring food aid. Overall, there is no reason to  doubt  the  British
    Embassy's assessment of 6 September 2010, that "the quality of life for
    many Zimbabweans is now considerably better. Schools and hospitals  are
    open. Cholera has been largely absent this  year.  Around  15%  of  the
    population now requires food aid. The shops are open  and  the  shelves
    full. Most Harare residents are getting some water and electricity  for
    the first time in years".

Internal relocation

219. Before analysing the scope for those at real  risk  of  persecution  in
    their home area  to  relocate  to  another  part  of  Zimbabwe,  it  is
    necessary to clarify what is meant by "home area" in this context.   In
    common with many other parts of Africa and, indeed, other parts of  the
    developing world, Zimbabwe has seen a process of urbanisation,  whereby
    persons from rural areas have migrated to the cities, for  the  purpose
    of seeking  work.   For  instance,  Professor  Ranger  described  Shona
    migrating to Bulawayo, when that city was the manufacturing hub of  the
    country.

220. A person who has migrated  from  the  countryside  to  city,  or  whose
    forebears did so, may well look on his or her rural place of origin  as
    their "home area".  This emerged from the evidence of  Ms  Harland  and
    W66.  For our purposes, however, in determining  whether  a  person  is
    entitled to asylum or other international protection, a  person's  home
    area must be established  as  a  matter  of  fact.   Someone  who,  for
    example, has for years before leaving Zimbabwe made his or her home  in
    Harare must have  a  claim  to  international  protection  assessed  by
    reference to whether that person is at  real  risk  of  persecution  in
    Harare; and, if so, whether he or she can  reasonably  be  expected  to
    relocate to another part of Zimbabwe, where no  such  risk  exists  and
    where it would not be unduly harsh to do so (see Januzi [2006] UKHL  5;
    AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49).  The fact that the person  concerned  feels
    an attachment to a rural area, and even  has  relatives  living  there,
    does not mean that that area falls to be treated as the home  area  for
    the purposes of determining entitlement to international protection.

221. Having said this, it is highly unlikely  that,  for  a  person  from  a
    major urban centre such as Harare who establishes he or she is at  real
    risk of persecution there, going to a  rural  area  will  constitute  a
    viable internal relocation.  In the light of our findings regarding the
    general situation at the present time, any risk of persecution to  such
    a person in Harare is most likely  to  be  because  he  or  she  has  a
    significant MDC profile.  In such a case,  given  what  we  have  found
    about the position of rural areas other  than  Matabeleland  North  and
    Matabeleland South, it is difficult to see  how  such  a  person  could
    avoid persecution by going to a rural area, where, in the words of  one
    of the appellants' witnesses, they would "stick out like a sore  thumb"
    and attract the adverse attention of ZANU-PF headmen.  We  do  not  say
    that such a scenario is impossible; but  any  finding  to  that  effect
    would have to be cogently justified.

222. A more realistic scenario is the converse; that  is  to  say,  where  a
    person facing a real risk of persecution in what is  his  or  her  home
    area in rural Zimbabwe (as addressed above)  is  said  to  be  able  to
    relocate to a large urban centre, such as Harare or Bulawayo.

223. Here, the social and economic position of the person in  question  will
    assume particular importance.  In particular, whilst it  might  not  be
    contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR to expect a person without family  or
    friends to set themselves up in the informal sector as a street trader,
    bearing in mind  the  distinction  identified  in  AH  (Sudan)  between
    Article 3 ill-treatment and reasonableness or undue  harshness  in  the
    case  of  internal  relocation,  it  might  well,  on  the  facts,   be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect such a  person  to  relocate  on
    that  basis.   The  ultimate  answer  will,  however,  depend  on   the
    particular circumstances of the case.

224. Perhaps because the evidence shows that, at present, the best place  in
    Zimbabwe to  be  if  one  is  not  a  ZANU-PF  supporter  is  Bulawayo,
    considerable attention focused at the hearings on  the  possibility  of
    relocation to that city.

225. We accept the evidence of the appellants that a Shona,  without  family
    or other significant contacts in Bulawayo, seeking to move to that city
    from outside Matabeleland, is likely to face  social  difficulties,  in
    addition to others of the kind we have just described.  In  particular,
    he or she may face discrimination in relation to jobs and housing.   It
    is, however, apparent from the evidence of  Professor  Ranger  and  the
    civil society interviewees in the FFM report, that in previous  decades
    there was a significant pattern of migration of Shona  to  Bulawayo  in
    search of work, and that, as a result, some 20% of  the  population  of
    that city is Shona.  It would, accordingly, not be  necessary  for  the
    newcomer to speak Ndebele, in order to get  by  in  Bulawayo,  although
    linguistic problems may be relevant in determining the issue of whether
    it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for such a person to  live  in
    that city.

Teachers

226. At paragraph 261 of RN, the Tribunal in that case found that there  was
    clear evidence that teachers in Zimbabwe had, during the  period  under
    review, once again become targets for persecution.  The fact of being a
    teacher or having been one in the past was, it was found, again capable
    of raising an enhanced risk, whether or not the  person  concerned  had
    been a polling officer, because when encountered it would not be  known
    what a particular teacher did or did not do in another area.

227. In the present  appeals,  the  respondent  acknowledges  that  teachers
    remain in a category where there is  a  heightened  or  enhanced  risk.
    That  is  plainly  right.   Various  news  reports  submitted  by   the
    appellants demonstrate the fact that teachers can  face  problems  from
    ZANU-PF.  For example, on 3 August 2010, teachers  on  assault  charges
    claimed that they were being victimised for challenging soldiers  at  a
    meeting.  A day earlier, the Teachers Union had accused the Ministry of
    Education of failing to speak out about the  alleged  intimidation  of,
    and violence against, rural teachers  "who  were  politically  targeted
    during the turbulent 2008 election period".  Teachers countrywide  were
    said to be being harassed by ZANU-PF supporters  at  meetings.   On  29
    July, teachers at a  rural  primary  school  accused  war  veterans  of
    interfering with the day-to-day running of the school.  Also in July, a
    teacher told The Zimbabwean that teachers were afraid of  participating
    in the COPAC meetings "as we have always been victimised  and  cast  as
    MDC supporters".  On 4 November, three teachers were said to have  been
    severely assaulted by suspected  ZANU-PF  youths,  whilst  in  December
    there were concerns expressed about the whereabouts of six teachers who
    were said to have been abducted in Mashonaland East.  This  was  later,
    however, described as a "botched abduction attempt by a member  of  the
    notorious Central Intelligence Organisation".

228. Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights told  the  FFM  team  that  teachers,
    politicians, lawyers and members of the Zimbabwean Electoral Commission
    had had charges dating from 2005 to 2008 reviewed as what was described
    as "an intimidatory tactic  and  to  hamper  their  ordinary  work  and
    activities". The British Embassy's egram of  15  November  referred  to
    teachers having traditionally been targeted by ZANU-PF. On  12  January
    2011, according to the Zimbabwean.co.uk, in Mashonaland East "hooligans
    began the school year by disrupting classes  and  trying  to  push  out
    teachers who were alleged to support the MDC".

229. Being in a heightened risk category is  not,  however,  to  be  equated
    without more as being at real risk of persecution.  There needs  to  be
    an individual assessment of the  circumstances  (TM  (Zimbabwe)  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 916).  A good instance of this point is to  be  found  in  the
    case of appellant JG.  It is accepted that she taught for a  period  at
    Prince Edward School, an elite educational institution to which  senior
    functionaries of the regime amongst others might send  their  children.
    She claimed to have been discriminated against at the school because of
    the perception of her loyalties, while the Immigration Judge  concluded
    that the fact of having taught  at  the  school  would  enable  her  to
    demonstrate loyalty to  the  regime.   Having  heard  the  evidence  of
    Professor Ranger who knew the school well and pointed out instances  of
    how it had asserted and maintained its independence from directives  of
    the Ministry of Education, we conclude that she was not exposed to risk
    of ill-treatment by having taught there, nor would she be imputed to be
    a ZANU-PF loyalist for having done so. JG had also  taught  at  a  high
    school in Epworth.  Again her  past  experiences  there  and  Professor
    Ranger's assessment of the  consequences  of  having  done  so  do  not
    indicate to us that there is a real risk that, on return to Harare, she
    would be imputed to have either MDC or ZANU-PF sympathies  from  having
    done so.  In short her past employment as a teacher simply did  not  in
    her case yield evidence  of  a  risk  of  future  ill  treatment  or  a
    requirement  to  demonstrate  loyalty  to   ZANU-PF   that   would   be
    objectionable on RT (Zimbabwe) grounds.

230. It is also noteworthy that, on 28 September a news article stated  that
    the Minister of Education, Sports, Arts Culture  had  begun  recruiting
    qualified and  temporary  teachers  to  fill  vacant  posts  throughout
    Zimbabwe, after the Public  Service  Commission  and  the  Minister  of
    Finance had  granted  the  Education  Ministry  permission  to  do  so.
    Preference will be given to returning qualified teachers.  The Minister
    is an MDC senator.

231. We do not agree with the respondent's  submission  that  harassment  of
    teachers is now "relatively rare".  Those who are or have been teachers
    accordingly require to have their cases determined on  the  basis  that
    this fact places them in a risk category,  the  significance  of  which
    will need to be assessed on an individual basis.


                  G.  THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FUTURE ELECTIONS

232. As we have already said, it was a  major  part  of  the  case  for  the
    appellants, as advanced by Mr Henderson, that regardless of the  actual
    country conditions as at late January 2011, the  Tribunal's  assessment
    of risk to the appellants and its associated country guidance should be
    made by reference to the fact that fresh parliamentary and presidential
    elections in  Zimbabwe  were  reasonably  foreseeable,  and  reasonably
    likely to occur  in  mid-2011,  and  that,  in  view  of  the  violence
    associated with  the  presidential  elections  in  2008;  that  ZANU-PF
    continued to control the  instruments  of  state  power  and  that  the
    evidence suggested the party would use those instruments mercilessly to
    ensure electoral success at whatever price, we should decline to depart
    from the country guidance  in  RN,  except  in  a  way  that  was  more
    favourable to appellants.

233. In order to address  this  issue,  it  will  be  necessary  for  us  to
    consider the authorities, upon which the parties  respectively  relied.
    Before doing so,  however,  there  needs  to  be  an  analysis  of  the
    evidence, both as to the likely point in time at which any such  future
    elections will fall and as to  their  potential  to  generate  risk  to
    returning failed asylum seekers from the United Kingdom.   Our  summary
    of that evidence is set out in Appendix B.  Our analysis of  it  is  as
    follows.

Analysis

The Issues

234. For all its problems we recognise that  Zimbabwe  remains  a  democracy
    with parliamentary and presidential elections.   The  election  process
    has given rise to periods of political tension and violence on previous
    occasions and was the  occasion  of  the  peculiarly  intense  violence
    beginning in  mid-2008.   Whilst  political  events  have  resulted  in
    significant changes to the daily lives of Zimbabweans since  then,  the
    leadership  of  the  military  and  other   security   forces   remains
    fundamentally unchanged and the possibility of a return to  the  abuses
    of mid 2008 cannot be discounted as unreal.

    We are faced with three problems of assessment:-

    (i)    the likelihood of when and in what circumstances elections  will
         be called;

    (ii)    whether  such  elections  will  be  accompanied  with  enhanced
         protections against abuse by both internal  electoral  arrangements
         and robust independent external monitoring;

    (iii)  what contingencies we should take into  account  in  considering
         whether there has been a durable change of circumstances  since  RN
         and how long such a change may endure in the future.

(i)  When will elections be called?

235. Around the middle of 2010,  the  evidence  indicates  that  there  were
    messages coming from both Mugabe and Tsvangirai to the effect that both
    wanted there to be early elections, in order to resolve  the  political
    impasse.  The point in time most often spoken about was the  middle  of
    2011. Other evidence, however, including the more recent, suggests that
    elections in mid-2011 or even 2011 itself are by no means probable. The
    present position appears to us to be  well-summarised  in  the  British
    Embassy egram of 29 October 2010, that it is  "impossible  to  predict"
    when elections might be. Commentators have drawn a distinction  between
    the public and private pronouncements of the leadership of ZANU-PF  and
    the MDC, in effect suggesting that both have seen fit  to  make  public
    pronouncements for tactical purposes, which do not represent their true
    intentions. The pattern of evidence before us, covering a longer period
    of time than was envisaged at the beginning of the hearing  in  October
    2010, supports this analysis. In particular, public  pronouncements  by
    Mugabe of an intention to call early elections  contrast  starkly  with
    the other evidence that, in private, he is at least unpersuaded of this
    course.

236. In addition, other forces, contending for  later  rather  than  earlier
    elections,  appear  to  be  gathering  strength.   Notwithstanding  the
    party's public declaration that elections would  be  held  around  June
    2011, there is a suggestion that ZANU-PF  MPs,  no  doubt  fearing  for
    their political futures, may be opposed to early  polls.   As  for  the
    MDC, there is an understandable desire to maximise the chances  of  new
    elections being fully free  and  fair,  since  otherwise  a  repeat  of
    previous attempts at coercion and gerrymandering  is  feared.   As  for
    other players, whilst we do not overestimate the power of the  Zimbabwe
    Electoral Commission, we  note  the  evidence  that  its  Chair  is  an
    internationally  respected  jurist,  who  has   already   indicated   a
    reluctance to be rushed into elections, before proper preparations have
    been made; in particular, reform of the electoral roll.  More important
    will be the attitude of the SADC and, in particular, the government  of
    South Africa.  Again, the earlier evidence in this regard to  which  we
    have been referred paints a somewhat uncertain picture.   However,  the
    later evidence indicates a greater degree  of  commitment  to  ensuring
    that any future elections in Zimbabwe are not characterised by the sort
    of violence seen in 2008.  President Zuma's  meeting  with  Mugabe  and
    Tsvangirai at the end of November 2010 seems to us to be of a different
    order from  at  least  some  of  his  earlier  interventions.  This  is
    supported by the Embassy egram of 1 December, confirming  Zuma's  being
    "engaged on Zimbabwe" and  concerned  to  see  that  elections  proceed
    without violence in a free and fair manner. It is further supported  by
    the Minister's statement in the House of Lords on 27 January  that  the
    South African President is assuming personal responsibility for  seeing
    that Zimbabwe is properly prepared for elections.

237. We accept that, whether or not buoyed by  the  financial  rewards  from
    exploiting Zimbabwe's supply of diamonds, Mugabe  and  ZANU-PF  possess
    the theoretical capability  to  hold  elections  at  a  time  of  their
    choosing, regardless of  regional  and  wider  international  concerns.
    Nevertheless, the pressure  coming  from  the  SADC  and  South  Africa
    represents, in our view, a factor that  diminishes  the  likelihood  of
    elections as early as the middle of this year and  points  towards  the
    end of 2011 at  the  earliest,  although  2012  is  increasingly  being
    mentioned.

(ii)  Protection Against Abuse

238. The evidence regarding SADC "roadmaps" touches on a  further  question;
    namely, whether  presidential  and  parliamentary  elections  would  in
    practice be held before Zimbabwe is  given  a  new  constitution.   The
    COPAC timelines indicate that the process leading to the adoption of  a
    new constitution is well behind schedule and that, if a referendum  and
    the implementation of a new constitution are to occur before  elections
    (which many consider should be the case), elections before at least the
    latter part of 2011 would not appear to be feasible.  We are mindful of
    the strength of the evidence, to the effect  that  Mugabe  and  ZANU-PF
    can, and would, proceed before a new constitution is in place, if  they
    thought early elections would suit their purposes.   Nevertheless,  the
    countervailing forces, including it seems within ZANU-PF, mean that  it
    would be wrong to discount  the  constitutional  process  as  a  factor
    tending against the holding of early elections.

239. The appellants' submissions of 28 January sought to rely on the  report
    that 80,000 youth militia etc will be mobilised across the  country  to
    cow the population in the run-up to elections, and  that  this  process
    may already be  beginning.  The  suggestion  is  that  hardliners  have
    decided to adopt this tactic as a means of pre-empting  the  deployment
    of international monitors to oversee the election campaign and voting.

240. Although the exposure of these  alleged  plans  is  to  be  given  some
    weight, it must be borne in mind that the article may itself be part of
    a plan to pre-empt  such  a  mobilisation,  by  exciting  international
    interest; in particular, SADC and President Zuma. Furthermore, it is at
    present speculative whether hard-line elements within ZANU-PF  and  the
    military have the upper hand in what appears to  be  a  power  struggle
    within that party and whether they would, in the event, be prepared  to
    resist international pressure, particularly given the reported  concern
    of at least some of them at  being  brought  before  the  International
    Criminal Court (see below). In conclusion, the  picture  regarding  the
    timing of elections; in particular, whether they will occur before  the
    new constitution has been agreed and without the  safeguards  generally
    seen as vital to ensure they are free and fair,  remains  at  least  as
    unclear as at 28 January 2011 as it was  on  the  evidence  adduced  in
    October 2010: if anything, it is more so.

241. As we have already indicated, the question  of  the  likely  timing  of
    elections is closely interwoven with the question of what might happen,
    in the event of such elections being held.   There  is  a  considerable
    body of evidence to the effect that, if elections were to be held early
    at the instigation of Mugabe and ZANU-PF, in defiance of  international
    opinion, there is a real risk of violence on the  scale  of  2008.  The
    Embassy egrams share this concern.  In  such  a  scenario  ("the  early
    election scenario"), a returning failed asylum seeker from  the  United
    Kingdom would face a situation in all essential respects akin  to  that
    identified by the Tribunal in RN.  Roadblocks would proliferate in many
    rural areas,  militia  bases  and  so-called  torture  bases  would  be
    activated in such areas and "loyalty tests" -  this  time,  of  course,
    involving Mugabe and ZANU-PF rather than the government as such - would
    again become commonplace.  A returnee to such an area would, except  in
    the categories identified in RN and described  in  this  determination,
    face a real risk of ill-treatment, in the event of a  failure  to  pass
    such a "test". We have already explained  why,  based  on  the  current
    position  in  these  rural  areas,  we  have  concluded  that   serious
    difficulties will in  many  cases  face  a  returnee  from  the  United
    Kingdom, with the result that, in this  regard,  our  country  guidance
    represents no significant change from RN. The result of  calling  early
    elections would therefore be to exacerbate what is an already dangerous
    situation for such a person.

242. However, even in the early election scenario, the  evidence  before  us
    does not suggest that Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South would be
    affected to anything like the same extent as the  rural  areas  of  the
    other provinces in Zimbabwe.  There is  significant  evidence  that  in
    2008,  the  violence  in  Matabeleland  was  significantly  less   than
    elsewhere.  There is some evidence that the splitting of the  MDC  into
    the MDC-T and MDC-M factions might persuade ZANU-PF  that  Matabeleland
    is, after all, a place within their electoral grasp.  However, there is
    also the report that the non -  Tsvangirai  faction  in  this  part  of
    Zimbabwe will make  common  cause  with  the  Tsvangirai  faction.   In
    addition, the evidence suggests  to  us  that  it  would  be  extremely
    difficult for  ZANU-PF  to  expunge  the  memories  of  the  atrocities
    committed in Matabeleland in the  1980s  (as  to  which  the  continued
    animosity towards North Korea is relevant). It is,  of  course,  always
    possible that evidence which comes into being after the  production  of
    this determination may indicate a different outcome;  but  the  current
    evidence cannot be said to do so.

243. What we have just said about Matabeleland applies to Bulawayo, even  in
    the  early  election  scenario.   As  for  Harare,  whilst  it  may  be
    reasonably likely that ZANU-PF militias etc would be bussed in to  that
    city in order to  cause  problems  during  an  election  campaign,  the
    present evidence is  such  that  it  would  be  merely  speculative  to
    conclude this would have a material impact upon those  living  in  low-
    density areas.  In addition, even in this scenario, we do not  consider
    the present evidence suggests that ZANU-PF would be able to  engage  in
    the kind of systematic intimidation, which it  would  deploy  in  rural
    areas of the eastern provinces.  In this regard, we note the absence of
    reliable evidence regarding militia bases. The  report  of  26  January
    2011, regarding the alleged use of ZANU-PF leaders' homes in Harare  as
    campaign bases, is said to be confined to high-density  areas  and,  in
    any case, appears to be of a different and lesser order to the sort  of
    camps and bases established in rural areas in 2008.  Whilst  we  accept
    the evidence of the appellants, that  even  in  high-density  areas  in
    which it dominates, the MDC would be unable to  resist  a  military  or
    quasi-military assault, it is questionable whether  ZANU-PF  would,  in
    2011, choose to launch such an assault, given the  high-profile  nature
    of Harare and the international condemnation which  would  ensue.   The
    evidence of January 2011 regarding disturbances in Harare instigated by
    ZANU-PF elements does not begin to amount to such a state  of  affairs,
    notwithstanding  the  report  of   Tsvangirai's   having   raised   the
    disturbances with President Zuma. Those involved  in  the  disturbances
    were MDC members and supporters (voanews.com article of 24 January) and
    the evidence of non-political residents suffering  in  this  regard  is
    sparse.

244. Without repeating what we have said regarding the  SADC  and  President
    Zuma, it is apparent that, compared  with  2008,  there  is  a  greater
    likelihood of future  elections  being  conducted  in  a  significantly
    different environment.  Anthony Reeler of RAU has  said  publicly  that
    Zimbabwe is not in the position  of  requiring  a  peacekeeping  force,
    rather, intense monitoring  during  the  elections  and  the  preceding
    campaign.  It is by no means fanciful  to  regard  such  monitoring  as
    being a real possibility.  Zimbabwe's civil society  organisations,  of
    which there are many, are pressing for this.

245. The Counselling Services Unit told the FFM team that ZANU-PF wished  to
    avoid increasing the risk of finding individuals being indicted  before
    the International Criminal Court.  On its own, we would not accord that
    evidence significant weight.  However,  according  to  the  voanews.com
    report of 9 November, about 50 Zimbabwean  NGOs  had  urged  the  three
    parties in the country's national unity government  jointly  to  engage
    senior military and other security service commanders "to reassure them
    of their future in return for guarantees they will not interfere in the
    transitional democratic process".  The Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum,
    meeting in Bulawayo, urged such engagement to discuss the interests and
    fears of the security chiefs, who were said to  oppose  a  transfer  of
    power from ZANU-PF  to  the  MDC  "out  of  fear  that  they  might  be
    prosecuted for past misdeeds".  This appears to us to lend considerable
    force to the views expressed by the CSU.  It also  suggests  a  way  in
    which there might be fair elections, free  from  significant  political
    violence, leading to an orderly transfer of power from ZANU-PF  to  the
    MDC.

246. Given the recent history of Zimbabwe, it would be quite wrong  to  view
    these factors through Panglossian  eyes.   They  nevertheless  properly
    fall to be taken into account in deciding, according  to  the  relevant
    legal principles, whether the issue of future elections  is  one  which
    materially  impacts  on  the  claims  of  the  present  appellants   to
    international  protection,  and  on  the  giving  of  current   country
    guidance.

(iii)  The Legal Assessment of Future Risk

247. We turn to the submissions on the legal principles.  Whilst it  is  the
    case that the Tribunal must  assess  the  risk  to  the  appellants  by
    reference to the present time, since the appellants are at  present  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  the  assessment  of  risk  necessarily   has   a
    prospective element.  As the ECtHR held in Chahal v UK (1997)  23  EHRR
    413 in the context of an Article 3 claim:-

         "86.     ... as far as the applicant's complaint under Article 3 is
             concerned,  the  crucial  question  is  whether  it  has  been
             substantiated that there is a real risk  that  Mr  Chahal,  if
             expelled, would be subjected to treatment prohibited  by  that
             Article.  Since he has not yet  been  deported,  the  material
             point in time must be that of the court's consideration of the
             case.  It follows that, although the historical position is of
             interest insofar as it may shed light on the current situation
             and its likely evolution, it is the present  conditions  which
             are decisive."

248. For the appellants, Mr Henderson sought to  emphasise  the  words  "and
    its likely evolution" in the passage just cited.   He  also  relied  on
    Saadi v Italy (2009) 49 EHRR 30, in which the Strasbourg Grand  Chamber
    held that:-

         "129.    It is in principle for the applicant  to  adduce  evidence
             capable of proving that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
             believing that, if  the  measure  complained  of  were  to  be
             implemented, he would be exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  being
             subjected  to  treatment  contrary  to  art.  3.   Where  such
             evidence is adduced, it is for the government  to  dispel  any
             doubts about it.


         130.     In order to determine whether there  is  a  risk  of  ill-
             treatment, the Court must examine the foreseeable consequences
             of sending the applicant to the receiving country, bearing  in
             mind  the   general   situation   there   and   his   personal
             circumstances."

249. It is also, in our view, necessary to have regard to paragraph 131:-

         "131.    To that  end,  as  regards  the  general  situation  in  a
             particular country, the Court has often attached importance to
             the information contained in recent reports  from  independent
             international  human-rights-protection  associations  such  as
             Amnesty International, or government sources, including the US
             State Department.  At the same time, it has held that the mere
             possibility  of  ill-treatment  on  account  of  an  unsettled
             situation in the receiving country does  not  in  itself  give
             rise to a breach  of  art.  3  and  that,  where  the  sources
             available to it describe a general situation,  an  applicant's
             specific   allegations   in   a   particular   case    require
             corroboration by other evidence."

250. Mr Henderson also  relied  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in
    Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11.  In particular, he  drew  attention  to
    what the Court had to say in that case about the Australian decision of
    Sackville J in Minister for Immigration  and  Multicultural  Affairs  v
    Rhaalingam [1999] FCA 719.  The  thrust  of  the  Australian  decision,
    according to Mr Henderson, was  that  the  decision  maker  in  a  case
    involving a  claim  to  international  protection  must  not  foreclose
    reasonable speculation about the chances of a future hypothetical event
    occurring.

251. At paragraph 18 of his judgment, Sedley LJ  in  Karanakaran  said  that
    there was, in cases of this kind, no "probabilistic cut off" and:-

         "everything capable of having a bearing has to be given the weight,
         great or little, due to it.  What  the  decision-makers  ultimately
         make of the material  is  a  matter  for  their  own  conscientious
         judgment, so long as the  procedure  by  which  they  approach  and
         entertain it  is  lawful  and  fair  and  provided  their  decision
         logically  addresses   the   Convention   issues.    Finally,   and
         importantly,  the  Convention  issues  from  first  to   last   are
         evaluative, not  factual.   The  facts,  so  far  as  they  can  be
         established, are signposts on the  road  to  a  conclusion  on  the
         issue; they are not themselves conclusions.  How far  this  process
         truly differs from civil or criminal litigation need not detain  us
         now."

252. Sedley LJ quoted, in this  context,  Simon  Brown  LJ  in  Ravichandran
    [1996] Imm AR 97:-

         "In my judgment the issue whether a person or group of people  have
         a 'well founded fear  ...  of  being  persecuted  for  [Convention]
         reasons' ... raises a single composite  question.   It  is,  as  it
         seems to me, unhelpful and potentially misleading to try  to  reach
         separate conclusions as  to  whether  certain  conduct  amounts  to
         persecution, and as  to  what  reasons  underlie  it.   Rather  the
         question whether someone is at risk of persecution for a Convention
         reason should be looked at  in  the  round  and  all  the  relevant
         circumstances  brought  into  account.   I  know  of  no  authority
         inconsistent with such an approach and,  to  my  mind,  it  clearly
         accords both with paragraph 51 of the UNHCR Handbook and  with  the
         spirit of the Convention."

253. Also helpful is the passage in paragraph 19 of  Sedley  LJ's  judgment,
    which immediately follows this quotation:-

         "While, for reasons considered earlier, it may well be necessary to
         approach the Convention questions themselves in discrete order, how
         they are approached and evaluated should henceforward  be  regarded
         not as an assault course on which hurdles of  varying  heights  are
         encountered by the asylum seeker with the decision maker acting  as
         umpire, nor as a forum in which the improbable is magically endowed
         with  the  status  of  certainty,  but  as  a  unitary  process  of
         evaluation of evidential  material  of  many  kinds  and  qualities
         against the Convention's criteria of eligibility for asylum."

254. Mr Henderson also relied upon cases of the Special Immigration  Appeals
    Commission concerning Libyan appellants in respect of whom  the  United
    Kingdom government had secured from the Libyan government a  memorandum
    of understanding (MOU), to the effect that, if returned, the appellants
    would not be subjected to judicial  execution  or  other  serious  ill-
    treatment.  The question was whether, notwithstanding this  memorandum,
    there was a real risk that the Libyan authorities would  ill-treat  the
    appellants.  The unpredictability  of  the  Qadhafi  regime  was,  SIAC
    concluded, such that there was  a  real  risk  of  non-compliance.   At
    paragraphs 359 to 361, SIAC held:-

         "359.    Colonel Qadhafi may well regard the MOU as a  favour  done
             to the UK and could conclude at some point that Libya has done
             a great deal for the West in its rapprochement  and  that  the
             West owed it favours in return.  If Libya did not feel that it
             was receiving enough for what it had done, it could  take  the
             view that the benefit was not worth full adherence to the MOU.
               There  remains  room  for  misunderstandings,  although  the
             diplomatic ties and other relationships  are  growing  closer,
             more trusting and open.


         360.     We cannot say how far into the period of return  any  such
             incident could occur, for it could occur at any time, although
             we would expect the initial stages of  return,  detention  and
             questioning to proceed as required and to be without any  real
             risk of a breach of the MOU or of Article 3.


         361.     Indeed, we would  accept  that  there  is  an  element  of
             speculation about how any change of approach  might  occur  in
             what we have set out.  That is inevitable  in  this  case  for
             what we are satisfied about is that there  is  a  considerable
             element of unpredictability which  we  do  have  to  consider.
             That is where the risk first arises and it could result from a
             number of actions.  We have to do what we can  to  assess  its
             degree, causes and impact.  We are satisfied  that  there  are
             real risks of such events occurring, which could lead to  acts
             which diverge from the pragmatic course as Mr Layden would see
             it, even though the divergence would be occasional,  responded
             to events, or  temporary.   These  are  not  in  our  judgment
             unrealistic scenarios." (DD & Anor v Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department [2007] UKSIAC 42/2005)

255. In AS (Libya) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 289, the respondent's challenge in the Court of Appeal to the  SIAC
    judgment failed.  The respondent  contended  that  SIAC  had  erred  in
    principle by asking itself whether the pragmatism of the Libyan  regime
    was sufficient to exclude a real risk of torture, when the test  should
    have been put the other way round (paragraph 74).  The Court of  Appeal
    rejected this:-

         "75.     We do  not  accept  that  submission.   It  was  correctly
             accepted that (however the test  is  precisely  formulated  or
             defined), but for  the  assurances  in  the  MOU,  there  were
             substantial grounds for believing that the  respondents  would
             face a real risk of torture on return. In these  circumstances
             the question was indeed whether the pragmatism of  the  regime
             was sufficient to exclude that risk, or at least to reduce  it
             to an acceptable level.  This case  is  quite  different  from
             cases like Mamatkulov and  Askarov  v  Turkey  and  Shamyev  v
             Georgia.  In any event each case must be decided  on  its  own
             facts."

256. At  paragraph  77,  the  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the  respondent's
    criticism of paragraph 361 of the SIAC determination:-
         "We reject Mr Sales' submission  that  SIAC  there  misapplied  the
         test. It correctly said that it was for it to  assess  the  degree,
         causes and impacts of the risk and said that it was satisfied  that
         there were real risks of the contemplated events  occurring.   That
         was a correct statement of the test, with the nature of which  SIAC
         was very familiar.  Moreover the statement  that  those  were  'not
         unrealistic scenarios' seems to us, when read in the context of the
         paragraph as a whole, to mean that they were realistic scenarios."
257. At paragraph 81, the Court of Appeal stated in conclusion that  it  did
    not accept that SIAC misunderstood or misapplied the test  or  that  it
    failed to have proper regard to the evidence of Mr Layden.  "Nor are we
    persuaded  that  SIAC  lowered  the  test  to  take  account   of   the
    unpredictability of future events.  SIAC was bound to  have  regard  to
    the unpredictability of the future.  It had understood that the risk of
    mistreatment was contingent upon other events occurring; but that  will
    often be the case."

258. In the present appeals, both  sides  agreed  that,  in  Mr  Henderson's
    words, there needed to be a  "single  holistic  assessment  of  whether
    there is a real risk of serious harm in the event of return as  opposed
    to a mere possibility" of serious harm, in the event of return.  As  we
    have already said, and as the case law plainly reveals, this inevitably
    involves an element of prognostication on the part of the Tribunal.  In
    her closing submissions, Ms Grey  acknowledged  that  the  judgment  in
    Saadi, which  spoke  of  examining  "the  foreseeable  consequences  of
    sending the  applicant  to  the  receiving  country,"  necessitated  an
    examination of the risk of change to an existing situation.   That  was
    what SIAC had done in DD.  According to Ms Grey, it is not suggested by
    the respondent that there is any  "bright-line"  test  to  be  adopted,
    based upon some temporal rules; rather the Tribunal looks to  see  what
    are the foreseeable consequences of  return.   As  the  date  at  which
    events/risks might transpire or materialise  becomes  more  remote,  so
    their prospects become more uncertain; and the "real risk" test becomes
    progressively more difficult to satisfy.

259. We doubt that there is any material difference between the  submissions
    of the parties  on  the  application  of  Karanakaran  to  the  present
    problem, but we find considerable assistance in the  submission  of  Ms
    Grey.  Support for it can be found in Karanakaran. The fact that it  is
    reasonably foreseeable  something  may  occur,  whilst  constituting  a
    matter  within  the  scope  of  the  holistic  assessment,   will   not
    necessarily play a  determinative  or  even  significant  part  in  the
    finding of  whether  there  exists  a  real  risk  to  a  person.   The
    significance of the reasonably foreseeable state of affairs will depend
    upon a number of interrelated factors, including the predicted point in
    time at which the event may occur, the likelihood of its occurring  and
    the directness and degree of its impact on the person concerned.

260. At one end of the scale would be the following example.   A  government
    enacts a law, which is to come into force in three years'  time,  under
    which adherents of a particular religion are  to  be  executed,  unless
    they then formally renounce their faith.   The  state  in  question  is
    totalitarian in nature and there is no evidence  to  suggest  that  its
    government would change in the intervening period, or repeal  the  law.
    Notwithstanding the relative remoteness  of  the  future  position,  it
    would plainly be a violation  of  the  United  Kingdom's  international
    responsibilities to return an adherent of that religion to the  country
    in question, albeit that the  evidence  shows  he  or  she  would  live
    unmolested until the law came into force.

261. In the SIAC case involving the Libyan appellants, it was common  ground
    that, without the memorandum of understanding, they faced a  real  risk
    of serious ill-treatment, including torture, on return.  Given that  it
    was only the MOU that stood between them and this state of affairs,  it
    was obviously right for SIAC to have regard to the  volatility  of  the
    power systems in Libya with a view to determining whether there  was  a
    real risk that the MOU would, in the case of these individuals, not  be
    followed.  Whilst the evidence indicated that the MOU would be complied
    with on the appellants' return, the remoteness of the risk  had  to  be
    weighed against the directness and seriousness of the harm, if the  MOU
    were later to be ignored: the appellants would be targeted for torture,
    or worse.

262. Although we recognise that an evaluation of  whether  future  elections
    would lead to a return to the intensity and generality  of  persecution
    identified in RN is an issue with which  we  must  engage,  we  do  not
    accept that the kind of assessment undertaken in the  Libyan  cases  is
    required as a matter of law in the present cases.  In the Libyan cases,
    but for the memorandum of understanding the individuals concerned  were
    accepted to be at risk of being  tortured  because  of  their  personal
    profiles.  Here we are having to make an assessment of  whether  anyone
    returned to Zimbabwe would be  at  risk  because  of  an  inability  to
    demonstrate loyalty.

263. Even in the early election scenario we have described, the evidence  is
    very far from pointing to a real risk to any  returning  failed  asylum
    seeker to any part of Zimbabwe, in any circumstances.  Not  only  would
    the categories identified in RN as not being at risk still be likely to
    apply, it is very likely that  geographic  differences  would  play  an
    important part in  whether  a  particular  person  would  be  at  risk.
    Furthermore, on the evidence before us, we conclude that  the  scenario
    of elections being held in mid-2011, or slightly later, in defiance  of
    international  (especially  regional)   opinion   and   the   Electoral
    Commission, and in circumstances where, despite his indications to  the
    contrary, Morgan Tsvangirai decides to expose  the  MDC  to  danger  by
    contesting the elections,  is  an  unlikely  one,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, albeit that there is  a  chance  it  might  happen.   As
    matters stand, the further away the elections, the more  uncertain  are
    their consequences. In this regard, the factors we have  identified  as
    militating against a repeat of the violence of 2008  are  not  fanciful
    and require to be factored in to the overall assessment.

264. Drawing all these  threads  together,  we  do  not  conclude  that  our
    evaluation of who is or  is  not  presently  at  risk  if  returned  to
    Zimbabwe is undermined, by the possibility of a return to  violence  at
    2008 levels in the event of elections being called in  the  foreseeable
    future.  The combined effect of  the  evidential  uncertainty  of  when
    elections may be called and what might happen when they are produces  a
    picture that is too equivocal or obscure to amount to a  real  risk  of
    future ill treatment.

265. We would emphasise that our findings on this issue do not  affect  what
    we have earlier said about the present general risk to those  returning
    to rural parts of the eastern provinces of Zimbabwe.  There is also the
    following  important   point.    If,   after   promulgation   of   this
    determination, evidence emerges  that  elections  will  be  held  at  a
    particular time, without any of the safeguards and other countervailing
    features we  have  described,  then  the  structures  underpinning  the
    country guidance system  ensure  that  judicial  fact-finders  will  be
    required to have regard to  the  new  state  of  affairs,  in  reaching
    determinations on Zimbabwe cases.  The  effect  of  Practice  Direction
    12.2 is such that  a  country  guidance  case  is  authoritative  in  a
    subsequent appeal, only so far as that appeal relates  to  the  country
    guidance issue in  question  and  depends  upon  the  same  or  similar
    evidence (our emphasis).  By  the  same  token,  we  would  expect  the
    respondent  to  take  account  of  that  situation,  both  in  reaching
    decisions on asylum claims involving Zimbabwe (including  fresh  claims
    under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules) and in  deciding  whether
    to give directions for a person's removal to Zimbabwe.



                      H.  COUNTRY GUIDANCE ON ZIMBABWE

At the point of return

266. It was common ground in the present appeals that the  country  guidance
    the Tribunal would give would not involve the position  at  the  actual
    point of return to Zimbabwe of a failed asylum seeker from  the  United
    Kingdom, which in practice will be  Harare  Airport  (now  usually  via
    South Africa). The appellants adduced no  specific  evidence  regarding
    the position at the airport and the only potentially relevant  evidence
    from the respondent was the material in the FFM  report  regarding  the
    experiences of the seven returnees. The country guidance regarding risk
    at the airport accordingly continues to be as set out in HS  (Returning
    asylum seekers) Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT 00094, read with the findings  on
    that issue in SM and Others (MDC - internal flight -  risk  categories)
    Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKIAT 00100 and AA (Risk for involuntary  returnees)
    Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061 (paragraphs 36 to 48 above).



New country guidance regarding the position after the point of return

267. In the light of our findings, evaluating the position as at the end  of
    January 2011, the following country guidance replaces that  in  RN,  as
    follows:

(1)    As  a  general  matter,  there  is  significantly  less   politically
    motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with the situation  considered
    by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does not show that, as a
    general matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker  from  the  United
    Kingdom, having no significant MDC profile, would result in that person
    facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

(2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise  in  the  case  of  a
    person without ZANU-PF connections, returning from the  United  Kingdom
    after a significant absence to a rural area  of  Zimbabwe,  other  than
    Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a person may  well  find
    it difficult to avoid adverse  attention,  amounting  to  serious  ill-
    treatment, from ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control.   The
    adverse attention may well involve a requirement to demonstrate loyalty
    to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm in the event of  failure.
    Persons who have shown themselves not to be favourably disposed to ZANU-
    PF are entitled to international protection, whether or not they  could
    and would do whatever might be necessary to  demonstrate  such  loyalty
    (RT (Zimbabwe)).

(3)   The situation is not uniform  across  the  relevant  rural  areas  and
    there may be reasons why a particular  individual,  although  at  first
    sight appearing to fall within the category described in the  preceding
    paragraph, in reality does not do so. For example, the  evidence  might
    disclose that, in the home village, ZANU-PF power structures  or  other
    means of coercion are weak or absent.

(4)   In general, a returnee from the United Kingdom to  rural  Matabeleland
    North or Matabeleland South is  highly  unlikely  to  face  significant
    difficulty from ZANU-PF elements, including the security  forces,  even
    if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter. A person may, however, be
    able to show that his or her village or area is one that, unusually, is
    under the sway of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.

(5)    A  returnee  to  Harare  will  in   general   face   no   significant
    difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density area.  Whilst
    the socio-economic situation in high-density areas is more challenging,
    in  general  a  person  without  ZANU-PF  connections  will  not   face
    significant problems there (including a "loyalty test"), unless  he  or
    she has a significant MDC profile, which might  cause  him  or  her  to
    feature on a list of those targeted for harassment, or would  otherwise
    engage in political activities likely to attract the adverse  attention
    of ZANU-PF.

(6)   A returnee  to  Bulawayo  will  in  general  not  suffer  the  adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he or  she
    has a significant MDC profile.

(7)   The issue of what is a person's home  for  the  purposes  of  internal
    relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not  necessarily
    to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person  from  Zimbabwe
    regards as his or her rural  homeland.  As  a  general  matter,  it  is
    unlikely that a person with a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  a
    major  urban  centre  such  as  Harare  will  have  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative to  a  rural  area  in  the  Eastern  provinces.
    Relocation to Matabeleland  (including  Bulawayo)  may  be  negated  by
    discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.

(8)         Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or  (subject  to
    what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in general,  more  realistic;  but
    the socio-economic circumstances in which persons are reasonably likely
    to find themselves will need to be considered, in  order  to  determine
    whether it would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  to  expect  them  to
    relocate.

(9)   The economy  of  Zimbabwe  has  markedly  improved  since  the  period
    considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the  US
    dollar and the South African rand has ended the recent  hyperinflation.
    The availability  of  food  and  other  goods  in  shops  has  likewise
    improved, as has the availability  of  utilities  in  Harare.  Although
    these improvements are not being felt by  everyone,  with  15%  of  the
    population  still  requiring  food  aid,  there  has   not   been   any
    deterioration in the humanitarian situation since late  2008.  Zimbabwe
    has a large informal economy, ranging from street traders to home-based
    enterprises, which (depending on the circumstances)  returnees  may  be
    expected to enter.

(10)  As was the position in  RN,  those  who  are  or  have  been  teachers
    require to have their cases determined on  the  basis  that  this  fact
    places  them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened   risk   category,   the
    significance of which will need to be assessed on an individual basis.

(11)   In  certain  cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously   lacking   in
    credibility may properly be found as a result to have failed to show  a
    reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in fact, be regarded, on
    return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b) that they would be returning
    to a socio-economic milieu in which problems with ZANU-PF  will  arise.
    This important point was identified in RN, (see paragraphs  62  and  64
    above) and remains valid.


               I.  RE-MAKING THE DECISIONS IN THE FOUR APPEALS

Appellant EM

268. Appellant EM failed without  explanation  to  attend  the  hearings  in
    October 2010. No explanation  has  subsequently  been  forthcoming.  He
    failed to maintain contact with his representatives.  His  account  was
    substantially disbelieved by the  Immigration  Judge  and  her  adverse
    credibility findings were not challenged.

269. Although the Tribunal indicated  in  January  2010  that  none  of  the
    Immigration Judge's findings were to stand, except that relating to the
    appellant EM's knowingly false use of  a  passport  stamp,  we  see  no
    reason why his failure to attend and give evidence  should  rebound  to
    his benefit. Even if he did work as a supply teacher for a brief period
    prior to coming to the United Kingdom, it is not remotely credible that
    this fact would be known to the authorities on arrival in  Zimbabwe  or
    that they would be remotely interested, even if  he  were  to  disclose
    this fact to them. No reliable evidence has been put forward  regarding
    the reason why family members in  the  United  Kingdom  may  have  been
    granted asylum here. Again, applying  the  relevant  country  guidance,
    there is nothing to suggest that the authorities at the  airport  would
    know about any such grant, let alone regard it as a reason  to  subject
    appellant EM to any form of interrogation at which serious  harm  is  a
    real possibility, notwithstanding his time in the United Kingdom.  What
    we have said applies, whether or not the authorities discover or assume
    that appellant EM has made an unsuccessful claim for asylum.

270. We are prepared to accept that appellant EM comes from the Mutoko  area
    of Mashonaland East, north-east of Harare. This is a rural area in  one
    of the Eastern provinces and we therefore apply the country guidance in
    paragraph 267(2) above. Appellant EM has been absent from Zimbabwe  for
    a significant period (nearly 12 years). The key  issue,  therefore,  is
    whether appellant EM has shown there is a real risk that he lacks ZANU-
    PF connections, such as to displace the risk of adverse  interest  from
    ZANU-PF elements in Mutoko.

271. On his own account, appellant EM's parents were  card-carrying  members
    of ZANU-PF. We see no  reason  in  the  circumstances  to  believe  his
    assertion that this was done only to ensure their protection.  Even  if
    it is true that appellant EM's father and brother  had  been  teachers,
    this does not compel a finding that they had joined  ZANU-PF  only  for
    reasons of self-protection. Whilst the generally prevalent view is that
    teachers are likely to be pro-MDC, this does not mean that all teachers
    in Zimbabwe must be of that persuasion. As the Immigration Judge found,
    the parents had lived without problems for many years and, like her, we
    see no reason to find that they left for Zambia as recently as 2008 for
    any reason other than to  seek  treatment  for  the  father's  illness,
    despite the assertion that their leaving was occasioned by  an  upsurge
    in violence in Mashonaland in late 2008. There may well have been  such
    an upsurge; but, given the parents' ZANU-PF connections,  there  is  no
    reason to assume that they would have  been  the  victims  of  it.  The
    parents had, after all, remained throughout all the previous  problems,
    including those in the middle of that year.

272. There is also the point that, on appellant  EM's  account,  the  family
    home is still  in  Mutoko,  and  that  it  is  being  looked  after  by
    relatives. There is no credible suggestion that these relatives are not
    also ZANU-PF adherents. On the contrary, if they were not, and  if  the
    parents had been driven out by violence, it is  hard  to  see  how  the
    relatives would be allowed by local leaders to stay there.

273. In conclusion,  appellant  EM  conspicuously  fails  to  discharge  the
    burden of showing there is a real risk that, if returned to Mutoko,  he
    would face persecutory or other  serious  ill-treatment.  He  would  be
    returning  as  a  member  of  a  ZANU-PF  family,  whose  parents  were
    established in the area for very many years, and he would have  a  home
    and other relatives to go to. Given  that  he  left  Zimbabwe  for  the
    purpose of studying, there would be no reason for the locals to look at
    him askance because of his time in the United Kingdom,  lengthy  though
    that has been. Appellant EM has not been involved in any  MDC  activity
    in Zimbabwe or the United Kingdom. Indeed, there is no reason to assume
    he harbours any positive feelings towards the MDC and  good  reason  to
    assume the opposite.

274. Particularly given the  Zimbabwe  government's  recruitment  drive  for
    teachers, appellant EM has failed to show he would be without the means
    of earning  a  living,  if  returned.  He  is  35  years  old  with  no
    significant health issues. If he did not work as a  teacher,  he  still
    has a home to go to and there is no reason to find that he  would  have
    difficulty getting some kind of employment, including in  the  informal
    sector.

275. Mr Henderson did not advance any Article 8 case on behalf of  appellant
    EM.  That  was  understandable,  given  the  uncontested  findings   at
    paragraphs  15  and  16  of  the  Immigration  Judge's   determination.
    Appellant EM has no protected family life in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    although he appears to have a NVQ qualification  his  private  life  is
    remarkably exiguous, comprising little more than reading and  going  to
    the gym.

276. We re-make the decision in the case of appellant EM by  dismissing  his
    appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds.  He  is  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.

Appellant COM

277. As we have already recorded at paragraph 19 above,  on  22  October  we
    indicated that we would re-make the decision in appellant COM's  appeal
    by allowing it. Our reasons are as follows.

278. In the present proceedings, the credibility of appellant  COM  has  not
    been put in issue,  as  regards  his  account  of  his  experiences  in
    Zimbabwe and his MDC activities in the United  Kingdom.  Besides  those
    described in the determination of the Immigration Judge, summarised  in
    Part B above, it is relevant that appellant COM has been interviewed at
    a demonstration in the United Kingdom involving those said to have fled
    despotic regimes and that the interview was reported on  the  internet,
    where  appellant  COM  was  quoted  and  named.  Appellant  COM's   MDC
    activities in the United Kingdom have been substantial. He has  adduced
    credible  third  party  evidence  to  that  effect.  Besides  attending
    demonstrations and vigils, which may well not in themselves be such  as
    to cause difficulties at the point of return to Zimbabwe, appellant COM
    has been active in fundraising for the MDC in this country.

279. In the light of appellant COM's activities in  Zimbabwe,  these  United
    Kingdom activities strike us as being  genuinely  undertaken  and  thus
    ones which, if within the knowledge of the  authorities,  would  strike
    them as different from the activities  of  an  apolitical  opportunist,
    from whom no  trouble  might  be  expected  once  he  had  returned  to
    Zimbabwe.

280. As we have indicated, appellant COM was active on  behalf  of  the  MDC
    whilst in Zimbabwe. Those activities earned him a beating and  a  night
    spent sitting in cold water, whilst detained  by  ZANU-PF  youths,  who
    warned him not to support the MDC. The Immigration Judge regarded  this
    treatment as falling short of persecution. We disagree;  and  therefore
    apply paragraph 339K of the immigration rules, whereby past persecution
    is to be regarded as a serious indication of future persecution, absent
    good reasons to consider it  will  not  be  repeated.  Appellant  COM's
    employment in Zimbabwe as a  credit  controller  for  an  international
    courier company brought him to the attention of the CIO.

281. In view of all of the above, applying the country guidance relevant  to
    the point of return (paragraph 266 above), we find that there is a real
    risk that, if returned, appellant COM will be  taken  for  second-stage
    questioning at Harare Airport, and thus be at real risk of serious harm
    at that point.  The  internet  interview  strikes  us  as  particularly
    significant and may well have come to the attention of the  CIO,  given
    their past  interest  in  him.  We  also  regard  his  significant  MDC
    activities here as ones that, in the circumstances, may well have  come
    to the attention of  the  CIO,  through  informers  in  the  Zimbabwean
    community.

282. Although it was for the above reasons we indicated we would  allow  the
    appeal of appellant COM, it is apparent that, even if he  were  to  get
    back to his home area of Highfield, a high-density area of  Harare,  he
    has shown himself to be a MDC activist who (unless deterred by fear  of
    persecution) is reasonably likely to resume such  activities  following
    his return. In the light of our country guidance  at  paragraph  267(5)
    above, appellant COM would be at real risk in  Harare  at  the  present
    time. He may well come to feature on a list of those targeted by  ZANU-
    PF elements and/or be involved in attacks on  MDC  activists,  such  as
    have recently occurred in that city. He plainly has no viable  internal
    relocation alternative to the Eastern provinces. His rural home appears
    to be in the area of Chinhoyi in Mashonaland West and there is  nothing
    to suggest any connection with Matabeleland (paragraph 267(7) above).

283. We re-make the decision in the case of appellant COM  by  allowing  his
    appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds  (Article  3).  He  is  not
    entitled to the grant of humanitarian protection.

Appellant CLM

284. As indicated earlier, the Designated Immigration  Judge's  findings  of
    fact are preserved, both as regards appellant CLM's account  of  events
    in Zimbabwe and the United Kingdom and as regards the evidence  of  the
    Chair of the South West District  MDC  United  Kingdom,  who  confirmed
    appellant CLM was a  member  of  a  particular  local  branch  of  that
    organisation.

285. The Designated Immigration Judge made adverse credibility  findings  at
    paragraphs 70 to 72 of the  determination.  Amongst  the  matters  that
    concerned the Judge were that appellant CLM had waited some  two  years
    before joining the MDC United  Kingdom,  notwithstanding  his  asserted
    activist role in the party whilst in Zimbabwe (organising secretary for
    the Hatfield area of Harare, responsible  for  arranging  meetings  and
    rallies), and that he had seen fit to claim asylum only in 2009. It  is
    plain  from  the  determination  that,  as  a  result,  the  Designated
    Immigration Judge did not accept appellant CLM's evidence about what he
    had done for the MDC in Zimbabwe and what had  happened  to  him  as  a
    result (namely, some beatings at  the  hands  of  ZANU-PF  thugs).  The
    Designated Immigration Judge's finding, which he was  plainly  entitled
    to reach on the evidence before him, was that  "any  political  profile
    that the Appellant had with the MDC [in Zimbabwe]  was  at  the  lowest
    level" (Paragraph 71).

286. In his closing submissions,  Mr  Henderson  sought  to  make  appellant
    CLM's claim to international protection primarily by reference to  risk
    at the point of return. Applying  the  relevant  country  guidance,  Mr
    Henderson submitted that appellant CLM's United Kingdom activities with
    the MDC would be known by the authorities in Zimbabwe  and  that  these
    would put him at real risk of serious  ill-treatment  at  the  airport.
    Amongst other passages, Mr Henderson  relied  on  the  record  of  what
    Witness 6 (who had worked in a relevant capacity in Harare Airport) had
    said to the Tribunal in AA (No 2), that  "People  in  Harare  are  well
    briefed by people in London so they know who they are interested in. If
    you do any activities in the U.K  you  put  yourself  in  a  situation"
    (paragraph 67). He also relied on the observation in paragraph  104  of
    HS that "the regime has invested considerable resources in  seeking  to
    infiltrate groups in the United Kingdom to identify those  who  support
    the opposition or who are 'activists in the country'". Drawing on  this
    and paragraph 260 of RN, Mr Henderson, at paragraph 261 of his  written
    closing submissions, submitted that it was "therefore  clear  from  the
    Country Guidance that the CIO's intelligence gathering operation in the
    UK may identify those asylum seekers who have  actively  supported  the
    MDC  in  the  UK  and  that  they  will  be  taken  for  'second  stage
    interrogation' by the CIO with consequent risk of ill-treatment".

287. These submissions seek to lead us too far.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    relevant country guidance that  constitutes  an  authoritative  finding
    that the CIO in Harare are reasonably likely to know about everyone who
    participates in MDC activities in this country, of  whatever  kind  and
    for whatever reason, and that the CIO are reasonably likely  to  detain
    and ill-treat everyone whom they have reason to  believe  has  had  any
    kind of  involvement  with  the  MDC,  whilst  here.  As  indicated  at
    paragraph 104 of HS, it is with the identification  of  activists  that
    they are likely to be concerned.

288. Does the evidence before us show a real risk that  appellant  CLM  will
    be so regarded? Pursuant to  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 appellant CLM has adduced written  evidence
    that was not before the Designated Immigration Judge. Since the hearing
    in Newport in October 2009, appellant CLM has  managed  to  obtain  the
    minutes of meetings of the relevant local branch of the MDC between  19
    May 2007 and March 2010. He has also obtained a number  of  photographs
    of these meetings, posted on flickr.com.

289. Appellant CLM failed to attend half of the 14 meetings covered  by  the
    minutes. In his latest statement he says this was due to lack of funds,
    although his address is given as being in the town to which  the  local
    branch relates. Of the 7 meetings he attended, the minutes do not  show
    him as standing for any kind of  office  or,  indeed,  as  having  said
    anything worthy of recording in them.  The  one  exception  is  in  the
    minutes of 10 January 2009, where the Food Secretary  appears  to  have
    allocated to appellant CLM the task of providing  "salt/  pepper/onion/
    tomatoes", to the value of �5, apparently for a meal to be supplied  at
    the next meeting.

290. This conspicuous lack of activity  sits  poorly  with  appellant  CLM's
    claim to have been  a  MDC  organiser  in  Harare  and  reinforces  the
    Designated Immigration Judge's adverse  credibility  findings  on  that
    issue. It also colours the reading of the  Southwest  District  Chair's
    letter of 20 February 2009, which was before the Designated Immigration
    Judge, and which claimed appellant CLM had been  actively  involved  in
    branch activities. Furthermore, if his  branch  of  the  MDC  has  been
    infiltrated by ZANU-PF informants and/or CIO  operatives,  they  cannot
    have failed to notice appellant  CLM's  lack  of  activity.  That  they
    should see fit to report  to  Harare  that  he  is  someone  worthy  of
    intensive interest, should he return, is fanciful in the extreme.

291. The flickr.com  photographs  have  been  marked  for  our  purposes  to
    identify a person said to be appellant CLM, whom  we  are  prepared  to
    accept is him. The photographs show various groups of people,  none  of
    whom is identified by name in a caption or similar. Appellant CLM is at
    the back of most of the photographs, his features  barely  discernable,
    or else apparently completely absent in others (ie.  no  identification
    marker relating to him). In only one is he shown at the  front  of  the
    group, waving to the camera.

292. It is speculative whether these photographs, even if in the  possession
    of the CIO, would enable that organisation to identify  appellant  CLM,
    were he to return to Harare.  But,  even  if  they  could,  it  is  not
    reasonably  likely  that  they  would  cause  or  contribute   to   the
    identification of appellant CLM as a person in whom they  might  decide
    to take a significantly adverse interest.

293. In conclusion, we find  there  to  be  no  reasonable  likelihood  that
    appellant CLM would face serious ill-treatment at Harare Airport. In so
    finding, we have had regard to his having claimed asylum, to  his  time
    spent in the United Kingdom and to the assertion that appellant CLM has
    been on demonstrations.  Mr  Henderson  submitted  that  appellant  CLM
    should have his appeal allowed, on the same basis as we  had  indicated
    we would allow that of appellant COM. But, as can be seen, their  cases
    are substantially different. The evaluation of risk  at  the  point  of
    return, as well as later, is a fact-sensitive exercise.  Appellant  COM
    was entitled to the finding as to his significant degree of activity in
    MDC affairs in the United Kingdom, in  part  because  of  the  evidence
    showing that he had been so active in Zimbabwe. This is not at  all  to
    ignore Danian [1999] EWCA Civ 300 and the possibility  of  cynical  sur
    place activities creating a real risk. Appellant CLM  might  have  been
    able to make good such a claim; but he has  failed  to  do  so  on  the
    totality of the evidence.

294. Mr  Henderson  submitted,  much  more  briefly,  that  additionally  or
    alternatively to the airport issue, appellant CLM would  be  unable  to
    demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF and would be regarded as an opponent  of
    the regime. His long stay in the  United  Kingdom  would  confirm  this
    risk.

295. Appellant CLM is now 58 years old and has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    since February 2005. He would be returning to the  Hatfield  suburb  of
    Harare, described by appellant  CLM  at  interview  as  a  low  density
    suburb. His assertion that he had to move from the property he owned in
    that area is not credible, given the general problems  identified  with
    his credibility. However, even  if  his  last  place  of  residence  in
    Zimbabwe  was  Hatcliffe  (sic),  appellant  CLM  could  return  there.
    Immediately  before  leaving  Zimbabwe,  appellant  CLM  said  he   was
    undertaking market  research  for  an  aunt  regarding  a  property  in
    Borrowdale. He also worked as a small businessman (letter  of  refusal,
    paragraphs 49 to 51).  He was able to afford the air fare to the United
    Kingdom. Appellant CLM has failed to show a reasonable likelihood that,
    if returned, he would lack accommodation and  support  from  relatives,
    including three adult children living in Harare, until he could  resume
    economic activity. His high blood pressure and cholesterol can both  be
    treated in Zimbabwe, on his own admission (albeit at a cost). We do not
    find that his health issues are such as to preclude him  from  working.
    In view of the evidence discussed earlier, it is plain  that  appellant
    CLM could work, if need be, in the informal sector, otherwise than as a
    street vendor which, given his age, we accept might be problematic.

296.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  appellant  CLM's   vestigial
    connections with the MDC would put him at risk  in  Harare  of  adverse
    action, including having to demonstrate  loyalty.  This  is  especially
    true if he resides in the low or medium density suburbs with  which  he
    has been historically connected and  to  which  his  economic  capacity
    indicates that he could return. Even  in  the  unlikely  event  of  his
    living in the high density suburbs, we conclude that there is  no  real
    risk of his being subjected to a loyalty test or serious harm, applying
    the country guidance at paragraph 267(5) above.  There is no reason  to
    believe that his connection with the MDC would become more  significant
    on return in the light of the Designated Immigration Judge's conclusion
    about absence of significant activity in the past.

297. No Article 8 case has been advanced on behalf of appellant CLM  and  we
    can see nothing in the evidence to suggest why one might have  been.  A
    20 year old son lives in Oldham, Lancashire, with  whom  appellant  CLM
    speaks daily (presumably by telephone) but the other children  live  in
    Harare. He is separated from his wife.  His  private  life  appears  to
    involve occasional gardening and other odd jobs, and going to  the  MDC
    meetings, as found above.

298. We re-make the decision in the case of appellant CLM by dismissing  his
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds. He is not  entitled  to  the
    grant of humanitarian protection.

Appellant JG

Claim to international protection

299. Having had the opportunity of hearing appellant JG  give  evidence,  we
    formed a poor view of her credibility, as regards her claim  to  be  in
    need of international protection. Her oral  and  written  evidence  was
    characterised by discrepancy and exaggeration. At paragraph 13  of  her
    witness statement of September 2009 she claimed her  home  in  Zimbabwe
    had been destroyed, an assertion not mentioned in her asylum  interview
    and inconsistent with her subsequent assertions, that  her  mother  had
    continued to live there, on the basis that  the  destruction  had  been
    only partial, and that the property was still worthy of  being  coveted
    by other relatives. She was inconsistent  as  to  who  these  relatives
    were. As we have already  seen,  appellant  JG's  assertions  regarding
    Prince Edward School  were  contradicted  by  Professor  Ranger,  whose
    evidence on this issue we prefer. In  her  oral  evidence  to  us,  she
    disowned statements contained in the social worker's report,  regarding
    the threat posed by her ex-husband in the United Kingdom,  which  could
    only have come from her. She tried to give the impression that,  whilst
    teaching at Prince Edward School, she had been prevented  from  meeting
    the Queen; an impression she later had to correct.

300. Appellant JG claimed that her mother was assaulted  in  the  street  in
    Queensdale, Harare by youths  from  the  nearby  high-density  area  of
    Epworth and that they made comments about her  mother  having  kids  in
    England. Whilst we do not regard the error by appellant JG as  to  when
    this occurred as significant (witness statement of 24  November  2010),
    it is apparent from  the  statement  of  29  September  2010  that  the
    incident was a random one. Its significance is  further  undermined  by
    appellant JG's oral evidence, that her mother was planning a  visit  to
    Canada to see her accountant daughter there, but would be returning  to
    Zimbabwe after a short period.

301.  Appellant  JG  sought  to  make  much  of   her   medical   condition,
    particularly  as  concerns  her  ability  to  work.  However,  her  own
    consultant's letter of 8 October 2010 says that  she  would  "generally
    would cope with life and although this  disease  [chronic  haemoptysis,
    following previous  tuberculosis]  causes  tiredness  this  should  not
    really limit her function too much". Appellant JG  accepted  in  cross-
    examination that this letter was written in the context of her possible
    return to Zimbabwe and then agreed with Ms Grey that teaching  was,  in
    fact, a job with which she would be able to cope.

302. The Immigration Judge did not  find  credible  appellant  JG's  alleged
    fear of her in-laws in Zimbabwe, who have a close association with ZANU-
    PF. On the totality of the evidence, we do not find it credible either.
    The general problems with her credibility mean she has  no  entitlement
    to be believed on this issue. In any event, appellant JG's  own  family
    is manifestly middle class, as evidenced by her previous employment  at
    one of Harare's most prestigious schools, her ability to come here on a
    three year student visa, her mother's ability to travel to  Canada  and
    back and her sister's profession as an accountant. The evidence  points
    clearly to appellant  JG's  own  family  falling  within  the  category
    identified in RN as being either ZANU-PF - inclined  or,  at  the  very
    least, one which has established a way of living  with  Zimbabwe  power
    structures, which would obviate any risk of being  challenged  to  show
    loyalty to ZANU-PF, even in such a period as was under consideration in
    RN.

303. Mr Henderson asked us to accept that, if returned, appellant  JG  would
    have to find work as a teacher and that this  would  put  her  at  real
    risk. He relied upon Professor Ranger's contradiction of  appellant  JG
    as to how she would be perceived, submitting that she would in fact not
    be seen as associated with  ZANU-PF  because  of  her  past  employment
    (written closing submissions, paragraph 224).

304. We agree that teaching is the obvious and perhaps only profession  that
    appellant JG would pursue, if returned. We disagree, however, with  the
    submission that this will put her at real risk. As we have found, being
    a teacher in Zimbabwe puts one in a risk  category;  but  whether  this
    equates or contributes to there being a real risk will  depend  on  the
    individual facts of the case. In appellant JG's case, it is clear  that
    working as a teacher will not do so. There would be no need for her  to
    go to teach in a rural area, where  reports  suggest  the  distrust  of
    teachers as MDC indoctrinators is most prevalent. She claimed she would
    be unable to find employment, as  before,  in  the  private  sector  in
    Harare but she has adduced no evidence to support this assertion and we
    find it to be another example of her willingness to paint  a  false  or
    exaggerated picture.

305. We accept that the presence of her children (hypothetical as it  is  in
    view of the Article 8 decision) would impact on appellant JG's  ability
    to work; but the  presence  of  her  mother  and  continuing  financial
    support from her sister in  Canada  will  enable  appellant  JG  to  be
    economically active, despite the presence of her children.  She  has  a
    house to go to, which we do not find has been  destroyed  in  whole  or
    part, and which is at worst in a medium-density area of Harare.  We  do
    not accept that the proximity of Epworth means it  would  be  seriously
    problematic for appellant JG and her children to live there. In  short,
    appellant JG has signally failed to show that, if returned, she faces a
    real risk of persecution or other serous  ill-treatment,  or  that  her
    living conditions would breach Article 3 of the ECHR.

306. For completeness, we do not find the evidence suggests  that  appellant
    JG would be held for potentially persecutory  interrogation  at  Harare
    Airport. She has no MDC profile of any kind. It is highly unlikely that
    her teaching history would be revealed in the course of her  transiting
    immigration, but if it was, there is enough ZANU-PF involvement in  her
    background to obviate any difficulty this  might  cause.  The  somewhat
    special nature of Prince Edward School is also very unlikely to be lost
    on officials working in Harare and would not cause her to  be  regarded
    as MDC (notwithstanding we accept Professor Ranger's evidence  that  it
    would not mark her out as ZANU-PF either).  We do  not  find  that  her
    having claimed asylum in the United Kingdom will be  reasonably  likely
    to cause or contribute to any problems, even if it came to light.

307. We re-make the decision in appellant JG's asylum appeal  by  dismissing
    it on those grounds and on Article 3 grounds. She is  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.

Article 8

308. In the light of the grant of humanitarian leave to remain on Article  8
    grounds, this issue is no longer before us and cannot be the subject of
    a judicial determination.  We are conscious, however, that there may be
    a considerable number of people in a broadly similar position  who  now
    face a real prospect of removal to Zimbabwe, but for the application of
    Article 8. If the Secretary of State had not  accepted  appellant  JG's
    Article 8 case we would have allowed her appeal on this head  and  here
    briefly set out what would have been our reasons for doing so:

    (i)    JG has been resident in the UK for 11 years as at  the  date  of
         decision and approaching 12 years now,  with  the  exception  of  a
         short return visit to Zimbabwe in the early years.

    (ii)   She has three children for whom she has responsibility now  aged
         13, 9 and 6 the first of whom has been resident here since 2002 and
         the other two all of their lives.

    (iii)  JG's leave to remain expired in 2001 when she  could  no  longer
         fulfil the requirements to study, but by then the general  security
         situation in Zimbabwe was deteriorating and in 2002 a moratorium on
         enforced returns to Zimbabwe was begun which has for one reason  or
         another been continued until the outcome of this  country  guidance
         case, as the Secretary of State and the judiciary have responded to
         the sequence of developments in that country.

    (iv)   Whether JG could ever have substantiated a protection  claim  to
         remain or not, it is understandable that she would be unwilling  to
         return voluntarily to a society so ravaged by violence,  insecurity
         and an absence of sound governance as was Zimbabwe under ZANU-PF.

    (v)    On the  evidence  before  us,  each  of  her  children  is  well
         integrated into the educational system of the  United  Kingdom  and
         the social connections and support such participation brings.

    (vi)   Even where neither the children nor any parent has the status of
         a British citizen,  the  welfare  of  the  children  is  a  primary
         consideration in administrative action affecting their  future  and
         accordingly the balance of competing interests under Article 8 must
         reflect this factor as a consideration of the first  order,  albeit
         not the only one (see LD (Article 8  -  best  interests  of  child)
         Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) and ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4).

    (vii)  The public interest in interfering with the private life  of  JG
         and her three children established in the  United  Kingdom  is  the
         preservation of the economic interests of society by enforcement of
         immigration control rather than the protection of the  public  from
         crime and criminality.

    (viii) In the absence of any other policy guidance from  the  Secretary
         of State, it remains legitimate for Immigration Judges to give some
         regard to the previous policy that seven years residence by a child
         under 18 would afford a basis for regularising the position of  the
         child and parent in the absence of conduct reasons to the contrary,
         in making a judicial assessment of whether removal is proportionate
         to the legitimate aim having regard to the best  interests  of  the
         child.
                               Signed
                                                                  Mr
Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal,
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                 APPENDIX A

                          Summary of Oral Evidence

Appellant COM

1.    COM spoke to his witness statement dated 5 October 2010.   He  adopted
    the contents of that statement in which he said that,  since  his  last
    appearance at the Tribunal in 2009, he had continued to be  politically
    active.  This was evidenced by photographs of COM at vigils as well  as
    meeting minutes to show that he was still attending MDC meetings in the
    United Kingdom.  On this basis, COM considered that he  was  "factually
    an opponent of the regime" (paragraph 4).

2.    Were he to be returned to Zimbabwe, COM said that he was likely to  go
    to Highfield, Harare "which is a high density urban residential  area".
    Although Highfield was an area where ZANU-PF had begun as  a  political
    party, it was also where the MDC had dominated in the elections,  since
    the formation of that party.  ZANU-PF had been using violence to try to
    get back the ZANU-PF votes in preparation for a new election, which COM
    said was rumoured to be in 2011.

3.    COM said that if returned it would be difficult for him to survive  as
    he would have no job or money as well as no family.  He had no house in
    Zimbabwe and could not relocate as there was no family to support  him.
    Although his mother and children remained in Zimbabwe, COM could not go
    to live with them since he would be placing their lives at risk because
    of his political activities in the United Kingdom.  If he  did  try  to
    relocate, he would be asked his  history,  activities  in  the  UK  and
    political opinion; and once it was discovered that he had been  in  the
    United Kingdom for so long "I will be seen as a traitor and treated  as
    an outsider".

4.    COM considered that he would be at risk  in  the  airport  in  Harare,
    since his pictures  had  been  displayed  on  the  internet  and  would
    therefore be in the public domain.  Even if he managed to get past  the
    airport security, he would be more than likely to  face  ZANU-PF  party
    members, war veterans and militias at roadblocks.  COM would  be  asked
    to produce a ZANU-PF card and sing the latest songs  and  slogans.   He
    would be unable to do this.  He would also be unable to produce a ZANU-
    PF card.

5.    In oral evidence, COM said that he had had  about  50  photographs  of
    him put on the website.  If returned to  Zimbabwe,  he  said  he  would
    continue with his MDC activities since it was "fundamental" that if  he
    started something, he had to keep on going.  If asked by the CIO at the
    airport, COM said that he would say he had been involved with the  MDC.
    The CIO would, in any event, already know this.

6.     In  cross-examination,  COM  said  that  he   had   worked   for   an
    international commercial company whilst  in  Zimbabwe.   However,  most
    such companies had subsequently closed.  It was put to COM that he  had
    attended the airport in  Zimbabwe  frequently  as  an  employee  for  a
    courier company, when he would have been asked questions for  the  CIO.
    COM said, however, that he had only  been  asked  questions  about  his
    employment.  He had not been asked about his MDC activities.

7.    COM said that his mother-in-law and two children lived in a  house  in
    Highfield but he would not wish to return to that house because he  did
    not want to put them at risk.  Asked whether Highfield was  a  majority
    MDC area, COM said that it was mixed; he would estimate 50:50.  It  was
    put to him that in his statement he had said  that  Highfield  was  MDC
    dominated.  COM agreed that this was the case.  He would, nevertheless,
    attract attention if returned because the grassroots of  the  MDC  were
    more targeted than the upper echelons.  His mother-in-law was  over  60
    and no longer politically active, whilst the children were minors.

8.    COM agreed that there  were  no  roadblocks  within  Harare  but  said
    roadblocks had been set  up  outside  in  order  to  stop  people  from
    entering rural areas.

Appellant JG

9.    JG adopted her written statement dated 29  September  2010.   In  that
    statement, JG attempted  to  clarify  the  position  of  Prince  Edward
    School, at which she had taught.  Although many  of  the  parents  were
    ZANU-PF, this did not mean, according to JG, that teaching  staff  were
    also of that political persuasion.   In  Zimbabwe,  apart  from  church
    schools and a small number of private schools, every school was run  by
    ZANU-PF.  Prince Edward School was more in  the  nature  of  a  private
    school at present.  It charged fees in the region of �5,000  per  term.
    JG felt that many of the children at Prince  Edward  were  pompous  and
    spoiled.  She did not consider that  her  connection  with  the  school
    would help her, if she were to be  returned  to  Zimbabwe.   The  other
    school at which she had worked, Domboramwari High  School  in  Epworth,
    was one of the poorest schools in the region.  The  people  there  were
    very much ZANU-PF supporters.  However,  that  did  not  mean  that  by
    having worked there, JG would  be  "okay".   If  challenged  about  her
    political views, it would be hard for her to persuade anyone  that  she
    did support ZANU-PF.  Her family came from an MDC  supporting  area  in
    Manicaland and JG had a Manicaland accent, when speaking  Shona.   This
    was so even though she had grown up in Harare.  It would be obvious  to
    anyone that JG's children had not grown up in Zimbabwe, on  account  of
    their English accents and that they could not speak Shona.

10.   Although JG did not believe what ZANU-PF stands for, if she were in  a
    "tight corner I would have to try to say I supported them, but I  would
    feel very uncomfortable about that".  She would feel  like  she  was  a
    coward and was letting down her  friends  and  family.   Pretending  to
    support ZANU-PF "would be like a mockery of my friends and relatives in
    light of all they went through.  In any event  I  don't  think  that  I
    would be believed if I tried to pretend I was a ZANU-PF supporter  -  I
    don't think I would be  able  to  deceive  them  in  my  circumstances"
    (paragraph 13).

11.   JG said that her sister, T, was in the final stages of applying for  a
    visa to join her sister, S, in Canada.  T was also  applying  for  JG's
    mother to accompany T to Canada "which will leave me without anyone  in
    Zimbabwe that I can turn to if I am returned".  There was also the risk
    that, once the mother had left, certain male relatives would take  over
    the family home for themselves.  These were the paternal uncles of  JG.
    In a paternalistic society, such as Zimbabwe, the likelihood  was  that
    the house would be taken over by these individuals.

12.   JG said that her home area  of  Queensdale  in  Harare  was  "kind  of
    medium density and of moderate affluence - I would describe it as being
    'in the middle'".  However, although not high density,  Queensdale  was
    unfortunately situated not far from Epworth "where  many  rowdy  gangs,
    radicalised into politics, come from where there  is  trouble.   It  is
    therefore  a  vulnerable  location  despite  its  reasonably   affluent
    character."  In Epworth, the law did not exist and  there  was  a  gang
    culture, which was why there were youth or military bases  in  Epworth,
    run by ZANU-PF.

13.   So far as the  house  in  Queensdale  was  concerned,  this  had  been
    partially destroyed during Operation Murambatsvina.   JG's  family  had
    subsequently tried to rebuild the damaged part of the home but had  not
    had the equipment necessary to complete the job.

14.   If returned, JG did not consider that she would be able  to  secure  a
    place at a good school, because such places came  up  very  rarely  and
    would be sought by people who already had contacts  in  Zimbabwe.   She
    would be more likely to end up in a school such as the one  in  Epworth
    "because no-one else wants to work in an  area  like  that"  (paragraph
    24).  JG supposed that her sister in Canada could send her  remittances
    occasionally, but these would not be enough on which to live.

15.   If JG tried  to  live  elsewhere  in  Zimbabwe,  she  would  face  the
    difficulty that  no-one,  not  just  ZANU-PF  diehards,  wanted  to  be
    associated with an outsider, in case that person turned out to  be  the
    bringer of trouble.  JG could not go to her rural homeland in Zimbabwe,
    a place where she had hardly ever ventured, because it was one  run  by
    chiefs who were effectively employed by the ZANU-PF  government.   This
    ancestral area was near Marange in Manicaland, described as a  band  of
    land around Inyanga/Makoni.  JG had been there no more than five  times
    in her life, for major funerals when she was a child and  so  on.   She
    had uncles  and  half-uncles  in  this  area,  but  they  were  virtual
    strangers to JG and were not kin to whom she could turn.   Furthermore,
    Marange was  one  of  two  places  in  Zimbabwe  that  ZANU-PF  "really
    disliked, largely for  reasons  of  tribalism";  the  other  one  being
    Bulawayo  (paragraph  3).   As  a  result,  Marange   received   little
    government assistance and its infrastructure was very poor.  Its people
    never felt that ZANU-PF represented their  interests,  but  the  chiefs
    were still on the ZANU-PF payroll.

16.   JG said that her lung condition also limited the  kind  of  employment
    she could realistically take on.  She had a fungal growth in her  lung,
    which could not be operated upon owing to the risk of death.   JG  felt
    that she could nevertheless work part-time,  perhaps  as  much  as  six
    hours on a good day.  She thought that she could return to teaching  as
    this was "one of the few jobs I could do that is not so  physical,  and
    where I can sit down if I feel weak" (paragraph 40).

17.   JG's ex-husband had indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.
     He was also from Zimbabwe.  JG feared that,  according  to  Zimbabwean
    customary law, the ex-husband could seek to take JG's children off her,
    were she to return to Zimbabwe.   JG's  eldest  son,  aged  12,  hardly
    remembered anything about Zimbabwe and her other two children have been
    born and brought up in the United Kingdom.  Her youngest child  was  in
    Year 1 and her middle one in Year 4.  Both  were  getting  on  well  at
    school and would, in JG's view, find it difficult to adapt to  life  in
    Zimbabwe.  JG had  tried  to  teach  them  Shona,  but  abandoned  this
    project.

18.   Cross-examined, JG said that  her  father  was  professional  and  her
    mother was a matron of a  home.   Her  sister,  S,  in  Canada  was  an
    accountant and had sent JG financial support.  JG also had a sister, J,
    living in the United Kingdom.  The plan was for JG's  mother  to  visit
    Canada only for a short period, following which  she  would  return  to
    Zimbabwe.  JG's mother had been beaten in April 2010 as  she  had  been
    walking home from a church meeting.  JG's mother had not lived  in  the
    house subsequently.  JG was asked about the fact that in her  statement
    she referred to her paternal uncles  wanting  the  house,  whereas  the
    social worker's report referred to JG's half-brothers wanting  it.   JG
    said her uncles were in the forefront of the  project  to  recover  the
    house.  It was possible that they were doing it on behalf of the  half-
    brothers.

19.   JG confirmed that her ex-husband did not at present have contact  with
    her children.  However, he might want to take the children away from JG
    if she were in Zimbabwe.  JG denied that she had been  married  in  the
    United Kingdom (cf question 65 of the interview record), asserting that
    she had been married in a customary manner in Zimbabwe, albeit that  JG
    had been in the United Kingdom when this occurred.  JG was asked  about
    the social worker's report in which JG was described as having  a  fear
    of her husband obtaining control of the children whilst in  the  United
    Kingdom.  JG denied knowledge of this.  It was put to JG  that  it  was
    improbable that her ex-husband would launch proceedings in Zimbabwe  to
    secure control of the children.  JG  said  that  in  Zimbabwe  the  law
    placed men in a higher position, vis-�-vis women.  Her uncle  had  said
    that this is what the ex-husband would do.

20.   JG was asked about inconsistencies in  her  evidence  in  relation  to
    whether she had met the Queen whilst teaching at Prince Edward  School.
    JG said that she had met the Queen but  had  not  gone  to  the  social
    function connected with it.  JG had come to the United Kingdom in  1999
    in order to study as a nurse, benefiting from a United Kingdom bursary.

21.   JG said that, after all, she did not know if she was  well  enough  to
    return to teaching.  She was referred to the letter from Dr Russell  of
    8 October 2010 in which he said that  JG  "would  generally  cope  with
    life" and that her condition did not  really  limit  her  function  too
    much.  Asked if she accepted this, JG said that she had been  having  a
    lot of bleeds and there were "good days and  bad  days".   JG  accepted
    that the doctor's letter  had  been  written  in  the  context  of  her
    possible return to Zimbabwe.  JG then said  that  she  considered  that
    teaching was a job with which she would be able to cope.  However,  job
    sharing did not exist in  Zimbabwe.   JG  accepted  that  there  was  a
    chronic shortage of qualified teachers in Zimbabwe, particularly in the
    rural  areas.   She  was  asked  whether  private  schools   were   re-
    establishing themselves in Harare, to which JG replied that she did not
    know.  JG accepted that she had  taught  in  a  "posh  school"  without
    difficulty in Zimbabwe.  JG had had no involvement with the MDC  whilst
    in the United Kingdom.  She did, however, support the MDC "in my mind".
     If returned, JG would not want to be politically involved.

22.   In answer to a question from the Tribunal, JG  said  that  her  eldest
    child was being assessed  for  Asperger's  Syndrome  and  that  he  had
    behavioural difficulties.  JG, if returned, would not go to  Queensdale
    but would have to go to a high density area or to her ancestral area.

Sarah Harland (Zimbabwe Association)

23.   Sarah Harland, Coordinator of the Zimbabwe Association, confirmed  her
    written statement of 12 October 2010.  The Zimbabwe  Association  is  a
    community organisation supporting the Zimbabwean Diaspora in the United
    Kingdom, largely concerned with asylum issues.   It  has  approximately
    1,000 members, is run mainly by volunteers and its membership is almost
    entirely comprised of asylum seekers  and  refugees.   The  Association
    took a close interest in the work of the Institute of  Migration.   The
    Association's concern was not to discourage voluntary return  of  those
    who genuinely wished to go, but to  ensure  that  asylum  seekers  made
    informed choices.  Her statement went on to say that she  believed  IOM
    was in danger of losing its UKBA funding and that this was relevant, in
    considering the voluntary return programme run by IOM, and whether this
    could be regarded as a success.  She had attended an IOM  event  on  22
    September 2010, involving a live video  conference  with  returnees  in
    Zimbabwe.  The IOM provided  �500  assistance  to  a  returnee  at  the
    airport, upon departure; whilst further support worth up to �1,000  may
    be provided to support the launch of a business, based on an acceptable
    business plan, or an acceptable plan for  vocational  training  or  job
    placement.  All assistance had to be spent within six  months.   Family
    groups received a grant for each family member, which could be spent on
    education and accommodation but, again, a family could not have funding
    for more than six months of accommodation.

24.   At the recent event, returnees had expressed  great  appreciation  for
    the IOM and said their returns had gone well with the IOM's help.   One
    returnee had used IOM funds to restart her father's business; a  second
    had a cousin in the United States of America who had given the returnee
    a farm to run in Zimbabwe; a third had started a poultry business.   Ms
    Harland said that the three returnees did  not  appear  to  be  at  all
    typical of ordinary Zimbabwean asylum seekers.

25.   Ms Harland  stated  that  there  were  significant  class  and  social
    divisions in the Zimbabwean Diaspora and that, apart  from  those  with
    links to the regime, there were those from families who had  been  well
    off and of high social class, whose families supported them as students
    in the United Kingdom for many  years.   Some  of  these  students  had
    claimed asylum only when  the  family  could  no  longer  support  them
    because of the state of the Zimbabwean economy.

26.   Ms Harland said that since the end of 2008 she had  come  across  only
    two Zimbabweans who had taken voluntary return.  From figures  provided
    by Mr Walker of UKBA, it appeared that at most 215 asylum  seekers  had
    returned voluntarily in any given year.  Ms Harland accepted  that  the
    Association saw only a disproportionately small number of those  asylum
    seekers who returned voluntarily.

27.   Ms Harland referred to the  fact-finding  mission  report.   In  this,
    eight returnees  had  agreed  to  be  interviewed  although  one  later
    withdrew.   The  eight  "tended  to  be  more  from  the  more   recent
    returnees".  The IOM speculated that this could be  because  those  who
    returned  earlier  had  already  received   the   entirety   of   their
    reintegration assistance and had less need for continued  liaison  with
    IOM.  She inferred from this that the returnees who had  agreed  to  be
    interviewed had the expectation of receiving funds from  IOM.   At  the
    event, it was evident to  Ms  Harland  that  the  IOM  was  seeking  to
    encourage voluntary returns by presenting accounts from  returnees  who
    said that all had gone well.

28.   Ms Harland considered the Zimbabwean community to  be  distrustful  of
    the IOM, regarding the organisation  as  closely  linked  to  the  Home
    Office,  not  least  because  refusal  letters  advised  recipients  to
    approach the  IOM  for  assistance  for  returning  home.   Ms  Harland
    regarded it as unrealistic to expect returnees to complain to  the  IOM
    in Zimbabwe about adverse treatment by local state or  ZANU-PF  forces.
    In 2007, the IOM had provided similar "rosy comments  from  returnees",
    which  upon  inspection   appeared   to   be   similar   and   positive
    "notwithstanding deteriorating country conditions" (paragraph 16).

29.   Ms Harland's statement then turned to the reference  to  the  Zimbabwe
    Association in the FFM report.  The  Association  was  quoted  in  that
    report as saying:

         "The forum has not come across any cases of returnees from  the  UK
         being mistreated and would expect to know of any such cases because
         its member organisations are represented across  the  country.   It
         works closely with  the  Zimbabwe  Association  in  London  and  is
         alerted where there are concerns a returnee might be  at  risk  but
         has not come across any cases where this has  happened.   They  are
         unable to say that there have been no such cases but if  there  had
         been they would have been isolated examples."

30.   Ms Harland regarded this as misleading in that the  author,  W80,  had
    told her that he had actually been asked whether he would be  aware  of
    "systematic  ill-treatment"  of  returnees  since  the  Government   of
    National Unity was established.

31.   Ms Harland regarded this inaccuracy in the FFM as unsurprising,  since
    other fact-finding  reports  had  been  regularly  found  not  to  have
    explained fully the context of questions; and the interviewee  had  not
    been told that he or she was to be represented as stating the views  of
    an organisation, as opposed to their own views.

32.   Ms Harland considered people working for NGOs  in  Zimbabwe  as  "very
    busy, harassed and pressurised people, and I  was  not  surprised  that
    they had  appeared  in  previous  country  guidance  hearings  to  have
    approved Home Office notes without thinking about how the wording might
    be misunderstood".  She recalled an instance from the AA(2) case  where
    a representative had initially  made  a  statement  saying  he  had  no
    recollection of approving a misleading note made by the Home Office but
    had been reminded by the  Embassy  that  he  had,  following  which  he
    explained that he had been asked to approve it at  choir  practice  and
    had "completely forgotten about it but confirmed  that  he  should  not
    have approved it as written".

33.   Ms Harland said that  there  was  a  "general  paranoia"  amongst  the
    Zimbabwean Diaspora that information disclosed here,  such  as  to  the
    Zimbabwe  Association,  would  get  back  to  Zimbabwe.   It  was  also
    generally assumed by informed Zimbabwean opinion that ZANU-PF, the  CIO
    and  other  security  agencies  were  very   effective   at   achieving
    infiltration of the Diaspora and put great effort into it.

34.   The statement ended by recounting  the  experience  of  a  UN  Special
    Rapporteur who had travelled to Zimbabwe in 2009 and,  despite  his  UN
    status, had been lied to by officials, told he would not  be  let  into
    Zimbabwe and  "kept  in  a  small  office  that  looked  more  like  an
    interrogation room".

35.   Ms Harland was asked about paragraph 12 of Mr  Walker's  supplementary
    statement.  Mr Walker said  that  the  IOM  was  asked  to  identify  a
    representative selection of returnees to whom the FFM team could speak.
     Mr Walker could not assert positively that those to  whom  they  spoke
    were a fully representative sample of all failed asylum seekers in  the
    United Kingdom.  He did, however, believe that their circumstances were
    not particularly unusual.  In this regard, he referred to a 2009 report
    of The Solidarity and Peace  Trust,  which  stated  that  "It  is  only
    Zimbabwe's elite who make it to the UK".

36.    Ms  Harland  said  that  this  was  a  common  misconception  in  her
    experience.  A significant number of  those  who  had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom did not fall into  this  category.   For  example,  some
    victims of violence had been helped to  leave  by  their  employers  or
    churches, or had found an exit  via  South  Africa.   Many  Zimbabweans
    worked illegally in  South  Africa.   From  time  to  time  there  were
    difficulties in that country for Zimbabweans, such as the outbreaks  of
    xenophobic violence in 2008, which caused people to leave.  There was a
    class divide within the UK Zimbabwean Diaspora.   The  more  articulate
    members of  that  group  might  not  need  the  help  of  the  Zimbabwe
    Association.  The  Association  assisted  destitute  people,  including
    those who were no longer eligible for Home Office support.  Ms  Harland
    did not know what the total number of Zimbabweans in the United Kingdom
    was but she felt that the Association came into  contact  only  with  a
    certain proportion of asylum seekers.

37.   Ms Harland was asked about paragraph 13 of Mr  Walker's  supplementary
    statement.  This referred to a survey conducted by UKBA,  in  which  of
    the 1,058 applications for asylum received during the year, nearly  two
    thirds (627) originated in the large urban areas of  Harare,  Bulawayo,
    Mutare, Gweru, Chegutu and Masvingo.  The remainder came  from  smaller
    towns  or  rural  areas  across  Zimbabwe.   Mr  Walker  considered  it
    significant that,  despite  extensive  contacts  in  the  Diaspora  and
    Zimbabwe itself, the appellants had not provided evidence of those  who
    had experienced ill-treatment  on  return  or  would  have  encountered
    conditions that breached Article 3.  Ms Harland said that  the  figures
    for Harare were not broken down into  high  density  and  other  areas.
    Most who lived in high density areas would also have a rural home area,
    unless they had originated in Malawi.  She said it was difficult to say
    whether those whom the Association helped in  the  United  Kingdom  had
    access to funds in Zimbabwe but the majority that were helped had  been
    driven  out  and  she  did  not  consider  that  they  had  significant
    resources.  So far as people without qualifications were concerned, she
    saw a wide range of skills.  Many were vendors, whom she  described  as
    extremely ingenious but lacking in  qualifications.   The  most  useful
    thing the United Kingdom could do would be  to  permit  Zimbabweans  to
    become useful, by letting them work.

38.   She was asked about paragraph 12 of  her  statement,  where  she  said
    that since the end of 2008 she had  come  across  only  two  Zimbabwean
    asylum seekers who had taken voluntary return.  She  acknowledged  that
    there were possibly others with whom the Association had been  involved
    who did not tell her that they were returning.  Most effected what  she
    described as a "quiet return".  This had to do with the  huge  fear  of
    infiltration by ZANU-PF and CIO elements.  One  of  the  two  voluntary
    returnees was later murdered.  He had, however,  returned  to  Zimbabwe
    from South Africa, rather than the United Kingdom.  This fear  extended
    to the British Embassy in Zimbabwe.  There was a reluctance  to  go  to
    the Embassy in Harare because one might be seen by people watching  the
    premises; or local staff might be ZANU-PF informants.   The  same  fear
    applied to the Home Office and Zimbabwean interpreters operating in the
    United Kingdom.

39.   So far as the IOM's fear  of  not  having  its  contract  renewed  was
    concerned, Ms Harland said that she had spoken  to  two  sources  about
    this.  One of them stood by what had  been  said  to  her;  the  other,
    however, had reverted to the content of  the  official  minutes,  which
    said that the matter was merely whether the IOM should  be  invited  to
    quarterly meetings of a Diaspora focus group, until it was  clear  what
    the future of the IOM might be.  A  senior  IOM  source,  however,  had
    confirmed that there was  a  fear  regarding  funding  in  the  general
    context.

40.   Ms Harland did not know what proportion  of  the  Zimbabwean  Diaspora
    supported the MDC.

41.   Cross-examined, Ms Harland said that she saw  the  more  disadvantaged
    members of the Diaspora but she did help small numbers of higher  level
    people.  So far as IOM funding was concerned, she was  reliant  on  her
    two sources.  She had also seen the minutes of the meeting, which  made
    no reference to any disappointment being expressed  regarding  IOM,  on
    the part of UKBA.  The returnee who was murdered had not ever  been  in
    the United Kingdom, so far as Ms Harland  was  aware.   She  understood
    that he had been an activist.  Ms Harland had not had any dealings with
    the seven returnees who were interviewed in the FFM report.  She noted,
    however, with interest that none of these had told anyone  in  Zimbabwe
    that they had claimed asylum in the United  Kingdom.   Ms  Harland  was
    asked whether, although the IOM did not have a protection  mandate,  it
    was reasonable to assume that if returnees receiving IOM assistance had
    encountered difficulties in  re-establishing  in  Zimbabwe  during  the
    timescale with which IOM was concerned, this would  have  come  to  the
    attention of IOM.  Ms Harland said she was unsure of this.   She  could
    not speculate.

W66

42.   A country expert gave evidence.  He was identified as W66  in  RN  and
    we shall refer to him by that description.  He  adopted  his  statement
    (in the form of a report) at AB"A" tab 2, page 20.  He  said  that  his
    expertise and experience were summarised at annex A of the report.   He
    was still a director of the office of the named NGO in Zimbabwe.

43.   In his report, W66 indicated  that  his  understanding  was  that  the
    respondent considered the test set out  in  RN,  whereby  it  would  be
    unsafe to return those who could not demonstrate loyalty to the regime,
    as being too low and that it would be safe to return anyone who did not
    have some kind of clear anti-ZANU-PF profile.  W66  agreed  that  there
    had been developments in Zimbabwe since around  two  years  ago,  as  a
    consequence of the General Political Agreement.  He did  not,  however,
    believe that these developments had reduced the risk  facing  returnees
    to the extent that justified a change to the current approach.  In this
    regard he agreed with the reports of  W77, W78, Professor Ranger and Mr
    Reeler.

44.   The Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace (CCJP) and Mr Reeler  of
    the Research and  Advocacy  Unit  (RAU)  saw  an  increase  in  serious
    violence as being an almost inevitable consequence of Zimbabwe's moving
    towards an election in 2011.  W66 agreed.  ZANU-PF had no intention  of
    losing power and would do everything, including using extreme  violence
    where necessary, to "win elections".  An election in  2011  accordingly
    promised  to  be  as  violent  as  that  in  2008.   The  GPA  had  not
    significantly altered things to the extent that Zimbabwe could be  said
    to have turned the corner.  ZANU-PF still held all the effective  cards
    and was bent on using violence to keep it that way.

45.   W66 turned to the respondent's FFM report.  It seemed to  the  witness
    that the executive summary had attempted to put a  positive  "spin"  on
    matters.  W66 considered a  more  accurate  summary  of  the  political
    environment would be along the following lines:-

         "Although there has been some opening-up  of  the  political  space
         since the GPA (or formation of the GNU) this has been spasmodic and
         is of  quite  limited  significance  given  the  continued  serious
         intimidation and violence perpetrated  by  the  ruling  party;  the
         current government coalition has to a great extent been  a  failure
         (apart from the dollarization of the  economy  which  in  turn  has
         given rise to other problems for  the  vast  majority);  there  are
         grave fears that the  violence  will  quite  rapidly  escalate  and
         intensify as the expected 2011 election approaches - indeed, it has
         already begun to do so and key commentators see much more  violence
         as almost inevitable given ZANU-PF's track record and determination
         to stay in power at any cost."

46.   As for the argument that the  executive  summary  was  irrelevant  and
    what was important was what the NGOs had said to the FFM team, W66  had
    difficulties with this also.  The effect of the FFM report in his  view
    was to water down the most worrying aspects of the current position and
    the expected widespread and serious violence which was likely to  come,
    by "submerging" the views of the  most  credible  human  rights  voices
    within a broader range of NGOs, not all of which should  be  on  a  par
    with one another.  In this regard, W66 considered the analyses of  CCJP
    and RAU to be worthy of careful consideration.  He questioned, however,
    whether the same could be said of the anonymous organisations and  also
    the Bulawayo Progressive  Residents  Association  and  Radio  Dialogue,
    which he did not consider should be given equal  weight  with  that  of
    CCJP and the RAU.  First, the key human rights organisations  that  the
    United Kingdom courts had looked to in the past  continued  to  be  the
    most valuable source of credible information and their views should  be
    carefully considered.  Their views, together with  those  of  Professor
    Ranger and W77, painted a bleaker picture than that  projected  by  the
    respondent.

47.   Turning to the respondent's OGN, W66 noted this referred to  selective
    aspects of the FFM report and he was therefore also sceptical as to how
    useful the OGN was.  W66 had been asked in particular to comment on the
    broad suggestion of the respondent, that whilst the  political  climate
    in rural areas would be clearly dangerous for those perceived to be non
    ZANU-PF supporters, this did not apply to the same extent to  the  main
    urban centres.  W66 regarded the OGN as fundamentally  flawed  in  this
    view, in that it painted  an  altogether  unrealistic  picture  of  the
    reality of life in Zimbabwe.  To  begin  with,  the  vast  majority  of
    Zimbabweans had strong rural links and indeed referred to  their  rural
    homes as "home" which is where in the  normal  course  of  events  they
    would seek to return if, as likely, they were returning to the  country
    without realistic prospects of employment or  a  place  to  live.   The
    rural areas would be  where  one  had  family  and  some  prospects  of
    support; however, as it was accepted that this would be  dangerous  for
    them to do, the alternative suggestion was that they should go  to  the
    cities where the political climate was "safer".  This, however, ignored
    the obvious issues that would follow;  namely,  how  would  the  person
    concerned survive?

48.   Inflation had stabilised since dollarisation and more food  and  other
    essentials were available in urban shops.  The  unemployment  position,
    however, had not improved at all.  A returnee would need to be  housed,
    fed and supported by friends and  relatives  who  themselves  would  be
    living a subsistence existence.  For the majority, the availability  of
    goods in supermarkets did not mean availability for them.  Survival  in
    urban  centres  for  returnees  was,  accordingly,  very   problematic,
    irrespective of the political climate.  Shona speakers would also  find
    it hard to relocate to Bulawayo, for language reasons.

49.   In any event, W66 regarded the political climate in  the  urban  areas
    as being far from stable.  Mbare in Harare and Chitungwiza, nearby, had
    seen and were likely to see more violence as the  election  approached.
    The same could be said for Bulawayo and other urban  centres.   Whether
    the violence would not be as bad as was likely to occur in rural  areas
    was not the essential point.   More  recently  than  the  FFM  report's
    findings, reports in the press had  indicated  that  the  human  rights
    situation was deteriorating.

50.   W66 said that he was aware that the Secretary of State  had  announced
    the previous week the end of the  suspension  of  enforced  returns  to
    Zimbabwe.  A mention was made by the Secretary  of  State  of  positive
    statements by Morgan Tsvangirai and to improvements in circumstances in
    Zimbabwe.  Mr Henderson asked whether W66 was aware that Mr  Tsvangirai
    continued to  make  positive  public  statements  about  the  improving
    situation.  He replied that he was  not.   He  was  aware  of  positive
    comments made last year but not that Mr Tsvangirai had  repeated  them.
    In the previous  week,  Mr  Tsvangirai  had  made  a  strong  statement
    regarding problems  with  the  present  arrangements  in  Zimbabwe  and
    appeared almost to have given an ultimatum that  things  had  gone  too
    far.

51.   At  AB"C"  page  8  was  a  statement  dated  7th  October  2010.   Mr
    Tsvangirai had called on the EU to refuse to accept some  recent  moves
    by President Mugabe.  Judges and  ambassadors  had  been  appointed  in
    breach of the power sharing agreement.  W66  said  that  Mr  Tsvangirai
    seemed to be  saying  that  things  were  bad.   This  was  the  latest
    reflection of the MDC leader's view of the current  impasse.   W66  had
    referred to it at the end of his statement at paragraph  20,  where  he
    had  said  that  the  statement  by  Mr  Tsvangirai  seemed  likely  to
    significantly increase political tension in  Zimbabwe.   So  far  as  a
    statement from the Foreign & Commonwealth Office ("FCO") was concerned,
    he was not aware that enforced returns of failed asylum  seekers  might
    destabilise the government in Zimbabwe.  W66 said that he could not see
    how a decision on  returns  would  destabilise  the  position.   Things
    seemed to be hotting up day-by-day.  W66  had  seen  a  Reuters  report
    dated 15th October 2010 in which President Mugabe seemed to be  putting
    pressure on the Constitutional Outreach Programme and to  be  preparing
    for elections next year.  The Reuters report appeared at RB"C" at  page
    282.  W66 said that the timing  was  significant.   President  Mugabe's
    reaction came about a week after the Prime  Minister's  statement.   He
    understood this to be Mr Mugabe's response.   The  President  had  said
    that he could not see why the power sharing agreement should last  more
    than  four  months.   There  should  then  be  a  referendum   on   the
    constitution with elections to follow.

52.   In his report, W66 had said that the  elections  would  be  likely  in
    2011.  Mr Henderson asked why he had formed that view.  He replied that
    unless he had misread what organisations in Zimbabwe were saying, there
    was a feeling that elections would be sooner rather than later.  He had
    no "inside track" knowledge.  Another indication was the resurgence  of
    violence recently, interpreted internally as reflecting the  likelihood
    of an early election.  There had been a lull after the violence in 2008
    and in early 2009 but things  now  seemed  to  be  degenerating  again.
    There was an indication that ZANU-PF were girding their  loins  for  an
    election.  W66 said that he believed that all this was  linked  to  the
    constitutional process.  This in turn could not be separated  from  the
    electoral process.

53.   W66 said that it was difficult to say when precisely things  began  to
    degenerate.  In his report he relied upon W77's and Professor  Ranger's
    analysis.  The power sharing agreement was signed  in  September  2008.
    It was a terrible year.  The new government took power in February 2009
    and there was a sense of hope  and  relief  which  lasted  for  several
    months.  It was probably from the middle or the end of 2009 that things
    began to emerge showing that the hope that the  MDC  could  effectively
    wield power and wrest significant control from ZANU-PF  was  not  well-
    founded.  The trial of Roy Bennett showed that the  MDC  did  not  have
    control of the process.  The impression W66  had  this  year  was  that
    there were serious indications of violence  around  the  constitutional
    process.  A statement by a human rights  lawyer  (Tetito)  referred  to
    things never being as bad as they were  now.   W66  said  that  he  was
    speaking about the general human rights position.   The  rule  of  law,
    freedom of expression and the chance  of  the  police  prosecuting  law
    breakers were all in  issue.   It  was  not  only  about  people  being
    physically assaulted.  He would not like to give  the  impression  that
    people were being battered to the same extent as in 2008.  The "A Place
    in the Sun" report included a conclusion that things  were  as  bad  as
    they had ever been.

54.   W66 said that the constitutional process and  outreach  programme  had
    begun.  He was really talking about the current  year  in  terms  of  a
    deterioration.  He had not  been  back  to  Zimbabwe  since  mid  2009.
    Representatives  from  civil  society  had  reported  an  increase   in
    political violence.  W80 had made a report on 18th October  2010.   His
    statement appeared in AB"A".  W66 said that in the two months since the
    Fact-Finding Mission Report had been  published  there  had  been  more
    reports of violence in Zimbabwe.

55.   Mr Henderson asked whether W66 agreed that there  were  countervailing
    pressures that would restrain violence once an election was called,  as
    the Secretary of State contended.  He  replied  that  ZANU-PF  had  not
    changed.  Neither had President Mugabe.  The balance of forces  in  the
    country was not dissimilar to  that  in  2008.   Police,  military  and
    intelligence services were still controlled by  ZANU-PF.   Things  were
    not exactly the same as in 2008 and one could not predict whether  they
    would be as bad in the future.  His opinion was that ZANU-PF would  not
    hesitate for a second in unleashing whatever they felt was required  to
    stay in power.  They did not care about SADC, the UN  or  the  EU.   If
    there was a chance that ZANU-PF would be voted out democratically, they
    would fight tooth and nail to retain power.

56.   W66 said that  the  March  2008  elections  had  actually  been  quite
    peaceful.  There was a backlash  when  ZANU-PF  lost.   They  were  now
    preparing their forces, the youth militia and the military to  win  the
    forthcoming elections in spite of  having  no  great  popularity.   The
    electoral  process  should  be  viewed  as  combined  or  consolidated,
    consisting of parliamentary and presidential elections.

57.   Mr Henderson asked about the part of the Fact-Finding  Mission  Report
    dealing with the views of  organisations  in  Zimbabwe.   The  Bulawayo
    agenda and the Bulawayo  Progressive  Residents  Association  responses
    appeared at pages 92 and 94 of the report.  How would W66 compare these
    organisations and their views to those of others, including Mr  Reeler?
    W66 replied that he would not change what he put in his report.  He had
    read the Fact-Finding Mission report before making  his  own.   He  had
    drawn attention to ethnic tensions should Shona move to Bulawayo and to
    difficulties arising because of differences in language.  He said  that
    he did not know the two organisations particularly well.  He  had  seen
    reports from them from time-to-time.  He would himself tend to look  at
    more established human rights organisations for a helpful  analysis  of
    the position in Bulawayo.  It was not just that the  two  organisations
    were relatively new; he was not aware that they had the  same  research
    capacity as others.  So far as the reference to an influx of Shona  was
    concerned, W66 said that he was not sure what the author of the  report
    was saying.  If he was saying that the traditional ethnic mix had  been
    diluted over the years, he  was  sure  that  this  was  true.   It  was
    difficult to know the period of time being considered.  Although  there
    was no legal barrier to relocation by Shona to Bulawayo,  it  would  be
    difficult for a person if, as a Shona, he or she could not pass himself
    or herself off as Ndebele.  The obvious port of call for a Shona person
    was Harare and not Bulawayo.  The first port for an Ndebele person  was
    Bulawayo.  If a Shona went to that city, he or she would be in a weaker
    position than a native of the city.

58.   Mr Henderson asked whether W66  was  aware  that  there  had  been  an
    influx of Shona  people  to  Bulawayo.   He  replied  that  he  had  no
    knowledge of that.  If  someone  had  said  that  such  an  influx  had
    occurred, he would not wish to  dispute  the  claim  but  he  would  be
    surprised to hear it.

59.   So far as the statement of W80 was concerned, at AB"A",  tab  2,  page
    30, he would agree with what appeared in the statement, particularly at
    paragraph  8.   Here,  W80,  whilst  accepting  that  Matabeleland  had
    experienced comparatively less violence than  other  areas,  added  "No
    area can be regarded as safe in the run-up to the  election.   A  Shona
    person, without family support in Matabeleland, would face very serious
    problems  in  terms  of  ethnic  differences  and  language  and  being
    accepted."

60.   We asked W66 to comment on the claim made by W80 that a  person  would
    face very serious problems in Bulawayo in terms of ethnic  differences.
    W66 replied that it depended to some extent on  a  person's  class.   A
    poor Shona person finding himself in a high density suburb of  Bulawayo
    would find it difficult to survive.  It would  be  very  hard  to  find
    somewhere to live or to purchase essential goods.   Even  if  a  person
    were not targeted by reason of his or her ethnicity, he would  be  very
    isolated.  It would be  almost  like  arriving  in  a  foreign  country
    without support.  Services had collapsed.

61.    In  cross-examination,  Ms  Grey  asked  W66  to   comment   on   the
    authoritativeness of the organisations consulted  in  the  Fact-Finding
    Mission.  W66 said that Zimbabwe Rights was a good source of  evidence.
    It had been in existence since the 1980s and a  was  a  member  of  the
    Forum.  It was a credible organisation.  Organisation  A,  one  of  the
    anonymous sources, was known to him and he would describe it as a  very
    credible source.  The Research and Advocacy Unit was  also  a  credible
    source.  Mr Reeler was involved with it.  GALZ was also a member of the
    Forum and a credible source.  A key activist had  passed  away  in  the
    last year and he was not aware of the current dynamics.   The  Zimbabwe
    Association of Doctors for Human Rights  was  an  organisation  set  up
    after W66 left the country in 2002.  It too was a member of  the  Forum
    and he knew some of the members.  He believed that it  was  a  credible
    source.  They made an attempt to capture the views of health workers in
    Zimbabwe.

62.   So far as  Zimbabwe  Lawyers  for  Human  Rights  was  concerned,  W66
    described it as a very serious organisation.  Those involved  tried  to
    build a culture of respect for human rights and to respond  to  abuses.
    They focused on the most arduous breaches of human rights and tried  to
    defend people brought before the courts.  So  far  as  the  Counselling
    Services Unit was concerned, he had great respect for the  organisation
    in what they were trying to do.  They provided help and counselling  to
    those who were tortured or physically assaulted.   He  knew  a  leading
    doctor involved.  He believed that she was not so astute  at  political
    analysis.  They had frontline knowledge concerning the victims of abuse
    but analysing or drawing conclusions was something  he  would  be  less
    confident that they could do.  The organisation was not a member of the
    Forum.  He did not know the extent of the presence the organisation had
    outside Harare.  Organisation B  (at  page  81)  was  an  international
    organisation.   W66  said  that  he  did  not  know  much  about  their
    involvement but would describe the source as credible.  Their focus was
    a humanitarian one.  The Forum appeared at page 88 of  the  bundle  (at
    page 87 of the Fact-Finding Mission Report).  W66 said that  the  Forum
    was a coalition but had its own  secretariat,  lawyers  and  employees.
    He agreed with W80's analysis.  The CCJPZ was an  organisation  he  had
    huge respect for.  The leadership had changed from  time-to-time.   The
    CCJPZ was a member of the Forum.

63.   The next two, Bulawayo Agenda and the Bulawayo  Progressive  Residents
    Association were organisations he knew little of but his impression was
    that they came into being recently.  The Commercial Farmers  Union,  at
    page 99 of the Fact-Finding Mission Report,  was  not  a  human  rights
    body.  They used to be concerned with white  commercial  farmers.   The
    membership was now probably 10% of what it was.  The farmers  had  been
    driven out.  He did not know what their current role was.   So  far  as
    Radio Dialogue was concerned, he did not know much about them  but  had
    probably read some of their reports.

64.   Ms Grey asked whether the list of bodies represented a serious  effort
    to engage the views of NGOs and independent voices.  W66 said  that  he
    would agree but others might also have been approached.  Ms Grey  asked
    whether other major human rights organisations had been missed out  and
    he replied that he did not think so.  It might have been interesting to
    get the views of trade unions or farm workers.

65.   W66's evidence in RN, including evidence on the scale of  violence  in
    Zimbabwe, appeared at page 16 of the determination in that case  (which
    appeared in the authorities bundle 1, tab 1 at page 16).  Ms Grey asked
    how W66 would say that the picture on  the  ground  had  changed  since
    then.  He replied that although an  election  appeared  to  be  on  the
    horizon,  it  had  not  been  officially  set.   The  facts  were  very
    different, compared with 2008.  In his report,  he  had  described  the
    gist of things.  There were numerous indications that an  election  was
    coming.  Zimbabwe's history indicated that  this  would  be  a  violent
    event.  On the ground now, it would be wrong  to  suggest  that  things
    were as bad as they were in 2008.  Ms Grey asked whether he would agree
    that if there was violence, it was smaller in  scale.   W66  said  that
    this was so.  People would say that things might come back or even  get
    worse.  Between the two elections in 2008, there was an attack  on  the
    population and an  orgy  of  violence,  as  he  had  described  in  his
    statement.  Zimbabwe was not currently in the same position,  yet.   He
    did not want to suggest that he had more knowledge  than  organisations
    on the ground but his impression was  that  some  on  the  ground  were
    concerned at  what  was  coming.   There  were  worrying  developments.
    However, the numbers attacked were not the same.

66.   Ms Grey asked whether W66 would  agree  that  there  were  differences
    between the regions.  He replied that he would not disagree.  The rural
    areas were more dangerous.  He also agreed (in answer to questions from
    the Tribunal) that some rural areas  were  more  dangerous  than  other
    rural areas.  He said  that  he  had  no  reason  to  dispute  that  in
    Matabeleland, in the western part, there was  not  the  same  level  of
    threat.  This territory was lost to ZANU-PF.  He said that there  might
    be other reasons for political violence there.  ZAPU was resurgent  and
    there were the  MDC  factions.   People  might  be  targeted  as  those
    perceived not to support ZANU-PF.  The risks still  existed  and  would
    increase as the country moved towards elections.  A person would be  at
    less risk if not politically active.

67.   Ms Grey asked whether there might be a distinction, in relation  to  a
    person moving to a city in Zimbabwe, between those going home to  urban
    areas where they might have family and other links and those who  might
    relocate to Harare  from  rural  areas.   W66  replied  that  this  was
    simplistic in  the  Zimbabwean  context.   Even  most  urbanised  black
    Zimbabweans had links to rural areas.   If  someone  lived  in  a  high
    density suburb of Harare such as Mbare, having left the United  Kingdom
    and returned, he or she might choose Mbare  if  back-up  was  available
    there.  If there was none, such a person would head for his rural home.
     He might face danger there, having been absent for a substantial time.
     A person with support would be in a different  position  from  someone
    without.

68.   W66 said that it was reasonable to suggest that there  would  need  to
    be an individual assessment of a  returnee  and  consideration  of  the
    sources of help available in the area he  would  return  to.   Ms  Grey
    asked abut the difficulties that might be faced by a returnee to Harare
    with a professional background but no family back-up there.   W66  said
    in reply that people of whatever class who found themselves in  a  high
    density suburb would find it very difficult without support and  things
    would be worse as the election approached.  If people could live  in  a
    low density suburb, they would have less of a problem.

69.   In paragraph 16 of his report, W66 focused  on  economic  barriers  to
    return.  He was trying to deal with the position before 2009 when there
    was hyperinflation.  Things  had  changed  with  dollarisation  of  the
    economy.  Some might say that things had become better but for the vast
    majority in the country, this was not so.  He agreed that the  informal
    economic sector was expanding and it might be possible for  someone  to
    establish themselves there.  He had read a synopsis of  the  report  on
    this sector which appeared at RB C, tab 7, page 158.  That  report  did
    not lead W66 to modify his view that returnees would be able to survive
    economically in urban areas.  Some might fall within the sector.  If  a
    person were young and dynamic this would be possible.  It  depended  on
    the circumstances of the individual.  A returnee trained as a  teacher,
    in circumstances where there was a  shortage  of  teachers,  might  get
    employment and be paid in dollars, so as to  secure  accommodation.   A
    person with no skills and no family back-up or housing  might  find  it
    difficult to break into  economic  self-activity  to  survive,  without
    support from someone outside Zimbabwe.  In paragraphs 16 and 17 of  his
    report, he had focused on people without support.  Those at the  higher
    end of risk were literally living hand to mouth, day by day.   Ms  Grey
    asked how that would put them at risk  from  political  violence.   W66
    replied that  in  high  density  suburbs,  the  indications  were  that
    political violence was increasing.  People might be caught up in it  as
    the elections approached.   The  MDC  remained  dominant  in  the  high
    density suburbs in Harare but ZANU-PF had not abandoned those  suburbs.
    They might be active there if only to try to stop people  from  voting,
    to secure a low turnout  in  the  polls.   A  returnee  vulnerable  for
    economic reasons would be at risk at the best of times.  He would  have
    fewer means to avoid trouble  when  it  came.   By  and  large,  recent
    violence was focused on the  Constitutional  Outreach  Programme.   W66
    would not, however, want to suggest that there was  no  other  violence
    but this was a focus.

70.   So far as a distinction between Bulawayo  and  Harare  was  concerned,
    W66 had no reason to doubt the account at page 7 of tab 1  of  RB  "C",
    regarding Chitwungwiza.  W66 said that this reflected paragraph  17  of
    his report.   He had not looked at the detailed  reports  of  political
    violence and was not aware directly of such violence in Bulawayo.

71.   The Outreach events which formed part of the COPAC  process  were  the
    flashpoints where people were attacked.   Those  events  could  not  be
    separated out.  The violence was interconnected.  W66 said that he  was
    sure that it was right that those who attended the  events  and  had  a
    political profile were at a higher risk than those  whose  profile  was
    low.  Those closer to the frontline of  politics  were  more  at  risk.
    Those who avoided the events were not free from risk.  They might  just
    be in the wrong place at the wrong time.

72.   Ms Grey asked whether W66 would agree that circumstances now were  not
    the equivalent of those in RN, where  anyone  might  be  caught  up  at
    roadblocks and required to demonstrate loyalty to  ZANU-PF.   W66  said
    that things were not as bad now.  The position was different.  He would
    defer  to  others  in  relation  to  flashpoints  where  an   ordinary,
    uncommitted individual might be caught up in a need to show support.

73.   Ms Grey asked about paragraph 19 of W66's report, where he  considered
    an article regarding the CIO training ZEC officials.  This concerned  a
    training course.  The article was dated  7th  October  2010.   Some  of
    those participating were told to switch off  their  mobile  telephones.
    Ms Grey suggested that this was not a sinister requirement.   W66  said
    in response that in paragraph 19 he was trying to give  a  snapshot  of
    events over the last few days.  He was trying to put  a  question  mark
    over the electoral process.  W77 might  refer  to  the  event  in  more
    detail.  He said that it was correct that the new head of the ZEC was a
    judge from the Supreme Court in Namibia and  a  respected  person.   He
    agreed that this was one difference between circumstances now and those
    in 2008.  The article was published  in  the  Zimbabwean  which  was  a
    newspaper widely circulated in the country now.

74.   So far as the elections were concerned,  there  was  much  speculation
    regarding their timing.   This  appeared  to  be  based  on  cumulative
    indications that they would be held sooner rather than  later.   Mugabe
    had made a recent statement that they would occur after  February  next
    year.  W66 did not know whether this was simply posturing on his  part.
    The NGOs appeared to be expecting elections next year.  Ms  Grey  asked
    whether this might be set against concerns expressed by the head of the
    ZEC regarding work  required  to  be  done  before  the  elections,  in
    relation to finances and the electoral role.  W66 responded  that  this
    would be to look at it in a rational way.  Things were not rational  in
    Zimbabwe.  The ZANU-PF felt that they had their best chance next  year,
    they would call the elections.  The ZEC did not matter.    People  were
    expecting an election.  His view was that SADC and others would have no
    real influence in securing a fair outcome.  He accepted that this was a
    matter of speculation on his part but it was based on  the  history  of
    Zimbabwe over the last ten years.  There appeared to be  no  principled
    or pragmatic policy from South Africa.  When  President  Zuma  came  to
    power, there was a feeling that he would encourage  a  more  democratic
    approach in Zimbabwe.  Morgan Tsvangirai called repeatedly on President
    Zuma to help get Mugabe to abide by the agreement they had but  without
    success.  W66 said that he did not see things changing in the future in
    this regard.  He did not recall the Prime Minister saying that he would
    not participate in elections if this would risk violence as in 2008 (as
    appeared at AB "C", tab 1, page 8).  If the MDC took a decision to pull
    out of elections, this would lead to more complications.  On the  other
    hand, the presidential election run-off had gone ahead in 2008, without
    participation by  Morgan  Tsvangirai.   If  the  Prime  Minister  could
    achieve free and fair elections, no doubt he would but the reality  was
    that the MDC was very weak and had little room to dictate developments.
     The Prime Minister had popular support but did not control  the  state
    machinery.  W66 doubted that he could give effect to his pledges.

75.   In re-examination, W66 said that he agreed with the analysis  made  by
    W80 in paragraph 4 of the statement he had made, at page 30 of tab 2 of
    AB "A".  He also agreed with the analysis made by Mr Machiso  from  the
    Zimbabwe Rights Organisation  on  page  11,  at  paragraph  11  of  his
    statement.  W66 agreed that Mr Mavlinga from  the  Crisis  in  Zimbabwe
    coalition was a credible source.   He  also  agreed  with  Mr  Reeler's
    second statement at paragraph 11, page 16 of the  same  tab.   He  also
    agreed that the RAU was better able to  provide  a  political  analysis
    than the CSU.  He had no reason  to  disbelieve  what  appeared  in  Mr
    Reeler's statement although  he  could  not  comment  directly  on  the
    contents.

W77

76.   The expert witness referred to here as W77 has  worked  on  Zimbabwean
    issues since 1990.  He adopted the witness statement which appeared  at
    AB "A", tab 1 page 26 and the note he had prepared at tab 2 of the same
    bundle, page 28.

77.    W77's  report  relied  upon  published  reports  of   a   number   of
    organisations, together with his  own  contacts,  both  in  the  United
    Kingdom and in Zimbabwe.  W77's most recent visit to  Zimbabwe  was  in
    October and November of 2009.  He considered  that  there  had  been  a
    "silent military coup"  under  the  control  of  the  Joint  Operations
    Command (JOC), following the signing of the Global Political  Agreement
    (GPA).  The political environment was "rocky" and the economy had  only
    partially restabilised.  The humanitarian situation  was  "precarious".
    The GPA had  provided  an  opportunity  for  ZANU-PF  to  maintain  its
    repressive, kleptocratic and economically bankrupt rule (paragraph  8).
    The Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), as guarantor  of  the
    GPA, had made efforts to improve the position.  However, despite 16  of
    the GPA outstanding 27 issues having been agreed, none of these was  at
    the core of the power sharing dispute.   Although  the  MDC  controlled
    finance and spending ministries,  it  could  not  win  control  of  the
    police.  Tsvangirai was scheduled to be a member of the  Mugabe-chaired
    National Security Council, which was supposed to replace the  JOC,  but
    the Security Council looked likely still to be composed of senior  army
    and police officers, who had sworn that  they  would  not  recognise  a
    Tsvangirai-led government.  The Council had in any event only met  once
    or twice.  There continued to be violence,  farm  invasions  and  human
    rights  abuses,  including  in  the  Marange/Chiadzwa  diamond   fields
    (paragraph 14).  The MDC, under  pressure  from  ZANU-PF  and  its  own
    desire to turn around  Zimbabwe,  had  moved  from  being  prepared  to
    compromise on most issues to keep the IG  afloat  to  a  more  critical
    stance, but without being able to inform its base  or  society  on  its
    basic thinking.  Without movement on security sector reform, the  ZANU-
    PF grip was unlikely to slacken.  Although ZANU-PF had lost some of its
    power, it now, through the use of diamonds, had an increased ability to
    pay and feed its client network.

78.   However, so far as political support was  concerned,  according  to  a
    CIO contact of a human rights activist, ZANU-PF was down to  its  "bare
    bones", a matter to some extent corroborated by polling  organisations.
    The majority of the population appeared  to  credit  MDC  with  turning
    round the economy and saw that the former sole ruling party had  little
    to offer (paragraph 21).  ZANU-PF would need a high level  of  violence
    to win an election; but such high levels  of  violence  could  lead  to
    either/or SADC rejecting it and MDC refusing to participate.  "ZANU may
    be more in turmoil than MDC,  for  some  not  so  much  over  political
    differences but more between  those  more  disposed  towards  political
    violence to solve problems and those who see the dangers.  We could yet
    see, according to another church activist, the factions  becoming  kind
    of 'pre-warlordism' - i.e. a situation beginning to  develop  into  the
    chaos of Somalia" (paragraph 21).

79.   Life expectancy in Zimbabwe had dropped from 61 years in  1990  to  34
    for women and 37 for men in 2006  and  may  now  be  even  lower.   85%
    unemployment in the formal sector  had  driven  tens  of  thousands  of
    professionals to leave the country to find  work  abroad,  millions  of
    less-skilled  others  into  the  southern  African  region  and  Europe
    (paragraph 22).  Before dollarisation, hyperinflation had reached  over
    231 million%  or,  according  to  another  estimate,  89.7  sextillion%
    (paragraph 23).  The MDC-T's Minister of Finance had dollarised (or  in
    the Bulawayo area "randised") the economy and there were now  goods  in
    the shops although these were 100% imported from South Africa and  very
    overpriced.  Employment  was  "creeping  up".   Certain  factories  are
    either opening up or if they survived through the crisis  were  scaling
    up.  This improvement in livelihoods in the urban areas  was,  however,
    very partial and largely restricted to those with access to dollars  or
    rands (paragraph 24).  Those who had previously worked in the  informal
    sector had seen their situation worsen and a small rise  in  employment
    would certainly not capture their labour power and is  not  necessarily
    going to last.  Things were worse  in  the  rural  areas,  where  those
    without access to dollars were worse off.  The rural poor were more  or
    less out of the mainstream  economy,  being  dependent  on  harvesting,
    trading and survival.  After a better harvest last year, there would be
    a decline in 2010, leading to estimates that around 1.7 million  people
    would be in need of food aid.

80.   Western diplomats in Harare  had  pointed  out  that  development  aid
    hinged on economic and political reform but donors  were  too  familiar
    with the long history of Mugabe reneging on agreements.  Major  funding
    would not occur until there was a political  will  and  an  ability  to
    break decisively from disastrous previous policies.  The United  States
    and Britain, Zimbabwe's biggest aid donors, were reported to be unhappy
    that Mugabe had reappointed Gideon Gono as Head of  the  Central  Bank.
    Apart from the Chinese, the international community was  not  going  to
    provide significant aid and support  until  there  was  a  demonstrated
    return to the rule of law (paragraph 29).

81.   Given the problems ZANU-PF was  facing,  it  was  not  surprising,  in
    W77's view, that its response was militaristic.  Despite  its  supposed
    disbandment, there was no evidence that the JOC had  any  intention  of
    abandoning its strategies of maintaining its  power.   Its  main  focus
    would be on winning elections with the youth militia ("green  bombers")
    being mobilised under the control of the senior military as  the  shock
    troops for a ZANU-PF victory.  Given that  ZANU-PF  had  more  or  less
    destroyed the education system, it now had available  a  pliable  youth
    (paragraph 33).

82.   Zimbabwe had a high level of violence and patriarchal  attitudes  were
    extremely harsh on women.  40,000 girls were raped annually before they
    turned 17, according to the Girl Child Network.  Rape was also reported
    to be used as a political weapon.  It was abundantly clear  that  there
    would continue to be great difficulties for the MDC-T in ensuring  that
    the Ministry of Home Affairs, the police, army and CIO could be brought
    under the effective control of all parties (paragraph 35).

83.   Although there had been a period of quiet immediately  after  the  GPA
    and a swearing into office of the IG, ZANU-PF now felt more  in  charge
    and violence  and  violent  rhetoric  were  on  the  increase.   Mugabe
    retained control of the military and intelligence forces and the  whole
    system of governance ("organised chaos").  Faced with  the  refusal  of
    the west to remove sanctions, Mugabe and his followers  had  throughout
    2010 upped the "anti-imperialist" rhetoric (paragraph 36).

84.   W77 considered that the problems he had described meant  that  it  was
    very early days to be  reassessing  the  likely  impact  for  returning
    failed asylum seekers  (paragraph  45).   Nothing  suggested  that  the
    bureaucracy, military police and militia  would  quickly  change  their
    trademark modus operandi (paragraph 45).

85.   Zimbabwe's police state was vindictive and vicious; but  it  was  also
    inefficient, porous, distorted by personal  loyalties  and  corruption,
    with divided loyalties (paragraph 46).  Accordingly, its efficiency was
    limited.  It was estimated that more than 20,000 former police and army
    staff, from rank and file to very  senior  levels,  had  left  Zimbabwe
    since 2000.

86.   Anyone who had been in the United Kingdom for a number of years  would
    be viewed with some suspicion by  nationalist  elements.   These  would
    essentially see any opposition to the regime as  part  of  the  "regime
    change" agenda of the British and USA governments.   Little  protection
    could accordingly be  expected  from  the  authorities.   Militias  and
    soldiers continued to be deployed against the population and there  was
    nothing to indicate that forthcoming election would  be  any  different
    from that in 2008.  Although Mugabe had to take a view at some point as
    to how much he would have to listen to SADC  concerns,  the  fact  that
    SADC or AU peacekeeping forces have already  been  ruled  out,  despite
    demands for them from elements in  MDC  and  civil  society,  it  meant
    Mugabe was likely  to  believe  he  would  not  face  ultimate  changes
    (paragraph  48).   Violence  against  actual  and  presumed  opposition
    supporters continued.  Such violence was perpetrated by informal  state
    structures and youth militias.   This  was  attested  in  many  reports
    available from the London/International Office of  the  Zimbabwe  Human
    Rights Forum.  ZANU-PF youth militia were  under  the  control  of  the
    security forces and were used by them to infiltrate the MDC  and  other
    opposition elements (paragraph 53).  Although the  state  had  been  in
    severe economic decline for years, it had  always  found  resources  to
    fund its system of repression and rewarding its  supporters,  often  by
    printing money and now through the use of  diamonds.   Brief  and  very
    localised incidents of reconciliation appeared to have ceased as  ZANU-
    PF had attempted to reassert its hegemony over previously loyal  areas.
    There might be greater intimidation and ill-treatment  in  rural  areas
    but the nature of ZANU-PF violence, either  random  or  selective,  was
    such that few areas were "completely safe" (paragraph  54).   In  rural
    areas the authorities/local chief structures were keen to know who  was
    in their areas.  Local government structures had either  been  bent  to
    ruling party purposes or under  their  control  to  begin  with.   This
    included chiefs who were paid members of the party/state apparatus  and
    who reported any suspicions they  had  on  local  residents  and  newly
    arrived people to the authorities, including the  CIO  (paragraph  56).
    Returnees to urban areas, especially if there was no  family  or  other
    support, would find it next to impossible to sustain themselves.  Risks
    of relocating were  likely  to  increase  as  the  election  approached
    (paragraph 55).  "All of the above meant that there would be a risk  of
    ill-treatment for returnees for not supporting ZANU-PF, for having been
    out of the country for some time and for those having  been  associated
    with the opposition and/or an NGO.  If taken together,  these  seem  to
    indicate a cumulative risk." (sic)

87.   A Harare based activist considered that  teaching  was  still  a  very
    high  tension  and  risk  sector  "especially  in  the  times  of   the
    constitution outreach and debate process - and the prospective outreach
    about healing  and  justice  -  where  teachers,  potentially  literate
    community advisers and leaders, are being  seen  as  a  threat,  again"
    (paragraph 61).

88.   2011 was likely to  be  an  election  year,  with  even  the  Zimbabwe
    Electoral Commission believing it  was  not  possible  to  provide  the
    necessary structures for a free and fair poll.  There were  reports  of
    ZANU-PF  gearing  up  for  intimidation  in  both  constitutional   and
    electoral  terms,  with  the  expectation  that   violence   would   be
    particularly directed at areas that abandoned ZANU-PF in  2008.   ZANU-
    PF's capacity and willingness to use violence did not  appear  to  have
    abated "although intimidation and some violence  rather  than  systemic
    violence were the current characteristics" (paragraph 62).

89.   At paragraph 63, W77 provided a "balance sheet".  Amongst the  factors
    noted were the stabilisation of the economy,  a  constitutional  reform
    process having begun with meetings around the country (but with reports
    of the youth militia being used to  control/divert  the  process);  the
    return of the BBC to Zimbabwe, but with no indication from ZANU-PF that
    they had any  real  intention  of  changing  behaviour  or  policy  and
    increasing  hate  speech  in  the  state  controlled  media;  ambiguous
    acknowledgements that torture  and  abduction  may  have  taken  place,
    whilst defending this on the grounds of it being a battle against "neo-
    colonialism"; reports of continued repression, abductions and  refusals
    to free political detainees;  high  food  insecurity;  continuing  farm
    invasions; continuing use of the  youth  militia  to  attack  suspected
    opposition figures and supporters, those speaking out at constitutional
    outreach meetings (or  even  attending  them);  every  indication  that
    violence such as that seen in 2008's election periods would recur;  ...
    for regional or continental pressure to  ensure  that  GPA  commitments
    were honoured; and police still arresting and beating up  demonstrators
    and opponents of ZANU-PF.

90.   In W77's short further report of 11 October  2010,  he  gave  a  brief
    description of Zimbabwean civil society.  There was  a  wide  range  of
    groups within Zimbabwe that fell within civil society,  with  different
    interests and variations in expertise and methodology.   Comments  from
    civil society could be misinterpreted  as  often  contrary  to  western
    notions.  There was a degree of acceptance  of  violence,  intimidation
    and political interference, as being normal.  Also,  W77  said  that  a
    phrase that seemed expressed with caution could be hiding a  good  deal
    more.  It was debatable whether this stemmed from Shona culture,  often
    deemed to be somewhat passive, or from the experience of self-censoring
    after a decade of violence.  W77 identified the Research  and  Advocacy
    Unit as authoritative in terms of human rights monitoring and analysis.
     It was the successor to the  Amani  Trust,  which  came  under  regime
    scrutiny in the early 21st century, with the result  that  Tony  Reeler
    was forced to flee the country.  The  Amani  Trust  separated  into  an
    organisation treating victims and counselling them,  as  a  Counselling
    Services Unit and  a  Research  and  Advocacy  Unit.   The  Counselling
    Services Unit was not geared to information  collecting  and  analysis.
    W77 also considered the CCJPZ as having recovered its purpose and being
    instrumental  in  providing  information  from  areas  to  which  other
    organisations were unable to gain access, given that  their  structures
    went down to parish level throughout the country.

91.   He said that he had read the reports prepared by Professor Ranger  and
    W66, and had heard W66's oral evidence.  He did  not  take  issue  with
    anything he had  heard  or  read  regarding  the  current  position  in
    Zimbabwe.  W77 said that he is the chair of Zimbabwe EU Network.   This
    network is both church based and secular and lobbies on behalf  of  the
    Zimbabwean civil  society,  particularly  in  the  European  Community.
    Irish and British organisations are part  of  it,  as  are  French  and
    Belgian NGOs.  It spreads across  the  European  Union.   The  National
    Reference Group mentioned at  paragraph  5  of  his  statement  is  the
    counterpart  in  Zimbabwe.   Members  of  this  group  include   Crisis
    Coalition Zimbabwe, the Zimbabwe Lawyers for  Human  Rights  Group  and
    trade unions in Zimbabwe.  A contact in the FCO, a desk officer, was in
    broad  agreement  with  the  views  W77  expressed  in  his  statement.
    President Mugabe had ordered Tendai Biti to  set  aside  money  for  an
    election and a referendum next year.  W77 doubted that the  funds  were
    available but did not think that this would be an obstacle  to  calling
    the election.  If Mugabe wanted this to happen, it probably would.   He
    had available an alternative source of revenue in the form of diamonds.
     W77 said that he had seen the statement  made  by  Dewa  Mavhinga  and
    agreed with what was in it.  He was surprised that  the  Crisis  Office
    had not been approached by the respondent for its view.   He  had  also
    read Mr Reeler's two statements and strongly agreed with  what  was  in
    them.  He and his unit were an authoritative source.   He  also  agreed
    with what Mr Reeler had said in his second  statement  about  the  CSU.
    This did not exist to do the same job as the RAU.   That  was  why  the
    Amani Trust had split.  He did not disagree with anything Mr Reeler had
    said.

92.   W77 said, in relation to the statements from the CCJPZ, that  W78  had
    been optimistic in his first statement.  So  far  as  the  Fact-Finding
    Mission report  was  concerned,  W77  was  aware  of  the  sources  and
    organisations consulted.  Radio Dialogue had been set up  a  few  years
    ago by Father Nigel Johnson.  They worked with young  people  and  were
    involved  with  community  outreach.   They  were  unable  to   get   a
    broadcasting licence and were on air for perhaps a couple  of  hours  a
    day.  Bulawayo Agenda was a local organisation that promoted  dialogue.
    It played a role in a southern consortium of  NGOs.   The  organisation
    was thought to have an authoritarian style of leadership.  The Bulawayo
    Progressive  Residents  Association  was  new.    It   took   part   in
    demonstrations when allowed  to.   It  was  a  citizens  group,  not  a
    monitoring  group.   Members  were  young  activists   concerned   with
    community issues.  Neither was seen as research oriented.   The  people
    involved would tend to be youngish, well educated and middle class with
    some university education.

93.   Mr Henderson asked about the mention made by the interviewee from  the
    Bulawayo Progressive Residents Association regarding an influx of Shona
    to Bulawayo.  W77 said that people moved around.  Perhaps Shona  people
    moved to Bulawayo on occasion but nothing in  particular  on  this  had
    passed his desk.  Those who were educated and literate and able to move
    and had no problems speaking or communicating with  fellow  Zimbabweans
    might move there.  They  might  be  English  speaking  and  liberal  or
    progressive types.  Shona and Ndebele were  very  different  languages.
    The two ethnic groups had an  antagonism  historically  and  little  in
    common in terms of language or culture.

94.   In cross-examination by Ms Grey, W77 said that he largely agreed  with
    W66 in relation to the reliability of the  contributors  to  the  Fact-
    Finding Mission.  He was aware that  Bulawayo  Agenda  had  calved  off
    other organisations.  They had a broader reach  than  Bulawayo  itself.
    He agreed that it was not unreasonable to make  contact  with  the  two
    Bulawayo groups.  They  might  provide  raw  information  or  anecdotal
    evidence.  Ms Grey asked whether the view expressed in paragraph  5  of
    W77's first statement, regarding the shutting down of political  space,
    was an over-generalisation of what had happened, including in  relation
    to political space at a local level.  He replied that attempts to  open
    up space  had  been  largely  stymied  by  ZANU-PF  structures.   These
    included the local chiefs and the youth militia, and it did not  strike
    him that the space had ever been that large.  There  was  intimidation,
    the establishment of militia bases and control at the top.   There  had
    been attempts by churches and NGOs to engage with  the  COPAC  process.
    Participants were viewed with suspicion in  some  areas  controlled  by
    ZANU-PF.  So far as Matabeleland was concerned, ZANU-PF might  increase
    tension to remind the Ndebele people on occasions that they still had a
    presence.  So far as a distinction between Matabeleland and  Manicaland
    was concerned, he would seek to balance this with his second statement.
     In Harare, there might be some space  amongst  the  NGO  community  to
    organise and attend meetings.  Bulawayo had a more tolerant feel to  it
    but there might still be threats  from  the  police,  implementing  the
    POSA.

95.   Ms Grey asked about the Outreach Report in RB  "C"  and  the  contrast
    which appeared between Harare and Bulawayo, at  pages  6  and  10,  for
    example.  W77 agreed that this showed  that  meetings  went  better  in
    Bulawayo.  He accepted that there were differences between areas and  a
    distinction between rural and urban areas, where chiefs and headmen had
    a particular role in the former.  In  urban  areas,  there  were  local
    government structures and the police force.   W77  said  that  the  MDC
    controlled local structures in Harare, although they had  not  been  in
    power in the past.  When the MDC moved  into  local  councils,  ZANU-PF
    responded  by  abolishing  those  councils  and  seeking  to  establish
    commissions.  The MDC tried to take power back but  had  no  source  of
    revenue.   In  rural  areas,  the  headman  or  the  chief  would  have
    influence.  The picture was mixed.   ZANU-PF  also  had  structures  in
    place.  There was a coalition in name  between  the  MDC  and  ZANU-PF.
    People would be loyal in terms of ideology or to those who paid them.

96.   Ms Grey asked how this might affect  an  individual  returning  to  an
    urban area, perhaps to Harare, with no political profile  or  interest.
    W77 said that a person's class, identity,  and  where  they  came  from
    would all be important.  ZANU-PF violence might be random or  directed.
    In high density urban areas, curiosity about who was returning might be
    present, as it would in rural or quasi-rural areas.

97.   So far as W78's first statement was concerned, at  paragraph  13,  W77
    agreed that a person might be able to stay in  an  urban  area.   If  a
    person had dollars or rand he could  buy  stuff  in  the  supermarkets.
    This would not apply to many people.  It was possible  to  stay  in  an
    urban area without facing political violence.  If a person  had  money,
    he might move to a low density suburb.  The location was important.  In
    W77's view, having dollars enabled a person to survive and  live  where
    there might be no random violence, police or  spy  networks,  as  there
    would be in high density areas.  All economic transactions in  Zimbabwe
    took place in dollars, rand or the Botswana pula.

98.   Ms Grey asked W77 whether he would accept that Zimbabwe was no  longer
    in a period of widespread and indiscriminate violence, as had been  the
    case after the elections in 2008.  He replied  that  the  violence  was
    taking a different form.  It was particularly bad  in  2008.   Violence
    began to  increase  from  2009,  in  about  mid-July,  when  the  first
    Constitutional Outreach meetings were held.  The farm  invasions  which
    began in about 2000 had never really finished.  There  was  also  intra
    ZANU-PF  fighting.   The  COPAC  process  kick-started  the   increased
    violence.  Ms Grey asked whether it was  the  case  that  the  violence
    centred on the Outreach meetings and those not interested in  attending
    would not be at risk.  W77 said that he had two comments  in  response.
    ZANU-PF might force villagers to attend  meetings.   The  violence  was
    more to do with the elections rather than the  constitutional  process,
    which did not mean that much to ZANU-PF.

99.   The Constitutional Outreach process was rolling.  Ms  Grey  asked  how
    the risk of violence would continue in a high density poor  area,  such
    as Epworth in Harare, once the process had passed on to  another  area.
    W77 replied that in some places ZANU-PF  would  attack  the  MDC.   The
    militia might be bussed in or moved around.  They might have bases near
    areas which had voted ZANU-PF in the past.  Although there would not be
    violence in all places, there was some evidence of  intimidation  after
    the process had been completed in an area.  There was a  sliding  scale
    of risk.  MDC activists would be more at risk but ZANU-PF might  punish
    communities as well as individuals.  The threat to those at the  bottom
    in terms of risk,  in  high  density  areas,  would  involve  a  random
    element.  A person might be asked for a ZANU-PF card by the  police  or
    the militia.  A person might even be confronted by MDC  youth  although
    this was not common.

100.  So far as road blocks were concerned, 2008 was  an  exceptional  year.
    They were more random or sporadic now.  Intimidation tended to be  used
    but violence and the structures used in the past were ready to be  used
    again.  Some areas were safe, including the northern suburbs of  Harare
    such as Borrowdale.  The high density urban areas were less safe.  This
    appeared in paragraph 54 of his report.  Some areas fell in between and
    were neither completely safe nor completely unsafe.   The  low  density
    parts of the major cities including Harare and Bulawayo fell into  this
    category, as did parts of Matabeleland.  There were some medium density
    suburbs that were not completely  safe.   There  might  be  a  risk  of
    incursion by ZANU-PF.

101.  Ms Grey asked about the contact TS referred to in W77's statement  (at
    paragraph 60).  Should  the Tribunal rely on W77's evaluation of him as
    a credible source?  W77 replied that  this  was  so.   The  source  was
    anonymous.  However, he had  the  source's  permission  to  reveal  his
    identity to the Tribunal.  TS's organisation was Source P.  He appeared
    in RN as source TS.  W77 said that the risk of harm  would  be  greater
    for those perceived to be supporters of the MDC.   The  risk  of  being
    stopped and questioned was still there.  W77 said  that  the  risk  was
    there for people in general although it was higher for those associated
    with the MDC.  At the moment, the violence was  focused  on  the  COPAC
    process but there were still farm invasions and intra ZANU-PF violence.
     The risk would be great for those going to rural  areas  as  enquiries
    would be made of returnees.  In high  density  urban  areas,  the  risk
    might be the same.  The economic and political circumstances  would  be
    significant  to  the  fate  of  returnees.   People  would  still  face
    questions about why they had left Zimbabwe.   Ms  Grey  asked  how  W77
    would distinguish between the  risk  faced  by  families  known  to  be
    politically active and those who would return to families with no known
    profile.  W77 replied that the latter would face less of a  threat  but
    there  might  still  be  questions.   If  a  person  were  stopped  and
    challenged and not believed, ZANU-PF might fabricate  evidence  against
    you.  A person might be subjected to theft if he returned  with  money.
    It might be possible to dispel suspicion but the questioner  might  not
    find a person credible.  The family might be disliked.

102.  Ms Grey asked whether W77 was offering his opinion  or  was  aware  of
    particular incidents.  He replied that he was basing  his  comments  in
    part on Mr Reeler's evidence in his statements.  He did not  know  much
    about returnees from South Africa.  He had no useful comparison to make
    between returnees from South Africa and those from the United  Kingdom.
    South Africa and Botswana might push people across the border, although
    there might still be  a  confrontation  with  immigration  officers  in
    Zimbabwe.  He did not know if returnees in this category  were  tracked
    to their home areas.  So far as the timing of elections was  concerned,
    W77 would bow to Professor Ranger's expertise.

103.  In re-examination, W77 said that he had known  source  TS  for  twenty
    years.  This man fled into exile from Zimbabwe.  Some of those who fled
    to South Africa would be viewed as traitors as they were former members
    of the militia.  There was tension in the relationship between Zimbabwe
    and South Africa.  However, the mention  made  by  the  Forum  of  hate
    speech against the United Kingdom would not apply to South Africa.  W77
    said that he agreed with what appeared in Mr Reeler's  first  statement
    regarding the need to show loyalty and the  spectrum  of  risk.   If  a
    person moved to an urban area in a non-election period, the risk  might
    not be particularly acute but the key word  there  was  "particularly".
    The picture was mixed in urban areas.  In the second half of 2009,  the
    risk in urban areas increased.

Professor Ranger

104.  Professor Ranger is an acknowledged expert on  Zimbabwe.   He  adopted
    his witness statement at AB "A" tab 1 and his note at tab 2 in the same
    bundle at page 26.

105.  In that report, Professor Ranger said  that  the  economic  situation,
    following the Government of National Unity, had improved for those  who
    had access to dollars or rands  and  that  there  was  "certainly  less
    violence now than there was during the election  period  in  2008".   A
    process had been established to facilitate "national  healing",  albeit
    that that was proving difficult.  The Zimbabwe Human Rights  NGO  Forum
    had sent facilitators out into the countryside to  brief  people  about
    transitional justice and to ask their  views  about  how  it  might  be
    achieved.   Those  reports,  however,  made  "sobering  reading".    51
    parliamentary constituencies were chosen, on the grounds that they  had
    the most continuous record of violence since 1980.  In most  of  these,
    there were reports of harassment and  intimidation,  either  during  or
    immediately after the  consultation.   Having  said  this,  there  were
    nevertheless "many relatively open discussions".  It  was  widely  said
    there was relatively little violence currently in Matabeleland  but  it
    was undoubtedly there that "the coiled spring of trauma and  memory  is
    tightest".

106.  Professor Ranger  noted  that  in  June  2010  the  Bar  Human  Rights
    Committee of England and Wales, the General  Council  of  the  Bar  and
    others had published a report examining the state of the  rule  of  law
    after the GPA of September 2008.  The report found  that  rule  of  law
    issues had  not  improved  since  the  signing  of  the  GPA  and  many
    interviews expressed the view that the position was even worse.

107.   Professor  Ranger's  report  discussed  the  constitutional  outreach
    programme.  This had  been  designed  to  solicit  opinions  on  a  new
    constitution for  Zimbabwe.   It  was  said  that  560,000  people  had
    attended meetings.  However, civil society organisations had  denounced
    the process as being  dominated  by  politicians  and  had  called  for
    boycotts.  The independent press had been full of reports  of  violence
    and threats of violence.  At some meetings war  veterans  had  demanded
    support for the so-called "Kariba draft"  of  the  constitution,  which
    favoured presidential power.   In  other  meetings,  people  have  been
    assaulted for expressing  their  views.   In  some  places  chiefs  and
    headmen had excluded strangers and MDC  supporters.   Professor  Ranger
    considered that there was an unresolved legacy  of  violence  from  the
    past and that human rights abuses continued in the  present.   However,
    the most pervading emotion in the countryside and townships was a "fear
    of renewed violence".  That included violence that a  referendum  on  a
    new constitution; but the two scenarios that made people fear the  most
    were the general election which both Mugabe and Tsvangirai would  "call
    in 2011" and the "in-fighting within  ZANU-PF  when  Mugabe  eventually
    goes".  Although polls put ZANU-PF support only around 20%, few  would,
    according to Professor Ranger, welcome elections as things were.  Judge
    Mtambanengwe, a former student of Professor Ranger, had the  unenviable
    task of  being  Chairman  of  the  Electoral  Commission.   He  was  an
    admirable man with an excellent record as a judge  in  Namibia.   Judge
    Mtambanengwe's view, however, was that an election  was  impossible  in
    2011 because the voters roll needed to be totally reconstructed.

108.  Professor Ranger considered that people feared the election even  more
    than they hoped for it, because they expected a repeat of the  violence
    of 2008.  There were reports in the press that rural bases  from  which
    ZANU-PF operated its violent interventions in that year  still  existed
    or were being revived.

109.  Professor  Ranger  considered  that  it  was  likely  there  would  be
    elections in 2011, despite  Judge  Mtambanengwe's  objections  and  the
    fears of many people.  A report of 10 September 2010  in  the  Zimbabwe
    Independent stated that Mugabe had ordered his Finance Minister to  set
    aside US$200 million in the budget to  be  delivered  in  November  for
    fresh  elections  the  following  year.   A  plebiscite  on  the  draft
    constitution was likely to be held early  to  mid  2011  while  "no-one
    knows  when  new  elections  would  be  staged...   Mugabe's  direction
    reflects his unflinching determination to have fresh polls  next  year,
    whatever the electoral environment".  A report in the  Standard  of  12
    September suggested that Tsvangirai and Mugabe had struck a deal on the
    polls, and an election was  the  only  way  to  close  this  particular
    chapter.

110.  The Daily News reported on 19 September that there had  been  violence
    during COPAC meetings in Mbare.  ZANU-PF supporters had  realised  they
    were outnumbered and  resorted  to  intimidation  and  later  violence.
    However, police arrested only MDC supporters.  In the  light  of  this,
    COPAC announced that further meetings in Harare had been  "indefinitely
    suspended".  Tsvangirai said that he would not countenance any election
    if it was a declaration of war.

111.  The report ended by noting the  Zimbabwe  Inclusive  Government  Watch
    issue published on 17 September, covering the month  of  August,  which
    did not deny that human rights abuses and incidents  of  violence  "are
    currently less frequent than they were in the horrific election  period
    during 2008".  Nevertheless, in terms of impunity and the potential for
    violence, little had changed.

112.  In his document of October 7  2010  entitled  "Comments  on  the  Home
    Office submission and executive  summary",  Professor  Ranger  did  not
    consider that the basis for the executive summary was sound.  Professor
    Ranger had noted in particular the comment  "While  some  organisations
    noted that influential  MDC  supporters  could  be  at  risk,  ordinary
    opposition and MDC supporters were not thought to be at any  particular
    risk".  However, the Research and Advocacy  Unit  were  the  one  asked
    about  "profiles  of  victims  of  violence  -  why  are  these  people
    targeted?" to which their response was:-

         "In terms of profiles, the risk would be as follows:


         1. Office bearer in MDC/polling agent during elections.


         2. Members of MDC (known or discovered).


         3. Suspected MDC members (and possible to discover membership).


         4. Those linked with NGOs, Zimbabwe Electoral Support Network.


         To this list should also be added persons that do  not  demonstrate
         'positive affiliation' to ZANU-PF: this is especially important  in
         the rural areas and during elections."

113.  Professor  Ranger  noted  a  comment  of  the  Zimbabwe  Human  Rights
    Association that "People who work in the human rights areas or who push
    HR issues are  seen  as  enemies  or  opposition  in  political  terms.
    Therefore anyone who interacts with these people is  also  a  target...
    Also, resistance to participate in ZANU-PF activities is a  key  factor
    in violence - anyone who resists in this respect  is  also  a  target."
    Professor Ranger went on to set out quotations from the transcripts  of
    the FFM report in respect of  a  number  of  other  organisations.   He
    concluded that "A very different and more alarming set  of  conclusions
    could be reached on the basis of the comments  presented  in  the  Home
    Office report", compared with what was said in the executive summary.

114.  He had read the witness statements made by others  which  appeared  in
    AB "A".  There was nothing  with  which  he  would  disagree  in  those
    statements.  Mr Henderson asked Professor  Ranger  whether  he  thought
    that enforced returns, which were suspended until the week  before  the
    hearing, might destabilise the Zimbabwean government, as the  Secretary
    of State appeared to believe.  He replied that this was hard to answer.
     It would depend on  the  size  of  returns  and  the  period  of  time
    concerned.  Before the announcement made by the government, it had  not
    occurred to Professor Ranger that this issue was at stake.

115.  So far as the Fact-Finding Mission was  concerned,  the  Secretary  of
    State had  approached  two  organisations  in  Matabeleland.  Professor
    Ranger said that he was aware  of  Bulawayo  Agenda  and  had  attended
    meetings called by the organisation.  They were involved in seeking  to
    ensure that issues of public concern were debated.  Meetings  had  been
    held in Matabeleland north but mainly in Bulawayo itself.  He  did  not
    think that the organisation had a research  or  reporting  capacity  in
    relation to human rights issues.  Professor Ranger said  that  he  knew
    the Bulawayo Progressive Residents  Association  existed  but  was  not
    aware of them as a significant organisation.  In Harare,  there  was  a
    residents association with representation in the  townships.   Bulawayo
    had nothing like that.  He had read the report from  the  organisation.
    It appeared to be concerned with domestic issues.  Mr  Henderson  asked
    about the mention made of an influx of Shona people to  Bulawayo.   Was
    Professor Ranger aware of this happening in  recent  years?   Professor
    Ranger said that it depended on the period of time  they  were  talking
    about.  The last sentence in the material at page  94  might  refer  to
    decades.  The police and civil servants in Matabeleland  tended  to  be
    Shona.  This was resented but had been the position since the 1980s  at
    least.

116.  Shona people from Harare returning or moving to  Bulawayo  might  find
    profound difficulties in relation to accommodation.  Bulawayo had  much
    low density housing.  Up to ten percent of  the  stock  had  been  lost
    without replacement.  There was intense competition for housing in  the
    city.  The practical business of  moving  to  Bulawayo  would  be  very
    difficult, even if a person did not face violence.  Mr Henderson  asked
    whether the absence of family ties or language might affect a  person's
    ability to survive economically.  Professor Ranger said  that  language
    would not be a problem.  The influx of Shona over the decades had meant
    that Shona was used, with Ndebele, in Bulawayo.   Long  term  residents
    might speak some Shona.  The  informal  economy  was  not  thriving  in
    Bulawayo, partly because of  the  impact  of  Operation  Murambatsvina.
    Many of those who left Bulawayo after the destruction of their  housing
    were in the informal economy and they had not returned.  There was some
    fear of martial law in  Bulawayo,  largely  from  clashes  between  the
    police and informal vendors.  Bulawayo Agenda had  discussed  this,  in
    relation to a disproportionate  lack  of  investment  in  industry  and
    economy.  The first Shona influx occurred when  Bulawayo  was  a  major
    industrial city in the 1940s and 1950s.   It  was  no  longer  a  major
    centre as most industry had ceased to operate.  Difficulties might well
    result from the lack of jobs and housing.

117.  Professor Ranger said that the  COPAC  teams  held  meetings  in  high
    density areas in Bulawayo.  A friend, formerly of the Amani Trust,  had
    worked as a COPAC facilitator.  A report had been prepared after two or
    three days of meetings.  The Bulawayo event  was  overshadowed  by  the
    COPAC meetings in Harare which led to violence.  This was  less  so  in
    Bulawayo.  Many of  the  same  patterns  emerged.   Meetings  would  be
    announced and then not held.  There would be no real  discussion.   The
    COPAC meetings in Bulawayo were violently  noisy,  if  not  subject  to
    violence by means of sticks and stones.  The police had tightened up in
    Bulawayo.  The art gallery had closed.  It had held  events  since  the
    1980s.  An artist there had been arrested and faced a  serious  charge.
    The director of the gallery had also been charged.  The impression that
    Bulawayo was more tolerant and that  there  was  less  interference  in
    things was shaken up by that episode.

118.  Professor Ranger said that the government had thought  that  a  statue
    of Joshua Nkomo would please the people in Bulawayo.  However, the best
    tender came  from  the  North  Koreans,  who  were  very  unpopular  in
    Matabeleland as they had trained  the  notorious  Fifth  Brigade.   The
    statue had arrived covered in  a  black  cloak.   Stones  were  thrown.
    Joshua Nkomo's own family requested that it be removed and it  was  now
    placed next to a statue of Cecil Rhodes, behind the museum.

119.  Mr Henderson asked about JG's case and the schools she had taught  at.
     Was Professor Ranger aware of the Prince Edward  School?   He  replied
    that he had attended debates and Latin competitions there.  The  school
    motto included the last words of Cecil  Rhodes.   It  was  not  a  ZANU
    school.  Mr Henderson asked whether  the  fact  that  JG  taught  as  a
    trainee teacher there in 1992 and 1993 would mean  that  she  would  be
    seen as associated with ZANU-PF.  Professor Ranger  replied  that  this
    was not at  all  the  case.   Nor  would  JG  necessarily  be  seen  as
    supporting the opposition.  She had taught at evening classes and  said
    many who came were ZANU-PF officers.  However,  pupils  came  from  the
    wealthiest families in  Harare.   The  school  was  able  to  defy  the
    Ministry of Education effectively.  So far  as  the  second  school  JG
    taught at was concerned, the "Rock of God", Professor  Ranger  had  not
    visited it.  He doubted whether a teacher  there  would  be  associated
    with ZANU-PF.  The school was supported by a  Canadian  NGO.   When  JG
    taught there, ZANU-PF was the sole party in power and  responsible  for
    the education system.  Teachers had a  professional  independence  from
    the party until the 2000s.

120.  Mr Henderson  asked  about  Professor  Ranger's  view  on  the  future
    elections, and his comment that they were expected in 2011  and  likely
    to be violent.  The Secretary of State would say that they were  likely
    to be held later and that some safeguards would be in place to  protect
    people, including the appointment of a Namibian Supreme Court judge  in
    charge of the electoral commission.  Professor Ranger replied  that  he
    had known this judge since he was a student.  He was a splendid man who
    had fallen out with the military side of ZANU.  He had worked  for  the
    past decade in Namibia  and  had  a  successful  judicial  career.   He
    continued to live in that country.  He had an impossible  task  in  the
    elections as the voters roll was in chaos but there had been  chaos  in
    all previous elections and this would not stop them from taking  place.
    There were some measures intended to protect people in  place  in  2008
    and that was why the March  elections  in  that  year  were  relatively
    successful.  Publicising  the  results  and  the  votes  cast  made  it
    difficult for ZANU-PF to carry out too much  rigging.   The  party  had
    agreed  to   the   safeguards   without   understanding   fully   their
    implications.  There was then violence in the  June  elections.   There
    had been  further  reforms  to  the  process  recently.   It  had  been
    announced that results would be posted publicly and the overall outcome
    would be published within a week.  It had been said that  there  should
    be  a  police  presence  in  each  polling   station.    Human   rights
    organisations in Zimbabwe had commended some suggestions and criticised
    others.  If the elections were held later, perhaps these measures would
    be implemented.  Even though the Namibian judge had said that the  roll
    was chaotic, nothing was being done to resolve it.  The  fact  that  he
    might say that the elections could not happen yet  did  not  mean  that
    they would not be held.  Mugabe had insisted twice  in  the  past  week
    that there would be elections as the present power sharing  arrangement
    was unworkable.

121.  Mr Henderson asked whether Professor  Ranger  was  of  the  view  that
    ordinary people would receive more  protection  from  ZANU-PF  violence
    than in 2008.  Professor Ranger replied that after the votes  had  been
    cast, they might be counted more accurately.  The key question was  how
    to get people to vote.  There were increasing reports  that  people  in
    rural areas were told that when they voted  MDC  last  time  they  lost
    their cattle, whereas if they voted MDC  this  time,  they  would  lose
    their lives.  Rigging the election did not just mean  manipulating  the
    vote.  What was needed was a  significant  monitoring  force.   Neither
    Mugabe nor Morgan Tsvangirai had asked for such a force  and  the  SADC
    had not said that they would provide it.  Without  such  a  force,  the
    opportunities for violence would be there.

122.  Ms Grey asked questions by way of cross-examination.  So  far  as  the
    Forum report was concerned, the evidence at  AB  "A"  Tab  2,  page  11
    showed cases where meetings arranged  as  part  of  the  constitutional
    renewal process led to violence or could not be  held.    There  was  a
    report on the position in June 2009, showing no  reports  of  violence.
    The second report (page 16) showed the  position  in  June  2010.   The
    summary contained no reports of violent reprisals.  The  closest  to  a
    report on such an incident appeared  at  page  50  but  this  concerned
    another process.  Professor Ranger said that he  agreed  that  he  read
    this evidence in that way.  In his own report, he had tried to  include
    some instances where there was an atmosphere of violence, including the
    harassment of churches.  There was a relevant quote in  his  report  on
    page 4.  At page 50 was material on Bindura.  Ms Grey asked about other
    quotes, including at page 3  of  Professor  Ranger's  report.   He  had
    highlighted difficulties in the  transitional  justice  process  before
    going on to comment on the following page that nevertheless, there were
    many relatively open discussions as  part  of  the  process.   Ms  Grey
    suggested that the 2010 report showed many such instances, as  at  page
    78 under "Observations" and also at page 70.  When the original reports
    were looked at, there was a rich picture of a debate which was  largely
    open and constructive and the fact that a debate could take  place  was
    indicative of the opening up of political space to some  extent,  since
    2008.  Professor Ranger replied that he had focused on  material  which
    showed what happened to people.  Discussions on  the  ground  had  been
    going on even in 2008, in the  midst  of  periods  of  violence.   When
    Zimbabwe gained independence, there was almost no NGO presence.  It was
    difficult to find out what went on in Matabeleland in the 1980s.   From
    the late 1990s on, there had been  a  revolution  in  Zimbabwean  civil
    society, with the establishment of many NGOs.  The  Peace  Project  had
    reported all through even the worst violence.  Ms  Grey  asked  whether
    the relatively open discussion in the constitutional  outreach  process
    was indicative of the opening up of political space.  Professor  Ranger
    replied that it would be dangerous to take the  exercise  as  proof  of
    improvement.  Immediately after the Government of  National  Unity  was
    established, there was an attempt to destroy the type  of  organisation
    having this sort of discussion.

123.  Ms Grey asked about the second part of Professor Ranger's report,  the
    assessment of evidence from professionals.  This included the report "A
    Place in the Sun" at AB "B", tab 3, page 112.  Ms  Grey  asked  whether
    the contrast or distinction between threats made in rural areas and  in
    small towns and the position in Harare and Bulawayo  was  a  fair  one.
    Professor Ranger replied that this was so.  The magistracy  were  under
    greater threat in  the  smaller  towns.   Ms  Grey  asked  whether  the
    ordinary citizen harassed by the police would see the magistracy as the
    first port of call.  Professor Ranger agreed.  There  were  spectacular
    examples of magistrates dismissing charges brought against people.   He
    would not, however, say that the magistrates had become  bolder.   Some
    had always been bold.  In Harare and Bulawayo, there was a  picture  of
    the magistracy retaining independence and resisting intimidation.  This
    was so even in 2008.  Professor Ranger accepted that his report at page
    5 might be qualified in this respect.  So  far  as  the  constitutional
    outreach programme was concerned, Ms Grey drew attention to the  report
    at the RB "C", tab 1 at pages 1 to 10.  In the overview,  the  position
    of Bulawayo was described as relatively peaceful  although  there  were
    incidents of coaching and harassment.  She asked how that  report  from
    the Peace Project  matched  the  account  Professor  Ranger  had  given
    earlier.  He replied that they did not match well.  What he  had  tried
    to reflect was intransigence and the  non-meeting  of  minds.   It  was
    possible to see the outreach report as more positive than the source he
    had relied upon.  He agreed that the COPAC process was  the  focus  for
    the problems of intimidation and violence at present.   Ms  Grey  asked
    about the report from the Peace Project at AB  "B",  tab  3,  page  84,
    dealing with the position in August 2010 (at page 241).  Most incidents
    were tied to the  ongoing  constitutional  process.   Professor  Ranger
    agreed with that assessment and noted that the report stated that  most
    rural  communities  had  suffered  harassment  and  intimidation.    He
    accepted that there was a contrast or regional pattern, as appeared  in
    the same report, comparing Matabeleland, north and south, for  example.
    He had not seen the  tables  which  appeared  in  the  report  on  this
    particular topic.  Ms Grey asked  about  the  graph  which  showed  the
    position from March 2008.  There was relative stability  from  November
    2009 to the present.   Professor  Ranger  agreed  that  this  was  what
    appeared from the graph.  Ms Grey suggested  that  there  had  been  no
    recent deterioration but a continuing pattern from late  2009  onwards.
    Professor Ranger replied that he thought  many  were  saying  that  the
    situation was now worse than it was before.  People felt that there was
    no protection built in and that there would  be  a  repetition  of  the
    violence in the past.  The tension shown in  the  COPAC  process  could
    easily lead to a resumption of violence.

124.  Professor Ranger agreed with Ms  Grey's  suggestion  that  a  contrast
    might be drawn between the intensification of fears and  the  situation
    on the ground, which might be unchanged.  He  said  that  the  MDC  had
    provided one of the two chairmen in COPAC.  They spoke positively of it
    initially although there had been later disruption.  This  might  be  a
    reflection of what went wrong in Harare.  The province where there  was
    most  violence  was  Manicaland.   This  had  a  strong  MDC  presence.
    Professor Ranger said that he thought  that  further  COPAC  events  in
    Harare were not taking place but he did not know whether this  was  the
    result of a problem with funding.  At page 7  of  his  report,  he  had
    mentioned under-funding as an issue.  COPAC was a preparation for a new
    constitution and a referendum.  In 1999 and 2000,  there  was  violence
    associated with a referendum even  though  there  was  no  consultation
    prior to it.  Ms Grey asked how these events would have an impact on an
    ordinary Zimbabwean  citizen  with  no  particular  profile  who  might
    experience a COPAC event in his or her town, compared with the position
    once the process had been completed, perhaps a week  later.   Professor
    Ranger replied that after COPAC there would be a  referendum  and  then
    the elections.  The ordinary  villager  would  then  learn  that  these
    things were not done and dusted.  The message left behind would be that
    it was too dangerous to support the MDC.

125.  Ms Grey then asked about  section  6  of  Professor  Ranger's  report,
    dealing with elections.  She asked whether  the  appointment  of  Judge
    Mtambanengwe was a  real  change  from  the  position  in  March  2008.
    Professor Ranger replied that the electoral commission was  not  really
    expected to do its job.  Who could know whether the current head  would
    be effective.  The commission was  also  responsible  for  running  the
    referendum.  Ms Grey drew attention to tab 2 of  RB  "C"  at  page  72.
    This showed that deadlines had been missed.   Public  consultation  was
    intended to end in November 2009, almost a year ago.  Did this  suggest
    that the process would require at least another year?  Professor Ranger
    agreed.  Ms Grey asked whether this evidence showed that there  was  no
    real "gap" between COPAC and the elections.  Instead there would  be  a
    series of events likely  to  show  how  well  the  process  was  going.
    Professor Ranger agreed that some were saying that there  would  be  no
    elections until all the steps had been gone through.  Others, including
    President Mugabe, were saying that elections  were  so  important  that
    they should go ahead.  There was real uncertainty.   If  the  elections
    were called, their timing  might  be  opposed  by  civil  society.   If
    President Mugabe was determined to hold the elections, he would  ignore
    the constitutional outreach events.  There  were  several  pending  by-
    elections and the balance of seats in Parliament  no  longer  reflected
    the outcome of the March 2008 elections.  One of the factors in the mix
    might be the  unwillingness  of  some  MPs  to  subject  themselves  to
    elections.  Ms Grey asked about the suggestion at page  137,  paragraph
    3, that polls might be at least two years away.  Professor Ranger  said
    that he had no knowledge  of  the  "private  whisperings"  referred  to
    although the newspaper carrying the article was to be  trusted.   Civil
    groups were concerned and did not want the elections to be held  before
    the constitutional process had  been  completed.   Although  there  was
    uncertainty, this did not necessarily argue in favour  of  delay.   The
    calling of the elections would be a high  stakes  decision.   President
    Mugabe was painting it as a key election in the history of the country.
     It was correct that control  of  the  elections  was  not  exclusively
    President Mugabe's.  An agreement  between  ZANU-PF  and  the  MDC  was
    required.  Morgan Tsvangirai had his own  pressures  and  his  time  as
    president  of  the  MDC  was  also  running  out,  according   to   the
    constitution.  Morgan Tsvangirai had not  taken  a  strong,  consistent
    position and had said many different things about  the  timing  of  the
    elections  and  the  guarantees  required.   Nobody  could  say   where
    safeguards were coming from.

126.  Ms Grey then asked about the response of the business  community,  the
    evidence at RB C at page 139.  Professor Ranger said that the  business
    community was disappointed with the Government of  National  Unity  and
    had hoped for more investment.  The  Zimbabwe  stock  exchange  was  in
    difficulty.  The timing  of  future  elections  was  highly  uncertain.
    Professor Ranger agreed that his fear was that if  the  elections  took
    place, the violent events of 2008 would be repeated.   He  also  agreed
    that Morgan Tsvangirai had assured his supporters that he would not  go
    into a violent election or take part.  It was hard to believe, however,
    that he would not take part if the  elections  were  called.   Ms  Grey
    asked whether the two possibilities in that event were  that  he  would
    pull out or that the electoral commission would  suspend  the  process.
    Professor Ranger said  that  this  would  be  good  to  see.   The  MDC
    continued to learn.  They saw that pulling out last time did not do any
    good.  They hoped to get SADC support.  The option of withdrawing would
    put Morgan Tsvangirai in a difficult position, as had happened  in  the
    past.  He accepted that it might be right  that  exposure  to  violence
    inflicted on his supporters would be  a  compelling  factor.   Ms  Grey
    asked whether SADC could play a key  role  in  deploying  monitors  and
    perhaps a  peacekeeping  force.   Professor  Ranger  replied  that  the
    possibility of such a force being present was low.  Monitors were  sent
    last time.  The MDC had in the past  convinced  African  observers  and
    others to be present.  There was no reasonable prospect, however, of  a
    peacekeeping force.  He agreed that SADC in  South  Africa  were  under
    pressure to see the stabilisation of Zimbabwe.  This  was  one  of  the
    assumptions of the Government of National Unity but it had  not  worked
    out.  The presence of monitors had a  stabilising  presence  but  there
    would have to be more of them, early on.  The patterns of the past were
    not cheering.  Since the Government of National Unity, South Africa had
    not been able to apply adequate pressure.  There was a possibility that
    this would occur.  All things were possible but Professor Ranger  would
    have thought that it would be very unlikely.

127.  In re-examination, Professor Ranger  was  asked  whether  or  not  the
    friends he kept in regular contact with in  Zimbabwe,  as  he  had  not
    returned to the country since December 2008 in view of  his  ill-heath,
    were in a good position to advise him.  He replied that it varied.  His
    old friends were becoming decrepit.  He returned to Zimbabwe  to  teach
    after he retired from Oxford.  He had many younger colleagues and  many
    who were involved with COPAC.  Many were returning to work as  advisors
    to political parties.  He had friends involved in all the processes and
    he was in regular communication with them.  He would return to Bulawayo
    in a month's time and would see many of those  involved.   Particularly
    useful  were  those  in  an  intermediate  position,  participating  in
    research or meetings.  He was in email contact with them.  ZANU-PF  saw
    him as a British historian.  He was on good terms with those opposed to
    ZANU-PF.  He agreed that so  far  as  political  space  was  concerned,
    although it would not have been possible to hold  an  outreach  meeting
    in, say, June 2008, it would have been possible by October  that  year.
    It would also have been possible earlier than June.  June 2008 had been
    a particularly bad month.  The incidents  of  violence  and  harassment
    peaked between May and June.  The graph Ms Grey had asked about  showed
    a level of violence similar now to the level  in  about  October  2008.
    The graph would not cause him to change his evidence.  He was concerned
    with potentialities.  President Mugabe's record in terms of  respecting
    matters agreed with Morgan Tsvangirai was not good.  He  was  certainly
    capable of announcing elections without agreeing this  with  the  Prime
    Minister.  President Mugabe was bound  to  the  COPAC  timeline  to  no
    greater extent than he felt himself  bound  by  any  other  agreements.
    After June 2008, his credentials as President were very shaky and there
    was a period in which he backtracked.  In recent months, the  trend  on
    the radio was to refer to him with his  fullest  possible  title.   His
    role as President was now emphasised more than in the past.

128.  The  Tribunal  asked  whether  a  person  with  no  visible  political
    background or affiliation would be at risk, if  he  were  returned  in,
    say, January or February 2011.  Professor Ranger replied that there was
    some truth in the assertion that the mere fact that a person  had  been
    in the United Kingdom would be a disadvantage but that  would  not  put
    him in danger.  There were  large  numbers  of  Zimbabweans  in  danger
    through developments that had been discussed in the evidence.   Such  a
    person would not be at risk at the airport.  So far as roadblocks  were
    concerned, there were some in Manicaland.  A person  might  be  stopped
    when travelling to a  rural  area,  in  order  to  stop  access  there.
    Broadly speaking, a person could get to the major towns  without  being
    stopped.  The high density areas of Harare were more  difficult.   Some
    had cholera.  There were shortages of  water  and  power.   There  were
    three kinds of zone in Harare.  There  was  small  scale,  low  density
    housing.  Those housed there were now the white community, the coloured
    community and Africans who were not so poor.  The low density areas had
    more Africans than in the past.   In  areas  of  intermediate  density,
    social services had collapsed and  they  were  in  terrible  disrepair.
    There were problems with dereliction but not with gangs.   These  areas
    might be described as  "medium  density  areas".   There  had  been  an
    extension of party politics in these areas.   Even  low  density  areas
    like Mount Pleasant had suffered trouble at the hands of ZANU-PF.   The
    areas one might describe as townships voted heavily in  favour  of  the
    MDC, as did Chitungwiza.  There  were  problems  in  the  high  density
    areas, although these had some services.  There was also a struggle  in
    the informal economy which tended to be about survival.  Market  stalls
    were still destroyed in Bulawayo and Harare.  Some Zimbabweans  present
    in the United Kingdom did not wish to return  because  they  could  not
    return in splendour.  They had no resources and would not  be  able  to
    buy a house.  They might fear losing face.  Many Zimbabweans  took  the
    view that it would be marvellous to come to  Britain.   They  were  not
    told that it rains here.  They feared being found out if they  did  not
    succeed.

129.  Ms Jegarajah asked whether an active MDC member,  known  to  the  CIO,
    would have problems  on  return,  at  the  airport.   Professor  Ranger
    replied that such a person would face more problems than those  without
    such a profile.  Lists were made and MDC members were in  more  danger.
    President Mugabe might decide to eliminate activists.

130.  Mr Henderson asked whether the medium density areas were  occupied  by
    poor white and not so poor black people.  Professor Ranger replied that
    this was so.  Such people would not be destitute.   There  was  also  a
    geographical element in Harare.   There  was  proximity  between  white
    suburbs and high density areas.  There had been violence in Epworth,  a
    squatter settlement.  There were areas in a  buffer  zone  between  the
    good areas and the areas of potential violence.

Mark Walker

131.  Mr Walker  was  Assistant  Director  in  the  Directorate  of  Central
    Operations and Performance in the UKBA and Head of the Country Specific
    Policy Team.  He is now Head of Country Specific Litigation Team in the
    Appeals and Removals Directorate of UKBA.

132.  Mr Walker adopted his statements of 2 September 2010  and  15  October
    2010.  The first of these exhibited certain records of information that
    were provided to  a  joint  FCO/UKBA  fact-finding  team  that  visited
    Zimbabwe in August 2010.  The team's work led  to  the  FFM  report  of
    September 2010.  The sources contacted by the team were  informed  that
    if they did not respond to the invitation to comment on or approve  the
    records within seven days, it would be assumed that they  were  content
    that the records were accurate.  COIS, however, will continue  to  seek
    positive confirmation.  Speaking before the FFM report  was  published,
    Mr Walker's first statement opined that the final version of the report
    will probably present the information thematically, as well as  records
    of what  individual  sources  said,  and  would  include  an  executive
    summary.  There would, however, be no further analysis and  no  further
    information, apart from that in the records attached to the  statement,
    unless the information was  proactively  provided  by  the  sources  in
    response to a request that they confirm the accuracy of the records.

133.   Since  26  September  2006  the  Secretary  of  State  had   deferred
    involuntary removals of failed asylum seekers  to  Zimbabwe.   However,
    she now considered that it would be safe to resume involuntary  returns
    of those who had been found not to have a protection need.  The precise
    timing of the resumption of enforced returns would take full account of
    the situation inn Zimbabwe, including the political situation, and each
    removal would be considered carefully on a case by case basis.

134.   There  were  currently  three  general  Assisted   Voluntary   Return
    programmes (in addition to the Facilitated Return  Scheme  for  foreign
    national prisoners):

    Voluntary Assisted Return  and  Reintegration  Programme  (VARRP),  for
    those who had sought asylum and those with  certain  forms  of  related
    temporary status in the United Kingdom.  Returnees received support  in
    acquiring travel documentation, flight to country of origin and  onward
    domestic  transport,  airport  assistance  at  departure  and   arrival
    airports and up to �1,500 worth of reintegration assistance per  person
    including �500 relocation grant on departure for immediate resettlement
    needs,  additional  luggage  allowance  and,  once  home,  a  range  of
    reintegration options.  The majority of  returnees  were  said  to  use
    their reintegration assistance in income generation activities.


    Assisted Voluntary Return for Families and Children  (AVRFC),  was  for
    families comprising a maximum of two adult parents or  legal  guardians
    and at least one child under 18, who had either sought asylum  or  were
    in the UK illegally and who wished  to  return  home.   Such  returnees
    received support in acquiring travel documentation, flight  to  country
    of  origin  and  onward  domestic  transport,  airport  assistance   at
    departure and arrival airports and up to �2,000 worth of  reintegration
    assistance per person including a �500 relocation  grant  on  departure
    for immediate resettlement needs,  additional  luggage  allowance  and,
    once home, a range of reintegration options.  The scheme  was  said  to
    offer flexibility of reintegration for the whole family  and  increased
    emphasis  was  placed  on  the  use  of  reintegration  assistance  for
    educational needs, as well as income generation.


    Assisted Voluntary Return  for  Irregular  Migrants  (AVRIM),  was  for
    migrants who had not sought asylum but who were in the  United  Kingdom
    illegally and who wished  to  return  home.   Such  returnees  received
    support in acquiring travel documentation, flights to country of origin
    and onward domestic transport, and airport assistance at departure  and
    arrival airports.  There was generally no reintegration assistance  for
    AVRIM  applicants.   However,  there  was  discretionary  reintegration
    assistance of up to  �1,000,  considered  on  a  case  by  case  basis,
    available for vulnerable applicants.

135.  The respondent had since 1 September 2006 enforced the removal  of  81
    Zimbabweans who were refused leave to  enter  and  who  did  not  claim
    asylum.  Mr Walker was  unaware  of  any  reports  that  any  of  these
    returnees had been mistreated.  In January 2009 the respondent arranged
    the escorted  voluntary  return  of  a  foreign  national  prisoner  to
    Zimbabwe.   The  escorts  did  not  accompany  the   returnee   through
    immigration control at Harare  and  he  passed  through  these  without
    difficulty.  However, the escorts were arrested and detained  overnight
    before being deported the following day.

136.  The respondent made enquiries  with  a  number  of  other  governments
    about their experience of returning immigration offenders to  Zimbabwe.
    This  information  was  set  out  in  the  report   compiled   by   the
    Intergovernmental Consultations on Migration, Asylum and Refugees.   Mr
    Walker had been unable to obtain reliable information about the  number
    of travellers between  the  United  Kingdom  and  Zimbabwe.   The  only
    carrier currently operating direct  flights  was  Air  Zimbabwe,  which
    operated two direct flights a week.  Other  airlines  offered  indirect
    scheduled routes from the United Kingdom, mostly  via  Johannesburg  or
    Nairobi.

137.  In his supplementary statement of 15 October, Mr Walker addressed  the
    question posed by those representing  the  appellants  in  the  present
    case, regarding  access  to  the  persons  in  Zimbabwe  who  had  been
    interviewed by the team in respect of the FFM report.  Mr  Walker  said
    that some sources  who  had  provided  guidance  for  use  in  previous
    Zimbabwe country guidance cases had been distressed by  the  manner  in
    which they had been approached  by  representatives  of  appellants  in
    those cases.  One source had contacted the British  Embassy  in  tears,
    seeking to retract his statement after being telephoned at night by  an
    appellant's  representative  and  asked  whether  he   wanted   to   be
    responsible for Zimbabweans being returned to Zimbabwe to face torture.
     Another feared for his job after representatives of an  appellant  had
    contacted his boss.

138.  Mr Walker's supplementary statement dealt with the  witness  statement
    of Anthony Peter Reeler, which stated  that  Mr  Reeler  had  not  been
    informed in his interview with the FFM team that if  he  agreed  to  be
    identified he might be contacted by the  lawyers  for  the  appellants.
    Nor was he asked whether he was speaking in his personal capacity or on
    behalf of his organisation.  Debbie Goodier, however,  had  provided  a
    statement regarding her interview with Mr Reeler.  Ms Goodier explained
    the purpose of the  meeting  to  him  and  discussed  the  question  of
    attribution.  Mr Reeler responded that he was happy for  the  views  he
    expressed to be publicly attributed  to  him.   She  could  not  recall
    whether Mr Reeler was also asked whether he would be  speaking  in  his
    personal or organisational capacity.  However that question  was  asked
    in the email sent to Mr Reeler on 19 August 2010, seeking  confirmation
    that the note of the meeting accurately reflected what he had said.

139.  Mr Walker agreed with the criticism levelled by Mr Reeler at  the  FFM
    report, that it failed to indicate whether the sources were speaking in
    a personal capacity or on behalf of their organisations.  However,  the
    sources were asked to confirm this, although not all did so.  To  date,
    all but one had so confirmed the position.

140.  Mr Walker dealt with the questioning by Mr Reeler of the expertise  of
    some of the organisations that the FFM team had spoken to, noting  that
    Mr Reeler accepted that most of the organisations "do have expertise in
    the monitoring of political violence".  Fact-finding missions aimed  to
    cover as broad a range of views as possible and in the present case the
    COI Service had  sought  to  interview  individuals  and  organisations
    likely to have knowledge of the political and  humanitarian  situation,
    focusing on those involved in human rights and humanitarian  issues  in
    Zimbabwe,  including  international  and  domestic  organisations.   An
    initial list of potential sources was sent to the FCO,  inviting  their
    suggestions for other sources, based on local knowledge.  The  aim  was
    to achieve as balanced and representative a  sample  for  interview  as
    possible, though Mr Walker said that the final selection of sources was
    also influenced by practical factors such as availability,  timing  and
    location.   Mr  Walker  was  "confident  that  the  sources  who   were
    represented in the FFM report  provide  a  comprehensive  and  accurate
    picture" (paragraph 7).

141.  Although agreeing that it was probably true that  a  large  proportion
    of civil society in Zimbabwe had been infiltrated  by  the  regime,  Mr
    Walker considered that the organisations that the  FFM  spoke  to  were
    amongst the most vociferous in defence of democracy and human rights in
    Zimbabwe and that none shied away from reporting negative  information.
    As for the suggestion of Mr Reeler that the sources might have wilfully
    provided  false  information  because  they  were  concerned  to   keep
    relations with donors on a good footing, Mr Walker said in eight  years
    working in Country of Origin  Information  and  Policy,  he  could  not
    recall a single instance of a human rights or humanitarian organisation
    seeking to increase the flow of aid by underplaying the seriousness  of
    a problem.  On the contrary, the opposite was more likely to be true.

142.  Mr Walker regarded as "untrue and offensive"  Mr  Reeler's  suggestion
    that the United Kingdom government sought to manipulate the evidence it
    obtained by withholding funding from those who were unhelpful.  As  for
    the assertion that the British Embassy had been infiltrated, Mr  Walker
    had not heard of this.  So far as the Embassy's interaction with  civil
    society was concerned, Tim Cole, the Deputy Head of Mission,  had  said
    that the Embassy had partnerships with a number  of  groups,  including
    civil society organisations, in Zimbabwe, representing a range of views
    and opinions.  That information was used to inform  the  Embassy's  own
    analysis.  The Embassy did not attempt  to  exert  influence  over  the
    nature  of  the  information  gathered   or   the   conclusions   which
    organisations drew from that information, by linking these issues  with
    funding decisions.  To do so would undermine  the  objectivity  of  the
    Embassy's own analysis.

143.  So far as the assertion regarding  W80  was  concerned,  that  he  was
    asked if he was aware of  systematic  ill-treatment  of  returnees,  Mr
    Walker said that this gentleman was mistaken and that  neither  he  nor
    any of the other sources had been asked whether they would be aware  of
    treatment of returnees from the UK, systematic or otherwise.   W80  had
    volunteered information about what his organisation would  be  expected
    to know, unprompted, in response to a question whether he was aware  of
    any returnees from the UK.

144.  Mr Walker did not regard the circumstances of the  returnees  to  whom
    the FFM team spoke as particularly unusual.  He noted a report  of  the
    Solidarity and Peace Trust that it was only Zimbabwe's elite  who  made
    it to the United Kingdom.

145.  A survey conducted  by  UKBA  indicated  that  two  thirds  of  asylum
    applicants originated in the large urban areas.   The  rest  came  from
    smaller towns or rural areas across the country.

146.  So far as Sarah Harland's assertions regarding  the  IOM's  motivation
    were concerned, Mr Walker stated that  her  evidence  was  based  on  a
    misrepresentation of what had been said by Phil Douglas.  It was in the
    context of a discussion about whether IOM should be invited  to  attend
    Zimbabwe Diaspora events that Mr Douglas said that  although  UKBA  was
    currently  in  a  contractual  relationship  with  IOM,  there  was  no
    certainty that IOM would be the provider when that contract came to  an
    end.  That was simply a "statement of fact"  and,  in  fact,  UKBA  was
    "very pleased with what IOM has delivered in Zimbabwe" (paragraph  14).
    Any criticism by Professor Ranger of the executive summary of  the  FFM
    report was led by the fact that the respondent  did  not  rely  on  the
    executive summary but, rather, on the substance of the report as agreed
    by the sources.

147.  Mr Walker  said  that  it  has  not  been  possible  to  get  as  much
    information in the FFM as  one  might  ideally  have  wanted  and  this
    accounted for the absence of a  "trade  union  voice".   They  chose  a
    combination of organisations that COIS relied on and considered  to  be
    reliable, as well as suggestions made by the FCO.  Mr  Walker  selected
    one organisation.  Those selected were ones with whom  it  would  prove
    possible to hold meetings.

148.  Mr Walker was asked about the letter  of  18  October  from  the  FCO,
    regarding the  reasons  why,  hitherto,  it  had  not  been  considered
    desirable to enforce returns to Zimbabwe from the United  Kingdom.   He
    said that if Morgan Tsvangirai had been perceived by his supporters  to
    be compliant in large-scale forced  returns,  that  might  have  caused
    problems for the MDC.  It might also have been thought by ZANU-PF  that
    the MDC was seeking to have voters shipped back in order  to  vote  for
    him.

149.  Cross-examined, Mr Walker agreed there had  been  no  forced  removals
    from January 2002 to November 2004.  In July 2005 forced  removals  had
    been deferred, pending the country guidance in AA no. 1.  Removals  had
    occurred for a short period in July 2006 but had  been  suspended  once
    again in September of that year.

150.  Regarding the announcement on 14 October  2010  by  the  Minister  for
    Immigration that forced removals would recommence,  once  the  Tribunal
    had delivered its determination in the present  case,  Mr  Walker  said
    that the policy on removals was under continuous consideration  by  the
    respondent.  Mr Walker was asked how the position had changed  since  a
    statement made  on  2  September  2010,  which  indicated  that  forced
    removals would not resume.  Mr Walker said that the FCO considered that
    the political situation was right.  The reason the policy had not  been
    changed was not about the safety of returnees but because of the  FCO's
    concern to be as helpful as possible  to  the  Government  of  National
    Unity.  This was not Mr Walker's knowledge  of  the  position  but  his
    understanding of the government's  concerns.   Asked  about  the  press
    release concerning enforced returns  (P128A  of  Tab  2  of  respondent
    bundle B), Mr Walker said that paragraph 2 of the statement was  wrong.
    This said that returns had been suspended in September 2006 because the
    safety of returnees could not be guaranteed.  The press office had been
    told about this error.  A complaint had been made to them about it.

151.  Mr Walker said he was aware of a body of opinion to  the  effect  that
    elections in Zimbabwe might be likely in 2011 and that this would  lead
    to an increase in violence.  Indeed, there was a reference in  the  FFM
    report to an election unleashing "unprecedented violence".  Asked if it
    was not therefore a bizarre time to change the policy  on  returns,  Mr
    Walker disagreed, citing the reasons he had given.

152.  The executive summary of the FFM report was written  by  the  Zimbabwe
    Country Officer in COIS and revised by the line manager.   The  summary
    had not been written by Mr  Walker  or  Ms  Goodier.   She  was  not  a
    Zimbabwe specialist.  Mr Walker said that the reference on  page  5  in
    the executive summary of the FFM report to there being "fears that  the
    current situation may deteriorate ahead of national elections which are
    likely to take place in the next couple of years" were not  words  that
    he would have chosen.  He  emphasised  that  these  were  "fears".   He
    accepted, however, that it was a minority view that the elections might
    be later than 2011.  Mr Walker said it was probably the case  that  the
    civil society witnesses who had spoken to the FFM  team  had  indicated
    that the situation in Zimbabwe had deteriorated  since  the  interviews
    undertaken in August.  Mr Walker did, however, want to consider all the
    evidence before committing himself on that matter.

153.  Mr Walker was asked about  the  document  at  Tab  30  of  Authorities
    Volume 3, which was a document prepared by the Home Office in September
    2005 detailing  Home  Office  organisational  changes  in  response  to
    recommendations made by the Advisory Panel on  Country  Information  in
    March 2004.  In particular, Mr  Walker  was  referred  to  the  passage
    wherein the Home Office Minister "accepted the panel's advice that as a
    matter of good practice, the two  functions  [country  information  and
    policy functions carried out by Country Information  and  Policy  Unit]
    should be undertaken by different parts of the organisation;  and  that
    Home Office country information material  would  not  be  perceived  as
    impartial while it was being produced by a unit that was engaged in the
    development of country specific asylum policy".  Mr Walker said that he
    was unaware of that particular passage but knew  about  the  policy  in
    question.  Mr Walker was also asked about the minutes of  the  Advisory
    Panel on Country Information meeting on 8 September 2005 (Tab 34):

         "2.1     The chair noted that following the Panel's recommendation,
             the  Home  Office  had  separated  the   country   of   origin
             information (COI) and policy functions, with the  COI  element
             being  transferred  to  research  development  and  statistics
             (RDS).  He invited Dr Gary  Raw  to  introduce  paper  APCI5.1
             which outlined  the  organisational  changes  that  had  taken
             place.


         2.2      Dr Raw  noted  that  the  separation  of  COI  and  policy
             functions had taken place in two stages.  The  functions  were
             initially separated within Country Information and Policy Unit
             (CIPU) in December 2004.  In order to minimise disruption, the
             relocation of the COI function to RDS was  carried  out  after
             the publication of the April 2005  country  reports  and  took
             place on 1 June 2005.  The move to RDS had the twin objectives
             of removing COI from the policy area  and  placing  it  in  an
             environment  where  it  would  benefit  from  the   input   of
             professional research expertise."

154.  Mr Walker said that the separation had not  been  completely  achieved
    and that UKBA were a customer  of  the  COIS.   He  was  aware  of  the
    comments made by the Tribunal in the country guidance case of AA no. 1.
     Before going on the FFM visit to Zimbabwe, Mr Walker had discussed the
    matter with the head of the COIS service and it had been  decided  that
    the best way of obtaining relevant information was for Mr Walker to  be
    involved in the process; but  he  went  as  a  customer,  in  order  to
    describe what information was needed.

155.  Mr Walker was asked in particular about paragraph 146  of  AA  no.  1.
    This passage dealt with criticisms adopted by the Tribunal in that case
    regarding the information obtained by a delegation consisting  of  Home
    Office and FCO officials  who  had  gone  to  Zimbabwe,  prior  to  the
    hearing, in order to undertake a fact-finding exercise:-

         "146.    First, although no doubt Home Office officials have a very
             wide competence, it is surprising that the investigation facts
             and country circumstances was made by policy  staff.   It  was
             not made by, or analysed by, members of the Country of  Origin
             Information staff.  The way in  which  the  investigation  was
             conducted, and the way in which the results were presented  to
             us, gives rise to the possibility - we say no more than that -
             that the investigators may have had existing  policy  in  mind
             rather more than the discovery of  new  facts.   We  emphasise
             that we do not suggest at all that the  process  of  gathering
             information and reporting it to us was  intended  to  mislead:
             but we have to recognise that, as Mr Walsh in particular  made
             clear, the results of the investigation were being put  to  us
             very clearly in the  context  of  government  policy  and  the
             government's view."

156.  Mr Walker was asked  whether,  in  the  context  of  the  current  FFM
    report, he had gone  to  Zimbabwe  with  the  view  that  the  evidence
    regarding country conditions no longer supported the position taken  by
    the Tribunal in RN.  Mr  Walker  said  that  this  was  the  case.   He
    disagreed, however, that his view had an effect on the FFM report.  The
    COIS would not allow their objectivity to be skewed and the Home Office
    would not have the "slightest interest"  in  skewing  the  evidence  in
    order to ensure that a person was returned who would be at  real  risk.
    That would be the Home Office's "worst nightmare".

157.   Mr  Walker  denied  that  the  Operational  Guidance   Notes   (OGNs)
    represented policy and that there had perhaps been a lazy use  of  that
    expression.  OGNs take the facts and the relevant law and apply them as
    best can be.  It was put to Mr Walker that the FFM report could not  be
    impartial.  Mr Walker disagreed and said that its contents had not been
    affected by Home Office policy.  The team had gone to Zimbabwe in order
    to obtain knowledge from persons to whom they spoke.

158.  Mr Walker was asked about paragraphs 6  and  7  of  his  supplementary
    statement:

         "6.       Mr  Reeler  questions  the  expertise  of  some  of   the
             organisations the FFM team spoke to, although he accepts that,
             of the organisations that agreed to be identified in the fact-
             finding mission report  '...most  do  have  expertise  in  the
             monitoring of political  violence...'.   As  with  Country  of
             Origin Information Reports that are produced by  COI  Service,
             fact-finding missions aim to cover as broad a range  of  views
             as possible.  COI Service sought to interview individuals  and
             organisations likely to have knowledge of  the  political  and
             humanitarian situation, focusing on those  involved  in  human
             rights  and  humanitarian  issues   in   Zimbabwe,   including
             international and domestic organisations.  An initial list  of
             potential sources known to cover issues of interest  was  sent
             to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO),  inviting  their
             suggestions for other sources, based on their local knowledge.
              The aim was to  achieve  as  balanced  and  representative  a
             sample for interview as possible, though the  final  selection
             of sources was also influenced by practical  factors  such  as
             availability,  timing  and   location.    The   programme   of
             interviews was then arranged by the British Embassy in Harare.


         7. With finite time and resources, it is not possible to  speak  to
             everyone who may have something of value  to  say,  but  I  am
             confident that the sources who  are  represented  in  the  FFM
             report provide a comprehensive and accurate picture.  There is
             one other source in particular who we  would  very  much  have
             liked to talk to but it was not possible to arrange a meeting.
               Fortunately,  much  of  that  organisation's  knowledge   is
             published and is contained in the written  evidence.   I  note
             also that at least ten of the sources in the  FFM  report  are
             also represented in the appellants' evidence."

159.  Mr Walker was asked about the April 2008 review  of  COI  fact-finding
    mission reports and guidelines, prepared  for  the  Advisory  Panel  on
    Country Information by Dr Alan  Ingram  of  University  College  London
    (Authorities, Vol 3, Tab 31).  In particular, Mr Henderson referred  to
    paragraph 2.6:-

         "2.6.    FFMs to date appear to have conducted of the order of  17-
             42 meetings/interviews per visit.  In some settings  this  may
             provide comprehensive and adequate coverage, but  in  many  it
             may not.  With this in mind ideas about sampling, balance  and
             representativeness in the identification of  interviewees  are
             crucial and require deeper and  more  explicit  consideration,
             particularly in view of the complex political  contexts  where
             FFMs are likely to be undertaken."

160.   Mr  Walker  said  that  he  had  not  seen  this  Review.   He   had,
    accordingly,  also  not  read  paragraph  2.16,  where  a  concern  was
    expressed that a consultation of UKBA in order to gain a  full  picture
    of the range of information that an FFM mission could  seek  to  obtain
    might infringe the integrity of  the  COI  process;  and  that  it  was
    accordingly recommended that  it  should  be  made  explicit  that  the
    purpose of such consultation was solely to inform and improve  the  FFM
    process and not to serve any other policy objectives.

161.  Mr Walker was asked about the September  2008  document  prepared  for
    the Advisory  Panel  on  Country  Information,  entitled  "Fact-finding
    missions - methodology and guidance", written  by  Nick  Swift  of  COI
    Service.  Paragraph 4.1 of  this  made  it  clear  that  FFMs  were  an
    extension of the  routine  desk-based  research  used  to  produce  COI
    Reports and that FFMs were not "seeking to find  the  truth;  they  are
    simply looking to obtain a range of views from informed parties on  the
    issues in question".  At paragraph 4.2,  the  relative  advantages  and
    disadvantages of  giving  interviewees  advance  notice  and  editorial
    control were discussed.  The main disadvantages of giving prior  notice
    and "sign off" were that opportunities for eliciting fresh  spontaneous
    material were reduced and the need to obtain consent built a delay into
    the process.  The paper considered that  the  advantages  outweigh  the
    disadvantages.  The consent element, in particular,  gave  the  process
    inherent robustness and  transparency  "which  obviates  the  need  for
    extensive verification".

162.  At paragraph 5.2, there was discussion of feedback to the effect  that
    the term "fact-finding mission" was  misleading  because  the  missions
    actually obtained the views and opinions of sources rather than  facts.
    It was noted that "fact-finding mission" was simply the  accepted  term
    used by all countries which carried them out, although  a  recent  COIS
    FFM  in  2007  had  been  caught   "information   gathering   mission".
    Consideration could be given to reverting to that term in  the  future.
    At paragraph 5.5, referring to  the  report  of  Alan  Ingram,  it  was
    considered not to be  feasible  to  apply  social  research  models  of
    sampling to COIS FFMs "which often have to be arranged at short  notice
    and draw upon a relatively small pool of suitable  sources".   To  some
    extent  the  sources  used  were  self-selecting  owing  to   practical
    considerations of availability, geography and timing.  Although seeking
    to make samples as representative as  possible,  FFMs  made  no  claims
    about the validity of the sample and simply stated who was  interviewed
    and what they said.  It was left to the user to assess the value of the
    information provided by each source, as well as the overall balance  of
    the sample.  At 5.7 it was stated that  the  existing  process  whereby
    there was  internal  verification  by  two  team  members  followed  by
    explicit agreement from the interviewees that the information had  been
    recorded correctly was inherently robust and transparent.

163.  Mr Walker said that he was aware of the existence  of  this  document.
    Asked whether he accepted the statements to which  reference  had  just
    been made, Mr Walker said he would need to consider  that  matter.   Mr
    Walker had not been guided by the existence of the document in  framing
    his input to the FFM visit to Zimbabwe.  Mr Walker became aware of  the
    document only after the visit had taken place.

164.  Mr Walker was asked about the APCI document  of  April  2008  entitled
    "Evaluation of the report of the fact-finding  mission  11-20  February
    2008 Turkey" prepared by Dr Fiona Adamson of SOAS and Dr Ba?ak �ali  of
    UCL.  Mr Walker was unaware of  this  document.   Mr  Walker,  however,
    agreed with the following passage, as shown to him at the hearing:-

         "We note that statements by interviewees should not necessarily  be
         treated as authoritative but rather in many cases  as  opinions  or
         impressions.  Especially, given the relatively small sample, it  is
         unclear how representative the opinions  presented  in  the  report
         are.  When facts or statistics  are  quoted  by  interviewees  they
         should be backed up with written sources whenever possible.   Also,
         a statement by an  interviewee  that  no  statistics  exists  in  a
         particular area should not necessarily be taken as authoritative.


         HO: agreed.  The statements by the interviewees do contain opinions
         and impressions, as do many COI sources.   They  will  be  used  in
         context of other authoritative material."

165.  Mr Walker was asked about the minutes of the 7  October  2008  meeting
    of the Advisory Panel on Country Information (Authorities, Vol  3,  Tab
    35).  At paragraph 3.9 of the minutes, Nick Swift of  the  Home  Office
    stated that "The FFM report was  not  designed  to  be  a  'standalone'
    document, but to supplement the  COI  Report.   Also,  the  information
    contained in FFM reports did not claim to be 'objective fact', but  the
    views of the individuals interviewed.  Mr Swift said that these  points
    would be made clear in the introductory sections of future  reports  of
    FFMs."  It was put to Mr Walker that this had not happened in the  case
    of  the  present  FFM  report.   Asked  about  paragraph   7   of   his
    supplementary statement, Mr Walker said that he might not have used the
    word "comprehensive" on reflection, but nevertheless, given the  degree
    of unanimity in the responses, he considered  that  these  fitted  with
    other evidence, outwith the FFM report.  Although the team  could  have
    interviewed more individuals, he considered the range was  sufficiently
    representative, particularly given COIS and FCO involvement.

166.  Mr Walker was asked whether the team had been briefed by the  COIS  as
    to the relative weight to give to the views of the persons  interviewed
    as to the research capacity of their organisation.  Mr Walker  did  not
    know and the team had  not  looked  into  the  issue  of  the  research
    capacity of the organisations but that the COI and the FCO had been  of
    the view that they were credible organisations.

167.   Mr  Walker  could  offer  no  comment  on  whether  anyone  who   was
    interviewed had not realised what they were doing, when asked to sign a
    record of the information provided at the meeting.  One source who  had
    chosen to  remain  anonymous  was  an  organisation  which  had  worked
    worldwide and whose reliability was unquestioned.  Two other  anonymous
    sources were amongst the best known international organisations in  the
    world and were also reliable.  One was a source that was  also  one  of
    the witnesses for the appellants.  The fact that these assessments  had
    not been reduced to writing did not affect the issue of the  weight  to
    be given to the views concerned.

168.  Mr Walker described himself as having the function of a  tool  on  the
    FFM visit.  The respondent had declined to adduce  the  personal  notes
    taken by the members of the team, which were likely to be in the nature
    of personal jottings.  They had relied on the approval process of  what
    had been described as "transcripts", albeit that that expression  might
    be regarded as a misnomer.

169.   Mr  Walker's  understanding  was  that  they  would  be  speaking  to
    individuals as representatives  of  different  organisations  for  whom
    those individuals worked.  Mr Walker was aware of one  person  who  had
    not been speaking in that regard, as matters transpired.

170.  Mr Walker was asked  about  one  of  the  anonymous  interviewees  who
    (respondent D, divider 1, page 33) but apologised not  just  for  being
    unable to put the comments on the record but also for not  being  "more
    candid".  Mr Walker said this had  not  occurred  to  him  as  being  a
    problem but the responsibility for the accuracy of the FFM  report  had
    been that of the COIS.

171.   Mr  Walker  was  referred  to  page  6  of  bundle   D,   where   the
    representative of Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ) was recorded  at
    page 69 of the FFM report as saying that "in high density areas  openly
    gay men may face taunting and harassment".  In the  email  recorded  at
    page 6, however, the interviewee was recorded as saying that openly gay
    men in high density areas "may face violence, taunting and harassment",
    with the marginal comment that "although isolated,  it's  important  to
    highlight its occurrence [i.e. violence]".  Thus, in the published  FFM
    report, the reference to violence had been omitted.  As to whether this
    raised concerns about the reliability  of  the  report  altogether,  Mr
    Walker accepted that this had been a serious omission.

172.  At page 85 of the FFM report, in the record of  what  was  said  by  a
    major NGO, which asked to remain anonymous, Mr Walker was  referred  to
    pages 27 and 28 of respondent D, divider 1, where the  interviewee  had
    asked for amendments to be made to the record; but these had  not  been
    taken into the published document.  Mr Walker admitted that this was  a
    concern  but  he  nevertheless  did  not  accept  that  these   matters
    undermined the validity of the report.

173.  Mr Walker was also referred to bundle D, pages 68  to  71,  concerning
    the response of Zimbabwean Lawyers for Human Rights.  Their  record  in
    the FFM report had originally said:-

         "Those who are more  politically  active  are  more  likely  to  be
         attacked, for example MDC councillors or people who have  positions
         in MDC structures, however the nature of violence  depends  on  the
         area and the perpetrator of the violence.


         The violence is  mostly  in  the  form  of  threats  claiming  that
         violence in 2008 will be surpassed."

174.  The last sentence in the passage just quoted was  the  subject  of  an
    email comment from the interviewee stating:-

         "This  is  too  much  of  a  generalisation  and   underplays   the
         complexities of political violence in the country.  I would suggest
         it either be taken out or developed further to  indicate  the  many
         different types of political violence which are experienced.  It is
         definitely not just threats."

175.  It could be seen from the FFM report that the passage  had,  in  fact,
    been taken out.  Mr Walker said that that was not  necessarily  how  he
    would have approached the task.

176.  Later in the same response there was this passage:-

         "Relocation to rural areas is very difficult as there  is  no  land
         available to be allocated to new arrivals without the authority  of
         the chief in that  specific  area.   Movement  to  urban  areas  is
         possible but uncommon as economic reasons prevent people paying for
         accommodation."

177.  Again, there was an email comment as follows:-

         "It is not uncommon as there has been an influx  into  urban  areas
         but living conditions are terrible because people cannot afford the
         costs of accommodation and end up sharing  small  rooms  with  many
         other people."

178.  It was put to Mr Walker that this comment,  which  was  relevant,  had
    been omitted from the published report.  Mr Walker  admitted  that  the
    matter was unsatisfactory but it did not undermine the general validity
    of the FFM report.

179.  Mr Henderson then asked Mr Walker about  the  criticisms  of  the  FFM
    report voiced by W66 and Professor Ranger.  Mr Walker said he  disputed
    all their comments (appellant bundle A/Tab 2/pages 20 et seq).  So  far
    as the executive summary placing a more positive spin than  they  would
    justify was concerned, Mr  Walker  said  that  that  was  a  matter  of
    opinion.  Mr Walker had, however, argued strongly against the inclusion
    in the report of an executive summary; but he had been overruled.

180.  Mr Walker recollected that other interviewees  had  been  asked  about
    the profiles of victims of violence, not just the Research and Advocacy
    Unit (report, page 30); although it was only  that  organisation  which
    had provided a specific answer on this issue.

181.  Mr Walker was asked about paragraph 3.6.10  of  the  respondent's  OGN
    (RB/1/RB/1) which suggested that the FFM visit had found  facts,  which
    was inconsistent with the respondent's evidence to the  Advisory  Panel
    as to how FFMs should be used.  Mr Walker  said  he  was  not  sure  he
    agreed with that question, in that the FFM  was  part  of  the  factual
    basis on which the respondent made  decisions  regarding  international
    protection.

182.  In the FFM report the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum is  recorded  as
    saying that MDC supporters  would  be  relatively  safe  if  relocating
    within MDC  dominated  areas,  noting  that  the  MDC  is  "quite  well
    organised" and can "protect" those at risk of  violence  (OGN  3.6.17).
    Mr Walker was referred to the witness statement in appellant A/2/30) of
    W80 of the Zimbabwe Human Rights Forum, in which he said:-

         "6.      The summary refers to there being areas in which  the  MDC
             can protect its supporters by the threat of retribution.  What
             I was referring to there was isolated  pockets  of  resistance
             that have appeared on occasions.  I did not  mean  that  there
             were areas of the country that the MDC controlled or that  the
             MDC could generally protect its supporters.  As I said to  the
             Home Office, the infrastructure of violence  is  still  intact
             and ZANU-PF remains in total control of the coercive  arms  of
             the state.  There is little therefore  that  the  MDC  can  do
             other than rely on popular support in  the  areas  I  referred
             to."

183.  Mr Walker said that the source, W80, was a reliable one  and  that  he
    did not dispute the last sentence of paragraph 6 of W80's statement.

184.  Mr Walker disputed, however, paragraph 2  of  W80's  statement,  where
    the latter asserted that he "was actually asked whether the  forum  had
    reports of systematic ill-treatment of returnees since the GNU  and  it
    was the systematic ill-treatment of returnees as I said we would expect
    to hear about if such a thing was occurring".  Mr Walker said that  the
    interview with W80 had stood out in his memory  because  the  team  had
    been taken aback that W80 had volunteered what he did.  Mr  Walker  did
    not accept that W80 had referred  to  "systematic"  ill-treatment.   Mr
    Walker disagreed that W80's recollection was better than  his  in  this
    regard.  Mr Walker was "absolutely clear" that they had not  asked  W80
    merely about whether reports of systematic  ill-treatment  had  reached
    him.

185.  Mr Walker  was  asked  about  Mr  Reeler's  second  statement  and  Mr
    Reeler's third statement (A1/2/108).  This statement  took  issue  with
    paragraph 8 of the supplementary statement of  Mr  Walker.   Mr  Reeler
    claimed that he had actually said that "It should be noted that  it  is
    generally considered in Zimbabwe that a large proportion of  Zimbabwean
    civil  society  organisations  have  been  infiltrated  by  the  regime
    although the extent of the infiltration is very difficult to prove.  Mr
    Reeler said that his statement was about the general perception,  which
    was not possible to prove.  Mr Reeler did not know to what  extent  the
    British Embassy had been infiltrated.

186.  Regarding paragraph 10 of Mr Walker's  statement,  in  which  he  took
    issue with Mr Reeler as suggesting that HMG "seeks  to  manipulate  the
    evidence  it  obtains  by  withholding  funding  from  those  who   are
    'unhelpful'.  This is  untrue  and  offensive."   Mr  Reeler  said  his
    statement had made no such claim, nor would he do so.  Mr Reeler denied
    that he had made a general allegation about what the British Government
    might do in this regard; and he  was  not  suggesting  that  Zimbabwean
    civil society organisations would give evidence that they  knew  to  be
    false.  His point had been that there could be a tendency to exaggerate
    the expertise and knowledge of  the  organisation  in  interviews  with
    important funders or potential funders and to provide answers which  it
    is thought would be helpful.  That could lead to information being less
    valuable "without any deliberate process of manipulation taking  place"
    (paragraph 4).

187.  Mr Walker stood by what he had said in  his  supplementary  statement.
    He was also asked about the comments  in  the  third  statement  of  Mr
    Reeler regarding the  Bulawayo  Agenda  and  the  Bulawayo  Progressive
    Residents Association, two organisations interviewed by the  FFM  team,
    which according to Mr Reeler did not  have  the  research  capacity  in
    relation to human rights violations.  Mr  Walker  accepted  that  those
    organisations would not as such have such research facilities.  By  the
    same token, the Institute of Migration did not monitor the human rights
    abuses but had a wider migration role.  Mr Walker did not know when the
    IOM's contract with  UKBA  was  coming  up  for  renewal.   He  agreed,
    however, that  the  IOM  had  not  been  invited  to  certain  Diaspora
    meetings, pending resolution of the contractual position.  As  for  the
    returnees being quoted as saying very similar things, Mr Walker did not
    regard that as strange.  He said that the returnees actually  had  said
    the same things.   He  did  not  know  whether  the  returnees  he  had
    interviewed in Zimbabwe were the same as those who had  taken  part  in
    the video link  conference  meeting,  described  by  Ms  Harland.   The
    returnees who had agreed to talk to the FFM team were inevitably  self-
    selecting.  Entitlement to further  funding  for  a  returnee  was  not
    subject to that person "having to make IOM happy".

188.  Mr Walker had not checked in advance about the asylum claims that  the
    returnees had made, whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  team  did,
    however, have background papers on the returnees;  but  these  had  not
    been published owing to the risk of  the  returnees  being  identified.
    Only one of the seven returnees had  approved  the  transcript  of  the
    meeting.  Mr Walker was unsure  whether  good  practice  considerations
    indicated that, in the circumstances, the transcripts of the  returnees
    should not be used.

Debbie Goodier

189.  Debbie Goodier confirmed her witness statement  of  15  October  2010.
    She is a Senior Country Researcher in the Country of Origin Information
    Service of the UKBA.  She led the joint FCO/UKBA fact-finding team that
    visited Zimbabwe in August 2010.  She was also involved in the  process
    of writing up and finalising the FFM report, which was published on the
    Home Office website on 21 September 2010.

190.  On 17 August 2010 she and Andrew Jones of the FCO interviewed  Anthony
    Reeler of the Research and Advocacy Unit.   At  the  beginning  of  the
    meeting Mr Reeler was handed a copy of the fact-finding  mission  Terms
    of Reference and Interview Guide  (exhibit  1).   The  purpose  of  the
    meeting was explained to Mr Reeler and the question of attribution  was
    discussed with him.  Although Ms Goodier could not remember whether she
    or Andrew Jones led that part of the discussion, she could confirm that
    Mr Reeler responded that he was happy for the views he expressed to  be
    publicly attributed to him and that he had already spoken to solicitors
    based in the UK.  It was also explained that  a  note  of  the  meeting
    would be prepared and sent to him to approve.

191.  Ms  Goodier  could  not  recall  whether  she  or  Andrew  Jones  also
    explained that in seeking approval Mr Reeler would be asked whether  he
    was speaking in his personal capacity or on behalf of his organisation;
    but that question was asked in an email sent to Mr Reeler on 19  August
    2010, seeking his confirmation of the note of the meeting.   Mr  Reeler
    responded on 19 August 2010.  He was sent an email on 3 September  2010
    from  the  FCO  seeking  his  confirmation  that  the  note  accurately
    reflected what he  had  told  the  team.   Mr  Reeler  responded  on  6
    September 2010, stating that he had made some amendments and  additions
    and was now happy with the amended document.

192.  Cross-examined, Ms Goodier said that she was aware of  recommendations
    relating to the preparation of fact-finding mission reports,  following
    the FFM report on  Turkey.   She  had  not  received  any  guidance  in
    relation to the present exercise regarding what weight was to be  given
    to  the  various  sources.   She  did  not  know  who  had  chosen  the
    individuals to be interviewed.  Ms Goodier did not  have  any  role  in
    approving the summaries.  Her role was limited to being  a  conduit  to
    the researcher who had written the executive summary.
                                 APPENDIX B

     SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE REGARDING TIMING AND CONSEQUENCES OF ELECTIONS


Timing of elections

1.    The appellants'  witnesses  were  of  the  view  that  it  was  likely
    elections would be held in Zimbabwe in 2011.  That was the view of W66,
    although he admitted in cross-examination that he  was  unsure  whether
    Mugabe's statement that elections would occur after February 2011 might
    be simply posturing on the part of the President.  NGOs were, according
    to W66, expecting elections in that year.  If ZANU-PF  felt  that  that
    would be their best chance, then elections would be called,  regardless
    of the views of the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission.  W77 considered that
    2011 was likely to be an election year, notwithstanding  the  Electoral
    Commission's belief that it  would  not  be  possible  to  provide  the
    necessary structures for  a  free  and  fair  poll.   Professor  Ranger
    considered the two scenarios people feared most were a general election
    which Mugabe and Tsvangirai would  call  in  2011  and  the  infighting
    within ZANU-PF when Mugabe were eventually to go.   Elections  in  2011
    were, in the view of Professor Ranger, likely despite the objections of
    the Chair of the Electoral Commission (Judge Mtambanengwe).  Mugabe had
    ordered his Finance Minister to set aside US$200  million  to  pay  for
    fresh elections in 2011.

2.    A newspaper report of 12 September  suggested  Tsvangirai  and  Mugabe
    had struck a deal regarding elections, as being the only way to achieve
    resolution of the impasse in which they found  themselves.   In  cross-
    examination,  however,  Professor  Ranger  agreed  that  the  fact  the
    constitutional process was running far behind schedule  suggested  that
    elections might have to be held later.  There  was  uncertainty  as  to
    whether the COPAC process leading to the adoption of a new constitution
    would  necessarily  precede  presidential  and  other  elections.    If
    elections were called prematurely, their timing  might  be  opposed  by
    civil society.  However, if Mugabe were determined to  hold  elections,
    he would ignore the constitutional process.  On the other hand, one  of
    the factors in the mix, according to Professor  Ranger,  might  be  the
    unwillingness of some MPs to subject themselves  to  elections.   Asked
    about an article indicating that the polls might be at least two  years
    away, Professor Ranger  said  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  "private
    whisperings" referred to in it, although  the  newspaper  carrying  the
    article was in his  view  to  be  trusted.   The  present  uncertainty,
    however, did not necessarily argue in favour of delay.   It  was  right
    that the control of elections was not exclusively within the  power  of
    President Mugabe and that agreement between ZANU-PF  and  the  MDC  was
    required.  Morgan Tsvangirai had said many different things  about  the
    timing of elections.  In re-examination,  Professor  Ranger  said  that
    Mugabe was capable of announcing elections without agreeing  this  with
    Tsvangirai; and Mugabe found himself bound by the COPAC timetable to no
    greater extent than he had felt himself bound by other agreements.

3.    A report of 14 September from swradioafrica.com described  ZANU-PF  as
    having "kicked into election mode".  On 28  July,  The  Zimbabwean  had
    spoken of the "possibility of  elections  next  year",  which  led  the
    Transitional Justice Project within the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum
    to shift focus from trying to  make  the  GNU  work  to  preparing  for
    elections and making sure that they worked.   On  15  October,  Reuters
    reported that Mugabe had said that, after a constitutional  referendum,
    elections would be held "by mid next year.  I don't see any reason  why
    we shouldn't have elections  next  year."  On  29  October,  a  British
    Embassy egram considered that "An election lies ahead, but when  is  as
    yet impossible to predict".

4.    On 25  November,  radiovop.com  reported  that,  although  Mugabe  was
    "feverishly pushing for elections by June next year", the President was
    "facing stiff resistance from his MPs who were opposed to  the  polls".
    Prime Minister Tsvangirai, meanwhile, was "cautiously saying  he  wants
    elections  but  under  conditions  free  of  political   violence   and
    intimidation".

5.    In an interview on swradioafrica in June 2010, Anthony Reeler  of  the
    RAU had said that "Whether it's in 2011 or 2012  or  2020,  the  crisis
    will be resolved by an election and that election has  to  be  genuine,
    free and fair and able to  be  accepted  by  the  entire  international
    community".  A  Reuters  article  of  27  August  quoted  the  Zimbabwe
    Electoral Commission as saying that an election in 2011 was not  likely
    and that funding was the biggest challenge to holding an election.   In
    addition, the voters' roll in Zimbabwe was a "shambles".  This was  the
    view of the Chair of the Commission, Judge  Mutambanengwe.   An  online
    report of 20 July had said that, whilst in public ZANU-PF and  the  MDC
    were telling their  party  supporters  to  stay  ready  for  elections,
    "privately their officials say the polls are at least two years  away".
    This was the article about which Professor Ranger was asked  in  cross-
    examination.  Lovemore Madhuku,  head  of  the  pressure  group  called
    National  Constitutional  Assembly,  said  that  there   was   "nothing
    inevitable about next year".  Madhuku did not think  that  ZANU-PF  was
    sure about the electoral outcome "and I don't see how they  can  be  in
    any hurry".

6.    On 30 September, a  report  in  The  Independent  of  Zimbabwe  quoted
    Morgan Tsvangirai saying that he was no longer certain  that  elections
    would be held in 2011.  The MDC had to be sure that there would  be  no
    violence or repetition of what had happened  in  2008.   The  Financial
    Gazette, two weeks earlier, had carried a report from its correspondent
    in Harare, regarding the SADC summit, which  concluded  that  "talk  of
    elections is premature and ill-advised".  The correspondent  considered
    that the MDC was in danger of "falling into a ZANU-PF elections  trap".
    On 12 September, however, it had  been  reported  that  Tsvangirai  and
    Mugabe had, according to the former, agreed to hold elections in  2011.
    The Chair of the Electoral Commission said that rushing to hold  a  new
    vote before thorough preparations would inevitably result in a disputed
    outcome.  On 5 October, Justice Mutambanengwe  was  quoted  as  stating
    that his organisation did not have the funding to run a full  and  fair
    poll, thereby contradicting a statement in October by his deputy, Joyce
    Kazembe, who had claimed that  the  Commission  was  ready  to  conduct
    national elections if the leadership and government asked  them  to  do
    so.  According to the report,  (in  thezimbabwean.co.uk)  Mutambanengwe
    appeared  determined  to  counter  her   conflicting   messages.    The
    allocation of money for a poll would only occur in January 2011.  On 16
    November, thezimbabwemail.com quoted COPAC's  co-Chairman  Mwonzora  as
    saying that Mugabe's and Tsvangirai's call for elections in 2011 "could
    just have been a case of nervous excitement".  Mwonzora said that there
    was "nothing on the table  to  impel  his  committee  or  the  Zimbabwe
    Electoral Commission to hold elections next  year".   His  organisation
    did not "listen to what leaders say at rallies when they are talking to
    their voters" and none of the leaders had gone to Parliament to request
    an election for 2011.

7.     On  23  November,  thedailynews.co.zw  reported  that  the  Executive
    Secretary of the SADC had said that it  was  "premature  for  President
    Robert Mugabe and Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai to talk  of  holding
    elections next year when they had  not  fully  implemented  the  issues
    agreed in the Global Political Agreement".  On the same day the British
    Ambassador in Harare was reported as saying that the political  climate
    was not conducive to a free and fair general election.  On 21 November,
    The Standard reported that some ZANU-PF MPs had boycotted their party's
    caucus meeting, which was designed to force them  to  endorse  Mugabe's
    push for early elections.  A source said "It's only Mugabe  and  a  few
    people who want elections to  be  held  next  year".   Another  source,
    however, said that if the President says  there  are  to  be  elections
    "there will be elections".

8.    On 29 November, radiovop.com reported that  President  Zuma  of  South
    Africa had visited Zimbabwe and met Mugabe and  Tsvangirai.   According
    to a government source, Zuma "was in a no nonsense mood  and  told  the
    leaders that he was fed up with continuously having to  discuss  simple
    issues which could be resolved amicably".   President  Zuma  felt  that
    "only credible elections will help  resolve  the  political  crisis  in
    Zimbabwe".  Reporting on the same visit,  another  internet  site  said
    that the talks had  been  expected  to  focus  on  the  timing  of  new
    elections "after the ZANU-PF party had declared  that  polls  would  be
    held around June 2011".  After the meeting, none of the leaders  "would
    elaborate on the timeline for elections or  the  future  of  the  unity
    deal".

9.    The evidence supplied by the  parties  up  to  28  January  2011  also
    contains a substantial amount of material relating  to  the  timing  of
    elections. Despite the public  pronouncements  at  the  ZANU-PF  annual
    conference in December and party hardliners pushing for an early  poll,
    voanews.com reported on 11 January  that  Mugabe  was  "amenable  to  a
    delay",  given  the  "intense  pressure  for  a  slower  pace   towards
    elections" from the SADC. A referendum on the constitution in September
    2011 looked like "a more likely timeline",  according  to  the  report.
    Reuters had reported  on  14  December  that  analysts  considered  the
    elections could still be postponed for at least a year due to  regional
    pressure. A  professor  of  political  science  at  the  University  of
    Zimbabwe  was  quoted  as  saying  that,  despite   Mugabe's   apparent
    preference for early elections, "His major problem is that SADC is  not
    convinced that early elections are good for Zimbabwe  or  the  region".
    The Chair of the National Constitutional Assembly considered that ZANU-
    PF "might not call early elections for strategic reasons". This  report
    echoed one in the Zimbabwean.co.uk of 8 December, which quoted a "well-
    placed source" in civil society in Zimbabwe as  saying  that  SADC  had
    told Mugabe that he could not unilaterally call for  elections  without
    SADC's involvement and input".

10.   On 4 January 2011, an Angolan  press  report  referred  to  Zimbabwe's
    state-owned Sunday Mail as saying that it would not be possible to hold
    elections because the constitutional reforms  needed  to  be  completed
    first; and that Zimbabwe had informed the SADC it was not  feasible  to
    hold  elections  "in  the  first  half  of  2011".  A  report  in   the
    standard.co.zw of 10 January claimed Mugabe had angered  hardliners  by
    supporting the recommendations of his  deputy,  Joice  Mujuru,  to  set
    aside plans to hold elections in 2011, and that constitutional  changes
    needed to come first. Political observers were said to  have  expressed
    the view that "it was highly unlikely that polls  would  be  held  this
    year".

11.   On 18 January, the MDC's finance minister said  in  Johannesburg  that
    it was a "probability"  that  elections  would  see  a  repeat  of  the
    violence of 2008. Although asserting the  MDC  would  not  boycott  the
    elections, if called in 2011, the minister,  Mr  Biti,  said  that,  if
    conditions were "in any way close to June 2008, it would be immoral for
    us to lead people to the slaughterhouse". A report  in  zimonline.co.za
    of 19 January observed that, although Mugabe had  said  elections  must
    take place in 2011, "they may yet be postponed to 2012 or 2013".

12.   In the House of Lords on 27 January 2011, the Minister of  State  said
    "Mr Mugabe seems to be pressing for  early  elections".  The  "sensible
    view", however, was for elections to come only after the constitutional
    process had been completed. The United Kingdom government  would  press
    for EU monitoring to play a part "when elections come in sight". On the
    same day,  zimonline.co.za  said  that  "rising  reports  of  political
    violence suggest a vote is imminent (sic) either at the end of the year
    or early next year".

Consequences of elections

13.   As can be seen from the foregoing, the question  whether  the  calling
    of elections is likely to unleash the sort of violence seen during 2008
    (or worse), with war veterans, youth militias and the  like  subjecting
    people on a wide scale to "loyalty tests", and  with  the  prospect  of
    violent retribution  in  the  event  of  failure,  cannot  be  entirely
    separated from the question of when such elections  are  likely  to  be
    held.  A rush towards early elections, say in the middle of 2011, would
    fuel fears that ZANU-PF and Mugabe are determined to  retain  power  by
    any means possible, including violent coercion.   On  the  other  hand,
    such a move may well be opposed  by  the  international  community,  in
    particular the SADC and President Zuma of South Africa.

14.   Entirely understandably, the appellants' main  witnesses  and  various
    of the civil society organisations interviewed by  the  FFM  team  were
    extremely concerned that any future elections will be attended  by  the
    widespread serious violence seen in 2008.  W66 noted grave  fears  that
    violence would quite rapidly escalate and  intensify  as  the  expected
    2011 election  approached,  in  view  of  ZANU-PF's  track  record  and
    determination to  stay  in  power  at  any  cost.   Zimbabwe's  history
    indicated that the coming election would be  a  "violent  event".   W66
    considered that the SADC and others would have  no  real  influence  in
    securing a fair outcome.  Whilst that was necessarily  speculation,  he
    based it on the history of Zimbabwe over the past ten years.   Although
    when President Zuma came  to  power,  there  was  a  feeling  he  would
    encourage a more democratic approach in Zimbabwe, there did not  appear
    to be any principled or pragmatic  policy  coming  from  South  Africa.
    Asked about Tsvangirai's statement that he  would  not  participate  in
    elections if this would risk violence as in  2008  (appellants'  bundle
    C), W66 did not recall the Prime Minister saying this; but if  the  MDC
    did pull out, this would lead to "more complications".

15.   W77 doubted that, despite its supposed disbandment, the  JOC  had  any
    intention of abandoning its strategies of maintaining power  for  ZANU-
    PF.  As before, youth militia or "green  bombers"  would  be  mobilised
    under the control of senior military as "shock  troops  for  a  ZANU-PF
    victory".  The destruction of the education system  in  Zimbabwe  meant
    that ZANU-PF now had a "pliable youth".  In his  "balance  sheet",  W77
    put on the debit side "every indication that violence such as that seen
    in 2008's election periods  would  recur".   There  would  need  to  be
    regional or continental pressure to ensure that  GPA  commitments  were
    honoured.

16.    We  have  already  noted  Professor  Ranger's  description  of  fears
    regarding future elections.  He regarded the  Chair  of  the  Electoral
    Commission, a Namibian Supreme Court Judge whom  Professor  Ranger  had
    taught as a student, as a "splendid  man"  but  Mtambanengwe  faced  an
    impossible task as the voters' roll was in chaos  and  there  had  been
    chaos in all previous elections.  On the other  hand,  there  had  been
    some measures in place to protect people in 2008,  which  was  why  the
    March elections in  that  year  had  been  relatively  successful.   In
    particular, publicising the results and the  votes  cast  had  made  it
    difficult for ZANU-PF to carry out too much  vote-rigging.   There  had
    also been further reforms in the  process  recently,  in  that  results
    would be posted publicly, the overall outcome would be published within
    a week and there was supposed to be a police presence at  each  polling
    station.  Human rights  organisations  had  commended  certain  of  the
    proposals, whilst  criticising  others.   Professor  Ranger  considered
    that, if the elections were held later,  then  perhaps  these  measures
    would be implemented.  However, nothing appeared to have been  done  to
    resolve the problems regarding the electoral roll  and  the  Commission
    could not stop elections happening if Mugabe insisted.

17.   Professor Ranger  agreed  in  cross-examination  that  Tsvangirai  had
    assured his supporters that he would not go into a violent election  or
    take part in one.  Professor  Ranger  nevertheless  found  it  hard  to
    believe that Tsvangirai would not take part in elections if  they  were
    called.  This time, however, Professor Ranger acknowledged  that  there
    was an Electoral Commission that could suspend the process and the  MDC
    also hoped to get SADC support.  Tsvangirai's  withdrawal  might  be  a
    compelling factor if MDC supporters were being exposed to violence.

18.   Professor Ranger regarded the prospect of an  SADC  monitoring  system
    or even peacekeeping force as  being  low.   There  had  been  monitors
    present in past elections.  Nevertheless, Professor Ranger agreed  that
    the SADC and South Africa were under pressure to see the  stabilisation
    of Zimbabwe.  There was a possibility that  South  Africa  would  apply
    adequate pressure, although Professor  Ranger  regarded  this  as  very
    unlikely.

19.   Anthony Reeler considered that long-term SADC  observers  were  needed
    both before and after the election, as well as independent  control  of
    the election process.  He thought there was no sign that SADC  had  the
    will or ability to impose this.  If the  election  went  ahead  without
    such measures, it was likely to be a very violent situation  "at  least
    comparable to 2008" or indeed "worse  than  2008".   Dewa  Mavhinga  of
    Crisis Zimbabwe Coalition said that although limited electoral  reforms
    had  been  undertaken,  these  had  not  been  "around  prevention   of
    violence".  Civil society groups were demanding that SADC should deploy
    monitors "with significantly more authority than mere observers".   The
    forthcoming election was likely to bring organised violence  throughout
    Zimbabwe, although it was difficult to predict how  the  worst  of  the
    violence would be distributed.  The witness thought  Mashonaland  would
    suffer especially badly.

20.   W78  of  the  Catholic  Commission  for  Justice  and  Peace  Zimbabwe
    considered that "We are now back on the road to  the  violence  we  saw
    during the 2008 election".  The MDC had failed to gain a  real  control
    over the Home Affairs Ministry.

21.   On 28 July, Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, speaking of  their  shift
    in emphasis from the working of the GNU  to  preparing  for  elections,
    stated that they were "very mindful of the fact that there might  be  a
    repeat of political violence".  Without saying what  they  were  doing,
    the spokesman indicated that the Forum was putting in place  strategies
    that would assist victims and try to mobilise the  grassroots  to  stop
    fighting political wars  among  themselves.   On  5  December,  Justina
    Mukoko of the Zimbabwe Peace Project gave a speech entitled  "Political
    violence in Zimbabwe: a curse or an age old tradition",  in  which  she
    said the fear for elections in 2011 was that they would  "prove  to  be
    more violent than the ones held in 2008".  Although violence  had  been
    perpetrated with  impunity  in  Zimbabwe  since  colonial  times,  only
    recently had  attacks  occurred  mainly  against  those  promoting  the
    democratisation of the national government.  She  said  that  the  2005
    elections had been "relatively peaceful", compared with 2008.

22.   In the FFM report, Anthony Reeler of RAU said that  that  organisation
    was currently researching communities where militia bases  existed  and
    looking at northern Zimbabwe "where the violence was worst in 2008.  We
    are looking at what was in place in  2008  where  there  were  multiple
    bases which explicitly targeted MDC and non-participating voters."   He
    considered that ZANU-PF was currently identifying areas  for  bases  to
    open in January 2011.  They were also recruiting youth to operate  from
    these bases.  Some bases would be used "again  and  again,  and  others
    will be set up anew".  One constituency they  had  monitored  had  five
    bases, whilst  in  other  areas  the  bases  would  rotate,  "being  in
    existence for only a week or two,  then  moving  on  to  another  area.
    There is no strong evidence of bases in urban area[s], although Epworth
    did have a base in 2008.  Rural districts can become no go areas in the
    election run-up and visitors to an area will be closely monitored.   In
    urban  areas,  retaliation  violence  is  not   uncommon.    Some   MDC
    communities have developed a strategy where all members carry a whistle
    to attract other members if there is  violence  so  the  community  can
    protect themselves."  The issue of whether there was a base at  present
    in Epworth (a township to the south-east of Central  Harare)  was  also
    the subject of comment from the Zimbabwe  Human  Rights  NGO  Forum  in
    February 2010, which spoke of the "alleged reopening" of a militia base
    in Epworth.  The Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights  were
    recorded in the FFM report as saying that it had heard that bases  were
    being set up in a similar way to those established in 2008.

23.   We are aware of what was said on behalf of  the  appellants  regarding
    the weight to be placed on the Counselling Services Unit's response  to
    the FFM team.  We consider,  nevertheless,  that  some  weight  can  be
    placed upon the comments of that Unit regarding what it  considered  to
    be the nature of the victims of violence in 2008, given that the Unit's
    remit extends to assisting those who are or had  been  the  subject  of
    such violence.  The CSU considered that in the 2008 elections, "80%  of
    the victims of such violence were known to  have  had  a  role  in  the
    electoral  process  above  and  beyond  of  merely   being   opposition
    supporters.  Most of the abductions and executions were at the hands of
    a death squad and took place on four particular days period (sic)  with
    the victims being clearly targeted for  their  political  effectiveness
    rather than random killings."

24.   The major international organisation interviewed  on  12  August  told
    the FFM team that there was "great potential" for  violence  levels  to
    increase or even exceed 2008 levels, when  the  elections  came  round.
    Violence in connection with elections would,  it  thought,  follow  the
    pattern of 2008 and be targeted at areas that were  previously  ZANU-PF
    strongholds.  The organisation considered that "targets will  primarily
    be political activists and former ZANU-PF voters who  defected  to  the
    MDC".  The anonymous organisation interviewed on 11  August,  likewise,
    had a fear that "any future election will lead to more violence".   The
    major NGO interviewed on 11 August noted  actual  and  implied  threats
    that victims of violence in 2008 could expect the same in the run-up to
    the  next  elections.   The  potential  for  political   violence   was
    "significantly higher in  most  rural  areas,  with  the  exception  of
    Matabeleland North and Matabeleland South, than it is in urban  areas".
    The Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum were quoted in the  FFM  report  as
    saying that the "infrastructure to deliver large scale violence remains
    in place".  The Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace Zimbabwe said
    that there was "potential for even higher levels of political  violence
    before the anticipated 2011 elections than were in 2008".  However, the
    source said that it was "not  however  possible  to  predict  with  any
    confidence" in that if ZANU-PF thought it could win by sleight of  hand
    it  may  decide  to  use  such  means;  otherwise  it   might   unleash
    "unprecedented violence on the basis that it has nothing to lose".

25.   We have already mentioned the interview given  by  Anthony  Reeler  on
    swradioafrica on 18 June 2010.  Here, Mr Reeler said that  peacekeeping
    forces were put into "failed states", which was not so  with  Zimbabwe.
    The best that could be hoped for from the international  community  and
    SADC was an "incredibly intense observation and that would require  the
    cooperation  of  the  state  in  Zimbabwe,  where  you  have  observers
    observing the Electoral Commission, the police, the army, the  prisons,
    the civics, the political parties, the  rallies,  there  are  different
    ways of doing this thing".  Mr Reeler thought that  such  very  intense
    observation "could ensure a genuine election".  Although  Zimbabwe  was
    in many ways a disaster, there were  encouraging  signs,  such  as  the
    people's demand for democracy.

26.   The swradioafrica.com article of 19 November, referring  to  the  SADC
    troika meeting on Zimbabwe, recorded SADC leaders as "pushing  for  the
    immediate deployment  of  an  SADC  team  to  oversee  the  reform  and
    electoral process.  But some  observers  remain  concerned  that  other
    leaders in SADC are firmly on  Mugabe's  side  and  are  not  impartial
    enough to help run free elections in Zimbabwe."  On  23  November,  the
    same organisation reported that the regional SADC block had  said  that
    an independent  investigation  was  required  in  Zimbabwe  "to  verify
    reports of violence and intimidation before a general election could be
    held".  Civic leaders were insisting such elections could be held  only
    if soldiers returned to their barracks to allow for the smooth  running
    of an election that was  free  from  militarisation,  manipulation  and
    violence.  On 29 November,  South  African  President  Zuma  was  said,
    during his visit to Zimbabwe to meet Mugabe  and  Tsvangirai,  to  have
    indicated that he wanted SADC "to be  heavily  involved  and  wants  an
    election  roadmap  which  is  credible.   Zuma  does  not  want  bloody
    elections and does not want members of  the  intelligence  and  uniform
    forces to interfere with elections.  In short, Zuma  effectively  wants
    elections to be run  by  SADC  together  with  the  Zimbabwe  Electoral
    Commission." Commenting on this visit, a British  Embassy  egram  of  1
    December concluded that "despite  his  many  other  distractions,  Zuma
    remains engaged on  Zimbabwe"  and  concerned  that  elections  proceed
    without violence in a free and fair manner.

27.   On 7 January 2011, a research group  called  "Afrobarometer"  said  an
    opinion poll indicated 7 out of 10 Zimbabweans feared intimidation  and
    violence "if elections go ahead this year"; but  despite  these  fears,
    70% still wanted elections in 2011. According to zimonline.co.za on  19
    January, a three month investigation had revealed plans for  more  than
    80,000 youth militia, war veterans and soldiers to be  deployed  across
    Zimbabwe "in an army-led drive to ensure victory for  President  Robert
    Mugabe in the next elections".  The  report  said  the  Joint  Military
    Operations Council (JOC) planned to intervene before  foreign  or  even
    local election observers were on the ground. Their plan was to  unleash
    violence and terror to ensure that "a thoroughly cowed electorate  will
    on voting day back  Mugabe  in  enough  numbers  to  save  the  veteran
    President" from a second round of voting in the Presidential elections.
    The JOC were said to have worked "quietly" and  "almost  unnoticed"  to
    reactivate the structures that waged violence in previous polls, "apart
    from the occasional [reports of] human rights groups or  the  media  of
    resurgent violence in some parts of the country". Referring to  Laurent
    Gbabgo, President of Ivory Coast, who in  late  2010  refused  to  cede
    power after defeat  at  the  polls,  the  report  described  Zimbabwe's
    generals as fearing that SADC "is unlikely  to  accept  another  blood-
    soaked second round election for Mugabe or allow him to refuse - Gbabgo
    style - to hand over power to  a  victorious  Tsvangirai".  The  report
    contained a list of senior soldiers who would be  based  in  particular
    districts, across Zimbabwe.  A ZANU-PF spokesman dismissed  the  report
    as an attempt to smear his party.

28.   Tsvangirai was quoted  on  7  December  as  saying  that  one  of  the
    fundamental issues to be addressed was that of violence in  any  future
    elections. Civil society  groups  were  pressing  the  SADC  to  deploy
    monitors, although how this would be done was not clear.

29.   A number of the recently produced reports  concerned  the  release  by
    the organisation WikiLeaks of  US  diplomatic  emails,  some  of  which
    involved Zimbabwe.  The leaks suggested Tsvangirai had met US officials
    to discuss policy, as a result of  which  there  were  suggestions  the
    Attorney General would charge him with treason, and also contained  the
    alleged observation from a minister of the government of  South  Africa
    that Mugabe was a "crazy old man". Voanews.com commented on 10 December
    that these leaks "could lead to instability and violence" ahead of  the
    election expected in 2011.

30.   A report in the zimbabweamail.com of  26  January  2011  claimed  that
    ZANU-PF had set  up  "campaign  bases  in  various  constituencies"  in
    Harare. The bases were said to be  "confined  to  high-density  areas".
    According to "some residents" this involved turning the homes  of  some
    district level party leaders and losing parliamentary  candidates  into
    campaign bases "to organise meetings where youths spend most  of  their
    time strategising for  the  next  election".  This  was  said  to  have
    "unsettled residents" and resulted in clashes between ZANU-PF  and  MDC
    youths in Mbare and Budiriro.  An ZANU-PF spokesman  denied  his  party
    was setting up bases, saying it was a normal part of party activity for
    members to meet for "mini rallies" at their leaders' homes.

31.   The Minister of State in the Foreign Office told the  House  of  Lords
    on 27 January that the United Kingdom government  "has  contributed  to
    the UN funding of the constitutional review process, with a  referendum
    due to be held in the summer of this year. We  are  also  working  with
    international partners, particularly the  Southern  Africa  Development
    Community, on a process to seek to ensure that  elections,  when  held,
    will not see a repeat of  the  violence  of  2008.  The  prospects  for
    credible elections will be greater if sufficient time  is  allowed  for
    important reforms to be implemented". In the same debate, the  Minister
    told peers that "Jacob Zuma has  said,  while  leading  SADC's  support
    programme, that he will take personal responsibility to  see  that  the
    constitutional process goes forward and that the  country  is  properly
    prepared for elections. We support him in these aims; that must be  the
    right way forward".

32.   According to zimonline.co.za, again on 27 January,  Morgan  Tsvangirai
    had told President Zuma "that  a  SADC-backed  election  roadmap  would
    still fail to deliver free and fair polls in Zimbabwe in  the  face  of
    resurgent political violence that has in recent days spread into  urban
    areas". Zuma was said to be drafting a roadmap, whereby "elections will
    follow a referendum on a new constitution and will also set  milestones
    such as electoral reforms, the role of the security forces and  how  to
    smoothly transfer power". The MDC reportedly said escalating  political
    violence from ZANU-PF hardliners and  the  military  would  render  the
    roadmap "meaningless".
                                 APPENDIX C

                            DOCUMENTARY MATERIAL

|     |Document                                           |Date          |
|Item |                                                   |              |
|1    |Amnesty International, "Amnesty International      |20 November   |
|     |statement to the 86th Session of the Council of the|2003          |
|     |International Organization for Migration (IOM)"    |              |
|2    |Second statement of Sarah Harland, freelance       |2 August 2005 |
|     |editor, of the Zimbabwe Association                |              |
|3    |Human Rights Watch, "Human Rights Watch Statement  |2005          |
|     |to the International Organization for Migration    |              |
|     |(IOM) Governing Council: 29 Nov - 2 Dec 2005 (90th |              |
|     |Session)"                                          |              |
|4    |Letter from Mohammed Abdiker, Chief of Mission, IOM|28 February   |
|     |Harare, to British Embassy Harare regarding the    |2006          |
|     |treatment of returnees                             |              |
|5    |Statement of Dr Alice Bloch                        |16 June 2006  |
|6    |Witness statement of Kirsty Whalley, freelance     |21 June 2006  |
|     |journalist for The Zimbabwean                      |              |
|7    |Expert report of David Corlett, "Report on the     |26 June 2006  |
|     |suitability of the International Organization for  |              |
|     |Migration to monitor 'involuntary returnees' from  |              |
|     |the UK to Zimbabwe"                                |              |
|8    |Statement of Ian Malcolm Wallace, Tearfund         |26 June 2006  |
|9    |Witness statement of Temba Moyo                    |26 June 2006  |
|10   |Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights   |26 June 2006  |
|     |(ZADHR), "Statement on return of Zimbabweans from  |              |
|     |the United Kingdom by the British Government"      |              |
|11   |Letter from Rosalind Clarke, Department for        |28 June 2006  |
|     |International Development, to Dr Alice Bloch       |              |
|     |regarding Zimbabwean Research IOM                  |              |
|12   |Letter from Graham H. Crouch regarding Statement of|30 June 2006  |
|     |Dr Alice Bloch                                     |              |
|13   |The Zimbabwean, "Zim activists challenge IOM and   |5-11 October  |
|     |Home Office"                                       |2006          |
|14   |Letter from Mohammed Abdiker, Chief of Mission, IOM|14 May 2007   |
|     |Harare, to British Embassy Harare regarding the    |              |
|     |treatment of returnees                             |              |
|15   |TheyWorkForYou.com, "Zimbabwe: Politics and        |14 January    |
|     |Government - Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs -    |2009          |
|     |Written answers and statements, 14 January 2009"   |              |
|16   |TheyWorkForYou.com, "Zimbabwe: Political Prisoners |2 March 2009  |
|     |- Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs - Written       |              |
|     |answers and statements, 2 March 2009"              |              |
|17   |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note:      |24 March 2009 |
|     |Zimbabwe"                                          |              |
|18   |SW Radio Africa, "Over 29,000 youth militia still  |3 April 2009  |
|     |being paid by the state"                           |              |
|19   |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe's hardliners accused of    |10 April 2009 |
|     |being behind new violence"                         |              |
|20   |TheyWorkForYou.com, "Zimbabwe: Politics and        |27 April 2009 |
|     |Government - Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs -    |              |
|     |Written answers and statements, 27 April 2009"     |              |
|21   |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwean teachers working|1 May 2009    |
|     |in fear"                                           |              |
|22   |Amnesty International, "More needed to end         |22 May 2009   |
|     |violations in Zimbabwe after 100 days"             |              |
|23   |ZWNews.com, "Elections could plunge Zim into chaos:|2 June 2009   |
|     |UN"                                                |              |
|24   |BBC News, "Zimbabwe: Still living in fear"         |9 June 2009   |
|25   |The Zimbabwe Times, "Minister warns of             |9 June 2009   |
|     |assassination plots"                               |              |
|26   |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe's progress on     |18 June 2009  |
|     |human rights 'woefully slow'"                      |              |
|27   |Los Angeles Times, "Zimbabwe accused of continuing |19 June 2009  |
|     |rights abuses"                                     |              |
|28   |VOA News.com, "Rights Report: Zimbabwe abuses could|21 June 2009  |
|     |constitute crimes against humanity"                |              |
|29   |Ecumenical News International, "Young Zimbabwe     |22 June 2009  |
|     |Christians give 'unity government' low score"      |              |
|30   |Yahoo News, "Tsvangirai's ministers snub Zimbabwe  |29 June 2009  |
|     |cabinet"                                           |              |
|31   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Taking           |June 2009     |
|     |Transitional Justice to the People: Outreach       |              |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|32   |The Zimbabwe Times, "MDC's contradictions a matter |2 July 2009   |
|     |of concern"                                        |              |
|33   |The Zimbabwe Situation, "Brutality continues"      |4 - 5 July    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|34   |The Standard, "Violence dampens national healing"  |11 July 2009  |
|35   |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: Drama as ZANU-PF disrupt |13 July 2009  |
|     |all-stakeholders conference in Harare"             |              |
|36   |VOA News.com, "Some Zimbabwe activists wary of     |23 July 2009  |
|     |official political violence healing process"       |              |
|37   |IRIN News.org, "Zimbabwe: Political violence       |27 July 2009  |
|     |growing in rural areas"                            |              |
|38   |IOL.co.za, "Mugabe's dirty ploy to poach power"    |26 July 2009  |
|39   |SW Radio Africa, "Police begin drive to recruit    |6 August 2009 |
|     |youth militia"                                     |              |
|40   |ZimOnline, "Army steps up attacks on civilians:    |27 August 2009|
|     |NGOs"                                              |              |
|41   |Human Rights Watch, "False Dawn: The Zimbabwe      |31 August 2009|
|     |Power-Sharing Government's Failure to Deliver Human|              |
|     |Rights Improvements"                               |              |
|42   |Zimbabwe Online Press, "MDC-T activist murdered in |1 September   |
|     |fresh political violence"                          |2009          |
|43   |SW Radio Africa news, "Another MDC activist        |7 September   |
|     |murdered"                                          |2009          |
|44   |The Zimbabwean, "War vets, soldiers threaten MDC   |9 September   |
|     |supporters"                                        |2009          |
|45   |Business Day, "Zimbabwe sanctions must stay - Human|10 September  |
|     |Rights Watch"                                      |2009          |
|46   |IRIN News.org, "Zimbabwe: One year on and still    |14 September  |
|     |treading water"                                    |2009          |
|47   |Sokwanele.com, "Zanu PF youth militia assault      |16 September  |
|     |school teacher"                                    |2009          |
|48   |SW Radio Africa, "Crisis group warns that ZANU PF  |23 September  |
|     |violence is on the rise"                           |2009          |
|49   |SW Radio Africa, "Bennett says MDC have no power in|29 September  |
|     |government"                                        |2009          |
|50   |Sokwanele.com, "74,021 people aged 100+ registered |7 October 2009|
|     |on Zimbabwe's voters' roll"                        |              |
|51   |The Zimbabwean, "MDC councillor attacked"          |12 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|52   |SW Radio Africa, "ZINASU leaders arrested & beaten |13 October    |
|     |for 'denigrating' Mugabe"                          |2009          |
|53   |BBC News, "Zimbabwe MDC man returned to jail"      |14 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|54   |SW Radio Africa, "Press statement by MDC President |16 October    |
|     |Morgan Tsvangirai"                                 |2009          |
|55   |IRIN News.org, "Zimbabwe: Violence spikes after    |27 October    |
|     |MDC's withdrawal from government"                  |2009          |
|56   |Zimbabwe Association, "Returns to Zimbabwe -       |29 October    |
|     |Government Statement"                              |2009          |
|57   |The Standard, "Comment: Harare must be hiding      |31 October    |
|     |something"                                         |2009          |
|58   |The Zimbabwean, "Landlord evicts MDC man"          |6 November    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|59   |The Zimbabwean, "Mutsekwa urges Mnangagwa to end   |6 November    |
|     |violence"                                          |2009          |
|60   |VOA News.com, "Renewed violence against rural      |11 November   |
|     |teachers amid Zimbabwe political crisis - Union"   |2009          |
|61   |EU Business, "EU concerned about arrest of Zimbabwe|12 November   |
|     |union members"                                     |2009          |
|62   |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: MDC accuses soldiers of  |13 November   |
|     |beating up orphans"                                |2009          |
|63   |ZimEye, "NGOs boycott of Zimbabwe's government to  |15 November   |
|     |continue"                                          |2009          |
|64   |New Zimbabwe.com, "80,000 complete youth service:  |24 November   |
|     |minister"                                          |2009          |
|65   |Zimbabwe Online Press, "Zanu PF abducts nine year  |2 December    |
|     |old"                                               |2009          |
|66   |Zimbabwe Independent, "Minister admits illegally   |3 December    |
|     |hiring 13,000 youths"                              |2009          |
|67   |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu's major fears and counter    |9 December    |
|     |strategies"                                        |2009          |
|68   |AIDS-Free World, "Electing to Rape: Sexual Terror  |10 December   |
|     |in Mugabe's Zimbabwe"                              |2009          |
|69   |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: JOC won't go - Zanu PF"  |17 December   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|70   |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin Information   |23 December   |
|     |Report: Zimbabwe"                                  |2009          |
|71   |TimesLive, "Activist detained 'to hide Zim sexual  |4 January 2010|
|     |abuses'"                                           |              |
|72   |SW Radio Africa, "Villagers forced to attend ZANU  |7 January 2010|
|     |PF rallies in Murehwa"                             |              |
|73   |Zimbabwe Democracy Now.com, "Murderers and         |15 January    |
|     |torturers appointed to Zimbabwe's Constitutional   |2010          |
|     |Outreach Programme"                                |              |
|74   |VOA News.com, "President Mugabe urges Zimbabwean   |18 January    |
|     |unity, reprises anti-Western rhetoric"             |2010          |
|75   |SW Radio Africa, "Armed soldiers and militias force|20 January    |
|     |villagers to adopt Kariba draft"                   |2010          |
|76   |Reuters, "Zimbabwe new constitution suspended over |21 January    |
|     |bickering"                                         |2010          |
|77   |RadioVop, "Zanu PF sets up torture bases"          |26 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|78   |ZimOnline, "'MDC-T shielding ZANU PF'"             |26 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|79   |Afrik-news.com, "Zimbabwe: Zanu-PF confidential    |28 January    |
|     |document leak scorns unity government"             |2010          |
|80   |The Standard, "Zanu PF's terror campaign threat to |30 January    |
|     |constitution-making"                               |2010          |
|81   |Human Rights Watch, "Country Summary: Zimbabwe"    |January 2010  |
|82   |ZimEye, "MDC activist 'was murdered by police'"    |5 February    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|83   |SW Radio Africa, "CIO splash out US$5 million on   |10 February   |
|     |200 vehicles"                                      |2010          |
|84   |UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural            |10 February   |
|     |Organisation, "Education under Attack 2010 -       |2010          |
|     |Zimbabwe"                                          |              |
|85   |Human Rights Watch, "Zimbabwe: One year on, reform |12 February   |
|     |a failure"                                         |2010          |
|86   |NewZimSituation.com, "National healing elusive, as |17 February   |
|     |torture bases re-emerge"                           |2010          |
|87   |SW Radio Africa, " ZANU PF supporters disrupt MDC  |23 February   |
|     |rally in Epworth"                                  |2010          |
|88   |Zimbabwe Information Centre, "Vicious ZANU-PF      |23 February   |
|     |attack on MDC continues in Epworth - Government    |2010          |
|     |responds"                                          |              |
|89   |ZimOnline, "Mugabe militia sets up torture camps:  |24 February   |
|     |Group"                                             |2010          |
|90   |Afrik-news.com, "Zimbabwe: Tsvangirai warned by    |25 February   |
|     |Zanu-PF youths"                                    |2010          |
|91   |SW Radio Africa, "ZANU PF sanctions demo youths    |25 February   |
|     |were 'drugged'"                                    |2010          |
|92   |ZWNews.com, "Mugabe militia set up torture camps:  |25 February   |
|     |Group"                                             |2010          |
|93   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Statement on     |26 February   |
|     |political violence in Epworth"                     |2010          |
|94   |Godwin Dube, "A study of the self-employed in the  |February 2010 |
|     |urban informal sector in Harare" (Master's         |              |
|     |Dissertation, University of KwaZulu-Natal)         |              |
|95   |IPSnews.net, "Informal sector lures university     |1 March 2010  |
|     |graduates"                                         |              |
|96   |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe human rights activists &   |3 March 2010  |
|     |defenders allege harassment campaign"              |              |
|97   |The Times Online, "'It has never been so bad':     |4 March 2010  |
|     |Zimbabwean human rights lawyers under attack"      |              |
|98   |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe PM Tsvangirai's MDC        |4 March 2010  |
|     |assesses 'deteriorating' political climate"        |              |
|99   |ZimOnline, "Civil society appeals for govt         |4 March 2010  |
|     |protection"                                        |              |
|100  |SW Radio Africa, "Mugabe says elections next year  |5 March 2010  |
|     |with or without new constitution"                  |              |
|101  |VOA News.com, "Mugabe's ZANU-PF deals serious blow |8 March 2010  |
|     |to unity government"                               |              |
|102  |U.S. Department of State, "2009 Human Rights       |11 March 2010 |
|     |Report: Zimbabwe"                                  |              |
|103  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe human rights activists     |18 March 2010 |
|     |report upsurge in politically motivated violence"  |              |
|104  |RadioVop, "Zanu PF sets up liberation war zones"   |21 March 2010 |
|105  |Zimbabwe Metro, "Mwenezi youth militia preparing   |21 March 2010 |
|     |torture camps"                                     |              |
|106  |Kubatana.net, "Zanu PF at it again"                |24 March 2010 |
|107  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: 'National healing an     |26 March 2010 |
|     |exercise in futility'"                             |              |
|108  |SW Radio Africa, "Mugabe makes it clear to Zuma he |31 March 2010 |
|     |is not sharing power"                              |              |
|109  |SW Radio Africa, "Terror breaks out in Muzarabani" |31 March 2010 |
|110  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Zanu PF employing theatrics |31 March 2010 |
|     |to buy time - Analysts"                            |              |
|111  |SW Radio Africa, "Zanu PF begins to militarise     |14 April 2010 |
|     |rural constituencies"                              |              |
|112  |Human Rights Watch, "Sleight of Hand: Repression of|20 April 2010 |
|     |the Media and the Illusion of Reform in Zimbabwe"  |              |
|113  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: 'Informal sector decline |29 April 2010 |
|     |a threat to GNU'"                                  |              |
|114  |Crisis Zimbabwe.org, "Zimbabweans ready for        |6 May 2010    |
|     |elections"                                         |              |
|115  |Crisis Zimbabwe.org, "'Talk' of 2011 elections     |7 May 2010    |
|     |sparks violence"                                   |              |
|116  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Violence fears as war vets  |13 May 2010   |
|     |mobilise against constitution"                     |              |
|117  |Zimbabwe Peace Project, "Summary on                |19 May 2010   |
|     |politically-motivated human rights and food-related|              |
|     |violations: April 2010"                            |              |
|118  |Amnesty International, "Amnesty International      |28 May 2010   |
|     |Report 2010 - Zimbabwe"                            |              |
|119  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: Weekend violence reported|31 May 2010   |
|     |ahead of constitutional outreach"                  |              |
|120  |ISN ETH Zurich, "Zimbabwe's 'Elite' indigenisation |31 May 2010   |
|     |misses mark"                                       |              |
|121  |ZimEye, "Zimbabwe soldiers set bases in Gokwe"     |3 June 2010   |
|122  |The Zimbabwean, "Church civic leaders urge govt to |4 June 2010   |
|     |end violence"                                      |              |
|123  |The Zimbabwean, "Statement on the arrests of civil |9 June 2010   |
|     |society leaders and increased political violence"  |              |
|124  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Zimbabwe: Let's be honest   |10 June 2010  |
|     |about elections in 2011"                           |              |
|125  |Boston.com, "Zimbabwe begins process of rewriting  |16 June 2010  |
|     |constitution"                                      |              |
|126  |ZZZICOMP, "ZZZICOMP Baseline Report"               |16 June 2010  |
|127  |Kubatana.net, "Hot seat: Analyst Tony Reeler on    |18 June 2010  |
|     |'what will resolve the Zim crisis'"                |              |
|128  |Zimbabwe Peace Project, "Summary on                |18 June 2010  |
|     |politically-motivated human rights and food-related|              |
|     |violations: May 2010"                              |              |
|129  |House of Commons, "Hansard Written Answers for 21  |21 June 2010  |
|     |June 2010 (pt 0008)"                               |              |
|130  |SW Radio Africa, "Outreach program begins as       |21 June 2010  |
|     |soldiers set up bases in rural areas"              |              |
|131  |SW Radio Africa, "ZANU PF unleashes violence to    |24 June 2010  |
|     |thwart outreach program"                           |              |
|132  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: JOC sends soldiers to    |25 June 2010  |
|     |enforce Zanu PF views in outreach programme"       |              |
|133  |The Standard, "Mugabe succession challenge vexes   |26 June 2010  |
|     |constitution outreach"                             |              |
|134  |The Zimbabwean, "200 soldiers disrupt              |26 June 2010  |
|     |constitutional outreach in Karoi"                  |              |
|135  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: COPAC, threat to         |30 June 2010  |
|     |inclusive govt?"                                   |              |
|136  |VOA News.com, "Amnesty International warns of new  |30 June 2010  |
|     |violence in Zimbabwe as constitution revised"      |              |
|137  |Avocats Sans Fronti�res, The General Council of the|June 2010     |
|     |Bar, The Bar Human Rights Committee and            |              |
|     |Commonwealth Lawyers' Association, "A Place in the |              |
|     |Sun: Zimbabwe"                                     |              |
|138  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: Villagers 'coached' to   |1 July 2010   |
|     |back Kariba draft"                                 |              |
|139  |The Zimbabwean, "CIO 'speaking' on behalf of ZANU  |1 July 2010   |
|     |PF at constitution meetings"                       |              |
|140  |British Embassy egram, "Zimbabwe: A step towards   |2 July 2010   |
|     |free and fair elections"                           |              |
|141  |ConsultancyAfrica.com, "The indigenisation of      |2 July 2010   |
|     |Zimbabwean business: A threat to economic          |              |
|     |recovery?"                                         |              |
|142  |The Zimbabwean, "Army, CIO hijack outreach"        |2 July 2010   |
|143  |The Zimbabwean, "Call to arrest constitution       |5 July 2010   |
|     |monitors"                                          |              |
|144  |The Zimbabwean, "Mutare records high volumes of    |5 July 2010   |
|     |violence"                                          |              |
|145  |The Zimbabwean, "Villagers ambushed, interrogated" |5 July 2010   |
|146  |TheyWorkForYou.com, "UK-Zimbabwe Relations: Oral   |6 July 2010   |
|     |Answers to Questions - Foreign and Commonwealth    |              |
|     |Office: House of Commons debates, 6 July 2010, 2:30|              |
|     |pm"                                                |              |
|147  |The Zimbabwean, "NGOs should banned from COPAC -   |6 July 2010   |
|     |Mahoso"                                            |              |
|148  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe's MDC voices concern about |8 July 2010   |
|     |intimidation in constitutional outreach exercise"  |              |
|149  |The Zimbabwean, "Outreach is a money making        |9 July 2010   |
|     |venture: ZCTU"                                     |              |
|150  |IRIN News, "Zimbabwe: Shut your mouth or else"     |12 July 2010  |
|151  |The Zimbabwean, "MDC supporters harassed"          |12 July 2010  |
|152  |The Zimbabwean, "'Waiting for the constitution'    |12 July 2010  |
|     |more popular than COPAC"                           |              |
|153  |SW Radio Africa, "Abducted MDC-T activists emerge  |13 July 2010  |
|     |from captivity"                                    |              |
|154  |ZimEye, "Hurungwe villagers terrorised by CIO over |13 July 2010  |
|     |Kariba draft"                                      |              |
|155  |The Zimbabwean, "Bully tactics mar outreach work"  |14 July 2010  |
|156  |The Zimbabwean, "Major threatens villagers - claim"|14 July 2010  |
|157  |The Zimbabwean, "Villagers silenced in             |14 July 2010  |
|     |constitution"                                      |              |
|158  |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu (PF) bus villagers to        |14 July 2010  |
|     |meetings"                                          |              |
|159  |ZimOnline, "ZANU threatens to block constitution"  |14 July 2010  |
|160  |RadioVop, "Zanu (PF) youth wreck havoc in Mbare"   |15 July 2010  |
|161  |PlusNews, "Zimbabwe: A third of children           |16 July 2010  |
|     |chronically malnourished"                          |              |
|162  |The Zimbabwean, "Few attend outreach Matabeleland  |16 July 2010  |
|     |meetings"                                          |              |
|163  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC councillors arrested"        |19 July 2010  |
|164  |The Zimbabwean, "Human rights abuses worsening"    |19 July 2010  |
|165  |New Zimbabwe.com, "2011 election inevitable: Zanu  |20 July 2010  |
|     |PF"                                                |              |
|166  |Reuters AlertNet, "Mugabe's party sees possible    |20 July 2010  |
|     |2011 Zimbabwe elections"                           |              |
|167  |SW Radio Africa, "Senior MDC official assaulted    |20 July 2010  |
|     |during COPAC meeting"                              |              |
|168  |The Zimbabwean, "The MDC Today"                    |20 July 2010  |
|169  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC activist stabbed by ZANU PF  |21 July 2010  |
|     |youths"                                            |              |
|170  |SW Radio Africa, "More reports of ZPF intimidation |21 July 2010  |
|     |at constitutional meetings"                        |              |
|171  |Zimbabwe Peace Project, "Summary on                |21 July 2010  |
|     |politically-motivated human rights and food-related|              |
|     |violations: June 2010"                             |              |
|172  |Change Zimbabwe.com, "New 08 'political violence'  |22 July 2010  |
|     |summons for MDC activists"                         |              |
|173  |SW Radio Africa, "International court urged to     |22 July 2010  |
|     |prosecute Mugabe"                                  |              |
|174  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Five years on Murambatsvina |22 July 2010  |
|     |victims struggle"                                  |              |
|175  |ZimOnline, "Call for ICC to probe Zim rapes"       |22 July 2010  |
|176  |RadioVop, "No respite as police arrest monitor     |24 July 2010  |
|     |again"                                             |              |
|177  |DavidColtart.com, "Zimbabwe organisations based in |25 July 2010  |
|     |UK to assist education"                            |              |
|178  |The Zimbabwean, "Should Zimbabwe declare itself    |25 July 2010  |
|     |rich or poor?"                                     |              |
|179  |SW Radio Africa, "NCA resolve to de-campaign       |26 July 2010  |
|     |government led constitutional process"             |              |
|180  |SW Radio Africa, "Outrage as Mugabe ignores GPA in |26 July 2010  |
|     |diplomatic appointments"                           |              |
|181  |VOA News.com "Traction elusive for Zimbabwe civic  |26 July 2010  |
|     |activists lobbying African summit in Uganda"       |              |
|182  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe's national constitutional  |26 July 2010  |
|     |assembly pledges to resist revision process"       |              |
|183  |ZimEye, "ZANU PF youths harass UN                  |26 July 2010  |
|     |mission-journalists"                               |              |
|184  |RadioVop, "CIO bans Tsvangirai"                    |27 July 2010  |
|185  |RadioVop, "War vets defend propaganda jingles"     |27 July 2010  |
|186  |SW Radio Africa, "More intimidation reported at    |27 July 2010  |
|     |constitutional outreach meetings"                  |              |
|187  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Robert Mugabe cannot stop      |27 July 2010  |
|     |jingles - Makumbe"                                 |              |
|188  |Zimbabwe Reporter, "Masvingo DA in hiding over     |27 July 2010  |
|     |executive powers remarks"                          |              |
|189  |ZimOnline, "Zim remains vulnerable: UNDP"          |27 July 2010  |
|190  |BBC News, "'Military junta' rules Zimbabwe, says   |28 July 2010  |
|     |MDC's Bennett"                                     |              |
|191  |RadioVop, "War vets attack monitors"               |28 July 2010  |
|192  |SW Radio Africa, "Constitutional meetings rendered |28 July 2010  |
|     |pointless by ZANU-PF intimidation"                 |              |
|193  |SW Radio Africa, "The MDC Today 28 July"           |28 July 2010  |
|194  |The Zimbabwean, "Villagers indoctrinated"          |28 July 2010  |
|195  |The Zimbabwean, "Measures taken for violent        |28 July 2010  |
|     |election"                                          |              |
|196  |RadioVop, "War vets now running school"            |29 July 2010  |
|197  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC harassment continues as ZPF  |29 July 2010  |
|     |start 'electioneering'"                            |              |
|198  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Harare outreach delay       |29 July 2010  |
|     |heightens tension"                                 |              |
|199  |SW Radio Africa, "No rule of law, despite the unity|30 July 2010  |
|     |government"                                        |              |
|200  |The Zimbabwean, "Get Zim army back to barracks"    |1 August 2010 |
|201  |Kubatana.net, "Police arrest teachers in Karoi"    |2 August 2010 |
|202  |Telegraph.co.uk, "Robert Mugabe criticises the West|2 August 2010 |
|     |at sister's burial"                                |              |
|203  |Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, "The Legal      |2 August 2010 |
|     |Monitor: Edition 56"                               |              |
|204  |VOA News.com, "Teachers again targets of           |2 August 2010 |
|     |intimidation in Zimbabwe constitutional revision   |              |
|     |process"                                           |              |
|205  |RadioVop, "Zimbabwe high school girls arrested over|3 August 2010 |
|     |homosexuality"                                     |              |
|206  |RadioVop, "Zimbabwe teachers arrested over MDC     |3 August 2010 |
|     |slogans"                                           |              |
|207  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC warned about Zanu-PF election|3 August 2010 |
|     |mode"                                              |              |
|208  |SW Radio Africa, "Teachers the target of violence  |3 August 2010 |
|     |as country slides into election mode"              |              |
|209  |Email between Andrew Jones, David Gibbon, Debbie   |4 August 2010 |
|     |Goodier and June Bartlett regarding the transcript |              |
|     |of the interview with [ ], dated 3 August 2010, and|              |
|     |transcript                                         |              |
|210  |Sokwanele.com, "Constitution Outreach: News        |4 August 2010 |
|     |Round-Up, 28 July - 4 August 2010"                 |              |
|211  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC: Constitution outreach       |4 August 2010 |
|     |suspended in Manicaland"                           |              |
|212  |SW Radio Africa, "Obama 'heartbroken' by events in |4 August 2010 |
|     |Zimbabwe"                                          |              |
|213  |SW Radio Africa, "ZANU PF using soldiers, chiefs   |4 August 2010 |
|     |and militia to attack MDC"                         |              |
|214  |The Zimbabwean, "Constitutional options needed"    |4 August 2010 |
|215  |VOA News.com, "Western diplomats refuse to         |4 August 2010 |
|     |apologize for diplomatic dispute"                  |              |
|216  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe constitutional outreach    |4 August 2010 |
|     |officials of MDC stage boycott over arrest"        |              |
|217  |RadioVop, "MDC supporters ordered out of Umguza"   |5 August 2010 |
|218  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC sustain broken limbs after   |5 August 2010 |
|     |Zanu PF attacks in Chipinge"                       |              |
|219  |The Zimbabwean, "Armed soldiers run riot"          |5 August 2010 |
|220  |The Zimbabwean, "Murehwa D.A bans civic education" |5 August 2010 |
|221  |RadioVop, "More Zanu (PF) jingles coming"          |6 August 2010 |
|222  |SW Radio Africa, "Fake plane accident or just      |6 August 2010 |
|     |attention seeking?"                                |              |
|223  |Mail & Guardian Online, "Fly-by-night election     |7 August 2010 |
|     |monitors fail Africa"                              |              |
|224  |Mail & Guardian Online, "Zuma wants 2011 Zim       |7 August 2010 |
|     |election"                                          |              |
|225  |The Zimbabwean, "NGOs want SADC to set poll        |7 August 2010 |
|     |conditions"                                        |              |
|226  |The Zimbabwean, "ZBC fuelling tension: Listeners"  |7 August 2010 |
|227  |The Zimbabwean, "Zim heads for more violence"      |7 August 2010 |
|228  |TimesLive, "Fabulous wealth in Marange diamonds"   |8 August 2010 |
|229  |New Zimbabwe.com, "Election preparations on course:|8 August 2010 |
|     |Tsvangirai"                                        |              |
|230  |Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, "The Legal      |9 August 2010 |
|     |Monitor: Edition 57" page 3                        |              |
|231  |RadioVop, "Constitutional outreach meeting         |9 August 2010 |
|     |suspended in Masvingo"                             |              |
|232  |RadioVop, "Outrage at Mugabe's amnesty call"       |9 August 2010 |
|233  |SW Radio Africa, "War vets holding constitutional  |9 August 2010 |
|     |outreach to ransom in Masvingo"                    |              |
|234  |Google News, "Mugabe urges army to 'jealously      |10 August 2010|
|     |guard' Zimbabwe's resources"                       |              |
|235  |SW Radio Africa, "Theresa Makone remains silent on |10 August 2010|
|     |war vets violence"                                 |              |
|236  |SW Radio Africa, "War vets leader threatens to     |10 August 2010|
|     |squash Tsvangirai like a 'fly'"                    |              |
|237  |SW Radio Africa, "War vets leader Jabulani Sibanda |11 August 2010|
|     |continues tour of terror"                          |              |
|238  |The Standard, "Outreach suspended over war vets'   |11 August 2010|
|     |terror in Masvingo"                                |              |
|239  |The Zimbabwean, "MDC under threat"                 |11 August 2010|
|240  |Sokwanele.com, "Zimbabwe Inclusive Government      |12 August 2010|
|     |Watch: Issue 17"                                   |              |
|241  |SW Radio Africa, "Two MDC activists hospitalized   |12 August 2010|
|     |after ZANU PF attacks"                             |              |
|242  |SW Radio Africa, "SMS news message throws          |13 August 2010|
|     |Manicaland CIO into panic"                         |              |
|243  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe constitutional revision    |13 August 2010|
|     |outreach exercise slow to roll out in big cities"  |              |
|244  |Zimbabwe Independent, "'Mugabe amnesty rhetoric    |13 August 2010|
|     |mockery to victims'"                               |              |
|245  |TimesLive, "Eight 'silenced' at COPAC meeting"     |14 August 2010|
|246  |ZZZICOMP, "ZZZICOMP Alert 7: Villagers' assault    |14 August 2010|
|     |causes abandonment of COPAC meeting"               |              |
|247  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Rowdy ZANU-PF youths close     |16 August 2010|
|     |markets"                                           |              |
|248  |VOA News.com, "MDC members abducted after speaking |16 August 2010|
|     |at constitutional outreach meetings"               |              |
|249  |SW Radio Africa, "SADC puts off confronting Mugabe |17 August 2010|
|     |over tribunal contempt"                            |              |
|250  |SW Radio Africa, "Wave of new violence erupts in   |17 August 2010|
|     |Chimanimani district"                              |              |
|251  |Emails between Andrew Jones, David Gibbon, June    |18 August 2010|
|     |Bartlett and Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights     |              |
|     |regarding the transcript of the interview with     |              |
|     |Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, and transcript  |              |
|252  |The Zimbabwean, "CIO thugs abduct, thrash MDC in   |18 August 2010|
|     |Manicaland"                                        |              |
|253  |The Zimbabwean, "Threats escalate, abuse worse"    |18 August 2010|
|254  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe farm workers union says    |18 August 2010|
|     |intimidation rampant in rural constitutions"       |              |
|255  |RadioVop, "Abducted MDC officials dumped at a      |19 August 2010|
|     |police station"                                    |              |
|256  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC COPAC teams resolve to cancel|19 August 2010|
|     |meetings in violent areas"                         |              |
|257  |Emails between Andrew Jones, David Gibbon, Mark    |20 August 2010|
|     |Walker, June Bartlett and [Organisation A]         |              |
|     |regarding the transcript of the interview with     |              |
|     |[Organisation A] (transcript A), and transcript    |              |
|258  |Emails between Andrew Jones, Mark Walker and       |20 August 2010|
|     |[International Organisation] regarding the         |              |
|     |transcript of the interview with [International    |              |
|     |Organisation], dated 17 August 2010, and transcript|              |
|259  |SW Radio Africa, "Farm workers targeted in         |20 August 2010|
|     |constitution outreach intimidation"                |              |
|260  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC devise local ways of dealing |20 August 2010|
|     |with constitutional violence"                      |              |
|261  |SW Radio Africa, "Mugabe reneges on GPA            |20 August 2010|
|     |implementation"                                    |              |
|262  |The Zimbabwean, "Farm workers face outreach        |20 August 2010|
|     |backlash"                                          |              |
|263  |The Zimbabwean, "The last looting party"           |20 August 2010|
|264  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe constitutional outreach    |20 August 2010|
|     |team members protest in Harare over unpaid wages"  |              |
|265  |The Zimbabwean, "Zim at 'extreme risk' of hunger"  |21 August 2010|
|266  |Daily News, "Deputy min, four MDC MPs arrested in  |23 August 2010|
|     |Masvingo"                                          |              |
|267  |SW Radio Africa, "Diamonds controlled by new group |23 August 2010|
|     |of ZANU PF hardliners"                             |              |
|268  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe Central Bank said to hold  |23 August 2010|
|     |many defaulted loans of ZANU-PF officials"         |              |
|269  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: Children crossing borders|24 August 2010|
|     |in search of HIV treatment"                        |              |
|270  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC-T legislator blasts police   |24 August 2010|
|     |for treating them like criminals"                  |              |
|271  |The Zimbabwean, "SADC: Supervise Zimbabwe's next   |24 August 2010|
|     |election to prevent state-sponsored violence"      |              |
|272  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe Minister Matinenga sees    |24 August 2010|
|     |draft revised constitution by late 2010"           |              |
|273  |Emails between David Gibbon, June Bartlett and the |25 August 2010|
|     |Director of GALZ, regarding the transcript of the  |              |
|     |interview with the Director of GALZ, dated 17      |              |
|     |August 2010, and transcript                        |              |
|274  |Letter from the Chief of Mission, International    |25 August 2010|
|     |Organisation of Migration, regarding the treatment |              |
|     |of Zimbabwean voluntary returnees                  |              |
|275  |RadioVop, "Zimbabwe police torch squatter camp"    |25 August 2010|
|276  |Zimbabwe Peace Project, "Summary on                |25 August 2010|
|     |politically-motivated human rights and food-related|              |
|     |violations: July 2010"                             |              |
|277  |SW Radio Africa, "Police after WOZA leader Jenni   |26 August 2010|
|     |Williams over constitutional program"              |              |
|278  |Emails between Andrew Jones and [International     |27 August 2010|
|     |Organisation B] regarding the transcript of the    |              |
|     |interview with [International Organisation B]      |              |
|     |(transcript B), and transcript                     |              |
|279  |Emails between David Gibbon, Andrew Jones, June    |27 August 2010|
|     |Bartlett and Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for   |              |
|     |Human Rights regarding the transcript of the       |              |
|     |interview with Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for |              |
|     |Human Rights (transcript E)                        |              |
|280  |Emails between David Gibbon and Source G regarding |27 August 2010|
|     |the transcript of the interview with Source G, and |              |
|     |transcript                                         |              |
|281  |Emails between June Bartlett, David Gibbon, Andrew |27 August 2010|
|     |Jones and Frances Lovemore regarding the transcript|              |
|     |of the interview with Source D, and transcript     |              |
|282  |Reuters, "Zimbabwe election body says poll unlikely|27 August 2010|
|     |in 2011"                                           |              |
|283  |SW Radio Africa, "Constitution committee want $5   |27 August 2010|
|     |million more"                                      |              |
|284  |SW Radio Africa, "Two state prosecutors tortured   |27 August 2010|
|     |for sending war vets to jail"                      |              |
|285  |ZimOnline, "SADC must supervise Zim polls: NGOs"   |27 August 2010|
|286  |Daily News, "Protect evicted people - Amnesty      |28 August 2010|
|     |International"                                     |              |
|287  |The Zimbabwean, "Mugabe sets up military state"    |28 August 2010|
|288  |The Zimbabwean, "Villagers forced to attend Zanu   |28 August 2010|
|     |meetings"                                          |              |
|289  |NewsDay, "MDC-T threatens 'No Vote' campaign"      |29 August 2010|
|290  |SW Radio Africa, "Zanu-PF on course to another     |30 August 2010|
|     |stolen election"                                   |              |
|291  |SW Radio Africa, "Problems in Masvingo as outreach |30 August 2010|
|     |meetings abandoned"                                |              |
|292  |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Armed police     |31 August 2010|
|     |torch homes of 250 people in Harare"               |              |
|293  |Emails between June Bartlett, Debbie Goodier and   |31 August 2010|
|     |[@radiodialogue.com] regarding the transcript of   |              |
|     |the interview with [@radiodialogue.com]            |              |
|294  |SW Radio Africa, "So called 'implementation matrix'|31 August 2010|
|     |exposes farce of coalition"                        |              |
|295  |ZimEye, "Election terror"                          |31 August 2010|
|296  |Google News, "Zimbabwe needs $200 mln for fresh    |1 September   |
|     |polls: media"                                      |2010          |
|297  |Guardian.co.uk, "Tony Blair: Military intervention |1 September   |
|     |in rogue regimes 'more necessary than ever'"       |2010          |
|298  |Sokwanele.com, "SW Radio Africa broadcasts jammed  |1 September   |
|     |despite unity government"                          |2010          |
|299  |The Economic Times, "Zimbabwe to become world's top|1 September   |
|     |diamond producer: Expert"                          |2010          |
|300  |Daily News, "Zimbabwe media precarious - US        |2 September   |
|     |Ambassador"                                        |2010          |
|301  |SW Radio Africa, "Gukurahundi artist faces 20 years|2 September   |
|     |in jail"                                           |2010          |
|302  |The Daily Catalyst, "Taking the constitutional     |2 September   |
|     |debate to Uzumba and Mrehwa"                       |2010          |
|303  |Witness statement of Mark Walker, including:       |2 September   |
|     |Exhibit A to the witness statement of Mark Walker: |2010          |
|     |"Record of interviews undertaken as part of the    |              |
|     |Fact Finding Mission to Zimbabwe: Harare 9-17      |              |
|     |August 2010" 1 September 2010;                     |              |
|     |Exhibit B to the witness statement of Mark Walker: |              |
|     |Intergovernmental Consultations on Migration,      |              |
|     |Asylum and Refugees, "Response to Request for      |              |
|     |Information - Return of Rejected Asylum Seekers to |              |
|     |Zimbabwe: Request by the United Kingdom" 23 August |              |
|     |2010                                               |              |
|304  |Emails between June Bartlett, David Gibbon and the |3 September   |
|     |Executive Director of Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO    |2010          |
|     |Forum regarding the transcript of the interview    |              |
|     |with the Executive Director of Zimbabwe Human      |              |
|     |Rights NGO Forum, dated 13 August 2010, and        |              |
|     |transcript                                         |              |
|305  |Emails between June Bartlett, David Gibbon and [ ] |3 September   |
|     |regarding the transcript of the interview with [ ] |2010          |
|306  |SW Radio Africa, "No food aid in Matabeleland South|3 September   |
|     |due to ZANU PF violence"                           |2010          |
|307  |Kubatana.net, "August Monthly Roundup - Peace Watch|5 September   |
|     |10/2010"                                           |2010          |
|308  |New Zimbabwe.com, "Inside Zimbabwe's security      |5 September   |
|     |services (Part II)"                                |2010          |
|309  |British Embassy egram, "NOSEC: Zimbabwe: The       |6 September   |
|     |balance sheet"                                     |2010          |
|310  |Daily News, "Governor Maluleke appeals for money to|6 September   |
|     |avert starvation"                                  |2010          |
|311  |Emails between June Bartlett, David Gibbon, Andrew |6 September   |
|     |Jones and Anthony Reeler, Director of Research and |2010          |
|     |Advocacy Unit, regarding the transcript of the     |              |
|     |interview with Anthony Reeler, Director of Research|              |
|     |and Advocacy Unit, dated 17 August 2010, and       |              |
|     |transcript                                         |              |
|312  |Daily Mail Online, "Zimbabwean man jailed for      |7 September   |
|     |10-months hard labour after calling President      |2010          |
|     |Mugabe 'old and wrinkly'"                          |              |
|313  |Daily News, "More violence mars COPAC meetings in  |7 September   |
|     |Nyanga"                                            |2010          |
|314  |Emails between June Bartlett, David Gibbon, Andrew |7 September   |
|     |Jones and Rodrick Fayayo, Bulawayo Progressive     |2010          |
|     |Residents Association, regarding the transcript of |              |
|     |the interview with Rodrick Fayayo, Bulawayo        |              |
|     |Progressive Residents Association                  |              |
|315  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC MP evades arrest over        |7 September   |
|     |'insult' charges"                                  |2010          |
|316  |Afrique Avenir, "Press watchdog blasts jamming of  |8 September   |
|     |broadcasts by private Zimbabwean radio station"    |2010          |
|317  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Anarchy as General Mujuru's    |8 September   |
|     |gunmen attack Mnangagwa's loyalists at Chitungwiza |2010          |
|     |head office"                                       |              |
|318  |Reuters, "Exclusive - Mugabe says wants closer ties|9 September   |
|     |with West"                                         |2010          |
|319  |Financial Gazette, "Ministers sued over filthy     |10 September  |
|     |holding cells"                                     |2010          |
|320  |The Standard, "Early elections: can Zimbabwe pull  |12 September  |
|     |it off?"                                           |2010          |
|321  |The Standard, "Tsvangirai, Mugabe strike deal on   |12 September  |
|     |polls"                                             |2010          |
|322  |SW Radio Africa, "ZANU PF kicks into election mode |14 September  |
|     |with 'threats' of more violence"                   |2010          |
|323  |TheyWorkForYou.com, "Zimbabwe: Oral Answers to     |14 September  |
|     |Questions - Foreign and Commonwealth Office: House |2010          |
|     |of Commons debates, 14 September 2010, 2:30 pm"    |              |
|324  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "UK, says UN, EU and SADC to    |14 September  |
|     |send monitors for free and fair Zimbabwe election" |2010          |
|325  |Financial Times, "Frailty fails to loosen Mugabe's |15 September  |
|     |iron grip"                                         |2010          |
|326  |British Embassy eGram / Gist of a report sent by   |15 September  |
|     |the British Embassy in Harare on 15 September 2010 |2010          |
|327  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC says ZPF deliberately        |15 September  |
|     |delaying implementing GPA"                         |2010          |
|328  |SW Radio Africa, "Violence forces cancellation of  |15 September  |
|     |23 COPAC meetings in Manicaland"                   |2010          |
|329  |Witness statement of Anthony Peter Reeler, Director|15 September  |
|     |of the Research Advocacy Unit                      |2010          |
|330  |Zimbabwe Reporter, "Resolutions of the MDC National|15 September  |
|     |Congress"                                          |2010          |
|331  |Financial Gazette, "Talk of elections in 2011      |16 September  |
|     |premature, ill-advised"                            |2010          |
|332  |Witness statement of W78                           |16 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|333  |Daily News, "Stop political violence against       |18 September  |
|     |teachers - Coltart"                                |2010          |
|334  |ZimOnline, "ZEC warns against rushed election"     |18 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|335  |Daily News, "Violence mars Mbare COPAC hearings"   |19 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|336  |Telegraph.co.uk, "Robert Mugabe blames sanctions   |21 September  |
|     |for Zimbabwe's woes"                               |2010          |
|337  |UK Border Agency Country of Origin Information     |21 September  |
|     |Service, "Zimbabwe: Report of Fact Finding Mission |2010          |
|     |to Zimbabwe: Harare 9 - 17 August 2010             |              |
|338  |Reuters, "Zimbabwe constitutional reform process   |22 September  |
|     |not credible: Tsvangirai"                          |2010          |
|339  |Zimbabwe Peace Project, "Summary on                |22 September  |
|     |politically-motivated human rights and food-related|2010          |
|     |violations: August 2010"                           |              |
|340  |ZimOnline, "Victims of violence arrested: MDC"     |22 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|341  |Daily News, "Chihuri orders police to register as  |23 September  |
|     |voters"                                            |2010          |
|342  |MSN ZA News, "Zimbabwean man dies after attack by  |23 September  |
|     |gang from Mugabe's party"                          |2010          |
|343  |Sokwanele.com, "Mbare resident dies after weekend  |23 September  |
|     |assault as other residents sustain injuries"       |2010          |
|344  |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note:      |23 September  |
|     |Zimbabwe"                                          |2010          |
|345  |RadioVop, "More constitution making meetings       |24 September  |
|     |cancelled"                                         |2010          |
|346  |SW Radio Africa, "Fear for abducted MDC official as|24 September  |
|     |ZANU PF violence continues"                        |2010          |
|347  |The Zimbabwean, "Shamuyarira blocks union from     |24 September  |
|     |giving food aid"                                   |2010          |
|348  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Dreaded abduction twin cabs    |24 September  |
|     |re-emerge across the country"                      |2010          |
|349  |SW Radio Africa, "MDC: Memorial for dead MDC       |27 September  |
|     |activist"                                          |2010          |
|350  |SW Radio Africa, "'Negotiated' constitution on the |27 September  |
|     |cards as outreach process fails"                   |2010          |
|351  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: Government on nationwide |28 September  |
|     |teacher recruitment drive"                         |2010          |
|352  |Gist of an e-Gram sent by the British Embassy in   |28 September  |
|     |Harare                                             |2010          |
|353  |Human Rights Watch, " Zimbabwe: Violence,          |28 September  |
|     |Intimidation Mar Constitutional Outreach: Rights   |2010          |
|     |Abuses and Repression Continue Under Power-Sharing |              |
|     |Agreement"                                         |              |
|354  |RadioVop, "'War vet' leader holds warning rallies" |28 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|355  |RadioVop, "COPAC wants political leaders to        |29 September  |
|     |publicly denounce violence"                        |2010          |
|356  |SW Radio Africa, "COPAC order fresh outreach       |29 September  |
|     |meetings for Harare"                               |2010          |
|357  |SW Radio Africa, "Intimidation of farmers          |29 September  |
|     |intensifies but PM remains silent"                 |2010          |
|358  |Amnesty International, "Up to 20,000 at risk of    |30 September  |
|     |forced eviction in Zimbabwe"                       |2010          |
|359  |Expert report of W77, "Expert Report on Zimbabwe - |30 September  |
|     |30 Sept 2010"                                      |2010          |
|360  |The Independent, "Tsvangirai not certain on        |30 September  |
|     |election date"                                     |2010          |
|361  |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin Information   |30 September  |
|     |Report: Zimbabwe"                                  |2010          |
|362  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Tsvangirai not certain on   |30 September  |
|     |elections date"                                    |2010          |
|363  |Expert report of Professor Terence Ranger,         |September 2010|
|     |"Zimbabwe Country Judgement Report"                |              |
|364  |Financial Gazette, "Tsvangirai to step down"       |1 October 2010|
|365  |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note:      |1 October 2010|
|     |Zimbabwe"                                          |              |
|366  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: Informal sector dims     |2 October 2010|
|     |economic prospects"                                |              |
|367  |The Standard, "Informal sector dims economic       |2 October 2010|
|     |prospects"                                         |              |
|368  |ZimEye, "Sibanda vows to continue terror campaign" |2 October 2010|
|369  |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu activates terror machinery"  |3 October 2010|
|370  |RadioVop, "ZBC labels journalists terrorists"      |4 October 2010|
|371  |SW Radio Africa, "Close to 2 million people        |4 October 2010|
|     |participated in outreach program"                  |              |
|372  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe Prime Minister's part      |4 October 2010|
|     |accuses ZANU-PF of stepping up intimidation"       |              |
|373  |AllAfrica.com, "Zimbabwe: Harare outreaches under  |6 October 2010|
|     |threat"                                            |              |
|374  |Daily News, "Mugabe's ill health a threat to the   |7 October 2010|
|     |MDC - Robertson"                                   |              |
|375  |Expert report of Professor Terence Ranger,         |7 October 2010|
|     |"Comments on the Home Office submission and        |              |
|     |executive summary"                                 |              |
|376  |SW Radio Africa, "Statement by the Prime Minister  |7 October 2010|
|     |of the Republic of Zimbabwe and President of the   |              |
|     |MDC Rt Hon Morgan R Tsvangirai"                    |              |
|377  |The Zimbabwean, "Chiefs, army, farmers to plot Zanu|7 October 2010|
|     |victory"                                           |              |
|378  |The Zimbabwean, "CIO trains ZEC officials"         |7 October 2010|
|379  |British Embassy eGram, "Zimbabwe: Tsvangirai       |8 October 2010|
|     |declares a constitutional crisis"                  |              |
|380  |Second witness statement of W78                    |9 October 2010|
|381  |Emails between Dewa Mavhinga and John Steward      |11 October    |
|     |regarding witness statement                        |2010          |
|382  |Expert report of W77, "Note in relation to Home    |11 October    |
|     |Office Fact Finding Mission report"                |2010          |
|383  |Expert report of W66, "Report for presentation to  |11 October    |
|     |the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal hearing set for|2010          |
|     |October 2010"                                      |              |
|384  |RadioVop, "Heavy presence of soldiers terrifies Zim|11 October    |
|     |villagers"                                         |2010          |
|385  |Email between W81 and John Steward regarding       |12 October    |
|     |witness statement                                  |2010          |
|386  |PostZambia.com, "Zim schedules constitution        |12 October    |
|     |referendum for June 2011"                          |2010          |
|387  |Second witness statement of Anthony Peter Reeler   |12 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|388  |Witness statement of W79 of the Zimbabwe Human     |12 October    |
|     |Rights Association (ZHRA)                          |2010          |
|389  |Witness statement of Sarah Harland, Co-ordinator of|12 October    |
|     |the Zimbabwe Association                           |2010          |
|390  |Xinhaunet.com, "Zimbabwe marks referendum countdown|13 October    |
|     |despite problems"                                  |2010          |
|391  |UK Border Agency, "Latest news and updates:        |14 October    |
|     |Enforced returns to Zimbabwe will resume"          |2010          |
|392  |Emails between June Bartlett, David Gibbon, Andrew |15 October    |
|     |Jones and Deon Theron, CFU regarding the transcript|2010          |
|     |of the interview with CFU                          |              |
|393  |Emails between June Bartlett, David Gibbon and W78 |15 October    |
|     |regarding transcript of  interview                 |2010          |
|394  |Financial Gazette, "Negotiated constitution in     |15 October    |
|     |offing"                                            |2010          |
|395  |Global Times, "Mugabe says 'reluctant' to prolong  |15 October    |
|     |Zimbabwe's inclusive government"                   |2010          |
|396  |RadioVop, "Mugabe says he will not extend life of  |15 October    |
|     |inclusive government"                              |2010          |
|397  |Reuters, "Mugabe sees end to Zimbabwe power-sharing|15 October    |
|     |in February"                                       |2010          |
|398  |Witness statement of Debbie Goodier, including:    |15 October    |
|     |Exhibit 1 to the witness statement of Debbie       |2010          |
|     |Goodier: Annex A: "List of outline questions sent  |              |
|     |to sources before interview" (for the COI Report of|              |
|     |Fact Finding Mission to Zimbabwe Harare 9-17 August|              |
|     |2010, dated 21 September 2010)                     |              |
|     |and "Joint Country of Origin Information           |              |
|     |Service/Country Specific Policy Team/Foreign and   |              |
|     |Commonwealth Office Fact Finding Mission to        |              |
|     |Zimbabwe: Terms of Reference" undated;             |              |
|     |Exhibit 2 to the witness statement of Debbie       |              |
|     |Goodier: Emails between Andrew Jones, Debbie       |              |
|     |Goodier, Mark Walker and Anthony Reeler regarding  |              |
|     |the transcript of the interview with Anthony       |              |
|     |Reeler, dated 19 August 2010                       |              |
|     |and "UK Border Agency Fact Finding Mission -       |              |
|     |Zimbabwe: Interview with Anthony Reeler, Director, |              |
|     |Research and Advocacy Unit" interview dated 17     |              |
|     |August 2010                                        |              |
|399  |Email between Mark Walker and Meredith Webb        |18 October    |
|     |regarding enforced returns to Zimbabwe             |2010          |
|400  |Letter from Margaret Belof, Zimbabwe Unit, Foreign |18 October    |
|     |and Commonwealth Office, "Zimbabwe Assessments:    |2010          |
|     |August to October 2010"                            |              |
|401  |SW Radio Africa, "Army deploys soldiers at Mutoko  |18 October    |
|     |business centre"                                   |2010          |
|402  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwean human rights organization|18 October    |
|     |warns of resurgence in political violence"         |2010          |
|403  |ZimOnline, "Fears of 2008 bloodbath repeat"        |18 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|404  |RadioVop, "Tsvangirai prepares for election"       |19 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|405  |Daily News, "EU rejects Mugabe's new ambassadors"  |20 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|406  |The Herald, "ZEC ready for elections"              |20 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|407  |Third witness statement of Anthony Peter Reeler,   |20 October    |
|     |Director of the Research Advocacy Unit             |2010          |
|408  |TimesLive, "Zimbabwe elections waiting for Mugabe" |20 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|409  |Witness statement of Robert Stephen Symonds,       |20 October    |
|     |Immigration Law Practitioners' Association         |2010          |
|410  |Emails between Debbie Goodier, David Gibbon, Colin |21 October    |
|     |Thomann and Returnee 4 regarding the transcript of |2010          |
|     |the interview with Returnee 4                      |              |
|411  |SW Radio Africa, "Zimbabweans fear elections after |21 October    |
|     |constitutional outreach exercise"                  |2010          |
|412  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Candid comment: Mugabe      |21 October    |
|     |desperate to secure his future"                    |2010          |
|413  |Zimbabwe Independent, "I won't return - Bennett"   |21 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|414  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Mugabe mobilises Zanu PF for|21 October    |
|     |polls"                                             |2010          |
|415  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Mugabe's plan to retain     |21 October    |
|     |power"                                             |2010          |
|416  |Zimbabwe Peace Project, "Summary on                |21 October    |
|     |politically-motivated human rights and food-related|2010          |
|     |violations: September 2010"                        |              |
|417  |SW Radio Africa, "School children and teachers     |26 October    |
|     |force-marched to ZANU PF rallies"                  |2010          |
|418  |The Zimbabwean, "Poor starve in the midst of       |26 October    |
|     |plenty"                                            |2010          |
|419  |The Zimbabwean, "Cops ordered not to protect MDC"  |27 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|420  |The Zimbabwean, "One Zim farmer shot, others forced|27 October    |
|     |off land as pre-election violence escalates"       |2010          |
|421  |ZimOnline, "Zim charter ready in time for polls"   |27 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|422  |British Embassy eGram, "NOSEC: Zimbabwe: Election  |29 October    |
|     |fever"                                             |2010          |
|423  |British Embassy eGram, "Zimbabwe: Constitutional   |29 October    |
|     |outreach draws to a close"                         |2010          |
|424  |The Zimbabwean, "Time to say no to violent polls"  |29 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|425  |The Standard, "Rampant police corruption cripples  |31 October    |
|     |transport sector"                                  |2010          |
|426  |Supplementary witness statement of Mark Walker,    |October 2010  |
|     |including:                                         |              |
|     |Exhibit A to the supplementary witness statement of|              |
|     |Mark Walker: Letter from Deputy Head of Mission,   |              |
|     |British Embassy in Harare, "Zimbabwe: Civil Society|              |
|     |Organisations" 15 October 2010;                    |              |
|     |Exhibit B to the supplementary witness statement of|              |
|     |Mark Walker: UK Border Agency, "2010 Zimbabwe      |              |
|     |Asylum Intake by Place of Birth" 3 June 2010       |              |
|427  |RadioVop, "Political violence hit Chimanimani"     |2 November    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|428  |RadioVop, "Zim teachers face fresh political       |3 November    |
|     |violence"                                          |2010          |
|429  |The Zimbabwean, "Emigrants' violent homecoming"    |3 November    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|430  |The Zimbabwean, "Rusape runs dry"                  |3 November    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|431  |The Zimbabwean, "Tsvangirai won't rule - General"  |3 November    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|432  |British Embassy eGram, "Zimbabwe: Brightening      |4 November    |
|     |prospects on the economy"                          |2010          |
|433  |Daily News, "Teachers beaten up because of         |4 November    |
|     |elections"                                         |2010          |
|434  |Financial Gazette, "Outreach resumption: More of   |5 November    |
|     |the same"                                          |2010          |
|435  |SW Radio Africa, "Four teachers severely beaten by |5 November    |
|     |ZANU PF youths in Masvingo"                        |2010          |
|436  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe electoral commission staff |5 November    |
|     |include secret police, MDC charges"                |2010          |
|437  |The Zimbabwean, "Election chief contradicts deputy |5 November    |
|     |on poll readiness"                                 |2010          |
|438  |Guardian.co.uk, "'I danced because I knew if I     |6 November    |
|     |didn't they would kill me'"                        |2010          |
|439  |RadioVop, "Farmers tortured for not attending Zanu |7 November    |
|     |(PF) rally"                                        |2010          |
|440  |RadioVop, "Soldiers declare Mugabe Life President  |8 November    |
|     |as panic sets in Masvingo"                         |2010          |
|441  |RadioVop, "Zim journos summoned to court"          |8 November    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|442  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Army General awarded massive   |8 November    |
|     |GMB exit package as looting continues unabated"    |2010          |
|443  |VOA News.com, "Demonstration by Zimbabwean soldiers|8 November    |
|     |for President Mugabe heightens concerns"           |2010          |
|444  |ZimOnline, "Another NGO ban feared as polls loom"  |8 November    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|445  |ZimRights, "CIS officers interrogate ZimRights     |8 November    |
|     |member"                                            |2010          |
|446  |SW Radio Africa, "Seven schools close in Rushinga  |9 November    |
|     |as teachers flee ZANU PF threats"                  |2010          |
|447  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe NGOs urge unity government |9 November    |
|     |to bring military into line on elections"          |2010          |
|448  |Zimbabwe Peace Project, "ZPP Information Alert:    |9 November    |
|     |Masvingo traditional leaders fine villagers for not|2010          |
|     |supporting ZANU PF"                                |              |
|449  |RadioVop, "Gukurahundi activist dies from suspected|10 November   |
|     |torture"                                           |2010          |
|450  |RadioVop, "Zim Peace Project exposes violence in   |10 November   |
|     |Masvingo"                                          |2010          |
|451  |SW Radio Africa, "Soldiers go on rampage in        |10 November   |
|     |Chipinge East"                                     |2010          |
|452  |SW Radio Africa, "Villagers pledge to sell chickens|10 November   |
|     |to fund election monitors"                         |2010          |
|453  |The Daily Agenda, "MDC-M provincial spokesman      |10 November   |
|     |threatens Bulawayo agenda"                         |2010          |
|454  |The Zimbabwean, "Army deployed to monitor MDC      |10 November   |
|     |activities"                                        |2010          |
|455  |The Zimbabwean, "Independent journalists harassed" |10 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|456  |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu buys loyalty"                |10 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|457  |Veritas, "Bill Watch 46/2010"                      |10 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|458  |Veritas, "Bill Watch Special"                      |10 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|459  |ReliefWeb, "EU expresses concern about Zim polls"  |11 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|460  |RadioVop, "Beheading operation launched to terrify |11 November   |
|     |Zim villagers"                                     |2010          |
|461  |The Zimbabwean, "MDC activist fights for his life" |11 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|462  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "We're no longer in direct      |11 November   |
|     |contact with Robert Mugabe - Tsvangirai"           |2010          |
|463  |VOA News.com, "Cracks widening in Zimbabwe's       |11 November   |
|     |fragile national unity government"                 |2010          |
|464  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Constitutional views worse  |11 November   |
|     |than Kariba draft - Ncube"                         |2010          |
|465  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Fishmongers set to meet next|11 November   |
|     |month over Zim"                                    |2010          |
|466  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Mugabe crushes dissent in   |11 November   |
|     |Zanu PF"                                           |2010          |
|467  |ZimOnline, "EU expresses concern about Zim polls"  |11 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|468  |Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition, "Zimbabwe Briefing:  |12 November   |
|     |Issue 2"                                           |2010          |
|469  |SW Radio Africa, "SADC accused of appeasing Robert |12 November   |
|     |Mugabe"                                            |2010          |
|470  |SW Radio Africa, "SADC to hold indaba with Zim     |12 November   |
|     |civil society organizations"                       |2010          |
|471  |Zim Diaspora.com, "Gukurahundi orphan demands      |12 November   |
|     |justice on parents graves"                         |2010          |
|472  |Daily News, "Mugabe is dishonest - Tsvangirai"     |13 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|473  |The Standard, "Pubs forced to play jingles"        |13 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|474  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Mugabe prepares for a brutal   |13 November   |
|     |and violent campaign"                              |2010          |
|475  |ZimEye, "Mugabe seeks dialogue with Britain"       |13 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|476  |British Embassy eGram                              |15 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|477  |Guardian.co.uk, Greenslade Blog, "Exiled Zimbabwe  |15 November   |
|     |editor faces arrest"                               |2010          |
|478  |News24.com, "Mugabe bill to stifle access to info" |15 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|479  |New Zimbabwe, "Constitution: MDC sends out mixed   |15 November   |
|     |signals"                                           |2010          |
|480  |Radio Netherlands Worldwide, "Zimbabwe villagers   |15 November   |
|     |live under tight security after death police chief"|2010          |
|481  |SW Radio Africa, "ZANU PF hangs onto broadcasting  |15 November   |
|     |monopoly ahead of elections"                       |2010          |
|482  |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu-PF is ready to use brute     |15 November   |
|     |force again to control the media"                  |2010          |
|483  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe parties gear up for        |15 November   |
|     |elections despite regional call for road map"      |2010          |
|484  |Daily News, "Soldiers terrorise villagers from     |16 November   |
|     |attending MDC rally"                               |2010          |
|485  |Guardian.co.uk, Greenslade Blog, "Another          |16 November   |
|     |journalist arrested in Zimbabwe"                   |2010          |
|486  |National Union of Journalists, "NUJ condemns the   |16 November   |
|     |arrest and harassment of the president of the      |2010          |
|     |Zimbabwe Union of Journalists, Dumisani Sibanda"   |              |
|487  |SW Radio Africa, "Bodies decompose at Tsholotsho   |16 November   |
|     |mortuary as donated generator diverted"            |2010          |
|488  |The Zimbabwean, "Nelson Chamisa on rules for our   |16 November   |
|     |rulers"                                            |2010          |
|489  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Call for Zimbabwe elections was|16 November   |
|     |'nervous excitement'"                              |2010          |
|490  |SW Radio Africa, "Attack on Hon Khupe an indictment|17 November   |
|     |on Zimbabwe's partisan security sector"            |2010          |
|491  |SW Radio Africa, "Cabinet drama as Deputy PM's     |17 November   |
|     |resist security search"                            |2010          |
|492  |SW Radio Africa, "Makone fears election bloodbath  |17 November   |
|     |if no reforms are made"                            |2010          |
|493  |SW Radio Africa, "Standard journalist arrested and |17 November   |
|     |charged with criminal defamation"                  |2010          |
|494  |The Zimbabwean, "Only war vets can get land"       |17 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|495  |The Zimbabwean, "Yes to elections, no to violence -|17 November   |
|     |Tsvangirai"                                        |2010          |
|496  |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu (PF) bars MDC supporters from|17 November   |
|     |farming"                                           |2010          |
|497  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Mawere warns investors to      |17 November   |
|     |Zimbabwe"                                          |2010          |
|498  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe police arrest journalist   |17 November   |
|     |over report on pre-election recruitment"           |2010          |
|499  |BBC News, "Zimbabwe land reform 'not a failure'"   |18 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|500  |Daily News, "Army in massive recruitment ahead of  |18 November   |
|     |elections"                                         |2010          |
|501  |The Zimbabwean, "Bulawayo mayor - 'a man of the    |18 November   |
|     |people'"                                           |2010          |
|502  |The Zimbabwean, "Operation 'Mugabe Zvachose'       |18 November   |
|     |launched"                                          |2010          |
|503  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Editor's memo: Mugabe wants |18 November   |
|     |elections for his own interest"                    |2010          |
|504  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Muchena set to quit air     |18 November   |
|     |force for Zanu PF"                                 |2010          |
|505  |SW Radio Africa, "Fearful Bulawayo magistrate      |19 November   |
|     |denies Standard journalist bail"                   |2010          |
|506  |SW Radio Africa, "GPA principals in Botswana for   |19 November   |
|     |Troika meeting"                                    |2010          |
|507  |TES Connect, "Death threats and a deplorable school|19 November   |
|     |system"                                            |2010          |
|508  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Mounting friction between      |19 November   |
|     |Mugabe, Tsvangirai threaten Zimbabwe's government" |2010          |
|509  |The Standard, "Zanu PF's MPs boycott Mujuru over   |21 November   |
|     |polls"                                             |2010          |
|510  |The Zimbabwean, "Bennett predicts Mugabe fall"     |21 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|511  |TimesLive, "UK warms up to Harare"                 |21 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|512  |RadioVop, "MDC supporters flee as houses are burnt"|22 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|513  |SW Radio Africa, "Fear grips Chipinge East as      |22 November   |
|     |soldiers go on rampage"                            |2010          |
|514  |SW Radio Africa, "Harassment concerns deepen as    |22 November   |
|     |journalist denied bail"                            |2010          |
|515  |Daily News, "Elections premature - SADC"           |23 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|516  |RadioVop, "Zim constitution process illegitimate - |23 November   |
|     |Tsvangirai"                                        |2010          |
|517  |Reuters, "UK expresses reservations on Zimbabwe    |23 November   |
|     |election timing"                                   |2010          |
|518  |Sokwanele.com, "Zimbabwe Inclusive Government      |23 November   |
|     |Watch: Issue 21"                                   |2010          |
|519  |SW Radio Africa, "SADC says independent Zim        |23 November   |
|     |violence report needed"                            |2010          |
|520  |SW Radio Africa, "State broadcaster 'strips'       |23 November   |
|     |Tsvangirai of PM title"                            |2010          |
|521  |SW Radio Africa, "ZANU PF politburo wants elections|23 November   |
|     |before June"                                       |2010          |
|522  |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu PF militia recruiting        |23 November   |
|     |students"                                          |2010          |
|523  |Yahoo News, "UK expresses reservations on Zimbabwe |23 November   |
|     |election timing"                                   |2010          |
|524  |Reuters, "Zimbabwe man jailed with intestines      |24 November   |
|     |hanging out"                                       |2010          |
|525  |SW Radio Africa, "ZANU PF beefing up terror gangs  |24 November   |
|     |ahead of elections"                                |2010          |
|526  |The Zimbabwean, "SADC shows allegiance to Mugabe as|24 November   |
|     |leaders fail to show"                              |2010          |
|527  |NewsDay, "Mangwana confesses"                      |25 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|528  |RadioVop, "Zim media commissioner fears violence   |25 November   |
|     |will mar elections"                                |2010          |
|529  |The Zimbabwe Guardian, "Elections to go ahead:     |25 November   |
|     |Zanu-PF politburo"                                 |2010          |
|530  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Mugabe and SADC set to impose  |25 November   |
|     |Mnangagwa as Zimbabwe President"                   |2010          |
|531  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Biti sets up fund for 2011  |25 November   |
|     |elections"                                         |2010          |
|532  |Zimbabwe Independent, "Mugabe orders acceleration  |25 November   |
|     |of constitution process"                           |2010          |
|533  |Zimbabwe Independent, "'Zim humanitarian situation |25 November   |
|     |still fragile'"                                    |2010          |
|534  |Gist of an e-Gram sent by the British Embassy in   |26 November   |
|     |Harare                                             |2010          |
|535  |People's Daily, "Zimbabwe parties agree on major   |26 November   |
|     |issues on constitution making"                     |2010          |
|536  |The Zimbabwean, "Commissioner wants violence       |26 November   |
|     |mongers exposed"                                   |2010          |
|537  |RadioVop, "No toilets for Murambatsvina victims"   |28 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|538  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Chihuri's efforts to turn      |28 November   |
|     |police into Zanu PF militia sinks to new low"      |2010          |
|539  |NewsDay, "Comment: Youth training a Zanu PF        |29 November   |
|     |campaign project"                                  |2010          |
|540  |RadioVop, "Zuma wants SADC to monitor Zim election"|29 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|541  |The Standard, "Analysts warn of bloodshed in 2011  |29 November   |
|     |polls"                                             |2010          |
|542  |The Standard, "Battle for Matabeleland looms large"|29 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|543  |VOA News.com, "Zimbabwe civic group marches to     |29 November   |
|     |promote its views on constitutional reform"        |2010          |
|544  |Kubatana.net, Blog archive "Be very afraid"        |30 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|545  |SW Radio Africa, "War vets establish new Zanu PF   |30 November   |
|     |bases in Matabeleland"                             |2010          |
|546  |The Zimbabwean, "An MDC activist died at Matapi    |30 November   |
|     |police station"                                    |2010          |
|547  |The Zimbabwean, "Teachers petitions UN and SADC"   |30 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|548  |TimesLive, "Zim police will only accept a Mugabe   |30 November   |
|     |win"                                               |2010          |
|549  |ZimOnline, "Analysis: Wikileaks, a godsend for     |30 November   |
|     |Mugabe"                                            |2010          |
|550  |British Embassy eGram, "Zimbabwe: President Zuma's |1 December    |
|     |visit"                                             |2010          |
|551  |RadioVop, "Election time is war time - Villagers   |1 December    |
|     |warned"                                            |2010          |
|552  |SW Radio Africa, "CIO agent abducts six teachers in|1 December    |
|     |Rushinga"                                          |2010          |
|553  |SW Radio Africa, "Jabulani Sibanda terrorizing     |1 December    |
|     |Lowveld, threatening death to MDC"                 |2010          |
|554  |The Botswanan Gazette, "Zuma in bid to break       |1 December    |
|     |Zimbabwe deadlock"                                 |2010          |
|555  |ZimOnline, "Soldiers hold drills in villages"      |1 December    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|556  |RadioVop, "Panic grips Zim media as cops are       |2 December    |
|     |recruited into newsrooms"                          |2010          |
|557  |RadioVop, "Urgent SADC summit on Zim in January"   |2 December    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|558  |SW Radio Africa, "Rushinga teachers flee on foot as|2 December    |
|     |CIO botch abduction"                               |2010          |
|559  |The Maine Campus, "2011 Zimbabwean elections could |5 December    |
|     |be violent"                                        |2010          |
|560  |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu PF members have hijacked the |2 December    |
|     |food aid programme"                                |2010          |
|561  |The Zimbabwean, "Zimbabwe elections - A war        |2 December    |
|     |situation, Concession residents"                   |2010          |
|562  |ZimOnline, "New wave of media repression in Zim:   |2 December    |
|     |RSF"                                               |2010          |
|563  |RadioVop, "Zanu (PF) party wings promise poll      |6 December    |
|     |terror"                                            |2010          |
|564  |RadioVop, "Zim journo beaten up by Zanu (PF) thugs"|6 December    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|565  |Sokwanele.com, "Zimbabwe Inclusive Government      |6 December    |
|     |Watch: Issue 22"                                   |2010          |
|566  |The Zimbabwean, "SADC to have input on election    |10 December   |
|     |date in Zimbabwe"                                  |2010          |
|567  |VOA News.com, "Wikileaks revelations could put     |10 December   |
|     |Zimbabwe at risk of further instability"           |2010          |
|568  |Reuters, "Analysis - Zimbabwe heads into a storm   |14 December   |
|     |with early election"                               |2010          |
|569  |The Telegraph, "Robert Mugabe 'ready to bury the   |19 December   |
|     |opposition' as opposition warns of beatings and    |2010          |
|     |intimidation"                                      |              |
|570  |Guardian.co.uk, "Morgan Tsvangirai faces possible  |27 December   |
|     |Zimbabwe treason charge"                           |2010          |
|571  |The Zimbabwean, "Soldiers man roadblocks"          |28 December   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|572  |Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2010 -        |2010          |
|     |Zimbabwe"                                          |              |
|573  |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Taking           |2010          |
|     |Transitional Justice to the People: Outreach       |              |
|     |Report: Volume 2"                                  |              |
|574  |Foreign Policy, "Does Robert Mugabe really need    |3 January 2011|
|     |WikiLeaks?"                                        |              |
|575  |Guardian.co.uk, "US cable leaks' collateral damage |3 January 2011|
|     |in Zimbabwe"                                       |              |
|576  |Angola Press, "Mugabe under pressure to accept     |4 January 2011|
|     |election delay"                                    |              |
|577  |MSNBC.com, "7 out of 10 Zimbabweans fear political |7 January 2011|
|     |violence"                                          |              |
|578  |SW Radio Africa, "CIO brutally assaulted MDC       |7 January 2011|
|     |activist on Christmas Eve"                         |              |
|579  |The Zimbabwean, "Electoral amendments - Zanu plot  |8 January 2011|
|     |to sidestep Zuma"                                  |              |
|580  |TimesLive, "Sigh of relief as polls likely to be   |9 January 2011|
|     |deferred"                                          |              |
|581  |Sowetan Live, "Horror attack on Zimbabwean"        |10 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|582  |The Standard, "Mugabe has angered Zanu PF party    |10 January    |
|     |hawks"                                             |2011          |
|583  |Radio Netherlands Worldwide, "Secret document      |11 January    |
|     |sparks outrage in Zimbabwe"                        |2011          |
|584  |VOA News.com, "Hardliners in Zimbabwean President  |11 January    |
|     |Mugabe's party insist on early constitutional      |2011          |
|     |referendum, election"                              |              |
|585  |SW Radio Africa, "War vet Sibanda threatens 2000 at|12 January    |
|     |Masvingo rally"                                    |2011          |
|586  |The Zimbabwean, "Rural teachers terrorised"        |12 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|587  |The Zimbabwean, "Zanu (PF) planning to win by      |12 January    |
|     |foulest of means"                                  |2011          |
|588  |The Zimbabwe Guardian, "Zanu-PF in rejuvenation    |13 January    |
|     |exercise"                                          |2011          |
|589  |Guardian.co.uk, "Zimbabwe faces election bloodbath,|19 January    |
|     |MDC minister Tendai Biti warns"                    |2011          |
|590  |ZimOnline, "Military plot to keep Mugabe in power" |19 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|591  |Yahoo News, "Mugabe to push for elections despite  |23 January    |
|     |deadlock"                                          |2011          |
|592  |Monsters and Critics, "Mugabe threatens to call    |24 January    |
|     |early elections without new constitution"          |2011          |
|593  |The Zimbabwean, "Zimbabwe in danger"               |24 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|594  |VOA News.com, "Members of Zimbabwe PM Tsvangirai's |24 January    |
|     |party seek refuge after violence"                  |2011          |
|595  |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Zanu PF sets up terrorists     |26 January    |
|     |bases around Harare"                               |2011          |
|596  |House of Lords Daily Hansard, "27 Jan 2011: Column |27 January    |
|     |1078 - 1080: Zimbabwe"                             |2011          |
|597  |The Independent, "Violence flares in Harare"       |27 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|598  |ZimOnline, "Violence will wreck Zuma roadmap: MDC" |27 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|599  |Appellants' closing submissions (JG, EM and CM)    |Undated       |
|600  |Appellants' schedule of passages from oral evidence|Undated       |
|     |(JG, EM, CM, CM)                                   |              |
|601  |Bulawayo Agenda, "The Daily Agenda: 11 November    |Undated       |
|     |2010"                                              |              |
|602  |Bulawayo Progressive Residents Association, "BPRA  |Undated       |
|     |engages parliamentary portfolio on Chombo issue"   |              |
|603  |Bulawayo Progressive Residents Association,        |Undated       |
|     |"Resident's Voices issue 35"                       |              |
|604  |Email between W80 and John Steward regarding       |Undated       |
|     |witness statement                                  |              |
|605  |Expert report of Professor Norma Kriger            |Undated       |
|606  |Interview notes of Mark Walker with:               |Undated       |
|     |Returnee 1; Returnee 2; Returnee 3 (11 August      |              |
|     |2010); Returnee 4; Returnee 5 (15 August 2010);    |              |
|     |Returnee 6 (15 August 2010); Returnee 7 (15 August |              |
|     |2010); and Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum         |              |
|607  |IOM Reintegration Questionnaire Database           |Undated       |
|608  |MDC, "COPAC Violations: 20 June 2010 - 28 September|Undated       |
|     |2010"                                              |              |
|609  |Media Monitoring Project Zimbabwe, "Monday November|Undated       |
|     |1st - Sunday November 6th 2010: Weekly Media Review|              |
|     |2010-43"                                           |              |
|610  |"Schedule 10 (Section 117): Article VI of          |Undated       |
|     |Interparty Political Agreement: Constitution"      |              |
|611  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008:         |Undated       |
|     |Hatfield"                                          |              |
|612  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Makoni  |Undated       |
|     |Central"                                           |              |
|613  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Makoni  |Undated       |
|     |North"                                             |              |
|614  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Makoni  |Undated       |
|     |South"                                             |              |
|615  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Murewa  |Undated       |
|     |North"                                             |              |
|616  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Murewa  |Undated       |
|     |South"                                             |              |
|617  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Murewa  |Undated       |
|     |West"                                              |              |
|618  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Mutoko  |Undated       |
|     |East"                                              |              |
|619  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Mutoko  |Undated       |
|     |North"                                             |              |
|620  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Mutoko  |Undated       |
|     |South"                                             |              |
|621  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Nyanga  |Undated       |
|     |North"                                             |              |
|622  |Sokwanele.com, "Constituency Results 2008: Nyanga  |Undated       |
|     |South"                                             |              |
|623  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Hatfield"   |Undated       |
|624  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Makoni East"|Undated       |
|625  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Makoni      |Undated       |
|     |North"                                             |              |
|626  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Makoni West"|Undated       |
|627  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Murehwa     |Undated       |
|     |North"                                             |              |
|628  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Murehwa     |Undated       |
|     |South"                                             |              |
|629  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Mutoko      |Undated       |
|     |North"                                             |              |
|630  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Mutoko      |Undated       |
|     |South"                                             |              |
|631  |Sokwanele.com, "Election Results 2005: Nyanga"     |Undated       |
|632  |States in Transition, "GNU Watch: Zimbabwe: August |Undated       |
|     |2010"                                              |              |
|633  |Witness statement of W80                           |Undated       |
|634  |Witness statement of Dewa Mavhinga, Regional       |Undated       |
|     |Information and Advocacy Coordinator of Crisis     |              |
|     |Zimbabwe Coalition                                 |              |
|635  |Witness statement of Peter Iliff, Secretary of the |Undated       |
|     |Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights   |              |
|636  |(Second) Witness statement of Peter Iliff,         |Undated       |
|     |Secretary of the Zimbabwe Association of Doctors   |              |
|     |for Human Rights                                   |              |
|637  |Witness statement of W81, National Co-ordinator of |Undated       |
|     |Source Q                                           |              |
|638  |Witness statements from Zimbabwean human rights /  |Undated       |
|     |civil society figures                              |              |
|639  |ZZZICOMP, "Harare/Bulawayo Report: Shadowing the   |Undated       |
|     |Outreach process"                                  |              |
|640  |Zimbabwe Vigil, "Zimbabwe Vigil Diary - 20th       |Undated       |
|     |November 2010"                                     |              |
|641  |ZimRights, "November 10, 2010: Anti-torture public |Undated       |
|     |meeting in Hurungwe"                               |              |
|642  |ZZZICOMP, "Harare Report: Shadowing the Outreach   |Undated       |
|     |process: 30-31 October 2010"                       |              |
|643  |ZZZICOMP, "Monthly Report: Shadowing the Outreach  |Undated       |
|     |process: August 2010"                              |              |
|644  |ZZZICOMP, "Weekly Report: Shadowing the Outreach   |Undated       |
|     |process: 19 - 25 July 2010"                        |              |
|645  |ZZZICOMP, "Weekly Report: Shadowing the Outreach   |Undated       |
|     |process: 26 July - 1 August 2010"                  |              |
|     |                                                   |              |
|     |Documentation specific to CLM                      |              |
|646  |Letter from Owen Muganda, Chair Southwest District,|20 February   |
|     |MDC UK & Ireland, regarding CLM's MDC membership of|2009          |
|     |local branch from January 2007                     |              |
|647  |Home Office Screening Interview for CLM            |4 March 2009  |
|648  |UK Border Agency, "Statement of Evidence Form:     |26 June 2009  |
|     |Combined Interview and NINO Application"           |              |
|649  |Letter from UK Border Agency, "Reasons for Refusal"|28 July 2009  |
|650  |Statement of CLM                                   |29 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|651  |Determination of DIJ Bowen                         |13 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|652  |Statement of CLM                                   |30 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|653  |MDC membership card of CLM, with subscription      |Undated/variou|
|     |schedule paid for and signed to November 2007      |s dates       |
|654  |Rule 15(2A) Notice and additional evidence         |Undated       |
|     |(photographs and minutes from MDC local branch     |              |
|     |meetings)                                          |              |
|     |                                                   |              |
|     |Documentation specific to EM                       |              |
|655  |City & Guilds, "Certificate of unit credit towards |October 2006  |
|     |National Vocational Qualification: Care Level 3"   |              |
|656  |City & Guilds, "National Vocational Qualification: |October 2006  |
|     |Care Level 3 certificate"                          |              |
|657  |Letter to Border and Immigration Agency regarding  |23 March 2009 |
|     |"Application for Leave to Remain in the United     |              |
|     |Kingdom on Human Rights Grounds and for            |              |
|     |Discretionary Leave", FLR(O) form and supporting   |              |
|     |documents                                          |              |
|658  |UK Border Agency, "Statement of Evidence Form:     |22 June 2009  |
|     |Combined Interview and NINO Application"           |              |
|659  |Letter from UK Border Agency, "Reasons for Refusal"|2 July 2009   |
|660  |UK Border Agency, "Notice of Immigration Decision" |2 July 2009   |
|661  |UK Border Agency, "One Stop Warning"               |2 July 2009   |
|662  |Appeal form AIT-1 and covering letter              |18 July 2009  |
|663  |Determination of IJ Braybrook                      |19 August 2009|
|664  |Letter from Tribunals Service and order granting   |21 September  |
|     |reconsideration                                    |2009          |
|665  |Letter from Ministry of Education, Sport, Arts and |15 December   |
|     |Culture, Harare, regarding Confirmation of         |2009          |
|     |Employment as a Teacher                            |              |
|666  |Witness statement of EM                            |18 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|667  |Belvedere Teachers' Technical College, Ministry of |Undated       |
|     |Education, identity card for 98-2000               |              |
|668  |Chronology of Events                               |Undated       |
|669  |City & Guilds, "Notification of Candidate Results" |Undated       |
|     |Processing Period 0610                             |              |
|670  |Comments on Reasons for Refusal                    |Undated       |
|671  |Statement of EM (pre-decision)                     |Undated       |
|672  |Witness statement of oldest sister                 |Undated       |
|     |                                                   |              |
|     |Documentation specific to JG                       |              |
|673  |Thames Valley Police, "Incident Report"            |1 October 2002|
|674  |Thames Valley Police, "Incident Report"            |26 November   |
|     |                                                   |2002          |
|675  |Thames Valley Police, "Incident Report"            |20 May 2003   |
|676  |Letter from Dr Jay Depani to JG regarding oldest   |21 November   |
|     |son of JG                                          |2007          |
|677  |Letter from Berkshire Healthcare NHS Trust Child   |4 December    |
|     |and Adolescent Mental Health Services to Dr Jay    |2007          |
|     |Depani regarding oldest son of JG                  |              |
|678  |UK Border Agency, "Screening Interview"            |17 March 2009 |
|679  |Letter from Dr R T Jones (Locum) to Berkshire      |31 July 2009  |
|     |Healthcare NHS Trust Child and Adolescent Mental   |              |
|     |Health Services regarding oldest son of JG         |              |
|680  |Witness statement for JG                           |30 August 2009|
|681  |UK Border Agency, "Statement of Evidence Form:     |3 September   |
|     |Combined Interview and NINO Application"           |2009          |
|682  |Appointment letter from Heatherwood and Wexham Park|4 September   |
|     |Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust to JG               |2009          |
|683  |UK Border Agency,  "Reasons for Refusal"           |14 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|684  |UK Border Agency letter, "Determination of Asylum  |15 September  |
|     |Claim"                                             |2009          |
|685  |Appointment letter from Heatherwood and Wexham Park|5 October 2009|
|     |Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust to JG               |              |
|686  |Witness statement of JG                            |20 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|687  |Letter from Dr Jay Depani regarding oldest son of  |Various       |
|     |JG                                                 |              |
|688  |Determination of IJ Forster OBE                    |2 November    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|689  |Application notice                                 |13 November   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|690  |Tribunals Service letter, "Notice of Decision"     |9 December    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|691  |Letter from Assistant Headteacher, to parents      |January 2010  |
|     |regarding child participation in "FRIENDS for Life"|              |
|     |program                                            |              |
|692  |Letter from Ros Curwood, Educational Therapist, to |14 March 2010 |
|     |Assistant Headteacher, regarding oldest son of JG  |              |
|693  |Letter from Dr Dennis Guiney, Comprehensive CAMHS  |13 April 2010 |
|     |Hub Co-ordinator,  regarding oldest son of JG      |              |
|694  |Letter from Dr Dennis Guiney, Comprehensive CAMHS  |26 May 2010   |
|     |Hub Co-ordinator, to JG regarding oldest son of JG |              |
|695  |Assessment of oldest son of JG by P Sefton         |24 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|696  |Statement of JG                                    |29 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|697  |"Report from School" for oldest son of JG          |4 October 2010|
|698  | "IEP Review Sheet" for oldest son of JG           |6 October 2010|
|699  |Medical Report of Dr R Russell regarding JG        |8 October 2010|
|700  |Expert report of Christine Brown, Independent      |10 October    |
|     |Social Worker, regarding JG and dependents         |2010          |
|701  |Addendum Report of Christine Brown, Independent    |21 October    |
|     |Social Worker, regarding JG plus dependents        |2010          |
|702  |Supplementary statement of JG                      |24 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|703  |Statement of sister of JG                          |24 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|704  |UK Border Agency letter "Determination of Asylum   |14 December   |
|     |Claim"                                             |2010          |
|705  |Letter from Immigration Advisory Service regarding |12 January    |
|     |JG and "Notice of intention to pursue appeal after |2011          |
|     |grant of leave"                                    |              |
|706  |IAS Research Analysis on Humanitarian Situation    |Undated       |
|707  |IAS Research Analysis on Political Situation       |Undated       |
|708  |Individual Education Plan regarding oldest son of  |Undated       |
|     |JG                                                 |              |
|709  |Permission slip from JG to college regarding oldest|Undated       |
|     |son of JG's participation in the FRIENDS for Life  |              |
|     |program                                            |              |
|710  |Reconsideration grounds                            |Undated       |
|     |                                                   |              |
|     |Documentation specific to COM                      |              |
|  711|Letter giving reasons for refusal of asylum claim  |12 August 2009|
|  712|Notice of Decision (to remove COM)                 |19 August 2009|
|  713|Minutes of Northampton Branch, MDC meeting         |September 2009|
|  714|Notice of appeal and grounds                       |7 September   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|  715|Determination of IJ Dawson                         |10 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|  716|Application Notice                                 |21 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|  717|Order granting reconsideration                     |10 December   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|  718|Minutes of Northampton Branch, MDC meeting         |20 February   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|  719|Sokwanele.com summary of Highfield constituency    |8 August 2010 |
|     |results 2008                                       |              |
|  720|Wikipedia article on Highfield                     |31 August 2010|
|  721|Letter from Organising Secretary, Northampton      |4 October 2010|
|     |Branch, MDC                                        |              |
|  722|Witness statement                                  |5 October 2010|
|  723|Map of Highfield area                              |Undated       |
|  724|Photographs taken at Zimbabwe Vigil                |Undated       |
|     |                                                   |              |

