
SM (Domicile of choice; Scots law) Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00092

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Glasgow                                                   Date of
Hearing: 12 September 2008
                                   Determination delivered orally at hearing


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                          Immigration Judge Forbes

                                   Between

                                     SM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. D Byrne, Drummond Miller LLP
For the Respondent:          Ms. M MacDonald, Home Office Presenting
Officer

1. In a Scottish case, whether a  person  is  domiciled  within  the  United
Kingdom or not falls to be considered by the  rules  of  Scots  law,  which,
although placing the burden of proof  firmly  on  the  party  asserting  the
acquisition of a domicile of choice do not impose  a  higher  standard  than
the balance of probabilities.  The evidence must be looked at  as  a  whole,
and as a whole it  needs  to  show  a  change  of  permanent  home  for  all
purposes.

2. A person who evinces a desire to retain the laws  of  his  original  home
(as distinct from the rules of UK or Scots law) for  a  continuing  part  of
his life does not show the intention relevant to a change of domicile.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. She appealed  to  the  Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent Entry Clearance  Officer  on  12
    July 2007 refusing her entry clearance as the unmarried partner of  the
    sponsor.  An Immigration Judge dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant
    sought and obtained an order  for  reconsideration.   Thus  the  matter
    comes before us.

 2. The matrimonial or quasi-matrimonial history of the sponsor is a matter
    of some complexity and importance in this case.  The sponsor  was  born
    in Pakistan and came to the United Kingdom as a child with his  father.
    He has subsequently obtained British citizenship.  In 1993  he  married
    in Pakistan a wife who came to the United Kingdom under  the  provision
    of the Immigration Rules to settle with him.  That relationship has now
    broken down, but there has been no divorce  recognised  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It follow that the sponsor and that wife  of  his  are  still
    married in United Kingdom and indeed Scottish law.

 3. Following the breakdown of his  marriage  he  entered  into  a  further
    relationship  (possibly  beginning  as  long  ago  as  2000)  with  the
    appellant in Pakistan and has a number of children by her.  As we  have
    said there is no United Kingdom divorce between the first wife and  the
    sponsor, but in 2005 the sponsor executed,  in  Scotland,  in  English,
    what is called a "Letter of  Divorce"  and  purports  to  be  a  Talaq.
    Following that he went again to Pakistan and entered into a ceremony of
    marriage with the appellant.

 4. There has been a previous application by the appellant for admission to
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of the sponsor.  That application,  we
    understand, was refused.  The reason for the refusal may have been that
    the marriage was not valid or it may have been that under para  278  of
    the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395  a  second  wife
    (that is to say, a party to a polygamous marriage where other wives  of
    the sponsor are already in the United Kingdom) cannot  be  admitted  to
    the United Kingdom whilst the marriage to the first wife subsists.   It
    is under those  circumstances  that,  advised  by  the  solicitors  who
    represent her before  us  today,  the  appellant  has  made  a  further
    application to admission to the United Kingdom as an unmarried partner.

 5. The Immigration Judge's determination, it is fair to say, exhibits some
    confusion.  It is confusion which goes to the heart of the issue  which
    the Immigration Judge had to  determine.   The  Immigration  Judge  had
    before her evidence in the form of a witness statement  adopted  orally
    by the sponsor, and documentary evidence,  showing  links  between  the
    sponsor and the appellant said to continue over a number of years.  The
    Immigration Judge was clearly in  a  state  of  some  confusion  as  to
    whether the case fell to be  decided  under  the  rules  applicable  to
    "married' or "unmarried" partners.  Referring to the requirement  under
    the rules applicable  to  unmarried  partners,  in  para  295A  of  the
    Immigration Rules, she began her conclusion on the issue as follows:

        "The Entry Clearance Officer's decision was based on the fact  that
        he did not consider that the Appellant  had  lived  with  the  U.K.
        sponsor for a period of two  years.   He  based  this  decision  by
        applying rule 295A.  I consider this approach to be erroneous."

 6. So far so good, perhaps.   The  Immigration  Judge  then  continues  as
    follows:

        "The fact is that the Appellant considers that she is  married  and
        indeed that there is a valid marriage under the laws  of  Pakistan.
        It is the status of the Appellant which is  significant  under  the
        rules and I would refer to Rule 281(1)(a) in this connection  which
        states 'the applicant is married to  or  the  civil  partner  of  a
        person  present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.'.   It  is
        therefore incorrect to seek to apply rule 295A in this  case.   The
        Appellant does not consider herself to be the unmarried partner  of
        the sponsor but considers herself to be the spouse.   However,  the
        marriage is not valid under  UK  law  as  the  UK  sponsor  is  not
        divorced under UK  law  from  his  first  wife.   Accordingly,  the
        Appellant does not meet the requirements of Rule 281.   It  is  not
        open to the Appellant to then choose to apply another rule based on
        unmarried partners."


    The Immigration Judge then went on  to  consider  matters  relating  to
    finance and to Art 8, although no ground of appeal was based on Art  8.
    The Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal.

 7. In making his application for reconsideration Mr. Byrne has pointed out
    that, broadly speaking, it is probably fair to say that  a  couple  are
    either married or are not married and that  the  determination  of  the
    Immigration Judge does not demonstrate whether she  thought  that  they
    were married or  not  married.   Indeed,  as  he  pointed  out  in  his
    expansion of his grounds before us, she appears to  have  treated  them
    both  as  being  not  married  and  not  unmarried,  evidently  to  the
    disadvantage of the appellant in attempting to prove her case.

 8. Those criticisms of the Immigration Judge's determination appear to  us
    to be sound.  This was a case in which the Immigration Judge needed  to
    decide  whether  she  was  satisfied  that  the   appellant   met   the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  upon  which  she  relied.   She
    relied on Immigration Rules applicable to her as an  unmarried  partner
    and, because of the provisions of para 278 to which we  have  referred,
    she needed indeed to show that she was not married to the sponsor.   It
    was therefore necessary for the Immigration Judge to decide whether the
    parties were married for the purposes of the Immigration Rules  and  UK
    law, and she failed to do so.  That was an error of law.

 9. We then turn, as we must, to deciding whether that error was  material.
    The error would not be material if the  Immigration  Judge  would  have
    been  bound  on  the  evidence  before  her  and  the   law   correctly
    interpreted, to have decide it in the same way that she did decide it.

10. The relevant law as it apples to this appeal is, as it seems to us,  as
    follows.  The marriage ceremony between the appellant and  the  sponsor
    constitutes a marriage in UK and, in particular, Scots law, if and only
    if it was valid.  Given that it was polygamous it would be valid if and
    only if neither of the parties was domiciled in any part of the  United
    Kingdom at the time that the marriage took place.  There  is  no  doubt
    that the appellant was not domiciled in any part of the United Kingdom.
     The sponsor had a domicile of origin in  Pakistan  and  would  have  a
    domicile in a part of the United  Kingdom  therefore  only  if  he  had
    acquired by choice a domicile different from his  domicile  of  origin.
    It is well known that both in English law and Scots law and, indeed  we
    understand it, the law of much of the rest of the world, it  is  for  a
    person who seeks to establish that a domicile of origin has  been  lost
    and replaced by a domicile of choice to  show  that.   The  better  and
    current view is probably that, despite some Scottish authority  to  the
    contrary, in a civil action the standard of proof is on no issue higher
    than the balance of probabilities (see eg Lamb v Lord Advocate 1976  SC
    110).  In this the law of Scotland (by which the sponsor's domicile  is
    to be determined in this appeal)  may  differ  from  that  of  England.
    There is no doubt,  however,  that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    appellant in the present case.  She needs to show that the sponsor  had
    acquired a domicile of choice in Scotland before undergoing a  ceremony
    of marriage with her.  If he had done, her marriage to him would be (in
    Scots law) void on the ground of polygamy.

11. If the sponsor was domiciled in Pakistan at the time of his marriage to
    the appellant the marriage is valid although polygamous.  It  is  valid
    because there is nothing in the provisions of Scottish law  or  UK  law
    which would invalidate it.  The law  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  its
    various parts recognises  polygamous  marriages  contracted  abroad  by
    those with domiciles not in the United Kingdom.  The marriage  although
    valid would, however, have the consequence under para 278 that  because
    of the continuance of the sponsor's first marriage, the appellant could
    not be admitted into the  United  Kingdom.   But  it  is  only  if  the
    marriage is not valid that the parties are entitled to be  regarded  as
    unmarried for the purposes of para 295A.

12. Everything therefore depends on whether  the  sponsor  had  acquired  a
    domicile of choice in any part of the United Kingdom, (that is to  say,
    for the present for these purposes, in Scotland) after his  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom with his  father  in  his  childhood.   If,  on  the
    evidence before her, the Immigration Judge could not but have  come  to
    the conclusion that she was not satisfied that a domicile of choice had
    been acquired, then her error of law, already identified by  us,  would
    not be material because she would have been bound to conclude that  the
    marriage was  a  valid  polygamous  marriage  and  that  the  appellant
    therefore could not succeed because of  the  provisions  of  para  278.
    Only if there could be a doubt about the matter  would  we  regard  her
    error of law as material.

13. What then was the evidence  before  her?   Mr  Byrne  has  pointed,  in
    particular to the application form made by  and  in  the  name  of  the
    appellant in which she states that the sponsor's permanent  address  is
    in Scotland and that his  home  is  the  United  Kingdom;  and  to  the
    sponsor's own witness statement, a production  before  the  Immigration
    Judge which was adopted in evidence, in which he gives his history.  Mr
    Byrne also points to the fact that the sponsor has a job in the  United
    Kingdom and that he has obtained British citizenship  and  he  asks  us
    also to infer from the fact that this application has been made that he
    wishes to continue to "keep his home" in Scotland, which is a  part  of
    the United Kingdom.

14. We perhaps should cite the witness statement of the sponsor  almost  in
    full:

        "I am making this statement in support of  my  application  for  my
        wife and children to come to the United Kingdom.


        I was born in Lahore but came to the UK to follow my dad in 1971 on
        18th June when I was 13 years old.  I became a British  citizen  in
        1976.


        I married [my first wife] from Pakistan on 6th November 1979.


        Unfortunately our relationship broke down in September 1993 and she
        moved out in July of that year.  She went to Birmingham and  got  a
        lawyer and informed me that we were no longer married.


        I tried to patch things up along the way  as  we  have  5  children
        together, 4 daughters over 18 and a boy who is 14.


        Eventually I realised that our relationship was over and I met [the
        appellant] in 2000 in Pakistan.  I met her through  some  relatives
        whilst I was visiting Pakistan.


        We decided to marry and married on 31st December 2000  and  I  have
        been subsequently spending nearly half my time in Pakistan and  the
        remainder in the UK since, splitting my life between my work in the
        United Kingdom and my family in Pakistan.


        I have two daughters and a boy with the appellant and they are  all
        British.  My two eldest have British passports... .


        In our culture my marriage with the appellant is competent  and  my
        divorce with [my first wife] is also culturally competent as a Nika
        Divorce.  To me therefore I am divorced and remarried.  However  in
        terms of British law [my first wife] will not sign the papers for a
        British divorce.  I believe she is doing this out of spite  because
        she doesn't want me to bring my wife over.  I got  this  impression
        when I last spoke to her on the  telephone  in  2002.   I  have  no
        contact with her.


        I want my new family over here because I have settled here.   Also,
        I do not like travelling back and forward to see my family.  It  is
        particularly difficult to come back to the UK without them."

15.  In  support  of  the  appellant's  application  there  were   detailed
    submissions by her solicitor which set out some of the  facts  relating
    to the sponsor's movements.  The sponsor  says  that  his  relationship
    with the appellant goes back a number of years and, as set  out  by  Mr
    Byrne in his submissions, the sponsor was in Pakistan for two weeks  in
    June and two weeks in December 2000, two  weeks  in  February  and  six
    months starting in May 2001, five months in 2002, over eight months  in
    2003, four months beginning in October 2004 and two months  from  April
    2005, and then a further period of  five  months  beginning  in  August
    2005, which is, we think, the  last  visit  to  which  Mr  Byrne  makes
    specific reference.

16. A domicile of choice is  acquired  by  the  person  deciding  that  his
    permanent home, for all purposes, is to be the new one.  A  person  who
    intends his home to be the new one for certain purposes only  does  not
    acquire a new domicile.  In determining whether a  domicile  of  choice
    has been established it is important to look at the evidence, including
    all relevant conduct and statements of the person  in  question,  as  a
    whole: see Ross v Ross 1930 SC (HL) 1, per Lord Buckmaster.

17. Mr Byrne is right to point to the acquisition of  citizenship,  to  the
    job, to the reference to the permanent address and to the  family  life
    as assisting him to indicate a change of domicile.   There  is  (as  is
    frequently the case) nothing  in  the  evidence  that  was  before  the
    Immigration  Judge  to  indicate  that  there  had  been  any  specific
    intention to change domicile.  There had been,  however,  a  number  of
    visits to Pakistan.  There had been the creation of a new  family  life
    in Pakistan and, of  the  highest  importance,  the  sponsor's  witness
    statement indicates quite clearly that he distinguishes between the law
    which he appears to regard as governing  his  relationships  in  family
    matters on the one hand, and UK law on the other.  He  recognises  that
    he is not  divorced  by  UK  law.   He  recognises  the  difficulty  in
    regarding his relationship with the appellant of one of marriage in  UK
    law.  And, nevertheless, his position is that he regards the divorce by
    Talaq and the new relationship by marriage as being valid.   Those  are
    circumstances which appear to us, as we say,  to  be  of  the  greatest
    weight.  We think that it is impossible on the basis of  that  evidence
    to say that he  had  made  his  permanent  home  in  Scotland  for  all
    purposes.  He clearly reserved a part of his life as  exempt  from  the
    consequences of such an intention. If, therefore, the Immigration Judge
    had  considered  all  the  evidence  before  her  she  could  not  have
    considered that the sponsor had acquired a domicile of choice.

18. It thus follows that she would have been bound  to  conclude  that  the
    sponsor remained domiciled in Pakistan and that  the  marriage  between
    him and the appellant was a valid marriage.  She would have been  bound
    therefore to dismiss the appeal because of the provisions of para 278.

19. It follows from that, that we do not consider that  the  error  of  law
    which we have identified in her treatment of the question which she had
    to decide was a material error.  We  shall  therefore  order  that  her
    determination dismissing the appeal shall stand.


                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
