
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Munday (EEA decision: grounds of appeal) [2019] UKUT 00091(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2018                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                          Tatsanee Srisuwan Munday

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       IMMIGRATION OFFICER, COQUELLES
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy instructed by direct access
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

 1. In an appeal against  an  EEA  decision  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016, the sole  ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  decision
    breaches the appellant's rights under the EU  Treaties  in  respect  of
    entry to and residence in the UK (sched 2, para 1).

 2. Consequently, in such an appeal an appellant  may  not  rely  on  human
    rights grounds in the absence  of  a  s.120  notice  and  statement  of
    additional grounds in which reliance is placed  upon  human  rights  or
    there has been an additional decision to refuse a human rights claim.






                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Thailand who was born on 8 August 1967.

 2. The appellant met a British Citizen, Mr Ian Munday in February 2007 and
    they formed a relationship.  In 2008,  Mr  Munday  began  work  at  the
    European Commission in Belgium and he and  the  appellant,  thereafter,
    resided in Belgium - Mr Munday as an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights and the appellant on  the  basis  that  she  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with him.  Both were issued residence cards by the Belgian
    authorities.

 3. In 2012, Mr Munday's employment in Belgium ended and he returned to the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant came with  him  and  was  granted  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  Thereafter, Mr Munday lived and worked  mainly
    in the UK and the appellant remained here with him.

 4. Thereafter, in 2012 (or it may have been in 2014 it is not  clear  from
    the papers), Mr Munday returned to Belgium to work and was joined there
    by the appellant.

 5. In 2015, Mr Munday's work in Belgium ended and he returned to the UK in
    order to take care of his ill mother.  The appellant returned with him.

 6. On their return in March 2015, the appellant (whom the  judge  accepted
    raised Surinder Singh at  the  border)  was,  in  fact  admitted  as  a
    visitor.  Again, it is not entirely clear what period of leave she  was
    granted but it would appear to have been until 18 April 2017.

 7. Whilst in the UK, the appellant applied for a  residence  card  on  the
    basis of her relationship with Mr Munday but that  was  refused  on  17
    December 2015.  The basis  of  that  application  was  as  a  returning
    "family member" of a British Citizen who  had  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights in another EEA state,  namely  relying  upon  the  principle  in
    Surinder Singh.  The  application  was  refused  under  reg  9  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regs 2006  (SI  2006/1003  as  amended)  because  the
    appellant had failed to provide Mr Munday's passport and  also  because
    reg 9 (and the  Surinder  Singh  principle)  only  applied  to  married
    partners.  That conclusion had subsequently been shown to be erroneous,
    at least in part, by the CJEU's decision in  SSHD  v  Banger  (Case  C-
    89/17) [2018] Imm AR 1205 (12 July 2018).

 8. On 29 March 2016, the appellant and Mr Munday married in the UK.

 9. In April 2016, a further application was made by the  appellant  for  a
    residence card now as the spouse of Mr Munday.   That  application  was
    refused in December 2016, again because Mr Munday's  original  passport
    was not submitted.

10. In March 2017, the appellant left the UK travelling to Europe and  then
    subsequently back to Thailand.  Mr Munday remained in  the  UK  looking
    after his mother.

11. It would appear that thereafter, Mr Munday and  the  appellant  decided
    that the appellant should again join Mr Munday in the UK.  To that end,
    Mr Munday travelled to Amsterdam where he met the  appellant  and  they
    both sought to enter the UK at Coquelles.

12. Although this was disputed, the judge accepted that the appellant again
    sought entry on the Surinder Singh principle  and  now  reg  9  of  the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016   (SI   2016/1052)   ("the   2016
    Regulations").

13. In a decision dated 22 March 2017, the Immigration Officer refused  the
    appellant admission under  reg  11  (read  with  reg  9)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.  The basis of that decision was  three-fold.   First,  the
    appellant and Mr Munday had not been residing in  an  EEA  country  (in
    particular Belgium in respect of which they both held residence  cards)
    since March 2015.  Secondly, Mr Munday was  not  a  "qualified  person"
    within reg 6 (or at least as deemed  to  apply  to  him  as  a  British
    Citizen for the purpose of reg 9) in the UK.   Although  this  was  not
    made explicit, I did not understand it to be disputed before  me,  that
    is because Mr Munday no longer works in the UK but rather  looks  after
    his ill mother.  Thirdly, the Immigration  Officer  concluded  that  Mr
    Munday had not been exercising treaty rights in another EEA country  as
    he had been residing in the UK since March 2015.

14. For those reasons, the Immigration Officer concluded that the appellant
    did not have a right to be admitted to  the  UK  as  the  spouse  of  a
    British Citizen applying the Surinder Singh principle and reg 9 of  the
    2016 Regulations.

15. The decision noted that the appellant had a right of appeal  under  reg
    36 of the 2016 Regulations but one that could only  be  exercised  from
    outside the United Kingdom.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

16. Before Judge Powell, the appellant conceded that she could not  succeed
    under the 2016 Regulations.  Not surprisingly, the judge dismissed  the
    appeal under the 2016 Regulations.  That appears to have  been  on  the
    basis that the  Surinder  Singh  principle  (and  reg  9  of  the  2016
    Regulations) only applied to British Citizens  and  their  spouses  who
    returned to the UK immediately after the  former  had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights in  another  EEA  country.     It  was  the  respondent's
    position, which Judge Powell accepted, that the  2016  Regulations  did
    not apply to those who were unmarried and in a  "durable  relationship"
    immediately prior to returning to the UK after exercising Treaty rights
    in another EEA country.  Here, the appellant and Mr Munday had returned
    to the UK in March 2015 immediately after Mr Munday had been exercising
    Treaty rights in Belgium.  At that time, they were  not  married:  they
    subsequently married in the UK on 29 March 2016.  By the  time  of  the
    decision in March 2017 when they entered the UK as a married couple, it
    could no longer be said that they did so immediately  after  Mr  Munday
    had been exercising Treaty rights in Belgium.

17. Of course, the respondent's position that the Surinder Singh  principle
    did not applying to an unmarried partner, does not survive  the  CJEU's
    decision in Banger unscathed.  But Banger would only be relevant  to  a
    challenge to the earlier refusal of a residence card in  December  2015
    and, perhaps, to the basis of the appellant's entry to the UK in  March
    2015 when she was admitted as a visitor.   However,  neither  of  those
    decisions was (or could be) challenged in the  appeal  heard  by  Judge
    Powell.

18. Instead, the focus of the appellant's submission made  by  Ms  McCarthy
    (who represented the appellant before Judge Powell as  she  did  before
    me) was that the appellant was entitled to rely upon Art 8 of the  ECHR
    in the appeal.

19. Judge Powell rejected that submission and concluded that the  appellant
    could not reply upon Art 8 for two  reasons.   First,  he  applied  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Amirteymour v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ  353
    that, in an appeal under the EEA Regulations (in that case  reg  26  of
    the 2006 Regulations) an appellant could not rely  upon  Art  8  unless
    raised as a consequence  of  an  s.120  notice  or  because  a  removal
    decision had been made against the appellant.  Neither was the case  in
    relation to this appellant and  so  Judge  Powell  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not rely upon Art 8.  He rejected an argument, made  by
    Ms McCarthy before him, that Amirteymour  was  distinguishable  as  the
    appellant had made a human rights claim.   He  rejected  that  premise.
    His reasons, dealing with the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Bahinga
    [2018] UKUT 90 (IAC) is at paras 35-40 as follows:

         "35. Amirteymour decides that I cannot because the appeal  in  this
             case is specifically a right of appeal against an EEA decision
             (Regulation 26(1)).  The regulation that gives  the  right  of
             appeal does not create a  general  arena  where  arguments  on
             immigration  rules  and  human  rights  can  be  raised.   The
             appellant did not make a  distinct  human  rights  application
             when she sought admission at Coquelles.  The evidence is clear
             that she applied for admission on the basis of  her  assertion
             of the Surinder Singh principle.

         36.   The  decision  in  Bahinga  (r.22;   human   rights   appeal:
             requirements) 2018 UKUT 90 does not assist  the  appellant  is
             this case.  As the headnote provides:

             An application for leave or entry clearance may  constitute  a
             human rights claim, even if the applicant does not, in  terms,
             raise human rights.  In cases not covered by the  respondent's
             guidance (whereby certain applications under  the  immigration
             rules will be treated as human rights claims), the application
             will constitute a human rights claim if, on  the  totality  of
             the information supplied, the applicant is  advancing  a  case
             which  requires  the  caseworker   to   consider   whether   a
             discretionary decision under the rules needs to  be  taken  by
             reference to ECHR  issues  (eg  Article  8)  or  requires  the
             caseworker to look beyond the rules and decide,  if  they  are
             not satisfied, whether an Article 8 case is nevertheless being
             advanced.

             The issue of whether a human rights  claim  has  been  refused
             must be judged by reference to the decision said to constitute
             the  refusal.   An  entry  clearance  manager's  decision,  in
             response to a notice of appeal, cannot, for this  purpose,  be
             part of the decision of the entry clearance officer.

             A person who has not made an application which  constitutes  a
             human rights claim cannot re-characterise that application  by
             raising human rights issues in her grounds of  appeal  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal.

         37.  The Bahinga principle applies, in my judgment, to applications
             made under the  Immigration  Rules  and  not  under  the  2016
             Regulations, where the position is established by the decision
             in Amirteymour.  There is nothing in Bahinga that  could  lead
             me to the view that Amirteymour is no longer good law.

         38.  Ms McCarthy invited me to distinguish Amirteymour on the basis
             that the appellant there had been applied for the issue  of  a
             residence card as confirmation of an existing rights to reside
             in the United Kingdom.  The decision did not therefore involve
             the exclusion of a  family  member  or  the  separation  of  a
             husband and wife.

         39.  I considered that submission carefully but I cannot accept it.
              The reasoning in Amirteymour appears to me  to  be  that  the
             right of appeal under regulation 26(1) is specifically a right
             of appeal against an EEA decision.  In  my  judgment,  if  the
             appellant sought to rely on her family life with  her  husband
             outside of the 2016 Regulations she could and should have made
             an application either under, and in accordance with,  Appendix
             FM of the Immigration Rules, or outside off the  Rules,  under
             Article 8 in the manner prescribed for making a  human  rights
             application.

         40.  In terms of  his  appeal  therefore,  I  find  that  the  only
             decision before me is one taken under  the  2016  Regulations.
             The only appeal before  me  is  one  mounted  under  the  2016
             Regulations.  I find  that  I  am  not  entitled  to  consider
             article 8 is this appeal."

20. In addition, Judge Powell went on to conclude that,  even  if  he  were
    wrong, and the appellant was in principle entitled to rely upon  Art  8
    of the ECHR, that was a "new matter"  falling  within  s.85(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA" Act 2002) which
    could only be relied upon in the appeal if the Secretary of  State  had
    given consent which he had not done.

21. Judge Powell's reasoning is at para 48 - 54 as follows:

         "48. The appellant's case at the border was for admission under the
             2016 Regulations.  Underlying her application was  her  family
             lie with her husband.  But there is no evidence before  me  to
             show  that  the  respondent  was  invited  to   consider   the
             appellant's case against the requirements in  Appendix  FM  or
             that he was provided with  any  evidence  that  might  now  be
             raised as part of an article 8 appeal.

         49.  Further, the appellant's evidence  in  this  appeal  does  not
             include the evidence either the  Secretary  of  State  or  the
             Tribunal would need to consider in order to assess whether the
             appellant met or meets the requirements of Appendix FM,  which
             is a key stage in the overall  assessment  of  proportionality
             under article 8.

         50.  Accordingly, even if I were able to  entertain  an  article  8
             appeal in this EEA appeal.  I would need to  consider  whether
             the matters raised are new matters.

         51.  In this regard, I must and do follow Mahmud (S.85 NIAA 2002  -
             'new matters') [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC), which provides:

             Whether something is or is not a  'new  matter'  goes  to  the
             jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and  the
             First-tier Tribunal must therefore determine  for  itself  the
             issue.

             A 'new matter' is a  matter  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal.  A matter is the  factual
             substance of a claim.  A ground of appeal is the  legal  basis
             on which the facts in any given matter could form the basis of
             a challenge to the decision under appeal.

             In practice, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not
             previously been considered by the Secretary of  State  in  the
             context of the decision in section 82)1) or a  statement  made
             by the appellant under section 120.  This requires the  matter
             to be factually distinct from that  previously  raised  by  an
             appellant, as opposed to further  or  better  evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment  will   always   be   fact
             sensitive.

         52.  In my judgment, even if article 8 was open to the appellant as
             a separate ground of appeal in this EEA appeal, I  must  treat
             is as a new  matter  notwithstanding  that  the  relevance  of
             Article 8 and family life is plain and obvious.

         53.  I am only  permitted  to  proceed  on  a  new  matter  if  the
             Secretary of State consents.  Mr Holt  took  instructions  and
             the Secretary of State does not give that consent.   I  cannot
             therefore proceed:  Quiadoo  (new  matter;  procedure/process)
             2018 UKUT 00087 (IAC) applied.

         54.  In light of the decisions I have made, which were discussed at
             the hearing, Ms McCarthy indicated that she intended to appeal
             against my decision that article 8 was not before me or, if it
             was, that I was wrong to treat it as a new matter and seek the
             Secretary of State's consent before determining the appeal."

22. Finally, Judge Powell rejected the appellant's application  to  adjourn
    the appeal pending the outcome of the CJEU's determination  of  Banger.
    At the date of the hearing, the  judge  had  a  copy  of  the  Advocate
    General's opinion but there was  no  indication  when  the  CJEU  would
    decide the case.  In fact, as we now know, the CJEU decided Banger just
    over two months later on 12 July 2018.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

23. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.

24. First, the judge had been wrong to follow the decision  in  Amirteymour
    because the appellant's circumstances were distinguishable  from  those
    in Amirteymour as the appellant had made a human rights  claim,  namely
    to enter the UK on the basis of her family life  with  Mr  Munday,  and
    therefore, unlike in Amirteymour the appellant was in the same position
    as a person who was subject to  removal  and  her  Art  8  rights  were
    engaged.

25. Secondly, the judge had been wrong to conclude that the  Art  8  was  a
    "new matter" under s.85(5) of the NIA Act 2002 since  the  claim  based
    upon the interference with the appellant's family life with her husband
    was at the "very heart" of her application to enter the UK and was  not
    a new, factually distinct, matter.

26. Thirdly, as a result of the CJEU's decision  in  Banger  (although  the
    grounds rely upon the opinion of the Advocate General)  the  appellant,
    as a partner in a durable relationship, was entitled to  be  considered
    on the Surinder Singh principle.

27. Fourthly, the judge had erred by failing to give full  reason  for  not
    adjourning the appeal pending the CJEU's decision in Banger.

28. On 30 July 2018, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Alis)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  On 25 September 2018,  the  respondent
    filed a rule 24 notice seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

29. At the hearing before me, I heard detailed submissions from Ms McCarthy
    on behalf of the appellant and Mr Howells on behalf of the  Immigration
    Officer.  I am grateful  to  both  representatives  for  their  helpful
    submission in relation to a number of  complex  and  difficult  matters
    relating to the jurisdiction of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  also  in
    relation to the application of the Surinder Singh principle.

The Legal Framework

30. The relevant legal provisions dealing with the appellant's  rights,  if
    any, to enter the UK and to appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  against
    an adverse decision, are set out in the 2016 Regulations and Part 5  of
    the NIA Act 2002 (in particular ss.82 and 84 - 86).

    The Substantive Provisions

31. Regulation 11 deals with the right of admission of a "family member" of
    an EEA national.  This provides in reg 11(2) as follows:

         "A person who is not an EEA national must be admitted to the United
         Kingdom if that person is -

              (a) a family member  of  an  EEA  national  and  produces  on
             arrival a valid passport and qualifying  EEA  State  residence
             card, provided the  conditions  in  Regulation  23(4)  (family
             member of an EEA  national  must  accompany  or  join  an  EEA
             national with the right to reside) are met..."

32. Regulation 23(4) provides that:

         "a person is not entitled to be admitted to the United  Kingdom  as
         the family member of an EEA national under regulation 11(2) unless,
         at the time of arrival -

         (a) that person is accompanying the EEA national or joining the EEA
         national in the United Kingdom; and

          (b) the EEA national has a right to reside."

33. Whilst a "spouse" is defined as "family member" of an EEA national (see
    reg 7(1)(a)), an unmarried partner in a durable relationship is  not  a
    "family member" under the 2016 Regulations but rather  is  a  "extended
    family member" by virtue of reg 8(5).  However, when  issued  with  the
    appropriate documentation such a person would be "treated as  a  family
    member" by virtue of reg 7(3).

34. In the present  case,  the  appellant  was  a  "spouse"  following  her
    marriage to Mr Munday on 29  March  2016,  i.e.  at  the  date  of  the
    challenged decision.  However, prior to that (as  the  judge  accepted)
    the appellant was in a "durable relationship" with Mr  Munday  but  had
    not been issued with residence documentation in the UK but had been  in
    Belgium.

35. Of course, the rights of entry under reg 11(2) is for a "family member"
    of an "EEA national".  Mr Munday, the appellant's spouse, is not an EEA
    national because he is a British Citizen (see reg  2(1)  defining  "EEA
    national").  However, the Surinder Singh principle  recognised  by  the
    CJEU places the "family member" of a returning British Citizen, who has
    been exercising treaty rights in another  member  state,  in  the  same
    position as a "family member" of an EEA national.

36. Regulation 9 seeks to give  effect  to  the  Surinder  Singh  principle
    applying the relevant provisions of the 2016 Regulations  to  a  family
    member ("F") of a British Citizen  ("BC")  as  though  BC  was  an  EEA
    national.  So far as relevant reg 9 of the 2016 Regulations provides as
    follows:
          "Family members of British citizens


         9.
             (1)  If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
                  Regulations apply to a person who is the family member
                  ("F") of a British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an
                  EEA national.


             (2)  The conditions are that-


                  (a)  BC-
                      (i)  is residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-
                           employed person, self-sufficient person or a
                           student, or so resided immediately before
                           returning to the United Kingdom; or


                      (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence in
                           an EEA State;


                  (b)  F and BC resided together in the EEA State;


                  (c)  F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.


                  (d)  F was a family member of BC during all or part of
                      their joint residence in the EEA State; and


                  (e)  genuine family life was created or strengthened
                      during their joint residence in the EEA State.


             (3)  Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is
                  or was genuine include-


      a) whether the centre of BC's life transferred to the EEA State;


      b) the length of F and BC's joint residence in the EEA State;


                   c) the nature and quality of the F and BC's
                      accommodation in the EEA State, and whether it is or
                      was BC's principal residence;


      d) the degree of F and BC's integration in the EEA State;


                   e) whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with BC
                      was in the EEA State.


             (4)  This regulation does not apply-


                   a) where the purpose of the residence in the EEA State
                      was as a means for circumventing any immigration laws
                      applying to non-EEA nationals to which F would
                      otherwise be subject (such as any applicable
                      requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter
                      or remain in the United Kingdom); or


                   b) to a person who is only eligible to be treated as a
                      family member as a result of regulation 7(3)
                      (extended family members treated as family members).


             (5)  Where these Regulations apply to F, BC is to be treated
                  as holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for the
                  purposes of the application of these Regulations to F.


             (6)  .....


              (7) For the purposes of determining whether, when treating
                  the BC as an EEA national under these Regulations in
                  accordance with paragraph (1), BC would be a qualified
                  person-


                   a) any requirement to have comprehensive sickness
                      insurance cover in the United Kingdom still applies,
                      save that it does not require the cover to extend to
                      BC;


                   b) in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated as
                      a worker under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC is not
                      required to satisfy condition A;

                   c) in assessing whether BC can be treated as a jobseeker
                      as defined in regulation 6(1), BC is not required to
                      satisfy conditions A and, where it would otherwise be
                      relevant, condition C."

37. As will be clear from the wording of reg 9, the  British  Citizen  must
    have been residing in another EEA state as a worker "immediately before
    returning to the United Kingdom" where  the  "family  member"  and  the
    British Citizen both "resided together"  (see  reg  9(2)(a)  and  (b)).
    Further, in order to treat the British Citizen as an EEA national under
    the 2016 Regulations,  the  British  Citizen,  in  effect,  must  be  a
    "qualified person" in the UK.  This  is  because  the  British  Citizen
    (treated as a "EEA national") must have a "right to reside" in  the  UK
    (see reg.23(4)(b) set out above).  In the present case that would  only
    because the appellant's spouse, Mr Munday was  a  worker  and  hence  a
    "qualified person".  As is apparent from both the Immigration Officer's
    decision and Judge Powell's decision, Mr Munday  did  not  fulfil  that
    latter requirement when he and the appellant sought to enter the UK  on
    22 March 2017.

38. Equally, given that Mr Munday had not worked  in  Belgium  since  March
    2015 (when they returned to the UK together), he  could  not  meet  the
    requirement in reg 9(2) that on returning to the UK on 22 March 2017 he
    had been "residing in an EEA state  as  a  worker...immediately  before
    returning to the United Kingdom (reg  9(2)(a)(i)).   Further,  at  that
    time it also could not be said that the appellant  and  Mr  Munday  had
    "resided together in the EEA state" as they had not done so since March
    2015 when they returned to the UK.

39. To the extent, therefore, that the appellant relied upon  an  EU  basis
    for being admitted to the UK on 22 March 2017, she could not  establish
    the right of admission, on a Surinder Singh basis, as the spouse  of  a
    returning British Citizen.

40. The fact that those provisions applied mutatis mutandis to a person who
    is in a "durable relationship" with a British  Citizen,  following  the
    CJU's decision in Banger at  least  to  the  extent  of  requiring  "an
    extensive examination" of  the  appellant's  circumstances  to  justify
    refusing her admission on that basis, had no direct  relevance  to  the
    decision  now  challenged  made  on  22  March  2017.   The  time   for
    challenging in any appeal the  earlier  decisions  in  March  2015  and
    November 2015 when the appellant was not yet married to Mr Munday,  has
    long passed and formed no part of the present appeal proceedings.

41. I did not understand  Ms  McCarthy  to  argue  otherwise  although  she
    maintained the relevance of that misapplication of the law at the  time
    of the earlier decisions (in hindsight in the light of  Banger)  was  a
    matter relevant under Art 8.  That may well be so but,  of  course,  it
    would only be relevant in these proceedings if the First-tier  Tribunal
    were required, or entitled, to consider Art 8 of the ECHR.

    The Appeal Provisions

42. On its face, the decision of 22 March 2017 is one taken under the  2016
    Regulations.  The decision is stated to be a refusal of  "admission  to
    the United Kingdom" in accordance with the 2016 Regulations.  That is a
    "EEA decision" as defined in reg 2(1) which includes:

         "a decision under these Regulations that concerns -

         (a) a person's entitlement to be admitted to  the  United  Kingdom;
         ..."

43. The right of appeal is set out in reg 36, in particular reg  36(1)  and
    (6) as follows:

         "Appeal rights

         36.-(1)  The subject of an EEA decision  may  appeal  against  that
                  decision under these Regulations.

             ....

             (6)  If a person claims to be entitled to a  right  to  reside
                  under regulation 9 (family members of  British  citizens),
                  that person may  not  appeal  without  producing  a  valid
                  passport and either-

                   a) an EEA family permit; or




                   b) a qualifying EEA State residence card; and

                        i) proof that the criteria to be a family member  of
                           the British citizen are met; and




                       ii) proof that the British citizen  is  residing,  or
                           did reside, in another EEA  State  as  a  worker,
                           self-employed person, self-sufficient  person  or
                           student."

44. By virtue of reg 37(1)(a), the right of appeal against an EEA  decision
    refusing to admit a person to the United Kingdom  may  not  be  brought
    whilst the individual is in the UK, in other words there is only an out-
    of-country appeal.

45. The 2016 Regulations incorporate (sometimes with  necessary  amendment)
    certain of the appeal provisions in Part 5 of the NIA Act 2002.

46. By virtue of reg 36(10), the provisions in the NIA Act 2002 referred to
    in Schedule 2 to the 2016 Regulations have effect in any  appeal  under
    the 2016 Regulations.  It  is  helpful  to  set  out  the  entirety  of
    Schedule 2, although for the  purposes  of  this  appeal  para  (1)  of
    Schedule 2 is the most central.  Schedule 2 provides as follows:

         "1.     The following provisions of, or made under,  the  2002  Act
             have effect in relation to an appeal under  these  Regulations
             to the First-tier Tribunal as if it were an appeal  against  a
             decision of the Secretary of State under section 82(1) of  the
             2002 Act (right of appeal to the Tribunal)-

             section 84 (grounds of appeal), as though the  sole  permitted
             grounds  of  appeal  were  that  the  decision  breaches   the
             appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect  of  entry
             to or residence in  the  United  Kingdom  ("an  EU  ground  of
             appeal");

             section 85 (matters to be considered), as though-

             (a)  the references to a statement under section  120  of  the
                  2002 Act include, but are  not  limited  to,  a  statement
                  under that section as applied by paragraph 2; and

             (b)  a "matter" in  subsection  (2)  and  a  "new  matter"  in
                  subsection (6) include a ground of appeal of a kind listed
                  in section 84 of the 2002 Act and an EU ground of appeal;

             section 86 (determination of appeal);

             section 105(35) and any regulations made under  that  section;
             and

             section 106(36) and any rules made pursuant to that section.




         2.   (1)  Section 92(3) of the 2002 Act has  effect  as  though  an
                  additional  basis  upon  which  an  appeal  under  section
                  82(1)(b) of that Act (human rights claim appeal)  must  be
                  brought from outside the United Kingdom were that-

                   a) the claim to which that appeal relates arises from an
                      EEA decision or the consequences of an EEA  decision;
                      and

                  (b)  the removal of that person from  the  United  Kingdom
                      has been certified under regulation 33 (human  rights
                      considerations  and   interim   orders   to   suspend
                      removal).

             (2)  Section 120 of the 2002 Act applies to a person ("P")  if
                  an EEA decision has been taken or may be taken in  respect
                  of P and,  accordingly,  the  Secretary  of  State  or  an
                  immigration officer may by notice require a statement from
                  P under subsection (2) of that section,  and  that  notice
                  has effect for the purpose of section 96(2)  of  the  2002
                  Act.

             (3)  Where section 120 of the 2002  Act  so  applies,  it  has
                  effect as though-

                  (a)  subsection (3) also provides that a  statement  under
                      subsection (2) need not  repeat  reasons  or  grounds
                      relating  to  the  EEA   decision   under   challenge
                      previously advanced by P;

                  (b)  subsection (5) also applies where P does not  have  a
                      right to reside.

             (4)  For the purposes of an appeal brought under section 82(1)
                  of the 2002 Act, subsections (2) and (6)(a) of section  85
                  (matters to be considered) have effect as  though  section
                  84 included a ground of appeal that the decision  appealed
                  against  breaches  the  appellant's  right  under  the  EU
                  Treaties in respect of entry  into  or  residence  in  the
                  United Kingdom.

         3.    Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  made  under  section  22  of  the
             Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  have  effect  in
             relation to appeals under these Regulations."

47. As will be clear, by virtue of para 1 of Sched 2 an  appeal  under  the
    2016 Regulations is treated  as  "if  it  were"  an  appeal  against  a
    decision under s.82(1) of the NIA Act 2002.  Para 1  then  goes  on  to
    apply ss.84 and 85 of the appeal provisions in the NIA Act  2002  with,
    in effect, amendments and applies s.86 as a whole.

48. Turning to those provisions in NIA Act  2002,  the  present  provisions
    came into effect on 20 October 2014, subject to certain savings,  as  a
    result of s.15 of the Immigration Act 2014.  They significantly  change
    the appeal provisions that were previously contained within Part  5  of
    that Act.

49. Section 82 sets out the rights of appeal against three decisions:

         (1) the refusal of a protection claim (s.82(1)(a));

         (2) the refusal of a human rights claim (s.82(1)(b)); and

         (3) a decision to revoke a person's protection status  (s.82(1)(c).



50. Sub-section (2) of s.82 goes on to define what amounts to a refusal  of
    a "protection claim" and "protection status".  A "human rights  claims"
    is not defined in  s.82.   but  is,  instead,  defined  in  s.113,  the
    interpretation section.  That provides that a "human rights claim":

         "means a claim made by a person that to remove him from or  require
         him to leave the United Kingdom or to refuse  him  entry  into  the
         United Kingdom would be unlawful  under  Section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authority not  to  act  contrary  to
         Convention)..."

51. Section 113 then goes on to exclude from the  definition  of  a  "human
    rights claim" any claim which, having regard  to  a  former  claim,  is
    stated in the Immigration Rules to be disregarded for the  purposes  of
    Part 5 of the NIA Act 2002.  In effect, when in force, this would be  a
    decision under para 353 of the Immigration Rules that the  "claim"  did
    not amount to a "fresh claim".

52. It does not appear that the definition in s.113 which  was  substituted
    by the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  has  been  brought
    into force.  However, the substance of the provision  -  leaving  aside
    the "fresh claim" issued - is not a  contentious  definition.   It  was
    applied (without comment) by the Upper Tribunal in Baihinga [2018] UKUT
    90 (IAC).

53. Section 84 sets out the  "grounds  of  appeal"  upon  which  an  appeal
    against one of the three decision in s.82(1)(a)-(c) "must be  brought".
    It provides as follows:

         "84 Grounds of appeal

         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal of protection claim)
             must be brought on one or more of the following grounds -

             (a)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would breach the united Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                  Refugee Convention;

             (b)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in  relation
                  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of   humanitarian
                  protection.

             (c)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
                  1998 (public authority not to act contrary to Human Rights
                  Convention).

         (2)  An appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
             claim) must be brought on the  ground  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

         (3)  An appeal under section  82(1)(c)  (revocation  of  protection
             status) must be brought  on  one  or  more  of  the  following
             grounds -

             (a)  that the decision to revoke  the  appellant's  protection
                  status breaches the United Kingdom's obligations under the
                  Refugee Convention;

             (b)  that the decision to revoke  the  appellant's  protection
                  status  breaches  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   in
                  relation to persons eligible for a grant  of  humanitarian
                  protection."

54. It follows from these provisions that an appeal against a refusal of  a
    protection claim must be brought on one or more of  the  grounds  that:
    (a) the appellant's removal would breach the  Refugee  Convention;  (b)
    that the appellant's removal would breach  the  UK's  obligation  to  a
    person granted humanitarian protection; and (c) the appellant's removal
    would be unlawful under s.6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  in  other
    words that his removal would be contrary to the ECHR.

55. A refusal of a human rights claim must be brought on  the  sole  ground
    that the decision is unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998.
    That means, in effect, that the decision would breach the  individual's
    human rights protected under the ECHR.

56. Finally, an appeal against the revocation of protection status must  be
    brought on one of the grounds that

         (a)   the  decision  to  revoke  that  state  breaches   the   UK's
             obligations under the Refugee Convention; and

         (b)  the decision to  revoke  the  individual's  protection  status
             would breach the UK's obligations  in  relation  to  a  person
             granted humanitarian protection.

57. Relevantly, therefore, to this appeal, s.82(1)(b) creates  a  right  of
    appeal against a decision to refuse a human rights claim.   It  is  not
    sufficient that a human rights claim has been made; the right of appeal
    only arises if the claim has been refused.  Any such appeal can only be
    brought on the  single  ground  that  the  decision  would  breach  the
    individual's human rights protected by the ECHR.

58. Looking, for a moment, at the 'reading  across'  of  the  provision  in
    ss.82 and 84 when the appeal is against an  "EEA  decision"  under  the
    2016 Regulations, the effect of para 1 of Schedule  2  is  as  follows.
    First, whilst the appeal is treated "as if it  were"  an  appeal  under
    s.82(1) of the NIA Act 2002, the only ground of appeal - and  s.84  has
    to be read accordingly - is that:

         "the sole permitted  grounds  of  appeal  were  that  the  decision
         breaches the appellant's rights under the EU treaties in respect of
         entry to or residence in the  United  Kingdom  ('an  EU  ground  of
         appeal')...".

59. Consequently, but subject to the effect of s.120 of the NIA  Act  2002,
    an appeal against an EEA decision can only be brought and maintained on
    the basis of the decision being contrary to EU law.

60. Importantly, therefore, Schedule 2, reading across into  appeals  under
    the 2016 Regulations provisions in s.84, limits the grounds  of  appeal
    to a breach of EU law and does not contemplate a right of appeal  based
    upon the decision being contrary to s.6 of the Human Rights Act, namely
    that the decision breaches the individual rights protected by the ECHR.



61. That is an important,  and  significant,  limitation  relevant  to  the
    appellant's case in this appeal that she was entitled to rely upon  Art
    8 of the ECHR in an appeal under the 2016 Regulations against  an  "EEA
    decision".

62. Section 85 of the NIA Act 2002 deals with "matters to be considered" by
    a Tribunal hearing an appeal under s.82.  It provides as follows:

         "85 Matters to be considered

         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).

         (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes  a  statement  under
             section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised  in
             the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind
             listed in section 84 against the decision appealed against.

         (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under  section  120
             whether the statement was made before or after the appeal  was
             commenced.

         (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1)  ...against  a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider ...any matter which it  thinks  relevant
             to the substance of  the  decision,  including  ...  a  matter
             arising after the date of the decision.

         (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider  a  new  mater  unless  the
             Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.

         (6)  A matter is a 'new matter' if -

             (a)  It constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind  listed  in
                  section 84, and

             (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered  the
                  matter in the context of -

                  (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or

                  (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120."

63. Two matters should be noted.  First, an appeal under s.82(1) against  a
    particular decision must be treated by the  Tribunal  as  including  an
    appeal against any other decision in respect of which a right of appeal
    under s.82(1) exists.  Secondly, where in response to an s.120  notice,
    an appellant makes a statement raising "any matter" which  "constitutes
    a ground of appeal" under s.84, the Tribunal must consider that matter.
     That is the subject to the 'new matter' provision in s.85(6).

64. Section 120 provides as follows:

         "120.  Requirement to state additional grounds for application etc.

         (1)  Subsection (2) applies to a person ('P') if -

             (a)  P has made a protection claim or a human rights claim,

             (b)  P has made an application  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom, or

             (c)  a decision to deport or remove  P  has  been  or  may  be
                  taken.

         (2)  The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may  serve  a
             notice on P requiring P to provide a stamen setting out -

             (a)  P's reasons for wishes to enter or remain in  the  United
                  Kingdom,

             (b)  any grounds on which P should be permitted  to  enter  or
                  remain in the United Kingdom, and

             (c)  any grounds on which P should  not  be  removed  from  or
                  required to leave the United Kingdom.

         (3)  A statement under subsection (2) need not repeat  reasons  for
             grounds set out in -

             (a)  P's protection or human rights claim.

             (b)  the application mentioned in subsection (1)(b), or

             (c)  an  application  to  which  the  decision   mentioned   n
                  subsection (1)(c) relates.

         (4). Subsection (5) applies to a person ("P") if P  has  previously
             been served with a notice under subsection (2) and -

             (a)  P requires leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
                  but does not have it, or

             (b)  P has leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom only
                  by virtue of section 3C [] of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
                  (continuation of leave pending decision or appeal).

         (5)  Where P's circumstances have changed since  the  Secretary  of
                  State or an immigration officer was  last  made  aware  of
                  them (whether in the application  or  claim  mentioned  in
                  subsection (1) or in a statement under subsection  (2)  or
                  this subsection) so that P has -

             (a)  additional reasons for wishing to enter or remain in  the
                  United Kingdom,

             (b)  additional grounds on which  P  should  be  permitted  to
                  enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or

             (c)  additional grounds on which P should not be removed  from
                  or required to leave the United Kingdom, P must,  as  soon
                  as  reasonably  practicable,   provide   a   supplementary
                  statement to the Secretary  of  State  or  an  immigration
                  officer  setting  out  the  new  circumstances   and   the
                  additional reasons or grounds.

         (6)  In this section -

             'human rights claim' and  'protection  claim'  have  the  same
             meanings as in Part 5; references to 'grounds' are to  grounds
             on which an appeal under Part 5 may be  brought  (see  section
             84)."

65. Section 120 applies where the Secretary of State serves a notice on  an
    individual who has, for example,  made  a  protection  claim  or  human
    rights claim requiring the individual to state any other reason why  he
    wishes to enter or remain in the UK and any ground from which he should
    be permitted to enter or remain in the UK or should not be removed from
    the UK.  This is the so-called 'One-Stop Notice'  which  results  in  a
    'one-stop' appeal.  In response to a notice from the Secretary of State
    or Immigration Officer, but only in such circumstances, the  effect  of
    s.120 read with s.85(2) is that the Tribunal is required to decide  not
    only the issues  raised  directly  by  the  appealable  decision  under
    s.82(1) but also the additional basis upon which the  appellant  wishes
    to enter or remain in the UK or the basis upon which he says he  cannot
    lawfully be  removed  from  the  UK.   The  effect  is  to  expand  the
    jurisdiction of the Tribunal  beyond  the  issues  raised  directly  in
    respect of the appealable decision within s.82(1) and the  ground  upon
    which that decision may be challenged in appeal set out in  s.84  (see,
    AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1076).

66. The scope of the Tribunal jurisdiction is, however, limited as a result
    of the amendments to s.85 effected by the Immigration Act 2014  (s.15).
    The Tribunal must not consider a "new matter"  as  defined  in  s.85(6)
    unless the Secretary of State has consent to the Tribunal doing so (see
    s.85(5)).   Without  that  consent  (the  refusal  of  which  is   only
    challengeable in judicial review  proceedings),  the  Tribunal  has  no
    jurisdiction to deal with the "new matter" (see  Quiadoo  (new  matter;
    procedure/process) 2018 UKUT 00087 (IAC)).

67. The matter is a "new matter" if it constitutes a ground of appeal of  a
    kind listed in s.84 and has  not  previously  been  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State in reaching  the  decision  appealed  against  under
    s.82(1) or, if a s.120 notice was served and a statement  made  by  the
    appellant, it has not been considered by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    response to that statement.  In Mahmud [2017]  UKUT  00488  (IAC),  the
    Upper Tribunal stated that the "matter" is the factual substance  of  a
    claim.  They went on to determine, as set out in the headnote, that:

         "in practice, a new matter is a factual matrix which has previously
         been considered by the Secretary of State in  the  context  of  the
         decision in s.82(1) or a statement  made  by  the  appellant  under
         s.120.  This requires the matter to be factually distinct from that
         previously raised by an appellant, as opposed to further or  better
         evidence from an existing matter.  The assessment will always  fact
         sensitive."

68. So, bearing in mind that the  "matter"  must  constitute  a  ground  of
    appeal listed in s.84, it may be  a  previously  unconsidered  "matter"
    related to a new  ground  of  appeal  -  for  example,  asylum  grounds
    otherwise than in the context of  an  international  protection  claim.
    Alternatively, a "matter" will be a "new  matter"  where,  although  it
    relates to a ground already relied upon and considered by the Secretary
    of State, it seeks to rely  upon  the  factual  matrix  not  previously
    considered - for example, where the human  rights  claim  and  decision
    related exclusively to the relationship between  the  appellant  and  a
    partner but now the appellant wishes to rely upon the additional  facts
    that they have a child (see [48] of Mahmud).

69. In the context of appeals under the 2016 Regulations para 1 of Schedule
    2 reads across the application of s.120 (para 2) and the definitions of
    "matter" or "new matter" in s.85(6) and includes, for those purposes, a
    ground of appeal listed in s.84 as well as an EU ground of appeal (see,
    Oksuzoglu (EEA appeal - "new matter") [2018] UKUT 385 (IAC)).

70. Consequently, in an appeal under the 2016  Regulations,  a  new  matter
    will, for example, even in a case where a s.120  notice  statement  has
    been made, include any of the grounds  relied  upon  in  s.84  and  any
    distinct factual matrix relied upon (not previously  considered)  as  a
    base upon which the appellant now claims to be entitled to enter the UK
    or not be removed from the UK by virtue of EU law.  An example  of  the
    latter would be where, for example, the  original  claim  and  decision
    related to the appellant's right to reside in the UK as the  spouse  of
    an EEA national but subsequently, in response to a  s.120  notice,  the
    individual relies for the first time upon a  derivative  right  as  the
    primary carer of an EU national child (see,  by  analogy  Oksuzoglu  at
    [15]).

71. For completeness, s.86 (considerably truncated by its amendments by the
    Immigration Act 2014) provides as follows:

         "86. Determination of appeal

         (1)  This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1)...

         (2)  the Tribunal must determine -

             (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal .. and

             (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.

             ..."

Discussion

72. With that legislative framework in mind, I turn  now  to  consider  the
    appellant's arguments in this appeal.

73. The central decision to  the  judge's  conclusion  that  he  could  not
    consider Art 8 of the ECHR in this appeal  is  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Amirteymour.  That case is, on its  face,  opposed  to  the
    appellant's position in this appeal.  Ms McCarthy sought to distinguish
    both before Judge Powell and in her submissions in the Upper  Tribunal.



74. In Amirteymour, the claimant applied for a derivative residence card as
    confirmation of his right of residence in the UK under EU  law  as  the
    primary carer of his daughter who was a  British  Citizen.   The  claim
    relied upon the CJEU's decision in Ruiz Zambrano (Case C-34/09)  [2012]
    QB 265 and under the 2006 EEA Regulations.   Following  a  decision  to
    refuse to issue the appellant with a  derivative  residence  card,  the
    claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  adverse  "EEA
    decision" under the 2006 Regulations.  Before the judge,  however,  the
    claimant no longer relied upon his claim under the EEA Regulations but,
    instead, relied solely upon Art 8 of the ECHR.  He raised  this  issue,
    for the first  time,  in  his  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State had not issued a s.120 notice and  so
    there was no relevant statement, to which  s.85(2)  applied,  requiring
    the Tribunal to consider the basis of the claimant's case under  Art  8
    of the ECHR.

75. The Court of Appeal held that, in  the  absence  of  s.120  notice  and
    additional statement in  response  or  in  the  absence  of  a  removal
    decision, the Tribunal had no jurisdiction in an appeal under the  2006
    EEA Regulations to consider Art 8 of the ECHR.  Beatson LJ  (with  whom
    Ryder and Sales LJJ agreed) said this at [27]:

         "In my judgment, the natural meaning  of  the  phrase  "may  appeal
         under these Regulations  against  an  EEA  decision",  as  used  in
         regulation 26(1), is that the appeal right thereby  created  is  in
         respect of an EEA decision  and  is  to  proceed  by  reference  to
         grounds of claim and grounds of appeal  of  a  kind  recognised  as
         creating entitlements under the Regulations themselves (reflecting,
         as they do, entitlements under EU law). This  interpretation  means
         that it was not within the jurisdiction of the FTT in this case  to
         allow the appellant to introduce in his appeal under regulation  26
         a claim directed to  the  exercise  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         discretionary powers under the 1971 Act and based upon Article 8."

76. The court recognised that the position would be otherwise if there  had
    been a s.120 notice in which the claimant relied upon his Art  8  right
    or there had been a removal decision (see [34] and [36]).

77. The decision of the Court of Appeal was, of course, based upon the 2006
    Regulations and the provisions in Part 5 of the NIA Act 2002 which were
    in force prior to July 2014.  There have  been  significant  amendments
    both in the 2016 Regulations, and, as has been seen, to Part 5  of  the
    NIA Act 2002.  However, those amendments only strengthen  the  position
    taken by the Court of Appeal; itself following the earlier decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

78. First, the Court of Appeal's view that the right of appeal under (then)
    reg 26(1) was restricted to an appeal against the  "EEA  decision"  and
    did not create a right of appeal against any other kind of decision  is
    equally applicable to reg 36(1) of the 2016 Regulations  which  are  in
    essentially the same terms.  At [26] Beatson LJ said this:

         "A right of appeal under regulation 26(1) is only a right to appeal
         "against an EEA decision". Regulation 26(1)  creates  no  right  of
         appeal against any other kind of decision. In particular,  it  does
         not create a right of appeal in relation to a claim  for  leave  to
         enter or remain under the Immigration Rules or by exercise  of  the
         Secretary of State's discretion by reference to  Article  8.  Where
         the Secretary of State makes a relevant decision  by  reference  to
         the Immigration  Rules  or  Article  8,  that  is  an  "immigration
         decision" with a separate right of appeal under section 82(1)."

79. Secondly, the terms of Schedule 2 to the 2016  Regulations  (reflecting
    the previously amended terms of Schedule 1 to the 2006 Regulations from
    5 April 2015 but which were not in force at the  time  of  Amirteymour)
    restrict the individual's appeal against  a  decision  under  the  2016
    Regulations to the "sole" ground of appeal, namely  that  the  decision
    breaches the appellant's right under the EU treaties.

80. At the time of Amirteymour, Schedule 1 to  the  2006  Regulations  read
    across into appeals under  the  2006  Regulations  the  more  extensive
    grounds of appeal found in the (then) s.84(1) of the NIA Act 2002  with
    the exception of paras (a) and (f).  These grounds included, therefore,
    that the decision was unlawful as it  breached  the  individual  rights
    under the ECHR or that his removal in consequence of the decision would
    breach his rights under the  ECHR.   Despite,  therefore,  the  broader
    range of grounds then read across from s.84(1) (with the  exception  of
    paras (a) and (f) concerned with  claims  based  upon  the  Immigration
    Rules) the Court of Appeal, nevertheless, interpreted  the  legislative
    structure when an appeal was brought against an "EEA decision"  as  not
    permitting reliance upon Art 8 of the ECHR or indeed  any  other  human
    rights ground.  In the light of the amended terms of Schedule 2, para 1
    to the 2016 Regulations, in the absence of a s.120 notice and statement
    in response, it is, in my judgment, impossible to see how an individual
    in an appeal under those Regulations can rely upon  his  or  her  human
    rights.  The necessary ground is simply not  part  of  the  legislative
    framework applicable to that individual's appeal.

81. That the "sole" ground of appeal under the 2016 Regulations against  an
    "EEA decision" is the EU ground, appears to mean that, even when  there
    is an EEA removal decision, an individual cannot rely upon any  of  the
    'other' grounds in s.84 in the absence of  a  s.120  notice.   To  that
    extent, the more restrictive wording of para 1 to Sched  2,  which  was
    not in effect at the time of Amirteymour, may eliminate one of the  two
    situations  envisaged  by  Beatson  LJ  (under  the  earlier  unamended
    provisions of  the  2006  Regulations)  where  an  individual  was  not
    restricted to the EU ground in an appeal against an "EEA decision".

82. Ms McCarthy sought to distinguish Amirteymour on two bases.  First, she
    submitted that the claimant in that case was not subject to a  decision
    which engages Art 8  rights.   He  was  not  subject  to  removal.   By
    contrast, the decision to which the appellant is subject -  namely  the
    refusal to admit  her  to  in  the  UK  with  her  husband  -  directly
    interfered with her Art 8 right.

83. Even if that is a sustainable  distinction,  and  I  have  considerable
    doubt as to whether it is, it  cannot  override  legislative  framework
    which, in the absence of  a  s.120  notice,  denies  to  an  individual
    appealing against an "EEA decision"  under  the  2016  Regulations  any
    other ground of appeal apart from the "EU ground" of appeal.   Schedule
    2, para 1 of the 2016 Regulations is plain and unequivocal, s.84 has to
    be read as though the "sole permitted grounds of appeal" are  that  the
    decision breaches the individual's EU rights.

84. Secondly, Ms  McCarthy  submitted  that,  unlike  in  Amirteymour,  the
    appellant had made a human rights claim when she sought  entry  to  the
    UK.  In that regard, she relied upon the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in
    Baihinga.  It was not necessary, she submitted, for  the  appellant  to
    have expressly referred to Art 8 or her human rights if  the  substance
    of her application to enter the UK constituted a  human  rights  claim.
    She relied, in particular upon para  2  of  the  judicial  headnote  of
    Baihinga in the following terms:

         "2.  An application for leave or entry clearance may  constitute  a
             human rights claim, even if the applicant does not, in  terms,
             raise human rights. In cases not covered by  the  respondent's
             guidance (whereby certain applications under  the  immigration
             rules will be treated as human rights claims), the application
             will constitute a human rights claim if, on  the  totality  of
             the information supplied, the applicant is  advancing  a  case
             which  requires  the  caseworker   to   consider   whether   a
             discretionary decision under the rules needs to  be  taken  by
             reference to ECHR  issues  (eg  Article  8)  or  requires  the
             caseworker to look beyond the rules and decide,  if  they  are
             not satisfied, whether an Article 8 case is nevertheless being
             advanced.

85. That approach, with respect, is no doubt correct.   The  "human  rights
    claim" need not explicitly refer to the relevant human right  provided,
    seen as a whole, the individual's claim relies upon a basis which seeks
    to invoke and rely upon their human rights (see also, R (Alighanbari) v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 1818 (Admin) at [66] - [72]).

86. Judge Powell found that the appellant had not made a human rights claim
    but rather had relied exclusively upon her right to enter the UK  on  a
    Surinder Singh basis (see [35]).  I was not taken to any material which
    casts any further illumination light upon this issue.   Nothing  I  was
    shown suggested that Judge Powell was wrong.

87. However, even assuming that the  appellant  had  made  a  human  rights
    claim, that did  not  give  the  First-tier  Tribunal  jurisdiction  to
    consider the appellant's putative claim under Art 8.   In  itself,  the
    fact that the appellant had made a human  rights  claim  takes  nothing
    away from  the  reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  the  limited
    jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  sole  ground  of  appeal
    against an "EEA decision" is the EU  ground  of  appeal.  The  position
    would otherwise if the Immigration Officer had treated it  as  a  human
    rights claim and had made a decision to refuse that claim.  Had he done
    so, then the appellant would  have  a  right  of  appeal  against  that
    additional decision under s.82(1)(b) of the NIA Act 2002 on the  ground
    that the decision not to admit her was unlawful under s.6 of the  Human
    Rights Act 1998, namely it breached Art 8 of the ECHR.   By  virtue  of
    s.85(1) of the NIA Act 2002 the Tribunal would be required to treat the
    appellant as appealing against both decisions.

88. However, it is clear that the Immigration Officer decision of 22  March
    2017 was taken solely under the 2016 Regulations.  Those are the  terms
    of the "Notice of Immigration Decision" and nothing in the body of  the
    notice relates to  anything  other  than  a  decision  under  the  2016
    Regulations.  As the Upper Tribunal recognised in Baihinga,  whether  a
    human rights claim has been refused, and therefore  gives  rise  to  an
    appealable decision under s.82(1), must be judged by "reference to  the
    decision which is said to constitute the refusal of  a  [human]  claim"
    (see [35]).  Such a decision cannot be discerned from an  ECM's  review
    (subsequently undertaken) or simply by being raised before the Tribunal
    in grounds of appeal.  Unlike in Baihinga, here the Immigration Officer
    made no reference to the Immigration Rules or exercising discretion  to
    admit the appellant (see [33] of Baihinga).

89. Although I was not specifically referred to  s.85(4)  of  the  NIA  Act
    2002, it cannot, in my judgment, be prayed in aid by the  appellant  to
    confer upon the First-tier Tribunal jurisdiction to consider Art  8  of
    the ECHR.  That is because it only permits  evidence  relating  to  any
    matter relevant to the "substance" of the decision.  Here, the decision
    is the "EEA decision" to which the Art 8 claim  was  irrelevant.   That
    was recognised by Beatson LJ in Amirteymour at [48] when he said this:

         "As so adjusted, section 85(4) provides that  on  an  appeal  under
         regulation 26, the Tribunal 'may consider evidence about any matter
         which it thinks relevant to the substance  of  the  [EEA  decision]
         ...'.  In this case, the substance of the EEA decision against  the
         appellant was that he had no entitlement to be in the  UK  pursuant
         to the principle of EU law set out in Ruiz Zambrano and that he had
         no entitlement under regulations 15A and 18A to be  issued  with  a
         derivative residence card: compare AS (Afghanistan) at [80] (Moore-
         Bick LJ) and [113] (Sullivan LJ), as approved in  the  judgment  of
         Lord Carnwath JSC in Patel  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department at [38]-[41].  The  appellant's  new  Art  8  claim  was
         irrelevant to those matters."

90. In summary, therefore,  the  appellant's  appeal  was  against  an  EEA
    decision made under the 2016 Regulations, in the  absence  of  a  s.120
    notice and statement of additional grounds raising a human rights claim
    or an addition decision refusing a human rights claim, the Tribunal was
    restricted to considering the legality of the EEA decision solely on EU
    grounds.  In my judgment, for these reasons Judge Powell was correct to
    conclude that he had no jurisdiction to consider the appellant's  claim
    that not to admit her to the UK was a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

The 'New Matter' Issue

91. Judge Powell also found that the appellant's case based upon Art 8 was,
    in any event a "new matter" which  could  only  be  raised  before  the
    Tribunal if the Secretary of State consented and he  had  not  done  so
    (see s.85(5) and (6)).

92. In her oral submissions, Ms McCarthy accepted that the  Art.  8  matter
    was a "new matter".  As I understood from Ms McCarthy, the appellant is
    contemplating (or has already begun)  judicial  review  proceedings  to
    challenge the Secretary of State's  refusal  to  consent  to  the  "new
    matter" being raised before the First-tier Tribunal.

93. As a matter of logic,  however,  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider Art 8  of  the  ECHR  then  it  is  irrelevant
    whether  that  issue  is  characterised  as  a  "new  matter"  or  not.
    Logically, a "new matter" must be a subset of the 'matters' which it is
    in principle within the Tribunal's jurisdiction to consider.  Absent  a
    s.120 notice and additional statement relying upon Art 8, this was  not
    a "matter" within the Tribunal's jurisdiction at all.  If it  were,  in
    my judgment, Judge Powell was  clearly  correct  to  conclude  that  by
    relying upon her "family life" under Art 8 the appellant was raising  a
    "new matter" in that it fell within a ground of appeal listed  in  s.84
    (as amended by para 1 of Schedule 1 to the  2016  Regulations)  and  it
    amounted to a different "factual matrix" in substance from her claim to
    be entitled to enter the UK simply as a spouse of a  returning  British
    Citizen on a Surinder Singh basis (see Mahmud).  In  the  latter  case,
    the appellant relied simply upon the relationship and the EU  law.   In
    the former case, she  would  be  relying  upon  the  substance  of  her
    relationship, the  impact  of  the  refusal  to  admit  her  upon  that
    relationship and the proportionality of excluding  her.   That,  in  my
    judgment, would have amounted to a  "new  matter"  (see  the  analogous
    reasoning of Beatson LJ in Amirteymour at [48] set out above).  But, as
    I have already said, the jurisdiction  point  makes  the  'new  matter'
    issue moot.

Other Issues

94. First, there is  the  appellant's  case  based  upon  EU  law.   I  was
    referred, as I have already indicated, to the CJEU's decision in Banger
    and its conclusion that  a  person  in  a  "durable  relationship"  was
    entitled to rely upon the Surinder Singh  principle  at  least  to  the
    extent that any decision concerning their admission to the  UK  with  a
    returning British Citizen required "an  extensive  examination  of  the
    applicant's personal circumstances and to justify any denial  of  entry
    or residence".  The basis of that conclusion is that, by analogy to the
    position of 'other family members' under the  Qualification  Directive,
    when applied to rights derived from Art 21(1), TFEU, a person  such  as
    the appellant (in a durable relationship) with  a  British  Citizen  is
    entitled to have their entry (and residence) "facilitated" following an
    extensive examination of their circumstances.

95. The problem with that contention in this case is that by  the  time  of
    the relevant decision the appellant was  Mr  Munday's  spouse.   Banger
    was, as a consequence, of no relevance to her circumstances.   Instead,
    her right of entry, if any, derived from the Surinder  Singh  principle
    domestically enshrined in reg 9  of  the  2016  Regulations.   On  that
    basis, as I pointed out earlier, she  could  not  succeed.   First,  Mr
    Munday was not,  at  the  time  of  the  decision,  a  British  Citizen
    returning from residing in an EEA state where he had been a worker.  He
    had left Belgium (together with the appellant) in March  2015  and  had
    not lived or worked there since.  Secondly, putting him in the position
    as if he were an EEA national in the UK, he could not show that he  was
    a 'qualified person' in the UK since he was not working.

96. The fact that when the appellant had previously sought admission for  a
    residence card her circumstance more naturally fell within the Surinder
    Singh principle does not, in any way, demonstrate that the present  EEA
    decision appealed against was not in accordance with EU law.   It  was.
    Of course, if the appellant now makes an  Art  8  claim  then  all  her
    circumstances (including, at least potentially, an argument that EU law
    had previously been  wrongly  applied  to  her)  would  be  considered.
    However, for the reasons I have given, that issue did not  fall  within
    the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal.

97. The final issue concerns the judge's decision not to adjourn the First-
    tier proceedings in order to await the outcome of the CJEU's ruling  in
    Banger.  Given the irrelevance of Banger to the appellant's appeal,  as
    a  spouse  relying  upon  Surinder  Singh,  it  is  difficult,  if  not
    impossible, to  contemplate  why  the  judge  should  have  granted  an
    adjournment.  In any event, given that it was  unknown  when  the  CJEU
    would reach a decision, the judge was fully  entitled  to  continue  to
    hear the appeal and apply the law as it was understood to be  prior  to
    Banger.  His reasons at paras 55 and 56 are entirely persuasive for not
    granting an adjournment.





Decision

98. Consequently the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal did not involve the making of any error of law.  The
    decision stands.

99. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             24 January 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             24 January 2019
