
ar    NA (Palestinians - Not at general risk) Jordan CG [2005] UKIAT 00094



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing : 8 October 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 01 feb 2005
Decision reserved
                                   Before:


                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)
                       Mr A R Mackey (Vice President)
                        Professor B R Gomes da Costa




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant :    Mr S. Revindran from the Refugee Legal Centre
(London)
For the respondent : Mr M. Blundell Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.  This  determination  is  concerned  with  the  position   of   ethnic
      Palestinians whose former habitual residence is in Jordan, in  respect
      of which the Tribunal had before it the following background objective
      evidence:

        a) US State Department Report on Jordan for 2003  published  on  25
           February 2004;


        b) Report from Forced Migration on Line : 'Palestinian Refugees  in
           Jordan' by Oroub Al Abed of February 2004;



        c) 'Palestinians in Jordan and Egypt: Holders of Travel  Documents:
           Their Legal Rights?' by Oroub Al Abed (undated);


        d) A report published by Euro-Mediterranean  Human  Rights  Network
           based on a Mission of Enquiry by  Mohammed  Tahi  and  Maria  de
           Donoto entitled 'Refugees Also Have Rights' on  the  subject  of
           Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon and  Jordan  following  an  EMHR
           Mission between 17-28 September 2000.


      On  the  basis  of  their  consideration  of  these  documents,   this
      determination gives the guidance of the Tribunal as to the position of
      Palestinian asylum seekers from Jordan.

2.    The appellant was born on 22 September 1954 in the  Gaza  Strip  in  a
      refugee camp run by UNRWA. From 1966 until  1990  he  lived  with  his
      family in Kuwait when they moved there following  displacement.  After
      the  first  Gulf  War  the  Kuwaiti  government  expelled  Palestinian
      nationals and his family and he then moved to  Jordan.  The  appellant
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 July 1998 with a  valid  Jordanian
      passport endorsed with entry  clearance  as  a  visitor,  and  he  was
      admitted on that basis. At that time he also had  an  Egyptian  travel
      document. On 31 October 1998 the appellant made an in-time application
      for asylum but for reasons which are not apparent, he does not  appear
      to have been issued with a self-evidence form for completion until  21
      June 2002, which was duly returned to the respondent, who subsequently
      interviewed him. His asylum application was refused  for  the  reasons
      set out in a letter  dated  14  August  2003.  On  the  same  day  the
      respondent issued notice of his refusal to  vary  leave  to  enter  or
      remain in the United Kingdom and the appellant appealed  against  that
      decision on both asylum and human rights grounds pursuant  to  section
      82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

3.    His appeal was heard on  2  December  2003  by  Dr  K.F.  Walters,  an
      Adjudicator, who recorded the appellant's basis of claim at  paragraph
      16 of his determination as follows:

             'The appellant claims that, as a result of the creation of the
              State of Israel, his family settled in a refugee camp in  the
             Gaza  Strip,  registered  with  UNWRA,  and  was  issued  with
             Egyptian travel documents. After the   Israeli  occupation  of
             the  Gaza Strip, his family moved to  Kuwait.  However,  after
             the Gulf War in 1990,  the  Kuwaiti  government  expelled  all
             Palestinians. The appellant travelled to Jordan.  It  was  the
             only country which, at that  time,  would  accept  Palestinian
             nationals.

             According to the appellant, after he had travelled to  Kuwait,
             he learned that persons who had been born in  the  Gaza  Strip
             were to be given a temporary Jordanian passport, issued by the
              Jordanian Embassy in Kuwait.


             In 1989, the Jordanian Embassy in Kuwait refused to renew  the
             appellant's passport, deciding, thereafter, to renew yearly.


             In  1996,  the  Jordanian  Government  refused  to  renew  the
             appellant's passport and imposed a fine upon those persons who
             were born in the Gaza Strip.


             In September 1997, the appellant  started a case to  have  his
             passport renewed and,  on  16  June  1998,  his  passport  was
             renewed for two years.

             In 1995, the appellant's wife  left  Kuwait  to  join  him  in
             Jordan  and,  thereafter,  her  application  for  a  Jordanian
             passport  was  refused.  She  was  only  given  four   months'
             permission to remain in Kuwait, until October 1995.   However,
             to date, the appellant's wife  was  still  living  in  Jordan,
             illegally, paying a penalty of 1.5 Jordanian Dinar  each  day.
             Since 1995, the Jordanian government has tried  several  times
             to deport the appellant's wife.'

4.    The Adjudicator  did  not  believe  that  account  save  that  he  was
      prepared to accept that the appellant is a Palestine 'national',  born
      in the Gaza Strip, on 22 September 1954, and  that  he  was  currently
      married, had no relatives in the United Kingdom, and that his wife and
      children were currently living in Jordan. Beyond that the  appellant's
      claims were rejected by the Adjudicator for the reasons which he  sets
      out at paragraphs 17 to 20 of his determination.

5.    The grounds of appeal do not challenge the adverse  findings  made  by
      the Adjudicator in relation to his personal account, the very  limited
      acceptance of which we have set out  above.   The  challenges  in  the
      grounds of appeal are  as  follows:   firstly,  that  the  Adjudicator
      failed to identify the country of habitual residence  in  relation  to
      which the claimed fear of persecution was to be  measured;   secondly,
      that at paragraph 15 of his determination he referred  to  Israel  and
      the Occupied Territories;  thirdly, that the Adjudicator was wrong  in
      referring to the appellant as a 'Palestinian national' as there is  no
      such thing  and  the  appellant  is  stateless;   fourthly,  that  the
      appellant's habitual residence was confused with Jordan, with specific
      reference to paragraphs 18 to 21 of the determination;  and,  fifthly,
      that the Adjudicator was wrong in not considering the country to which
      the appellant was to be removed as the  removal  directions  were  not
      clear in that respect.

6.    In granting permission to appeal, the President noted that he was  not
      clear which country the Adjudicator had  in  mind  in  assessing  risk
      because he referred to Jordan as the country of feared persecution and
      return  but  examined  Israel  and  the   Occupied   Territories   for
      background.

7.    It is unfortunate  that  the  Adjudicator  was  not  assisted  by  any
      representation for the Secretary of State at the hearing  before  him.
      The only objective evidence which  the  respondent  had  filed  was  a
      country report relating to Israel and the   Occupied  Territories  and
      since, by its nature, there are no removal directions where the appeal
      is against a decision to refuse to vary  leave  to  remain,  the  only
      relevant evidence from the respondent might be taken  to  indicate  an
      intention on his part to  return  the  appellant  to  the  country  in
      respect of which he has filed objective country evidence.  Before  us,
      Mr Blundell made it clear that the  intended  country  of  removal  is
      Jordan, which is  the  last  country  of  habitual  residence  of  the
      appellant.   There  are  only  two  references  in  the  Adjudicator's
      determination to Israel and the Occupied Territories. The first is  at
      paragraph 3(b) where he records that was the  country  in  respect  of
      which the respondent had submitted background evidence, and the second
      is at paragraph  15 of his determination where  the  Adjudicator  says
      this:

             'In reaching my conclusion, I have taken  fully  into  account
             the general country information in respect of Israel  and  the
             Occupied Territories. Whilst I am prepared to accept  that  in
             Israel and the Occupied  Territories there are regular  abuses
             of a wide range of fundamental human rights in a manner  which
             undoubtedly gives rise to persecution  under the 1951  Refugee
             Convention in certain cases, I am quite unable to accept  that
             this appellant has demonstrated he is at risk  of  persecutory
             harm.'

8.    Apart from that single reference, everything else is directed  to  the
      position of the appellant in Jordan.  In referring to the standard and
      burden of proof at  paragraphs  7  to  9  of  the  determination,  the
      Adjudicator says in terms at paragraph 9 :

             'The burden lies on the appellant to show that  returning  him
             to Jordan will expose him to a real risk  of  persecution  for
             one of  the  five  grounds  recognised  in  the  1951  Refugee
             Convention, or a breach of his protected human rights.'


9.    At paragraph 11 he repeats, in his analysis of the appellant's   claim
      as set out in the  self-completion  questionnaire,  at  interview,  in
      written statements and in oral evidence, that it is based on his  fear
      of what would happen to him 'if returned to Jordan'.

10.   Paragraphs 16 to 19 of the determination are  concerned  with  setting
      out the basis of claim and the reasons why the claims as to  what  has
      happened to him in Jordan are rejected save for the  limited  positive
      findings which we have noted above. Save for noting at paragraph 19 of
      the determination that the appellant had claimed before  him  that  he
      had tried to return to the  Gaza  Strip  but  the  Israeli  government
      refused, it is the  situation  in  Jordan  to  which  the  Adjudicator
      directs his mind including, as is apparent by his reference to them in
      paragraph 16 of the determination, the objective materials before  him
      in relation to treatment  of  Palestinians  from  the  Gaza  Strip  in
      Jordan.  Moreover, it is apparent from paragraphs  22  to  31  of  the
      determination  where  the  Adjudicator   considers   the   nature   of
      persecution and Article 3 prohibited treatment,  particularly  by  his
      reference to what Professor Hathaway defines as level 3 rights,  which
      are contrasted with the breaches of fundamental rights which are  more
      usually regarded as being relevant to issues of persecution, that  the
      Adjudicator is looking at the  situation  of  denial  of  core  rights
      referable to the Appellant's claims as to his treatment in Jordan.

11.    It  appears  to  us  wholly  clear  from  a  full  analysis  of   the
      determination that what the Adjudicator was primarily considering  was
      whether removal to Jordan would be in breach of the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations.  It may  be  that  he  felt  obliged  by  reason  of  the
      objective material filed on behalf of the respondent to refer,  as  he
      does at paragraph 15 of the determination, to the situation in  Israel
      and the Occupied Territories, but it is quite clear that  that  is  an
      isolated reference and that he understands the claim and approaches it
      on the basis of prospective removal to Jordan.

12.   Before us, Mr Revindran  accepted  that  the  issue  was  whether  the
      Adjudicator had erred in law in his consideration of what would happen
      to the appellant if now returned to Jordan on the basis of the limited
      acceptance by the Adjudicator of some elements of his claim. He sought
      to  rely  on  a  letter  apparently  from  the  General   Intelligence
      Department of the Jordanian Government to their  General  Director  of
      Passport Department in relation to an application which  he  said  had
      been made by the appellant's nephew for a Jordanian passport  in  June
      2004.  He sought also to rely on what was said in the covering  letter
      accompanying that document from  a  non-governmental  organisation  in
      this country, Kingston Advocacy, purporting to relay what  the  nephew
      had told the writer of that letter about his  attempts  to  renew  his
      passport in Jordan.  We did not regard this, insofar as  it  might  be
      proper to admit it, as evidence to which any weight  could  be  given.
      The purported translation of the letter was not certified and  related
      to other correspondence which had not been exhibited, so that for both
      those reasons little weight could be  attached  to  it.  The  covering
      letter from Kingston Advocacy sought to make assertions as to what the
      nephew said had happened to him and his family. But even if  that  was
      evidence which could properly be admitted as to a  changed  situation,
      the proper way to deal with it would have been by way  of  application
      to the Tribunal for leave to call the nephew  to  give  oral  evidence
      capable of being cross-examined.

13.   Mr Revindran next submitted that the appellant, if returned, would  be
      likely to be detained on arrival, and he asked us to infer from  that,
      that this would lead to a reasonable likelihood of persecution of  the
      appellant on the basis that, notwithstanding that the  law  in  Jordan
      prohibited abuse of detainees, the State  Department  Report  recorded
      that 'the police and security forces sometimes abused detainees during
      detention and interrogation, and  allegedly  also  used  torture'.  He
      accepted,  however,  that  he  could  point  to  no  evidence  of  any
      likelihood of arrest of the appellant if he  were  now  returned,  but
      invited us to infer that that might happen because the report revealed
      that there was a level of discrimination on  the  part  of  Jordanians
      against ethnic Palestinians. He did not, however, seek to suggest that
      on the objective evidence such discrimination would of  itself  amount
      to persecution for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.

14.   In his submissions to us Mr Blundell accepted that the  appellant  was
      a stateless person but it was clear that when he arrived in the United
      Kingdom he had a valid Jordanian passport and it was the view  of  the
      Secretary of State that he could renew it as he had done before.

15.   He referred us to all the passages in the current US State  Department
      Report dealing with the situation of  Palestinians  in  Jordan.  These
      make it clear that most Palestinians living in Jordan are citizens who
      receive passports valid for five years, but that there  are  estimated
      to be some  150,000  Palestinian  refugees  who  do  not  qualify  for
      citizenship. This group is able to obtain Jordanian passports  but  at
      different times they have been granted for varying numbers  of  years.
      Currently it appears that they receive three year passports valid  for
      travel but which do not confer citizenship rights.   Previously,  when
      Jordan disengaged in both administrative and legal terms from the West
      Bank in 1988, Palestinians residing there received two year  passports
      for travel purposes only, but in  1995  West  Bank  residents  without
      other travel documentation were again said to be eligible  to  receive
      five year passports. In 2001 it was reported that Jordanian  passports
      of some citizens  were  confiscated  where  they  were  carrying  both
      Jordanian and Palestine Authority travel documents on the  basis  that
      this was consistent with laws  forbidding  dual  citizenship  in  Arab
      League states, although this has otherwise been suggested to be  based
      only on informal agreements rather than on legislation. At the end  of
      2003 human rights activists reported that some twelve hundred citizens
      of Palestinian origin remained outside Jordan due to refusal to  renew
      their passports at embassies  overseas,  most  now  living  in  Syria,
      Lebanon or Libya  as  stateless  persons.  That  is  disputed  by  the
      Jordanian government who say that no Jordanian  citizens  are  refused
      passports but that only non-resident Palestinians who  seek  to  renew
      travel documents requiring proof of  residency  in  Jordan  have  been
      refused.

16.   It is clear  that  the  Jordanian  government  responds  to  emergency
      situations since during 1993 it had agreed to admit persons  displaced
      by the hostilities in Iraq. The  report  states  that  the  government
      granted protection to 2,773 third country nationals en route to  their
      countries of origin, while approximately  1,200  Palestinian  refugees
      were granted protection at the UNHCR  camp  at  Ruweshed.  The  report
      further states  that  almost  1.7  million  Palestinian  refugees  are
      registered in Jordan with UNWRA  which also   covers  another  800,000
      Palestinians as either displaced persons from the 1967  war,  arrivals
      following that war or returnees from the Gulf between 1990  and  1991.
      The report acknowledges that there is discrimination in Jordan against
      Palestinians but this is treated more fully  in  the  other  documents
      comprised in the appellant's bundle.

17.   The paper on Palestinian refugees in Jordan for  February  2004  notes
      that over 60% of the population in Jordan are  of  Palestinian  origin
      and the same author, in his other report, says  that  Palestinians  in
      Jordan  face  the  following  problems  because  they  hold  temporary
      passports:


         '1. They are forbidden to work in  the   government.  In  addition,
            they  cannot  have  professional  practice  certificates   from
            Syndicates.


         2.  They are not entitled to health care fee exemption. They depend
            on UNWRA clinics and health centres but they must pay for their
            health care. In the past they benefited from fee exemptions  ..
            [but this policy changed some number of years ago].


         3.   For higher education they must compete for  the  5%  of  seats
            left for Arab foreigners in  public  universities.   Names  are
            usually  provided  by  the  embassy.  The  Palestinian  Embassy
            usually sends the names of those living  in  Palestine  holding
            the PA [Palestinian Authority] travel document ...  Holders  of
            the two year passport are treated as foreign students and  must
            pay separate fees ...


         4.   They have difficulties in obtaining  Egyptian  visas  and  are
            forbidden to go to Syria with a two year passport.


         5.    Because they do not have a national ID number, they  are  not
            entitled to personal civil cards or to family books.


         6.   In case of any delays in renewing the passport, they are asked
            to go the  State  Security  Department  and  they  must  get  a
            certificate  stating  that  they  have  committed  no  criminal
            offence. They may face many other  obstacles  because  of  this
            delay.


         7. In case  of  membership  of  any  organisation  or  association,
            especially Islamist ones, the renewal of the travel document is
            impossible.'


18.   Although perhaps in more  detail,  the  areas  of  discrimination  are
      similarly identified in the report by the EMHRM Mission, although that
      report speaks of  the  Palestinians  who  have  been  given  Jordanian
      nationality being strongly discriminated against in matters  of  award
      of government posts where 90% of those posts are reserved  for  people
      of Jordanian origin.

19.   It is Mr Blundell's submission that  even  taking  all  these  matters
      into account, the discrimination relates to  what  are  classified  as
      third level rights and, as Mr Revindran had previously conceded, could
      not be said to be of such a nature as to lead either to persecution or
      breach of protected human rights  under  Article  3  of  the  European
      Convention. In particular, there was no reference at all to  detention
      or ill-treatment in detention  by  reason  of  Palestinian  ethnicity,
      whether at point of  entry  into  Jordan  or  subsequently  for  those
      Palestinians living there.

20.   We are satisfied, looking at the objective evidence placed before  us,
      that Mr Blundell's submissions are correct.

  21. In his submissions to us, Mr Revindran sought  to  make  much  of  the
      practicality of return of the appellant but, as was pointed out by the
      Court of Appeal in Saad Diriye and Osorio v Secretary of State for the
      Home  Department  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  2008,  all  asylum  appeals   are
      hypothetical in the sense that they involve  the  consideration  of  a
      hypothesis or assumption that a future act of removal  or  requirement
      to leave would be contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
      the Refugee Convention.   Although what was considered  in  that  case
      was the effect of the wording of Section 69  of  the  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999 and of the earlier provisions  of  Section  8  of  the
      Asylum and  Immigration  Appeals  Act  1993,  a  similar  hypothetical
      approach remains appropriate by reason of the wording of the  relevant
      sections in the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  which
      applies to this appeal.


  22.  What we are  required  to  do  is  to  consider  whether,  given  the
      assumption that the appellant has been lawfully returned to Jordan  as
      his former country of habitual residence, there would then be  a  real
      risk of persecution  for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason,  namely  his
      Palestinian ethnicity. The same position applies to our  consideration
      of whether there would be a real risk  of  breach  of  his  Article  3
      rights under the European Convention. Issues of practicality of return
      are, at least initially in  human  rights  terms,  a  matter  for  the
      Secretary of State. A similar issue as to practicability of return was
      raised with the  Tribunal   in  Pavlov  [2002]  UKIAT  02544,  a  case
      concerning the proposed removal of an ethnic Russian to Estonia  where
      he was  formerly  habitually  resident.  The  Tribunal  said  this  at
      paragraph 13:


           "... The most that could be said on the evidence before  us  was
           that the  Secretary  of  State  might  not  be  able  to  effect
           practical removal but Mr Jones  [the  Presenting  Officer]  made
           clear to us that if the Respondent  were  not  admitted  by  the
           Estonian authorities, then it was the policy of the Secretary of
           State that the Respondent would be  re-admitted  to  the  United
           Kingdom so that his position could be reassessed  on  the  basis
           that he was a stateless person. There would be  no  question  of
           any repeated attempt to  remove  him  to  Estonia  without  such
           reconsideration. There is, in our judgment, a clear  distinction
           between the question  of  lawfulness  of  intended  removal,  in
           respect of which there is specific provision for challenge under
           section 66 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999,  and  the
           practicability of removal to a country to which  the  person  in
           question may be lawfully  removed  under  the  powers  given  by
           Parliament to the Secretary of State. If the proposed removal is
           lawful, the Immigration Appellate Authorities are not  concerned
           with  the  question  of  its  current  practicability.  Were  it
           otherwise, the obviously absurd  situation  that  a  failure  by
           somebody unlawfully here to take steps open to  him  or  her  to
           procure the necessary travel documents readily available to them
           on application would prevent their lawful removal.


      It must be assumed that the Secretary  of  State  will  not  seek  to
      remove the appellant to Jordan  other  than  lawfully  and  this  will
      entail the provision of appropriate travel documentation to secure his
      entry on his arrival. If such travel documentation is not available or
      if the appellant is not admitted on arrival,  then  the  Secretary  of
      State will not be able successfully to remove the appellant to  Jordan
      and will have to reconsider his position.    That  is  a  matter  with
      which he is concerned but we are not  and,  given  that  there  is  no
      objective evidence that this appellant or  members  of  the  class  to
      which he belongs,  namely  Palestinian  refugees  formerly  habitually
      resident  in  Jordan,  are  reasonably  likely  to  be  persecuted  or
      otherwise treated in breach of  their  protected  human  rights  under
      Article 3 in Jordan, if admitted, it follows that the appellant cannot
      succeed before us.

23.   That is the conclusion at which the Adjudicator arrived on  the  basis
      of the evidence before him. Unless there is a material error of law on
      his part in reaching that conclusion, then the  Tribunal  has  in  any
      event no power to  interfere  with  his  decision  by  virtue  of  the
      provisions of section 101 of the 2002 Act which permits appeal to  the
      Tribunal only on an identified point of law.  Our primary  finding  is
      that the grounds of appeal point to no such arguable material error of
      law on the part of the Adjudicator, but we acknowledge  that  he  does
      not deal as fully as we have done with the  objective  evidence  which
      was before him as to the position of ethnic  Palestinian  refugees  in
      Jordan. In case, therefore, we are wrong in  our  primary  finding  of
      absence of  material  error  of  law,  we  have  also  considered  the
      objective evidence which has been placed before us as  appears  above.
      For the reasons which we have given, taking into  account  the  latest
      objective evidence before us, we  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant
      cannot succeed.

24.   In summary we make the following findings:

      (a)   The grounds of appeal do not identify any material error of  law
           on the part of the Adjudicator


      (b)   If we are wrong in that, we are satisfied on the totality of the
           evidence before us that  ethnic  Palestinians,  whether  or  not
           recognised as citizens of Jordan, are not persecuted or  treated
           in breach of their protected human rights under Article 3 of the
           European Convention in Jordan  by  reason  of  their  ethnicity,
           although they may be subject there to discrimination in  certain
           respects in their social lives in a manner which does not  cross
           the threshold from discrimination to persecution  or  breach  of
           protected human rights;


      (c)    There  is  nothing  to  distinguish  this  appellant  from  the
           generality of ethnic Palestinians in Jordan which is his country
           of former habitual residence and which he was able regularly  to
           leave on  travel  documents  issued  to  him  by  the  Jordanian
           authorities notwithstanding that  he  is  not  recognised  as  a
           citizen of Jordan.


      (d)   Applying the ratio in Saad Diriye and Osorio, it is our function
           to consider whether, on his hypothetical return  to  Jordan,  he
           would be at real risk of persecution  which,  on  the  facts  as
           established, he is not;


      (e)   As regards Article 3, we are not concerned with issues as to the
           practicality of his return which are, to the extent explained in
           paragraph 22 above,  a matter for the Secretary of State.

25.   For the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed.





                                  J. BARNES
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


